CAIN's LAMENTATIONS OVER ABEL, IN SIX BOOKS, CONTAINING: I. His Astonishment
at Abel's Death -- his melancholy Relation of the event to Adam and Eve, and
his sorrowful separation from his parents when he became a fugitive Exile. II.
His conviction and Penitence in his solitary Retirement, with Satan's appearing
to him. III. The appearance of Abel unto him as a Messenger from Heaven and
their Discourse. IV. His Reflections on Abel's Descension and Ascension again
to Heaven, and the Consolation it produced to his Soul. V. The appearance and
Discourse of Adam with him from Heaven -- Adam's departure -- his second
appearance to him as the Messenger of glad Tidings -- with Cain's melancholy
reflections and doubts in the interval. VI. His patient waiting the will of God
to depart from this spot of Solitude, and earnest desire to see his Mother
before she goes to his Father and Brother -- with the Death of Eve in the
presence of Cain.


THE FOURTH EDITION.

Improved morality elevates our souls to contemplate on things Divine.

COTTON. By ROWLAND COTTON.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY W. A. DAVIS, No. 438, PEARL-STREET, FOR THE AUTHOR. 1796.

EXPLANATION of the PLATE.
COURTEOUS Reader, permit me to give thee a description of my emblematical
design.

On the left corner, through the opening clouds, thou perceivest the rays of
Heaven, covering, as a shield of defense, the Angel of God, in a conflict with
SATAN; in his left hand he contains the shield of Truth, engraved in its
center, the Sword of Justice, while the right hand extended, brandishes the
sword of Wrath and Power. SATAN, like a vanquished foe, attempting his escape
with his weapons of defense; in his right hand he holds a dry bone, a moral of
wounded creation; in his left the first beguiled creature, the serpent, which
he assumed, that turns its head round to dart its venomous poison into the arm
of the grand revolter, that brought the direful curse upon him.

Underneath, on a mossy turf, thou perceivest CAIN, with bended knees and hands
uplifted, in a state of wonder, fear, and prayer, while all the inhabitants of
creation of different natures around him, with eyes intently fixed, as with
ideas of rational astonishment, seem terrified and moved with the dreadful
sight.

INTRODUCTION.
AS far as it is consistent with improving the morals, and instructive to
mankind, the support of religion and moral duties; -- the glory of our Maker,
and salvation of souls; it is an incumbent duty upon every member of the
community to lend his assistance, toward accomplishing that salutary purpose
proportionable to the abilities with which he is possessed. How far the
Author's endeavors merits this title, an impartial and judicious reader will
easily determine, and no farther does he request the patronage of public favor.

The Author cannot without ingratitude to individuals, and injustice to the
Public in general, omi^ mentioning, at the front of this Work, the
disinterested civility he has experienced from the gentlemen composing the
Committee of The New York Society for the Information and Assistance of Persons
Emigrating from Foreign Countries." And in a particular manner acknowledges the
respectable and obliging conduct of the gentlemen, delegated by the Committee
to confer with him on his publication of this Work, and the generous
encouragement he has experienced through the channel of that influence.

He cannot but hope that an institution founded upon principles of so
benevolent a motive, will be crowned with that success as is consistent with
the many unforeseen advantages, and benefits that may reasonably be expected to
accrue from it, to Emigrants of all descriptions; either to those whose
immediate necessities may require present assistance, or such whose affluent
circumstances may only require the needful information to accommodate
themselves with convenience and happiness.

A generous Public will undoubtedly see the utility of the plan in these days
of universal emigration from all parts of the globe, and contribute their aid
to its support, from the principle of humanity and friendship.

THE DESIGN.
THE Author has, in this treatise endeavored to represent CAIN under the
weight of those awful impressions that violent murder generally makes upon the
mind of the perpetrator, and the remorse of conscience that accompanies guilt
of so horrid a nature; at the same time, to inculcate the necessity of
humiliation and penitence, with a patient submission to the will of an offended
GOD. Though the infliction of his chastisements may be attended with severe
crosses and tribulations for restless and uncomfortable seasons; yet still his
dispensations are all appointed for our good in the end. Although the
calamities of our body or mind, inflicted upon us for our iniquities, may seem
for the present grievous, we must not mistrust his clemency and mercy, for his
ways of revelation far exceeds our finite comprehensions. These considerations
are encouragements to the vilest sinner, not to despair, nor for the most
upright man to presume; for although, while we are in the body there is hope,
so on the other hand, to counterbalance that hope, there are temptations. The
Almighty can, and frequently does make use of supernatural means to convince us
of his Omnipotency, and wean our affections from transitory and perishable
delights; and though those alarming mementos, may convey terrific ideas to our
imaginations, yet still his purposes are founded upon unerring wisdom; and
calculated for our good; and while we restrain all our inordinate desires, he
will bountifully supply all our necessary wants, as far as consistent with his
own glory, and our good.

Thus the Author has endeavored to render Cain's Lamentations over Abel, as
useful to mankind, as Gessner did the Death of Abel.

R. C.

CAIN's LAMENTATIONS OVER ABEL. BOOK THE FIRST.
THUS spoke CAIN to creation, 'Be calm, be serene; let an awful silence reign
throughout the wounded face of nature! Be reposed in solemn sadness, all ye
cheerful inhabitants of the creation! happiness is banished from your peaceful
retreats; harmony no longer accompanies your social retirements; for the gloomy
horrors of melancholy have found an entrance into the habitations of mortals,
and the perspective views of felicity are buried in the gulf of infernal
temptations. Short and momentary have been the days of hope allotted to the
first born of mankind; like the wings of the mounting eagle, have taken their
rapid course with the velocity of imperception, and doomed the forlorn, the
miserable CAIN to years of pensive woe! Resaon, art thou awakened? or do the
phantoms of delusive imaginations deceive thee? Have the nocturnal slumbers of
darkness taken possession of thy soul, and whirled thy scattered conceptions of
things into uncreated wo^^ds? and the fancies of sleep discomposed thy superior
powers by a confused mass of horrible ideas, representing to thy mind a scene
that will be shocking to the ears of humanity, for generations unborn, and
denounce vengeance upon the posterity of the first homicide and fratricide in
the world?

'See! there he lies! behold my brother! he sleeps! But why this unusual --
this motionless slumber? -- why cold and liseless his once heaving pulse, that
was wont to keep pace with the movements of nature's self; and those vigorous
limbs that relaxed not in their activity to obey their MAKER's dictates; even
from the rising sun till evening shadows evinced approaching night? -- The
circling blood of manhood se^^^ retarded in its usual progress, and a fr^zen
chilness closes up those lively passages, that with progressive rotundity of
motion communicated activity from vein to vein! I will again open my lips unto
him -- 'ABEL! ABEL! my brother ABEL aw^ke! behold before thee the image of
horror! a bare statue of mortality! a man and no man -- CAIN, thy brother! thy
murderer! Speak, I say, if breath is still within thee! -- he is silent! --
motionless he rests, regardless of my entreaties. -- What can this portend? --
What can this change in man predict? Can this cold, this icy state, be the
ALMIGHTY'S decree to ADAM and his posterity for the first act of disobedience
in Eden's paradise? Or has the GREAT CREATOR, from his unalterable wisdom,
appointed seasons and portions of time for the offspring of ADAM to have a
temporary relaxation from the laborious exercises and measures of life? If it
possible that created beings can again return into heir primeval state of
nonexistence, for hours, days, or years? If so, why not the elder before the
younger son of ADAM? Why either of the two before the father of both?
Astonishment seizes me! my soul is troubled! I dread the consequences of my
deed! Our father never experienced this mysterious change, or never revealed
the unfathomable secret to his son, to prepare him to encounter such a wordly
revolution.'

Thus was CAIN tossed to and fro by the agitations of his mind; framing such
imperfect ideas of the nature of death -- whether he had or had not killed ABEL
his brother, as we must naturally conclude that ABEL was the first corpse that
CAIN ever saw, having no Scripture tradition to give us room to suppose the
contrary.

CAIN in this state of perplexity deliberates within himself to go to his
father and make known his anxiety -- thus said, he hastens toward ADAM, and
thus addresses him: 'Father, thou first and original of men, speak to thy first
born; disdain not an answer to the requests of CAIN thy son; reject not his
solicitations, nor turn a deaf ear to his petition -- remove the sorrows of his
soul, or they will become an increasing evil with his length of days -- Declare
unto him the mutation that heaven has ordained for mankind -- enlighten his
ignorance; and let him not continue in the obscurity of fear, and hourly wander
in the labyrinth of despairing doubtfulness.' ADAM speaks -- 'Child open thy
mind to thy father.' CAIN begins --

'Make known the will of GOD to thy son, that future generations may be
acquainted with the decrees of Heaven -- Will the Creator of the world
condescend to appear to the descendants of ADAM, and with the voice of majesty
admonish them for their future obedience, to cleave to good and abhor evil? Are
these any of the conditions the Almighty entered into with ADAM, as renewing
covenants for children yet unborn? Will CAIN, will ABEL, have the gracious
opportunity of hearing and answering the Eternal One, by declaring his will to
regulate their future conduct in life? Will new commands, and injunctions of
obedience be delivered to them, to guide them in the paths of rectitude and
truth? Speak, my father, while CAIN thy son is close attention, to procure
alleviation to his wounded soul.' ADAM thus begins;

'What alleth my firstborn? What tumultuous grief has taken possession of the
soul of my eldest child? those questions border upon phrenzy; such
interrogatories cannot proceed from deliberation, ripened by perfect maturity;
Thy father is at a loss -- it exceeds the limits of his comprehension, even to
conceive the springs from whence thy difficult passages slow; it must be the
production of some sudden disaster in nature, for thy soul to be so agitated;
originating in the first great sin of disobedience in thy father; and those
disquietudes and distracted emotions that disorganise the vital parts of my
son, must be the fruits of that first guilt.'

'Oh, ADAM! thy memory is now refreshed with the bitter reflections of that
ungarded moment, when the first act of ingratitude and evil was committed upon
the earth by tasting the forbidden fruit.'

'Nothing, my child, has been withheld from thee or thy brother, that was
appertaining to your necessary knowledge, that has been manifested unto ADAM
your father, by the Great Creator; no duties commanded or restrictions
enjoined, have been kept from you; for it contributes much to the happiness of
my days to witness the holy and blameless walking of my children before the
Lord in purity of heart and uprightness of life; strictly adhering to the
commandments of heaven, and in mutual love and concord with each other. But,
CAIN, thy disordered looks forbode some trouble pending, and nearly ripe to
fruition; thy dejected appearance strikes a dread upon my mind, beyond the
fortitude of paternal tenderness to support; the whole frame of nature within
thee seems to border upon distraction; the agitating motions of thy soul, and
irregular beating of thy pulse, are certain omens of some approaching evil --
retire to thy peaceful habitation, and partake of the necessary calmness and
tranquillity -- thou indulgest some ungovernable passion, some unruly phantom
that deprives thee of manhood, reduces thee in reason beneath the standard of a
child, and bidding defiance to the exalted dignity of a man: restrain all
doubtful timidity, and confidence in thy Maker, for all needful revelation for
your instruction will be manifested in due time. If new dictates or
prohibitions are ordained in heaven for the sons of ADAM to rectify their
lives, it will be declared at the Lord's appointed time to CAIN and ABEL; GOD
will not permit succeeding children to remain in darkness, and unacquainted
with his will. But declare unto me, CAIN, from what hidden motives issues that
gloom on thy countenance, and the source of thy inward calamity? Remove my
astonishment! Cease not to quell the disturbance thou have created in my
breast, and dispel the anguish thou have brought on thy father, by concealing
thy own grief -- What moved thy earnest solicitations? wherein is thy soul
wounded? Relate thy trouble to EVE thy mother; perhaps her superior knowledge
in the virtue of herbs may procure some balsamic plant, that by her careful
preparation, may procure thee relief, restore thy disordered frame to its
former calmness, and banish from thy mind all unruly perturbations.'

To this discourse of ADAM, CAIN begins to reply;

'Oh, my father! let me not see my mother! Parents of the misereble! in the
anguish of my soul have I spoke thus. Answer me one question, father.' 'Propose
it my child.' 'What is death?' ADAM replies; 'It is the change, CAIN,
instituted by heaven to be undergone by all mankind, at GOD's appointed time;
it is the Lord's doing; we then cease our mortal existence, and return to GOD
that made us.' 'ADAM my father, be thou again attentive to thy son; solve his
doubts, remove his fears, and speak for ABEL, thy child; my brother sleeps! a
sleep yet unknown to ADAM or EVE; Those purple streams that were wont to flow
through the fibers of nature, and give activity to the vivid arteries of youth,
are suddenly relaxed in their daily course, and become motionless, pale, and
cold; the crimson hae that adorned and beautified his cheerful countenance is,
like a blossom of snow, vanished from sight, and an icy stiffness substituted,
to fix a permanent chillness on his once bloomy cheeks; thus lies ABEL, the
favorite of heaven, extended on the mossy bank, by the side of his staring and
hungry flock, bleating for daily food from his tender nurture; he lies
inactive, plunged unpreparedly into that dubious state thou speak of, by the
hand of CAIN his brother! What have I done? Will he not again resume life, to
renew his daily diligence? to present his acceptable sacrifices to his GOD, and
his prayers to heaven to pacify offended wrath upon CAIN? I will hasten again
unto him. Father follow thou me.

CAIN outran his father, and came first to the horrid spot where ABEL still
lay. -- 'I will,' said he, 'with tears of lamentation, wipe the clotted blood
from his lovely face before my father come, and pour over him the plaintive
accents of my wounded soul; and in pensive strains of grievous melancholy,
utter with mournful sadness the language of despair and repentance. My brother!
my brother! Have these hands produced the direful effects, originating in our
parents first fall? is this death? Is the change pronounced upon the children
of ADAM? Is this the curse denounced for eating the forbidden fruit? Is this
the road allotted for all mankind to travel from earth to heaven? ABEL, thou
answerest me not; He continues solemnly silent! every organ of sense is
deprived of its necessary properties; the whole body overhung with gloomy
sadness, and regardless of CAIN's bitter reproaches on himself, he peaceably
lays at rest. -- CAIN, ignominious infamy have thou entailed upon thy
posterity! behold the direful consequences of thy implacable malice against thy
inoffensive brother; where gentleness and meekness were always treasured up to
receive thee into his arms with fraternal and tender embraces. Heaven must be
shocked at thy unnatural transformation from a brother to a murderer!
detestable must thou be to thy own remembrance, to presume to limit the
boundaries of Heaven's will, by destroying a life which thou neither gave nor
can restore! Here comes my father in tears.'

'ADAM, behold thy son; step forward and touch him. Is this death?' ADAM after
a few moments recovering from his shock, exclaimed, 'Cursed art thou in the
sight of GOD; and impiously infamous will be the descendants of thy loins.'
Curse me not ADAM! the curses of ABEL alone from the ground will sink me!
Behold he is putrefying; he is hastening with swift dissolution to corruption,
and presently be united in nature with the earth that supports him; CAIN
laments him, CAIN by him unnoticed. What father, must now be done? Lift up thy
hand against CAIN, and retaliate with the blood of thy first born, for the
death of thy younger son, that CAIN may accompany ABEL through 'the unknown
regions of death.' No, CAIN; vengeance belongs unto GOD.' ADAM now looking
upon ABEL cries out 'My child! my child! ABEL my son! he answers not his
father! This must be to die! This must be death! From this hour must ADAM and
EVE bid adieu to joy; for the father of men has lived to see before he tasted
death. I go and fetch thy mother, to be a witness to the power of death.

'No, father; wound not her tender feelings with the woeful sight.'

O CAIN, this act of thine must exceed the threatened curse? the life of ABEL
was the gift of GOD; he alone had authority to take it away. Woe be unto thee,
thou have involved us all in the guilty scene! The blood of ABEL will pierce
the skies, and invoke Almighty vengeance for wrath upon us. Fly with rapidity,
if creation can produce a cavern of darkness fit for thee! haste upon the wings
of conscious timidity, and hide thee, if possible, from the presence of GOD!
But alas! no rock so dark, nor cave so deep, but the eyes of Omnisciency will
detect thee! No work of creation, ever so dismal or dreary, that would display
such clemeney as to admit thee within the bosoms of their obscurity, or vainly
attempt to secure thee from the penetrations of Omnipotence! Humble thyself
therefore before him: Let the smarting wounds of increasing penitence be
mingled with the tears of deep contrition, and unremittingly presented through
the bitter channel of painful remorse, to the Throne of Heaven. Let humiliating
protestations, daily, hourly, nay, every minute of thy existence, accompany
fervently thy lamentable supplications, that the sacrifice of keen anguish may,
in a small measure, be proportionable to the magnitude of thy crime. We know
not the will of GOD; the wisdom of Infinity is unsearchable; it exceeds our
shallow capacities; our ideas are too consined to judge thereof; he can -- he
may be merciful where mercy is not due, and pardon sins that to us may appear
unpardonable -- Let, therefore, thy sorrow be unfeigned; thy penitence devoutly
sincere; and without relaxation or intermission persevere to the end of thy
days; but be not vainly deceived with expectations of comfort or consolation
from ADAM, for his riper years are incapable of administering it unto thee.

'Behold my child, thy brother! there he lies! Abel! my son! my child! he
lies extended; he is no more! Silence dwells within him: peace abides with
him. O CAIN, my son! I will forbear longer to increase thy anguish, by
extenuating thy guilt. Henceforward, O my soul, be thou patiently silent, and
submissively resigned to the heavy stroke with a heavenly firmness. CAIN.'
'Father.' 'Join me to commit his cold corpse to the earth, to its native parent
dust; for GOD thus spoke unto thy father; 'For dust thou art and into dust
shall thou return.'

After discharging this last mournful office for my child, I return to EVE thy
mother, and communicate unto her the doleful tidings; and hasten thou to
appease thy offended GOD.' This last office of paternal love being with
solemnity and tears discharged, the Parent of mankind, with mournful and broken
accents, bids adieu to the grave of ABEL, and takes farewell of unhappy CAIN;
and with wringing hands, and eyes overflowing with waters of grief, he hastens
through the shady bowers, moistening the grass with the tears of lamentation,
in search of EVE his wife. EVE impatiently waiting the result of her husband
and son's conversation, was eagerly prepared to hear the news from the mouth of
ADAM. He attempts to speak; utteranee was denied him; faultering was his half
lengthened syllables; and by long and forced expressions, was the melancholy
catastrophe announced to the mother of men; to the mother of ABEL the dead --
She no sooner comprehended a sufficiency of ADAM's inarticulate words, to
dispel all doubts in her mind, but her whole nature within her with an unusual
shriek, gave way to the unexpected shock; the voice of her agonies reached the
very skies! In vain did ADAM apply every effort that tenderness and reason
could dictate to reconcile her dejected mind to the weighty intelligence; but
anguish had taken too deep root for conjugal affection to remove; and, extended
on the cold element, she laid in an almost state of nonexistence; when at last
coming to reason, she lift up her eyes toward ADAM with consternation, and
cries out;

'Where are my two sons? CAIN, being now come within hearing of his mother's
voice, with the terrors of guilt and self-cutting reproaches, flies toward the
spot, and falling with his face to the ground exclaims:

'Woe is me! on me be the curse! on me be the vengeance that Heaven has
reserved for man's first disobedience; On me, O GOD, display thy wrath! ADAM
was speechless; EVE almost senseless; neither capable of giving vent to the
emotions of pity or anger. The scene was affecting; it was too distressing for
the already wretched fratricide to support; and with the terrors of conviction,
inseparable from conscious guilt, and surrounded with the direful apprehensions
of lamenting despair, he quits the mournful spot of his almost lifeless
parents, and ruminates sorrowfully where to fly to procure peace to his soul,
and, if possible, to escape the vigilance of his GOD. 'I will again return,'
says he, 'to the sacred spot that faithfully encloseth in its bowels the body
of ABEL, now compounded with clay, and waiting its portion of time to mingle
with its native dust.' Thus said, he hastens toward the habitation of death --
when behold, a voice from the clouds, like the rattling of provoked thunder,
speaks to him with the Majesty of Omnipotence --

'WHERE IS ABEL THY BROTHER?'

Struck with horror, guilt, and fear, the infernal tempter was at hand, and
insinuated into him a quick reply -- 'I know not: am I my brother's keeper?'
Immediately sentence of condign punishment was inflicted upon him by the GREAT
JEHOVAH; and, to screen him from the dangers of the many enemies the bloody act
had exposed him unto from future generations, the Lord distinguished him from
the rest of mankind by a guilty mark. What that mark was Scripture is silent;
consequently we can only form conjectures, every one as their imagination leads
them: If my opinion may be given, (and which I do not wish to force upon
another) it was this -- That conscious terror that displays itself in the
countenance of every murderer, when the question is confronted unto him with
strong suspicions -- with this important difference -- that it was always
manifest in the face of Cain, as the concomitants of guilt to the day of his
death.

CAIN having received the chastising malediction of provoked Heaven, heavily
proceeds toward the grave of ABEL: languishing as he walks, he bemoans, with
grievous lamentation, the empire that sin had erected within him; and with
heartrending complaints, on the eve of distraction, he arrives at the mournful
spot! the sad hillock of death! and, in straims of pensive sadness bedewed the
hallowed turf that covered the mangled body of the innocent victim, with tears
of inconsolable anguish -- After a few minutes sobbing and bewailing his
forfeited bliss over ABEL's grave he exclaims to himself -- 'This is forbidden
ground; the sacrifice of unspotted purity rests concealed under this grassy
hillock; defile not the ground by thy footsteps, consecrated to the relics of
virtue; polluted by thy evil, it is now become sacred by admitting into its
bosom the remains of perfective innocence; I must withdraw the sharpened darts
of piercing remembrance wounds my soul afreth. Adieu, thou virtuous spot,
adier! The sentence of Heaven's frowns, replete with foreboding gloom, must now
be fulfilled, and CAIN be banished into regions unknown; where penitence may
produce peace, aad solitude procure lost tranquillity. O wretched man! miserable
CAIN! to meditate death on the endearing fountain of innocence, where it never
entered the heart to cherish a thought tending to thy disquiet, much less thy
death! execrable, foul, and black the deed; yet darkness must provide thee a
cell to pour out thy complaints and dedicate thy soul to Heaven. Admonition
from my father may be now salutary and beneficial to me; I again return and
request his advice and benediction; he will not disdain to hear my plea.'

Thus said, he returns to his father and mother. ADAM beheld him advancing, and
drawing toward him, perceives the mark of GOD, and says -- 'CAIN, what is
this? thy countenance has the appearance of nature's transmutation! CAIN
replies -- 'Father give ear to the words of the unhappy! CAIN thy son has seen
the Lord; the decree of justice is passed; thus spoke the GOD of Heaven; A
fugitive and vagabond shall thou be. Earth is forbidden to CAIN its increase;
the MARK of Heaven is his security from bloody men; make known unto me the path
to steer my course for calm consolation; distressful as the hour, yet welcome
would be the messenger of death. Can forlorn hopes, or humble acquiescence to
Divine mandates dispel the turbulency of raving madness? Retaliate ADAM for the
blood of ABEL, by solicitation for Heaven's permission to disunite the soul and
body of CAIN. He is, he can be no more than an encumbrance on the earth; the
ground whereon his foot rests will be defiled by the pressure of his image;
barrenness will proceed after the footsteps of the cursed delinquent. I must
die? Help me to die! The sin exceeds the extent of mercy! The abominable crime
will not admit of Heaven's favor.'

Thus he importunes ADAM to take away his life; ADAM was silent; he again
proceeds --

'My soul wants deliverance from the bondage of a growing sensation that holds
it in captivity from the enjoyment of every domestic and final endearment.' --
ADAM speaks --

'No, Cain; the will of GOD must be obeyed. -- EVE searcely recovered from her
first confused state of mind at ADAM's relating the melancholy event, could
barely summon fortitude enough to enter into a renewed discourse with CAIN or
her husband; but she thus begins --

"ADAM, my spouse, my other half, let us not anticipate evil; there is an
Almighty Providence who rules all wordly mutations, and where celestial
goodness deigns to protect and provide for the feeblest insect and twisting
reptile; Comfort CAIN, that he may not plunge us into increasing troubles by
distrusting the clemency of his GOD; dejection sits on his brow; his
attitude is that of madness! Join thy feeling with mine ADAM, and let us mingle
compassion with his flowing agonies -- We may associate paternal pity and
commiseration, as the same time we hold in destation the enormity of his crime;
let not the curses of the whole creation conjunctively deprive him of our
parental love.'

CAIN was still in a posture of deep humiliation -- his grief overballanced the
powers of impressed nature, and his soul heavy laden with the burden of
affliction; the flowing drops issue from his swollen eyes, and fall to the
ground like globulets of an heavy storm, the sound of which roused ADAM and EVE
from their state of deep consideration how to advise him -- when suddenly, as
if guided by the hand of instinct, they look in the face of CAIN, and without a
uttering a word, both fell prostrate with their faces on the earth, and
moistened the grass with the dumb waters of sympathy.

Thus our first parents lay, deprived of the organs of speech, but with
groanings and lamentations that echoed through the whole diversity of nature's
delightful space; the utmost boundaries of creation were smitten with the
uncommon sound; all the inhabitants of the forest were disturbed by the unusual
echoes: The ravenous beasts of prey, the winged tribe of jocal harmony, the
insects that hovered in the airy element and the little unnoticed reptile that
twirls under foot, felt the effect of murder; and thrown into an unsual
profound silence and terror, neither motion, voice or sound could be perceived
on that side EDEN, but the broken, the plaintive accents of ADAM and EVE.

CAIN stood like an engraven statue of raving phrenzy, speechless, and
motionless with eyes intensely fixed upon his father and mother. Thus lay the
first parents of mankind; thus stands before them the first murderer in the
world.

The sun was now declining, and drawing spedily toward the close of it is daily
course; The luminous brightness and warmth proceeding from the exhalations of
his radiant beams, was powerfully diminished, and the chilling damps from the
surface of the earth made their gradual and forcible approaches, so that ADAM
and EVE began to experience the sensitive effects of cold and advancing night;
reason being a little recovered, they arose; EVE first; she opens her lips to
ADAM and speaks thus;

'ADAM, it is prudent, it is the counsel of discretion for us to put a restraint
upon immoderate grief, and not indulge the woes of an irretrievable malady.'
Then embracing ADAM as her partner in calamity, she thus begins; 'ADAM my
husband, the joy of my soul; see before us our firstborn, sinking under the
load of dreadful expectation; although the title of parental softness is
forfeited, let us not withhold from him the compassion of pity; Is not that
established in the bowels of our affection? What must be done? Give me lessons
of instruction, and I will deliver them with improved admonition to our
unfortunate son; I can promise myself success from thy nature and ripened
deliberations: behold him before us! it is a melting scene; let us be tender
toward him, it may reduce his soul to serenity, or we know not what a fatal
moment of distraction may produce, when all the faculties are in a state of
derangement; he may add iniquity to iniquity, and commit a suicide on himself;
if this evil also befall us, unceasing and unavailing sorrow must accompany us
all the days of our life; the pleasures of every sacred as well as moral duties
will be banished from us; and all private consolations in our various
circumstances of life will feel its effects, even in the midst of these
unforeseen vicissitudes that our Maker has ordained for us to encounter; it
will obstruct us in paying obedience to the Divine commands, by a continual
preying upon our vital parts, rendering us incapable and unfit for the services
required of us: besides, ADAM, thou know the Lord is merciful: he tempers
judgment with clemency; there are still beams of hope left for our child; the
Lord preserved us from destruction for the first transgression; we involved our
children and their successive generations in sin to the end of time, or CAIN
would have been a stranger to jealousy or hatred to his brother; give
reflection a seat in thy bosom; May we not justly attribute a portion of CAIN's
crime to our first fall? We planted the seeds of sin, he only plucked the
fruit; and it is impossible for us in this infantile state of nature, to
conceive the different kinds and qualities of fruit that will be produced from
the tree of sin that we planted; they will differ widely in degrees of
magnitude and circumstance; yet all, proportionable to their enormity,
destructive of that primeval innocence in which we were created; Let us
endeavor to relieve his depression, to administer consolation unto him, and
with joyful gratulation, he will return cheerful thankfulness; leave him not
sinking under the weight of ingrafted impiety, transfused into him with his
mother's milk; CAIN was not the first sinner; Are not we also banished the
presence of the Lord? still we have hope; let us hope also for our child. If
the increase of the earth is withheld from the labors of his own tillage,
still nature itself is abundantly sufficient to supply all his wants. The Lord
has rejected his future sacrifices; then CAIN need not Till the ground --
Pardon is treasured up in heaven for repentance, or ADAM and EVE would be now
as ABEL. Speak, my husband, what words shall I utter to my son? Let me
alleviate the pain, if I cannot prevent the growth of grief by sin allotted
him, or it will eat deeper into his soul, beyond the penetration of parental
feelings, and beyond the power of compassion to moliify."

ADAM all this time was soberly attentive to the words of EVE, but could not
subdue the rising tumults of passion against CAIN, that did at intervals force
itself upon him; but still he strived against the depressions that human
infirmities made upon his mind; he strived in vain to stop the sources that
produced sighs and moans for his child; he attempted to unbosom his mind in
compliance to EVE, but the power and vivacity of utterance had left him, and
like a lifeless image he falls again to the earth. CAIN was no longer able to
support himself under the melancholy scene, and began to exclaim against
himself in the most poignant accents of grief --

'CAIN, CAIN, witness the effects of thy obduracy! consider the baneful
consequences of thy lustful enmity against thy brother! Behold thy father
surrendering up life to the cold mansions of mortality, by the tedious weapons
of a soul wounded malady; by slow approaches to his native earth, to accompany
ABEL his son in glory! behold also thy mother, with a heart softened by the
melting compassion of plaintive sympathy, unable to keep within their limited
bounds the watery drops, or heart bursting sighs, turn all thy eyes toward
yonder spot, where rests in peace the innocent victim of thy fury.' -- He now
addresses ADAM; 'My father if thou still retainest life, cast thine eyes upon
Cain, ere death removes his soul into the boundless regions of eternity, and
banish him thy presence forever; Life is a burden; existence is become
insupportable; the cruelties of death will be a balm; it will deliver my soul
from the bondage of relentless remorse and bitter torture; the execution of
Heaven's wrath cannot exceed the torments of a stinging conscience; Father,
farewell! I die! -- The hand that severed ABEL from thy bosom, shall remove
CAIN from thy sight, and leave thee childless: -- a similar stroke will produce
a similar effect; and consequences must be left to future revelation.'

ADAM, by a sudden emotion proceeding from those terrible words of CAIN, and
trembling at the baneful project nourishing in the bosom of his son, looks up,
and in that moment of perturbation, with the trembling of nature upon him, fell
upon the neck of CAIN, and embracing him in the ecstacy of charity and love,
and thus he begins;

'My first born! my eldest child! -- Assume the man! be again thyself! -- A
frozen horror has iced up my intellects in defiance of reason, and raging
madness has taken possession of thee -- thy irregular conceptions of things
deceive thee, and will deprive thee from enjoying those succors that are
reserved in heaven for the unfortunate -- GOD ALMIGHTY is ingenuous in
distributing mercy, and extends it as much beyond our comprehensions as
beyond our deserts; and turns not a deaf ear to the returning penitent and
reclaimed sinner. -- Drive contemptuously from the recesses of thy soul all
those subtle and ensnaring insinuations, that are obtruded upon thy disordered
senses by the first great revolter from heaven and deceiver of men -- Thy life
is the sole prerogative of GOD -- let him be thy judge -- let him be thy
executioner -- let his will be thy law; and as thy days are prolonged let thy
prayer be incessant; embrace gratefully the season of life, that unwearied
devotion may atone for thy guilt -- steadfastly adhere unto, and perseveringly
discharge with close application, the duties thou have hitherto neglected --
sacrifice with grateful pleasure every vain delight that has hitherto been
aiding to immerge thee in sin; and with praises devout dedicate thy future days
to the shrine of morality and religion -- choose prudence for a directory in all
thy desires, and let temperance be compounded with all thy gratifications; and
forget not the sacred obligations due unto heaven for granting thee space to
make thy peace with GOD; Such pious emotions will inspire thee with zealous
fervency, and the beneficence of heaven will be more apparently visible unto
thee; Almighty clemency will be more eminently manifested to thy conceptions,
and thy present contracted ideas of Divine inspiration will shine with more
captivating luster in thy soul; the bright perfection of Omnisciency will
dispel from thy breast those obscure imaginations that almost reduce thee to an
inanimate Being; It is the LORD that punishes; it is the LORD that pardons;
therefore let not the extremities of despair drive thee to madness; ABEL thy
brother has not forfeited his right to the inheritance of heaven by his
untimely dissolution; but thou, by sacrificing thy own life to the passion of
terror, excludest thyself from all redemption, and cover, by the veil of
suicide, all prospects of future felicity: therefore, my child, be calm;
maintain a manly fortitude in thy breast; consider the conspicuity of GOD'S
goodness and greatness in all the works of creation; and our cheerful obedience
to his precepts, is like undefiled virtue that brings with it its own reward;
be watchful that thy future conduct may not be defiled with sin, to plunge thee
inevitably into the dark and horrible labyrinth of endless agony: our sins
though numerous, and in magnitude astonishing yet the love of GOD toward us
will still be superior in justice and in mercy. It Is proper; it is needful, that
thy mind shall be occasionly checked with the reflection on ABEL'S death, and
produce within thee some painful remonstrances; yet still rest thou upon thy
GOD; establish piety and holiness within thee, and with laborious exertions,
cultivate a future integrity and uprightness al^ the days of thy life; Be
quick, and obey the Divine mandate; seek some remote spot to take up thy
dwelling amongst the inoffensive guiltless; those irrational inhabitants of
creation that are untainted with the corrupted principles of man, and by the
instinct of pure nature, they may console thy plaintive accents; the luxuriant
branches of the grove, the variegated shrubs of the field, may, with the melody
of their pliable movements, lull thy soul to repose. -- Thy reflections thus
encompassed on all sides, may, for a season, banish from thy memory the
disconsolate situation of thy forsaken parents -- With speed be gone; obey the
voice of the Lord; abandon this spot; because loathsome by dejection, and find
a seat of meditation more consistent with the unsettled circumstances of thy
soul; shun the dwelling of ADAM and EVE, that frequent interviews with the
parents of sorrow may neither impede nor restrain thee in the exercises of
emulation and penitence: go where contrition, gratitude, and adoration to GOD
demands all the pious servitude thy lengthened days can present; relish with
pleasure the duties enjoined, and let the task be delightful and pleasing; and
this will be a balm to thy calamity, and banish despondency from the door of
thy heart, and the powers of grief gradually abate within thee -- Prayer and
praise will be as bulwarks unto thee to enable thee to conflict with thy
oppressive imaginations; and proportionable to thy perseverance will the
beatitudes of GOD be displayed. This, CAIN, is the road; these are the
footsteps thou must pursue, and thy assiduity herein will be crowned with
success; let not thy thoughts delude thee; for, by attempting to retaliate for
ABEL'S death on any other terms, the GOD of all the earth will reject, and it
will nip in the bud every appearance of irregularity within thee; guard against
thy heart, for know thou, it is desperately wicked, it is outrageous, and
requires the chains of unshaken resolution to keep it in subjection, and within
the bounds of moderation; thou know what is good, and have already
experienced the knowledge of evil; curb all passions, and permit no vice to
reign predominant within thee; be watchful that Satan may have no dominion over
thee. Cherish these admonitions of thy father, and virtue will still add
reverence to thy years; and thy lengthened days will be accompanied with hopes
to the grave. CAIN, thy father has discharged his duty, and bids thee farewell
-- Farewell, my child!'

'My father, farewell! Eve, my mother, farewell! Parents of mankind, farewell!
EVE, unable to sustain herself under the impressive weight of affliction, thus
began;

'My child! my first born! and must the sorrows of EVE be her annual
consecration? must tears alone be her daily consolation for the loss of both
her sons? ADAM, review thy admonition; let not paternal counsel exceed the
limits of needful precaution; have thou closed up the bowels of compassion?
Can thou reconcile thy parental feelings to thy child's continual absence?
Would thou exclude him forever our sight? be not lost to sensation; thou
spakest to CAIN, while thy eyes and thy heart was with ABEL; thy affections for
the dead divested thee of sympathy for the living son: I doubt not his
sincerity; all his vital parts are oppressed with conviction; not a member in
his whole frame that has escaped the powerful agitation; he seems inflexible on
contrition; the stormy seasons of boisterous mutations are gone and past; he
detests his crime, and longs to seek refuge in the bosom of penitence; his
future days will be regulated by the standard of truth; and holiness and
righteousness be established within him forever; as thou spakest unto him with
serenity, he listened to his father with instruction, and the sage counsel of
years had the desired effect: Can there be danger? May not our child, at the
expiration of revolving seasons return again to his disconsolate Parents, and
cheer their drooping spirits, by removing their deep rooted grief? We shall
then be joyful witnesses of his improving accomplishments; we shall see him
growing to perfection in the knowledge and practice of those duties that
constitute happiness and peace of mind, and ADAM and EVE be partakers of CAIN'S
tranquillity; it must gladden the hearts of his parents to behold the happy
change; a pleasing confirmation; and enlivening to our souls and in the midst
of solitude create in us a rapturous devotion to celebrate praises to Heaven!
those obstacles of gloomy doubtfulness that will at intervals intrude upon our
moments of retirement, will be kept at a reasonable distance, as is requisite
for our more serious performance of religious duties, and rendering our
services in obedience to the Almighty will; it will strengthen our fortitude to
encounter patiently all those afflictive smarts that will occasionally dart
into our souls, and occupy the recesses of our hearts, almost unmolested; and
thus, from groundless fears, we shall accumulate upon ourselves real evils; we
are, as well as CAIN, strangers to the inward workings of heaven; neither know
we the secret intentions of the Lord in these things.'

'ADAM, speak again to CAIN -- press upon him his zealous obedience to his
covenanted GOD, and solemnly remind him of his renewed engagements; and when
the melodious voice of peace has established its dwelling within him, and he
finds his soul purified with calm and holy gladness, and an uninterrupted
converse with heaven, has procured him a sweet complacency of mind, he may,
thus prepared for our embraces, return to his parents again, and, under the
auspices of Heaven's favor, pay the duties of filial gratitude unto us; this
will cheer us under hourly depressions, and give us comfort in our acquiescence
to Providence -- we can be aiding unto him by a cultivation of virtuous seeds
in his mind; the beneficence of Providence will become more conspicuous unto
him; and his ideas of heaven be more enlarged, and refined, and fitted for the
digestion of Divine revelation. Speak thus, ADAM to the child of thy bosom, it
will be salutary to the heart of thy wife.'

ADAM at this last and earnest solicitation of EVE, seemed to be wrought upon
by her arguments, and inclined to charity toward CAIN -- he drew such
conclusions from her words as had weighty influence upon his own judgment, and
thus began again to discourse with CAIN --

'My son, is there yet a branch of virtue left within thee? or one grain of
seed centered within thee, not yet burried in the bowels of evil, whereon thy
father may place a shadow of hope? is there yet a vacuity unoccupied by the
flames or ashes of sin, that a virtuous deed may take possession?' CAIN
answers --

What say thou my father!' ADAM replies --

'What are the emotions of thy heart? is there a stability in thy vows to
Heaven? Do unshaken resolutions and firmness of mind unite together to oppose
the encroachments of thy soul, that have hitherto put all mortality to
defiance?' CAIN, with broken acccents and words scarce intelligible, replies to
ADAM;

'Father, suspect me not: a second evil cannot be produced from a first that is
finally eradicated, root and branch; the malignancy of sin is apparent unto
CAIN in all its odious deformities, and the rebellious fiend is subdued by all
the arrows of conviction; his former insinuations are abolished and beome
annihilated in CAIN; religion shall reign as sovereign over the empire of his
soul and supplications to Heaven shall never cease: reason begins to abound
and stedfastness of thought remains with him: CAIN knows that to asspire
toward Heaven is to be humble at the footstool of its throne; Sin has been
compounded with all CAIN'S actions; but is not mercy tempered with God's
justice? shame is visible in my countenance, and the mark of conscious guilt
condemns me; so shall my repentance be demonstrated by simplicity; to GOD I
will apply; by GOD will the necessary succors be administered; persecutions
from men shall not sink me, nor tribulations of conviction weigh me down; to
shameful actions I will be estranged, that creation may not again blush at my
guilt; moderation shall be the regulator of my desires; and my petitions
justifiable, that they may be accepted, and return unto me bountiful, and the
blessings impressed on me with grateful joy; CAIN can defy Satan; the helmet of
Heaven is proof against his assaults, and courageously can he combat the
tempter; seduction shall no more invite him, nor perfidy any more harrass him;
discontent shall no longer abide with him, nor sadness damp his cheerfulness.'
Here CAIN ended, and again addressed his father with a farewell; Parent,
farewell! again I bid adieu to this spot of rural innocence, and fly to regions
unknown".

CAIN, my child! my blessing! and may the presence and munificence of Almighty
benediction await thee, and accompany thee to the retirements of solitude!
Farewell! farewell.!

EVE now approached toward CAIN, with the sinking steps of paternal affections
and maternal feelings, and almost drowned in tears of sympathetic tenderness,
dropping almost imperceptibly from her overflown eyes, not able to contain the
heart-feeling moisture, while she took a fainting embrace from her child.

'EVE,' says ADAM, 'our son is now taking his leave of this beautiful spot; let
us hope the remembrance of it will be engraved on his bosom, and cheer him in
his moments of devotion.'

'My child!' my child!' said EVE, and down she dropped, unable to proceed; ADAM
raised her on her knees.

'What says the wife of my bosom? Speak to thy son.' Heaven accompany him, said
she, and down she fell. ADAM again raised her, and she faintsin his arms. CAIN
ran to a murmuring brook and bro't water, and sprinkled on the face of his
mother; she came to herself, and began;

'May thy resolutions be strengthened with thy days, and the glorious
brightness of heavenly splendour surround thee with benign consolation in the
gloomy mansions of thy different retirements; improve thy mental powers with
the attentive cares of prudence, and let thy daily adorations be presented with
unremitting diligence; and remember that the Lord thy GOD is privy to all thy
thoughts, thy words, and thy actions; treasure up in thy soul the words of thy
parents, and bid them adieu! Farewell, my child! farewell! ADAM again embraces
him; and with the language of sorrow, scarcely articulate, speaks unto him:

'My son darkness is approaching -- in a few hours night will becloud the
atmosphere, and all creation be dressed in sable melancholy; we must (...) to
the mournful separation -- be gone; (...) more than frail nature can support to
look upon thee. Behold EVE thy mother, she is sinking under the pressure of
weeping grief -- thy father trembles like the approaching dissolution of
mortality; embrace the present inanimate moment, and fly our sight; be gone! I
sink! EVE is swooning! life is almost obsc^^ed -- speak no more.'

'Farew^^ my parents; I go; adieu! I am gone! ^^^ewell! farewell! -- Look not
behind yo^^ ^omeet the languishing eyes of CAIN, that without the emotion of
additional unquiet he may to the utmost bounds of sight have a glimmering
perspective of his beloved parents, and escape the poignant wound that their
distorted features would make upon his soul -- Now I go, I go, my parents I go;
farewell! I am gone! My father and mother farewell!'

ADAM and EVF, both together, at this instant, like the voice of one soul,
without looking at CAIN, cried out -- ' Adieu, our child! adieu!

CAIN's LAMENTATIONS OVER ABEL. BOOK THE SECOND.
THE irregular imaginations that now succeeded each other in the mind of CAIN
gave all nature the appearance of a new creation; every visible object strikes
anawful consideration into his soul; he soon begins to collect his scattered
reason, and to bring to mind the state from whence he was fallen, and to pacify
his soul by a composed reconcilement to the inflictive chastisement of GOD, and
with calm fortitude submit to these dispensations of Prodence; and thus began
to commune with himself:

'I am still an inhabitant amongst, although a stranger to the beauties of
creation -- Where will my wandering footsteps lead me? A solemn and sad silence
must be my nightly as well as daily companion; and the peaceful habitation of
ADAM and EVE will produce renewed bitterness to my reflections; I would hope
for consolation; then says ADAM my father, 'build thy expectations upon
penitence.' 'Religion is my aim; then says EVE my mother, cultivate an
acquaintance with thy GOD! Peace of mind I would compound with lengthened days;
then conscience tells me, 'to plant the seeds of contrition with double care,
and daily water them with the tears of remorse, and thou shall reapt the fruit
of tranquillity; petition Heaven, the source of good, and its spiritual essence
will not be denied thee; let an emulative increase of virtuous actions prompt
thee forward, and thou will attain a sufficiency of power to withstand and
accumalate a portion of pious resignation, to enable thee to encounter
courageously with all the temptations and tribulations that will occasionally
and unexpectedly befall thee,' -- Ye skies! ye stars! ye angels! all ye the
glorified host of Heaven, and all ye the whole created face of Heaven, earth
and sea; all ye that are the works of the One great God, and witnesses to the
first wound that was given to the son of ADAM -- a deed that stained the whole
face of nature with blood! -- a deed the most heinous that can be recorded in
the acts of polution -- it is you, ye perfect works of GOD that I entreat, to
lend my wandering steps your influence; to render me your friendly guidance
through the untrodden expanse of creation, yet unknown and untraced by the foot
of man, bring my weary limbs to rest upon a spot most suitably adapted to the
forlorn circumstances of my soul -- the GREAT benificent CREATOR will not
reject your supplications for me!

Pausing a while to rest himself, he says again, CAIN be silent; thy phrenzy is
leading thee to distraction! thy addresses are vain! thou art degrading the
Most high; these are no more than created Beings incapable of gratifying thy
wishes; it is offending Heaven with sinful equalities; to GOD direct thy voice
(to whose laws thou art a convicted and condemned criminal) for guidance, that
thy banishment from the fertile plains of thy nativity may be wifely
accommodated to thy state? Thus CAIN slowly proceeds, while the foeble rays of
the luminary host were barely sufficient to reflect the image of creation to
his ideas, and the bright splendour of the more luminous orb was concealed under
the thickness of the beclouded atmosphere CAIN now perceiving that darkness was
making its rapid advances, in an ecstacy of of rapture, lifts up his hands
toward Herven, and exclaims --

O GOD, nothing in nature appears in a state of imperfection but CAIN; Every
thing in its kind vents reproaches on the unhappy by their uncorrupted
offerings of adoration; the more extensive my surveys, the more confirmed are
my speculations, that all the beauties of the world are only comparative
shadows to the majesty of thy works; all nature, except man, answers the
purpose of its creation; Oh! could the horrors of recollection be erased from
my mind, that there ever existed a second son of ADAM -- then the clouds of
anguish would be dissipated from CAIN -- These are the hopes of delusion --
these are the phantoms that oc^upy the brain -- Night, clothed in mournful
obscurity, is near at hand -- darkness may administer a relax, though not produce
a deprivation of my anxietes -- Softly I tread the tender herbage and stane the
blades with the crimson hue of guilty blood -- presently all nature will be
hushed in solemn sadness, and every reproachful object be hid in the mournful
mansions of visible obscurity.

'I will embrace the season to diffu^^ gratitude to my Maker, and for a moment
bid adieu to wretchdness, and my vital parts experience a short relax from the
sensations of external accusers, and seek consolation at the footstool of GOD:
shallow as my finite comprehensions are there may be some rays of infinite love
reserved for me, and ere the morning sun again illuminate the boundless plains
of nature, the voice of instruction may descond from heaven to direct my
fugitive (...) to a convenient asylum; (to rescue (...) from the numerous
tribes of wounded complainants that will make their appearance with the rising
sun) and concealed under the wings of Almighty protection, struggle only with
the tremblings and pangs that are become as united companions to my conscience!
-- Night is come! -- thou art welcome! Alas I deceive myself! there is another
interval of feeble light, and the gloominess of night diminishes! the moon
penetrates through the opening clouds, and I can behold my own shadow! then I
must not prognosticate peace; patience must longer abide with me, and let me
draw instructive lessous from the vicissitudes of the evening; it (...) vanity
to be lavish of my hopes; it is sinful to exalt my ignoble expectations; and
transported views will only plunge me into deeper misery -- my sins are
manifest; retaliation is requisite; and vain thoughts and disguised comfort
must be kept at a becoming distance; their dangerous tendency my soul has
woefully felt; their dismal effects have already severely smarted me.

'What have been hitherto the days of the years of CAIN? Ignorance and folly
began them, pain and sorrow now attend them -- preserve the end of them O LORD,
from everlasting destruction. Thou art merciful, make me supplicating -- thou
art glorious, make me humble -- thou art gracious, make me thankful. If CAIN
cannot restore the life of ABEL, teach him how to obtain remission for the
crime; actuate him by a lively improvement in religion, that thy glory may be
celebrated by his humiliation; and stimulated by conviction may keep in due
exercise all his rational faculties for the promulgation of holiness and
righteousness in his soul, so that at the last he may arrive to a peaceful
tranquillity?

Thus communed CAIN with himself as he soberly drew forward into the thickening
grove; when suddenly a rustling among the interwoven branches, with an hideous
howl, obstructed his progress and struck an icy chillness into his whole frame;
but supported by the power of faith in his GOD, he ventures on, and faintly
beheld the beautiful spots that curiously adorned the untamed and ferocious
Leopard, whose ferocity itself was reduced to a state of panic terror at the
sight of MAN! such destruction had sin made on the irrational ideas of the
brute creation. CAIN with consternation beheld him, and the terrified beast
makes half stares in return, with eyes sparkling with savage voracity, eager to
devour, but fearful to attack, the disturber of his rest, and with stern looks
and a hideous roar, he turns tail and flies affrighted into the wood. Every
concomitant of alarming apprehensions now possessed CAIN'S imaginations, and no
commiseration near, nor consoling friend to participate in his fears, and he
thus speaks to himself;

Vain conceptions deceive me; there are mutations requisite in the nature of
CAIN that requires the wisdom and power of Omnipotence to bring to pass; terror
will still accompany guilt -- My soul is confounded within me; the frightful
monster discomposed all my contemplations, and substituted an impression of
dread; the hardened, the premeditated impiety of CAIN precludes all self
abilities to reclaim; the performance exceeds the limits of his intellectual
capacities; it cannot be done without the aid of Heaven. A wretched outcast, a
notorious delinquent, cannot become virtuous unless the change is conducted
through the channel of Heaven! -- Can the thoughts? can the actions of one be
pure whose conduct was never regulated by an upright rule? Can a fratricide
become a moral of perfection? O CAIN! contract thy ideas of future happiness --
extend not thy hopes beyond due deliberation; repentance must be the unwearied
productions of time; thy flattering expectations of solitude may deceive thee;
it may prove unto thee as dreaming delusions -- Ages to come cannot recompense
what is past. Have thou tears in store sufficient to wash the vessel of thy
enormities clean? Can thou render up unto GOD sacrifices of affliction
proportionable to thy brother's blood? Let not thine eyes be blinded; hide not
the secrets of thy heart from thyself: leave not a vacuum; permit not a cavity
to remain unsearched, that dark conclusions may not abide with thee. Can a
Leopard affright thee? How then facest thou thy GOD that in a moment can crush
thee? Thou attemptest to draw realities from almost improbabilities; before
another setting sun all nature may be to thee as nothing -- Degrade not thy
present knowledge with darkened prospects; for thy first enemy is still
assailing thee under different disguises.' Into this discomposed state was the
soul of CAIN thrown by the equally affrighted beast, and self accusations
against himself; and from the effects of gloomy apprehensions, and fear of
repeated temptations, his calmness and serenity had again forsaken him, and
thus was his mind incumbered with foreboding disasters; he softly and fearfully
passes the entangled branches, which retarded his cautions motions by their
twisted fibers; he again began to talk with himself --

'This place is peculiarly adapted to a contemplative and innocent mind -- What
say thou CAIN? -- Innocence! -- Thou have forfeited that inheritance; It may
be recoverable.'

The sable clothing of darkness had now almost extinguished the feeble light
that at intervals penetrated through the opening clouds, and he looks about for
a thickened covert, wherein to take his night's repose; and at a small distance
perceived an enclosure uncommonly close, composed of brambles and woodbines,
and briars, so firmly united, it represented to his view, by the help of
glimmering light, an arbor of shrubby sweetness; 'Here concealed,' says he, 'I
may get ease from affliction.' As cautiously and softly as he trod the dewy
moss, yet still with an impressive consternation he perceived that almost every
step produced a discord amongst the interwoven branches; the harmless feathered
tribe experienced the unusual disturbance by the sudden emotion and movements
of the pliable twigs, whereon they had perched to bid adieu to the universal
harmony of the day, and enjoy in silent peace their nightly repose! the whole
family of the little melodious choristers was alarmed and terrified, and, as
quick as their half opened eyes would permit endeavored to extricate
themselves from the leaves and branches, and haste a removal; and with timorous
motions, making their escape with scarce extended wing hopping from twig to
twig, till the enemy of their peace, the encroacher upon their quiet asylum,
had made a further progress, and got beyond their tender sensations; at the
same time the savage race, the untamely brood of four-footed creatures, slowly
quit their dreadful coverts for the unwelcome guest, with eyes fiercely raging,
and stubborn reluctance, turn round, and almost bid him defiance; and, with
countenance ferociously aghast, boldly stare to behold the cause of the general
consternation; timorous to encounter yet voraciously eager to devour, the
untimely intruder. The threatening aspects of those enraged animals, struck
additional horror into his soul, weakened his resolutions, and even staggered
his most courageous fortitude; while the smaller works of creation, the
diminutive infects, that thought to have, as usual, slept in peaceful darkness
amongst the warm and pliant leaves, felt also the untimely shock, and with the
sudden bending of the boughs, tumbled by swarms from their easy rest, and fell
as innocent victims in multitudes to his merciless tread; some instantaneously
crushed to death, and others left in helpless agonies under the pangs of wounds
and mangled limbs beyond the healing of nature's kind restorative; and the
twisting reptiles for which Providence had provided a comfortable canopy from
the inclemency of the seasons under the thick mossy grass and autumnal leaves,
that lay in heaps like little mountains on the ground, even these experienced
the tremendous commotion; and with the sagacity of their natures, took refuge
under the sturdy roots of sternly oaks, creeping amongst the closest twinings
of the spreading bottom, where the cruel footsteps of the enemy could not
penetrate, nor the weight of his guilty carcass impress with dire effect.

CAIN, during this time, ruminating seriously on the unprovoked attack he had
made upon the awful sience of creation, and how effectually, though
undesignedly, he had effected an enmity between man and the works of GOD, the
whole creation becoming detestably fearful and unwillingly subservient unto
him. Reason began now to assist him in his contemplations, and he makes an halt
amidst the unsettled inhabitants of the grove, and deliberately pausing on the
evil he had caused amongst them, concluded that himself must escape danger,
while all creatures seemed to dread him. The aspect of the moon's rays was now
become scarce visible; little more than a bare glimmering shadow of light,
hardly perceptible through the thick entanglements of the wood, and softly and
slowly he draws toward the close enclosure -- 'it may be,' says he, 'the
nightly covert of some ravenous beast;' -- And with cautious magnanimity he
separates the almost jointed leaves, and surveys with narrow inspection the
desirous, yet fearful place; silence seemed to be wrapped up in its obscurity;
the motions or breathings of life could not be perceived; even air itself was
almost prohibited admission; so close, so joined, was this solitary recess on
all sides; the more tender and flexible branches he gradually removed, and
gained an entrance into this seat of pensive silence; and with conscientious
congratulations to Providence for protection, he entered the quiet and peaceful
retreat, and calmly composed himself for retirement with the inhabitants of the
wood. -- Thus meeting with no obstruction by art or nature, to discourage or
discompose him, he first addresses his Maker in strains of humble ejaculations;
and then laid him down to rest with that pleasing sensation that frequently
accompanies and is conjugal with fatigued nature, and undisturbed falls into a
profound sleep -- Veiled as the ordinations of Heaven were toward him, he
rests on the soft and untrodden moss in sacred security.

Thus sleeps CAIN, under the luxuriant branches, regardless of danger, with the
complacency of innocence, till night had finished its appointed course, and the
enlivening rays of the morning sun began to dart its refreshing beams through
the narrow openings of the disjointed branches and forewarned CAIN against too
long indulgence; the diligent messenger of Heaven was discharging his Creator's
errand, by making his daily circuit round the universal expanse; the earliest
little songsters had begun to chaunt the morning praises to their Maker, with
the grateful melody of united concord harmoniously delightful; the thrilling
voices and native accents proceeding from their warbling throats, awoke the
pensive sleeper, and summoned him to the duties of awakening day; CAIN looks
around him and minutely inspects his humble mansion, and thus begins to reason
with himself;

'There must be a bounteous, a merciful munificence in the dispensations of
Providence! This shall be the abode of CAIN; the desolate will here take up his
dwelling; he may here diminish his grief, and enjoy a portion if not a
permanency of solitary consolation; he can uninterruptedly revere the justice
and admire the goodness of GOD; and remembrance of iniquities past may check
future ingratitude and folly.'

Thus CAIN communeth with himself and arranges his fancies and resolutions into
a state of regularity, and then postrates himself before GOD, humbly and
servently supplicating his benignity and influence to enable him to accomplish
the desires of his soul; 'I know,' says he, 'before I can by rectitude arrive
to the notice of Heaven, I must, in the posture of humility, first learn to
abominate myself with contrition at the footstool of it; I know, O God, thy
knowledge is impenetrable; that all the inward motions of my heart are within
thy prescience, ere they are fulfilled, and the mysteries of futurity are
appointed by thy unerring decrees; nothing can pass thy Omnisciency unnoticed,
or escape the transcendant depth of thy wisdom, infinite in itself, and
infinitely beyond all human conception; therefore, O God, bestow such a portion
of thy beatitudes upon me as is necessary, and bless it unto me for good; teach
me how to bend myself before thee with submissive reverence; calm the stormy
tempests of my soul, and let scenes of evil be no longer nourished in my
breast.'

He now arises from the ground and addresses the birds of the air, and the air
itself -- 'Be silent, ye cheerful inhabitants of the grove; chaunt not your
harmonious voices, ye inoffensive warblers, and give a respite to your little
musical throats for a season; and ye boistrious and powerful winds, for a time
be still; let not your convulsive accents pursue me rigorously into the doleful
habitation of sadness? disturb not my ejaculations by your irregular discord of
sounds; and all ye, the living perfect works of creation, commisserate me, yet
happily innocent of my wants; your established innocence screens you from all
evil desires; your wishes and wants are reciprocally united, and one does not
exceed the other; the varying discords that subsist between good and evilare
yet estranged, and have not imbibed corruption amongst you; the beauteous
boundaries of creation you can enjoy without your enjoyment being annoyed with
ingratitude; with minds contented you know not the bane of superfluity; you
show your gratitude to your Benefactor for a supply of that alone which is
needful; you enjoy the good without partaking of any of the evil concomitants
that sin has compounded with it; hush then, for a while, and let your silent
adorations resound with melodious whispers through the grove to your Maker.

CAIN now began to assume the rational man with lamentations for ABEL, and
reflecting on his death; and with the powers of conviction upon him would cry
out, ' O my brother Abel! my brother Abel! could thou hear me, could thou
obtain permission from Heaven to make a visionary descension to look into the
dark cavern of my soul, and probe the wound that preys on my vital spirits! Can
love descend from heaven to earth? If so, look down and administer comfort to
the dejected, and apply the balm of virtue to the distressed. Nothing to be
seen or heard in answer to my wishes; all is sober sadness in this mournful
dwelling! nothing to be perceived but uncultivated nature! nor inward
encouragement, but to descry my own imperfections: Providence may see sit to
suit my condition to these accommodations; ABEL is beyond the reach of my
faultering accents; Heaven prohibits the fraternal mission; I will, therefore
with calm resignation, moderate my desires by descretionary bounds, and be not
dismayed while I can have hopes in the LORD: circumspection is meet for me, and
I will estimate it with due consideration, these shall be my resolves, and
morning and evening shall witness my punctual obedience to them; I have
woefully experienced the consequences of hatred, and accursedly felt the
painful stroke of anguish, and acquired a reproachful wisdom to detest evil. I
will endeavor in this lonesome cell to make penitential restitution for ABEL's
blood; and in this unfrequented shade dedicate my tears to that needful
pursuit; and by mingling my penitence in concert with my irrational company,
maintain fortitude with humility to protect me from a life miserably
unfortunate; commune with myself to regret less the loss of society; I would
wish to improve the purposes of my banishment that the hopes of ADAM and EVE
might not be frustrated; let a dilemma of fears, let a labyrinth of doubts
intrude themselves upon me, my hopes shall not be beclouded, my expectations
shall not be sunk in the pit of despondency, nor my promised comforts
overwhelmed with dejection. I long for useful knowledge, and by tedious
perseverance and tribulation will try to attain it; I will shun busy life that
temptations may not surround me, and my alarmed conscience become
proportionably unmindful; a fatiety of content cannot be expected while mixed
with a crowd of unweary persecutors, therefore will I not hazard my present
serenity; the world may be inviting to injuries; and embarrass my soul to
confusion; in the moment of anger I may slay my brother's advocate, for the
reproaches, of the scornful will be very inflicting, and the guilty are
restless under contempt; my infantile reasoning is not yet capable of measuring
the dimensions of provoked inveteracy; I will not join the latter offspring of
ADAM and thus escape the shafts of their calumny; nor shall their bitter
language wound my feelings; my grievous spirit none of them will heal; while
their pointed arrogance will court my frowning observations without
alleviation; my sighs will be their melody, and with my own lamentations will
they torment me, and make my days miserable for want of pity and commiseration.'

Thus reasons the forsaken fratricide with himself to shun society; and
though he is grievously doubtful of his own resolves, yet scrupulously exact in
his endeavors; striving to command himself with judgment, while he suspects
himself of the power of obedience; and thus successive ideas takes their
revolutions in his mind, and passes promiscuously over his self-reproaching
soul. 'I must not,' said he, 'by despondency, defeat my pursuits after wisdom;
I have variegated nature in this uncorrupted abode of solitude to meliorate my
heart with noble and delicious impressions, it is a situation transcendantly
conspicuous for contemplation, and where folly will scarce gain admission; here
will I begin to become acquainted with sacred piety, and enter into an
indissoluble union and communion with my innocent and melodious companions,
whose daily adorations to their Maker give motion to the pliable branches with
the energy of their vocal praises.

O ye cheerful inhabitants of the grove, admit me into your social society, and
accommodate me with a portion of your recreating virtnes.' CAIN now softens his
calamities with hopes of peace, and walks the wood to see how far its produce
was productive of those necessaries consistent with his situation; he was soon
convinced nature had been prolific, and in an ample manner provided all things
needful for his support -- this revived his soul -- gratitude here required no
deliberation; and after offering that sacrifice, he began to partake of
nature's repast, without reluctance. Plentifully did the fruits of various
kinds yield their juicy contents for his refreshment. Calm serenity now
occupied his breast, and a tranquil resignation composed him to his fate -- he
found the spot to be calculated for the indulgence of reflection and
improvement of reason.'

Thus we leave him under the protection of Heaven, improving under the
privileges of solitude for days, and months, and years; and the bounties of
Nature supplied all his wants. -- But even in this promising state of tranquil
peace the first Great Tempter found him out. 'Twas at the close of day when
sable darkness was approaching, the whole creation hushed in solemn silence,
and every living creature had bid adieu to activity for the night, that CAIN
was raised from a religious lethargy of pious contemplations by a shrill and
uncommon sound, like the voice of a spirit, but inarticulate, like the words of
a man, but incomprehensible; and darkness was become a total deprivation of
perception; the sound came nearer, and like the voice of softness entered his
ear: 'Cain, Cain, I am an ambassador from Heaven; haste and obey the voice of
thy God.'

CAIN looks and feels, but nothing could be seen or felt; and being by years of
meditation prepared for the infernal attack, he spoke in this wise; Who art
thou? What is thy mission?

The spirit replies -- 'I am commissioned by the God of Heaven to conduct thee
thither -- Thy penitence is accepted -- thy mortification is no longer needful;
follow me; the regions of eternal delight await thee; the atiributes of GOD are
justice and mercy; he delights not in punishment; easily offended, easily
appeased; thy iniquities are forgiven, and he is pacified.'

CAIN spoke -- 'Whose voice? What worda can those be? Art thou a messenger from
ABEL'S GOD? If so, why come thou in gloomy darkness? Assume the brightness
and luster of an angel, to put thy questionable visit out of all doubt --
command this spot of obscurity to be immediately transformed into a pleasing
transparency, to display thy angelic visage, and lead me were thou will.'

The evil one again makes answer -- 'The Almighty has appointed thy journey
through the regions of darkness, to enjoy the mansions of eternal light.'

'If so,' says CAIN, 'let the light of thy glory direct my footsteps -- measure
unto me the unbounded space to heaven, and circumscribe its dimensions ere I
quit my peaceful retreat.'

'Cain thy conceptions of etherial tracts are disordered: the path lays wide
through deserts unknown.' 'Be gone, thou hellish fiend! thy own arguments
betray thee! Return from whence thou came! I am no longer thine -- Go, and
feast ubon the bitter remorse of self conviction, and leave my soul at ease.'

The resolutions of CAIN were effectual -- the tempter was overcome, and in
darkness again departed; the long preparatory contemplations and dependence
upon GOD enabled CAIN to render all his machinations abortive. Having thus
escaped the powerful insinuations of the devil, he renders up to Heaven his
grateful adorations for the deliverance, and lays him down to sleep, and
composedly enjoyed that refreshing repose which his oppressed spirits required;
he awoke in the morning with the early lark and the rising sun; and the
clearness of the atmosphere foretold a pleasing day.

END OF THE SECOND BOOK.
CAIN's LAMENTATIONS OVER ABEL. BOOK THE THIRD.
CAIN now quits his bower, and musing, walks to the boundaries of the wood, to
enjoy without obstruction the beauties of opening day; and looking toward the
delightful EDEN, (from whence he was banished) even to the utmost limits of
creation's horizon, as far as eyes could trace, an object uncommon attracted
his attentive notice; the yet feeble rays of the sun beams presented to his
views a deep wounding reflective appearance -- What did he see? What did he
imagine he really saw through the resplendency of the morning's infant
brightness? At an immense distance, a space almost exceeding occular
demonstration, he beheld in the starry orb a celestial harbinger -- he cries
out, moved by the different passions of hope and fear, 'Art thou a messenger of
peace?' Again he turns his eyes from beholding, then again assumeth courage,
and ventures on a retrospective glance, and ruminates in his mind upon all the
works of creation, to draw some comparative conclusion, and bring his soul into
a state of steady composure; but he found the higher his conceptions aspired,
the lower did his real seize sink, for all nature dwindled into nothing
in his sight, when compared to the illustrious Guest; and with exalted rapture
and astonishment, he opens his lips toward Heaven -- ' It Is an angel! he
brings comfort unto CAIN! Tidings of joy are visible even in his distant
visionary deportment; he comes to extend the bounties of healing to the
wounded, and scatter the seeds of admiration amongst the roots of peace -- the
GOD of Heaven has desigued to hear my contrition -- the tributes of penitence
are not rejected.'

The angel makes but slow advances, as if prohibited by the injunctions of his
Maker, fulfilling the divine appointment with majestic obedience, and delivers
his message at a stately distance, with an implicit diligence and profound
silence. Thus was CAIN, whose heart was wont to be impregnable to the voice of
humanity and filial pity, rendered tractable and soft by the penetration of the
caelestial monitor; for some time his eyes were intent upon the ground, unable
to speak for past reflections; and then again he reasonably communes with
himself, and speedily hastens forward, and soon lost sight of the solitary
dwelling -- as he runs he ruminates -- 'This omen,' says he, 'cannot portend
evil; the wrath of offended justice cannot be executed under such a promising
disguise -- my soul, be thou quiet? passion and despair, fly from me!
despondency and doubts, bid me adieu; and thou, my invisible foe, the first
instigator of my sin, deceive me not; attempt not again to allure me by thy
various transformations -- I am no longer groaning under thy captivating
bondage; nor shall the fetters of thy malicious mockeries any more entangle my
feet. -- thy snaring cords are cut asunder, and to thy envious malevolence I
can bid defiance -- Take thy beguiling rounds, and circumscribe earth, air, and
seas, with thy revolutions, and assume the most tempting allurements sensation
can conceive, yet still thy counterfeit perfections shall be scornfully
rebuked, and shunned with reproach; even if thy transformation is accompanied
with an angelie aspect will I be scrupulously doubtful, and the designing
menaces of thy invisible working shall redound upon thy ownhead.' CAIN now
became silently musing, and his mind sedate, on the pleasure of his own
reflections over SATAN -- Still did the bright image of glory remain in the
expanded ether; and as the sun gradually approached its meridian, so did the
angelic luster appear more and more visible; and with an aspect of smiling
benignity, seemed to court, with a pleasing countenance, the nearer approaches
of CAIN, whose conscious integrity on Heaven convinced him no evil could be
concealed under such a transparency: his joys were now rapturous; no fears
could terrify him; no ideas could sink him -- yet still, in these encouraging
seasons of comfort, he had at intervals some trying conflicts with his
invisible foe; but accoutred with the armor of constancy, and the heavenly
monitor in view, he could, with confident temerity, resist all the efforts of
of SATAN; the subtlety of hell could not touch his constancy with its
destructive bane.

The sun was now arrived at its meridian altitude, directly over the head of
CAIN; and proportionable to the elevated power of the sun, did the inimitable
excellence of the shining one appear; the sparkling rays of its exalted war^ith
conveyed the beauteous aspect of the angelic features with increased
transcendency and enlivened his soul with additional astonishment: the
countenance of the caelestial being impressed his soul with enlarged ideas and
conceptions of the magesty and glory of Infinity -- composure guided his
reflections and brought to his mind solemn deliberations, and thus he began
again to commune with himself --

Experience has been as an instructive lesson unto CAIN, that in secret silence
there is sacred safety -- the tongue is curbed, the lips are guarded, and the
mouth restrained from uttering destructive words; these are the seasons to bow
at GOD'S Throne; his presence will cheer the countenance, and his benevolence
infuse joy into the breast of the supplicant; Almighty condescension will
instill raptures longings for devotion, and establish its heavenly influences
within me.'

The sun had now turned toward its decline, to make room for approaching
night, and CAIN, looking toward his guardianangel, perceived a proportionable
diminution of the illustrious smile which brought the following considerations
to his mind: 'And will the favorable opportunity of a communication with
Heaven to be lost with the expiring course of one fun's daily race? Will the
commission of Infinity be fulfilled without the further benediction of my GOD?
O my soul, improve the flying moments; trifle not with time, for the harbinger
of gladness to escape ^hy vigilance; descant more upon his excellencies;
animate thy soul; and let not futurity reproach the with neglect; strive for a
further attainment of knowledge, and assume an humble imitation of celestial
magnanimity; embrace with resolution and gratitude the present period of
securing for futurity a treasure of wisdom; defer not to obtain the salutary
admonition necessary to prepare thee for the unforeseen accidents of thy future
life; thy infantile state of conversation has not yet inured thee by religious
comba^s to the many tribulatious and disasters that may be enclosed in the womb
of futurity; trust not to thy own accumulated fortitude, for in the hour of
danger thou may be embarrassed; therefore let wisdom guide the while the
season awaits thee; and, with the footsteps of tranquil composure and humility,
draw toward the Angel of Heaven.'

As these impressive emotions and consternations gave way to calm and temporate
reasoning, he began to enjoy a serene state of mind, and peace flowed
abundantly into his foul; and again looking toward the bright ambassador of
joy in the firmament, he very intently viewed, and with accurate discernment,
observed more explicitly the spiritual visage; and steadfastly looking he
descried some famt representations of Man, surrounded with the sparkling luster
-- undaunted, and with manly fortitude he gazes, and with eyes devoted to
further useful and necessary discoveries, very minutely marks the movements,
and traces the narrow revolutions of this mysterious Being -- the more exact
his penetration, the more was he satisfied and his curiosity increased as his
mind was more contented; and wondering, as he was nearer advancing, he
perfectly perceived under the radiant beams a spiritual, a divine image of man,
divested of mortality, and an emblem of Heaven's perfection.

The power of the sun was now much diminished -- its warmth and heat wen
rapidly declining; and its forcible effects on CAIN'S perceptions was much
abated he could therefore look more distinctly through its feeble orbs, and by
clear discernment from his conjectures on the angelic host: He looks; he is
amazed, as the missionary of Heaven becomes more and more visible; his whole
frame was in a pleasing, and at the same time astonished agitation; and every
step he advances brings to his ideas more proof of the C^lestial Ambassador; it
both surprised and gladdened his heart at the same instant; his senses became
more evidently satisfied, and his conception had proof to demonstration, that
no unruly fantasies of his own brain had misguided and deceived him, for it
really was an heavenly being disguised in human shape, under a spiritual
influence. The time was now near for the heavenly dictate to be fulfilled, for
the mandate of GOD, to be executed; and while CAIN, in an attitude of deep
contemplation, had his eyes toward the earth, the shining one advanced almost
near him -- and CAIN, looking up and seeing, cried out to GOD in these words --

O GOD of Heaven assist me with thy impressive influence, that my language may
soar aloft toward thy seat of glory, so that I may face without terror thy
almighty missionary with a heart replete with praise and adoration; aid me with
thy benediction for utterance, and enlarge my conceptions and understanding to
comprehend thy will, so that I may reap spiritual comfort and improvement from
the messenger of peace; let his appointment be for healing my soul, and under
his celestial wings be conveyed the balm of holy consolation; let not his
luminous transparency overshadow me, nor the austerity of his voice plunge me
into sadness: furnish me with the armor of holy fortitude, that my spirit may
not sink within me; endue me with a competent measure of wisdom for necessary
attainment, that his revelation unto me may not be obscured; support me by thy
mercy, and withdraw not thy benevolence from me, so that I may increase in
understanding, and cultivate an holy and needful acquaintance with thy decrees
and ordinations; reject not the fugitive's supplication -- disdain not to
display thy wonted clemency that has hitherto kept him from total falling --
have mercy O Lord have mercy -- let the present season of manifestation by thy
servant from Heaven be revealed unto me for good -- preserve me from the fire
of despondency; purify me in the furnace of mercy; from the records of Heaven
erase the transgressions of my youth, and enter into a renewed covenant with
the greatest of sinners; establish integrity in my heart that I may know and
keep thy statutes; let thy benignity toward me be as the plant that
flourishes, and produce an unquenchable flame of sacred purity and holiness,
that all the days of my life may be devoted to thy glory; engrave on my foul a
memento of my past iniquities, and instill into my meditations an immovable
detestation of former sins, so that the source and motives of my lonesome
banishment may be continually regretted with persevering penitence; be thou
always present with me, O Lord, that seasonable intervals of relaxation may
produce composure from heavy reflections; and thus stimulated by thy
encouraging presence I may know how to seek mercy from thee with firm
confidence, and experience a sensation of happiness by being a partaker of thy
righteousness; the seeds of penitence are sown within him, water thou it with
the dew of forgiveness, that it may bring forth an increase redounding to thy
own glory, and a soul cordial healing to CAIN; deliver him from the frequent
attempts of the Tempter; restrain the pernicious seductions of the wicked one;
abolish his former dominion over me, and let him no more triumph to lull my
soul into woeful security, nor soothe me by his insinuating charms into the
arms of death; let my feeble exertions against him be crowned with the desired
success; bless my resolutions, that unexpected obstructions may not be too
weighty for me, nor my heart deceive me by its own unstable conjectures. I
would wish to humble myself before thee with mourning and lamentation, nor
attempt to vindicate or justtify my deeds in thy sight, for my sins are ever
before me; I would not presume to dwell on my resolutions, for I know they are
frail, and border upon inquietude; therefore, O Lord, teach me how to rely
entirely upon thee as my unnerring regulator in thought, word, and deed, so
that my enemy may be confounded, and I may escape the destruction of eternity;
SATAN would enclose me with hopeless despondency, and obliterate from my view
the footsteps that lead to the gates of mercy; Search me, O GOD, and examine my
inward workings, and make manifest thy wisdom that I may judge of my own
integrity, and see if iniquity still abides within me; purge and purify me
from all gross pollution, and fashion me anew after the image of ABEL my
brother; give me fortitude, and bestow upon me a heart stimulated by conscious
obedience and rectitude to persevere in all thy enjoined commands; let not
spiritual deformities sink me into deplorable miseries; let this spot of
privacy, this habitation of solitude, be productive of salutary effects needful
for me, by a daily supply of heavenly refreshment from the rays of thy gracious
bounty; let my resolves be tempered with the beams of thy dignity, that my
intended designs may be ripened into maturity; if I escape the temptations of
the present generation in pensive solitude with reclaimed virtue, permit not
the depravities of human corruption to deceive me; and still estrange me as an
alien to the inward impressions of contrite humiliation that is proper for me;
it is thy gracious goodness that has hitherto supported me under my guilty
considerations, and it is thy boundless love that has spared me to return by
fincere conviction to my infantile hours of innocence -- my prolonged days
proceed from thy distinguished clemency toward me therefore can I acquiesce
with grateful pleasure to thy dispensatitions; but inspire me with adequate
knowledge peculiar to my occasions that through ignorance or inadvertency I may
not abuse thy favors by improper conclusions, and speculate on thy providence
prejudicial to my own happiness by frustrating thy intended purposes toward me
for good; secure unto me contentment in this unfrequented wild of retirement,
and accept of my daily sacrifices of penitence and gratitude; and when I seek
thee hide not thy face from me, O God of Heaven and earth!'

Here CAIN ended his address to Heaven.

Being now suitably prepared in his mind for the divine mission, he turned his
eyes toward the sky, and behold, what did he see but the angel of God near
him! With undaunted fortitude he looks, and with a feeble timidity at intervals
of no long impression, was exalted in his raptures, and tranquil in his
meditations; the effects of terror were of no force; -- recollection would
presently assume its natural vivacity and receive renewed exaltation; reason
convinced him that the celestial guest was a forerunner of glad tidings, and
these considerations were as a barrier unto him against every intruding and
disagreeable impression that the temptations of the devil could make upon him;
and with a conscientious confidence on the Omnipotency of his MAKER, he boldly
and cheerfully, without the embarrassment of fear, faces the ambassador of
Heaven, and distinctly descerning the resemblance and glorified, features, he
with a sudden emotion over his whole body, and his soul in uncommon agitation,
cries out --

'Great God of Heaven, support me! -- hide me! shelter me! deliver me from
death! What do I see? My brother! Abel, my brother!' and down he fell prostrate
upon the ground, before the spirit of ABEL.

ABEL, gently descending from the opening clouds, softly whispers into his ear,
with the voice of real sympathy and love -- ' Cain, my brother! Arise, anger
finds no dwelling in Heaven -- malice is forbidden to enter that holy
residence; no envy, no embittered hatred is cherished in the bosom of ABEL;
remembrance of past evils can find no footing amongst Saints; the excellencies
of glory are allotted to ABEL, and the GOD thereof can secure a reversion of
its beauties for CAIN his brother. Clemency is an attribute of the Deity, and
an unexhausted treasure of mercy is reserved in store for unfeigned penitence;
GOD is in himself the source, the fountain of benignity and love; thy prayers,
CAIN, thy groans, thy constancy, thy resolutions have gained admittance within
the gates of glory -- ABEL thy brother is the commissioned messenger of
Infinity, to administer comfort and dispel the anxieties that at times disquiet
thee -- my brother, arise; arise my brother; give ear to the words of Heaven;
be attentive to the voice of gladness, and welcome in thy breast the language
of peace -- thy sacrifices have been acceptable; thy offerings of forrowful
tears have not been rejected; and thy repentance has been pleasing at the altar
of GOD. CAIN, CAIN, my brother, arise -- waste not the minutes of importance --
embrace the useful consultation -- reject not the happiness of consolation nor
lose the season of mutual forgiveness; receive with grateful tributes of joy
the necessary admonition that may be conducive to the establishment of thy
future peace; let ABEL communicate joy to thy soul, and participate in the
fullness of bliss that awaits him; O that ABEL could transform the soul of CAIN,
and mount him on the wings of velocity to the undescriable regions of
inconceivable bliss.'

These words so ardently and affectionately uttered, and with the voice of an
angel, awakened CAIN from his impressive situation and looking up he sees ABEL
in the likeness of divine brightness close by him surrounded with unspeakable
beam ties of luster, and after this manner speaks CAIN to his brother:

ABEL, thou child of God, my brother, what is thy mission? Wherein consists
the pleasure of GOD through thee? Art thou appointed by the Eternal One to be
the dire executioner of Almighty Justice upon thy murderer? Or art thou
commissioned, from the words of peace thou have spoken to manifest his
dispensations toward ^^e for good, and to pronounce the voice of Heaven, Thy
prayers are heard? Has the register of Infinity recorded my unceasing
lamentations and sighs? Are my feeble resolutions strengthened by the influence
of Omnipotency? Does mercy yet abound for me? Speak ABEL; hasten to deliver the
Divine junction; declare speedily the embassy of GOD my Judge! Fear, hope, and
doubts are conjunctively working within me; thy pleasing voice, thy soothing
language, with all its exhaling comforts, have not totally eradicated the roots
of dubious suspense that at times has almost crushed me; in silence have I
meditated; with languishing have I uttered the broken accents of my defective
supplications; transfuse thou now into my soul the reciprocal enjoyment of
filial endearments, that CAIN may partake of some delicious transport, so will
he embrace thee, and see thee as thou art; my soul pants after knowledge,
ABEL, and my spirit within me trembles to attain that knowledge it covets. The
first messenger from Heaven, since the first guilt of murder, must be an
important charge: Now ABEL speak; but with the voice of a pardoning GOD, speak
thou unto CAIN, and contribute tranquillity to his soul; the conflict with SATAN
at this minute is terrible; with all the venom of bitter rage he assaults my
weaker part, to wound my hopes and confidence with the weapons of despair and
mistrust; but patiently I lie at the footstool of my Maker.'

'CAIN, my brother,' replies ABEL, 'healing is in my wings; resplendent
kindness is my charge; thou shall enjoy the utility of thy penitence; the
throne of GOD is never shut against fervent supplications; the miseries of
anguish, and the sores of lamentation will be always rewarded by Heaven with
consolations; the strength of sorrow is never permitted to be unprofitably
exhausted; if thy allotted portion of experience are labor, indigence, and
pain, know, CAIN, it is the fruits of the first sin, concentered in the
enjoyments of all mankind; be thou therefore comforted, and contentment and
peace will spontaneously shoot forth and surround thee in the midst of
solitude. Be not the cause of thy own wretchedness and chase from thy eyes all
despondent tears; rest still on the LORD, and if SATAN tempt thee powerfully he
shall not prevail against thee, nor be able to accelerate thy destruction.'

This encouraging language revived the spirits of CAIN, and he found the evil
assailant become proportionably weakened, and speaks again to ABEL -- 'Proceed
my brother' -- 'Knowest thou and believe thou this CAIN, that thy evil
adversary, and the spirit of GOD cannot at the same time gain peaceful dwelling
in thy soul?' -- ''Tis so my brother.' -- 'Pl^cest thou thy hopes on this,
CAIN? -- P^st thou thus believe, my brother?' -- 'ABEL, I believe.' --, Then
there is mercy for thee, my brother, whilst thou thus strive against the
deluder.' -- 'Is it so?' says CAIN -- 'Can a hardened f^^tracide, a
premeditated delinquent, expect mercy? Can there be infinite clemency in store
for him? Would all the sacrifices of contrition, the powers of sensation, and
offerings of humiliation that could be presented at the altar of offended
majesty, during the incomprehensible limits of existing space, be an adequare
atonement to the enormity and magnitude of my crime? Is it so, ABEL? Is there
hopes? May CAIN compose his soul on the prospect of such a wonderful
possibility? Can time obliterate the guilt from the remembrance of Heaven? Can
a transaction, accompanied with such execrable darkness, be obscured by
oblivion in the bright mansions of glory?

ABEL makes answer; 'Nothing is impossible there my brother; Prayer and
penitence in a circuit of time can triumph over guilt; and according to its
energy so will be its velocity, and wing its way to Heaven with a career of
gladness; the existing space between penitence and mercy is not computed by the
dimensions of revolving time; Omnisciency is well acquainted with the
impatiency of supplication and Providence vouchsafes to accelerate its speed,
and liberally diffuse the oil of gladness; it ascends on the wings of rapidity
and descends almost instantaneously with the branches of peace -- There is a
door of hope still open for thee, Cain; and by the hand of gracious lenity will
be gradually extended in proportion to thy persevering integrity; serve the
Lord uprightly and he will enable thee to elude the vigilant seducer manfully,
and all his horrid purposes upon thee be abortive; it will terminate in thy own
security, and the fullness of grace be accomplished; It Is not the whole
circumference of time can erase thy guilt from the annals of Heaven, but thy
own unintermitting lamentations can deliver thee from its wrath, otherwise
decreed for thee in Heaven; the inflictive punishment is a decree, but the
execution of its sentence depends upon thy contrite perseverance; therefore
purify thy heart, and GOD will display his goodness.'

ABEL, I will not despair, although my crime appears with execrable gloominess,
yet I will endeavor to overshadow its darkness with the brightness of
sacrifices, so that my ideas of Heaven's condescending benignity might be more
enlarged, and my imaginations disengaged and released from hovering dread.'

'Henceforth Cain magnify the Lord, if thou art by some weighty reflections
seasonably alarmed, it may be profitable to thy considerations, to prevent thee
from falling into a state of easy relaxation, and consequently inactive in thy
duties; be not dismayed though thy spirits should be oppressed, and the woeful
gulf of eternity be magnified with all its deplorable terrors to thy mind, for
the same Eternal and Omnipotent One, is maker of Heaven, Hell, and the World,
he can protect and deliver thee -- let SATAN buffet thee, his arm can uphold
thee, and will not permit his total overthrowing thee. Thus Cain have I
discharged the mission of Heaven, and must now return from whence I came.'

CAIN was attentively earnest to the admonition of his brother; at these last
words of ABEL he sorrowfully addresses him -- 'And must I lose sight of thy
blessed vision? Let me first embrace thee, O Abel, my brother!' 'Touch me not
CAIN, all corporeal substance with me is dissolved; nature has given way to
supernatural effects, and mortality has put on an incorruptible immortality.'
'And will thou and must thou leave me, ABEL? Let me first moisten, with the
tears of sensitive anguish and bitterness of sorrow the malady, the dreadful
wound that made thee first to taste of death, that my grief may be united with
thy happiness.'

'CAIN, thy petition is brotherly, but thy requests are founded upon thy
unacquaintance with spirits; mutual enjoyments are prohibited by infinite
wisdom between us, relating to salutation between flesh and spirit -- know,
CAIN, the deadly gap is elosed -- the mortal wound is healed -- and with the
breathless carcass of corruption, returned to its parent earth -- thy hat^ed
removed ABEL from the parents' bosom to the seat of endless glory in the
spirit, while ABEL in the flesh is crumbling in the dust -- this is also thy
allotted change at times expiration with thee; thou will thus be disengaged
from this body of clay, and transfigured into an unsubstantial and unchangeable
state of duration -- prepare, therefore, to partake of ABEL'S glory -- daily
adore and worship the GOD of nature, and nature's GOD will guide thee to the
etherial mansions -- CAIN, I have finished -- behold my flight; I ascent to
Heaven in obedience to the Infinite mandate.' -- CAIN eagerly endeavored to
clasp ABEL in his arms, but the spirit immediately vanished with a transparency
that illuminated the whole face of the earth, so that the very objects around
him were indiscernible; in a few minutes the clouds assumed their wonted
thickness, and ABEL was (...) more.

END OF THE THIRD BOOK.
CAIN'S LAMENTATIONS OVER ABEL. BOOK THE FOURTH.
CAIN was again all alone; his former afflictve complaints crowded upon his
mind: he invoked almighty condescension with reverential silence; and
prostrating himself upon the earth held silent converse with Infinite
omnisciency; The impressive emotions that the past circumstances with ABEL had
made upon his faculties, rendered him incapable to join in grateful complacency
with the little harmonious choristers of the grove in their evening
salutations, he looks up to Heaven, crying, And art thou gone my brother? ABEL,
the delight of my soul, and art thou gone? Are my hopes banished with thee? or
have my prospects of future comfort in the contemplative hours of solitude
forsaken me? Go, then and glorify thy GOD, make, intercession for the desolate,
forget not the fugitive wanderer, assist the unfortunate in his supplications,
that the Eternal God may deign to remove from his ideas all gloominess,
discontent, and grief, nor permit dejection to becloud his distant prospect of
happiness; conscience itself severly reproaches him, needful then it is for
Providence to support him.'

This was the language of CAIN to the departed spirit of ABEL; and then as
follows reasons with himself:

'CAIN, be not presumptuously pressing what the Lord has graciously promised;
let not thy soul be disquieted, or thy allotted days be embarrassed with
irrefractable passions; ye unprofitable and tumultuous agitatious molest me
not, nor disturb my tranquillity; my soul thirsts after peace, that a concord
of sentiments might accompany my retired meditations; heaven has decreed it,
fate has determined it, that CAIN should be submissively obedient to sober
penitence: ABEL spoke it, GOD commanded it, reason confirms it, and
conscience sees the necessity of it; the stains of implety must be dislodged
with the tears of anxiety: the bitter cup of affliction must be sweetened with
the honey of dear bought consolation.'

Evening was now far advanced, and night with its sable clothing made its
approaches with quick rapidity, which stimulated CAIN to a consideration of
self-preservation, from the surrounding dangers of darkness, and seek for a
refuge and warm retreat, his wandering feet having conducted him quite astray
from his wonted spot of calm retirement.

The moon was just entering upon her nocturnal office of diffusing her borrowed
rays round the borders of creation, a favorable opportunity which the poor
fugitive pleasingly embraced, to partake of her yet feeble distribution of
light unknowing where, he walks over the untrodden plain till near midnight,
while the howling of the savage broodslightly alarms him; but not one had
permission from the power of heaven to make an attack upon the undefended man;
forward he proceeds, and espies at a small distance a thick, a darkened and
overgrown shady bower, encompassed around with the needful productions of
nature's liberality, and suitably adapted for retirement and safety; but even
now, as formerly at a similar season, some occasional doubts evinced his
frailty, 'May not this,' said he, 'be the covert of some furious animal of
nightly prey? -- Thoughtful he steps, and with pensive sadness approaches, with
heavy presages, foreboding, by his timorous apprehensions, a real evil, where
no evil was impending, not even the rustling of a leaf to disconcert his frame
after he had got admittance amongst the prickly shrubs; but still his faculties
and conceptions were scarcely properly arranged, since the interview with ABEL,
for contemplation, or to deliberate c^^posedly on his present situation; he was
quite unprepared for a conflict with Satan, or natural courage to combat with
the ferocity of a wild beast; he halts; he ponders and draws nearer toward the
enclosure by slow and cautious movements, and still maintained his courage with
consolation from the words of ABEL, 'The Lord would be with him.'

On these words did he rest with humble confidence, trying to dispel doubts and
banish timidity from his mind, and thus speaks he to himself:

This direction of my footsteps cannot be the event of chance, it must be the
over ruling hand of Providence that guided my feet to this desirable spot: My
soul, be thou at ease: ABEL was sent to forewarn and prepare me for all such
obstacles to human infirmities, that depravity might not predominate and
augment my offenses by mistrust and timidity; I will religiously approach the
thickened shelter, and with the tributes of servent gratitude take possession
as a provision by Almighty ordination for my security and rest.' He draws
toward it, and what did he see, but a fragrant convenience contrived by the
unpolished hand of perfect nature, for every enjoyment that was necessary for
his peculiar accommodation.

He enters, and with a conscientious conception of Almighty benevolence and
protection of him, directly prostrates himself upon the soft untrodden moss
that spread itself in a disordered regularity from side to side, and with
acclamations of joyful feeling rendered up his thanks to Heaven for its
merciful guidance and preservation -- 'Where now,' says he, 'is the threatened
evil that fear brought to my deluded imaginations.' And thus addresses his Maker

'O GOD, teach me to know thee; make this a season of joyful gratulation;
establish here my dwelling; let this be the habitation of CAIN, constructed by
the hand of inconceivable wisdom, perfected by nature's Creator -- here shall I
be able to defy the arrows of hell that would wound my confidence to distrust
the preservation of Omnipotency -- for this purpose was ABEL commissioned, to
prepare me for tribulation, and teach me how to depend upon thee -- with
brightness did he descend from the realms of glory, with the voice of peace and
gladness did he utter the language of Heaven unto me; the distress of my soul
was alleviated by the sympathy of his words, and the happy enjoyments that
issue from faith and obedience did he secure unto me; let that sacred earnest
of the reversionary treasures of Heaven be engraved on my heart as a
remembrance of my covenants with thee all the days of my life.'

Now recommending himself to the protection of Providence, he lays him down to
rest, to enjoy a peaceful slumber after the vicissitudes and unexpected
circumstances, that had possessed his mind during the tedious day. All nature
was now hushed in sober silence -- every living creature had ceased from busy
life -- the lion, the tiger, the leopard, and the wolf, were all silently
resting on their grassy couches; the tuneful tribe of cheerful warblers were
all at ease and quiet on the flexible branches that were closely interwoven one
with another; darkness itself had succeeded the pale light proceeding from the
moon's departing rays, whose appointed circuit was faithfully circumscribed,
and left the face of creation on a sable and darkened partition -- midnight was
past, and even the bird of melancholy was retired from her nocturnal
excursions, and solemnly perched within the closest enclosure of the oak -- no
wind or even a breeze sufficient to disturb the Aspen leaf; so calm, dark,
quiet, and silent was the night, when CAIN could rejoice in the first
opportunity of holy meditation upon GOD's revealed will toward him for good, by
the voice of an Angel from Heaven -- by the voice of Abel his brother.

Without interruption or disturbance, he sweetly slept, and enjoyed the
necessary refreshment for his body, and recruited his vital frame with renewed
vigor; and while in his slumbering state of inactivity, would, even unknown to
himself, call out with rapturous accents -- 'Abel, Abel, embrace me my brother
Abel.' -- Thus sleeps CAIN, profoundly peaceable, till the rising sun began
to penetrate its early beams through the narrow passages of the twining
branches, and warned the solitary sojourner of approaching day; he arose, and
devoutly returned his Maker praise; and after procuring such needful sustenance
for the nourishment of nature as the uncultivated situation produced, he
seriously begins to reflect upon ABEL'S descension after the following manner:

'The destiny inflicted upon CAIN by offended Majesty was to become a fugitive
and a vagabond; this was the ordination of Infinity; the decree has been
hitherto fulfilled, and after revolving years of dubious consultations with
himself, and promiscuous mutations in circumstances, ABEL was the appointed
administrator of comfort to my soul -- Frequently had SATAN beset me --
oftentimes were the joys I labored for, totaleclipsed by him, and by his
infernal delusions, have my drooping spirits been wretchedly obscured from the
radiant hopes of Heaven, and maliciously exposed to the burning tortures of
despondency; thus has it pleased Heaven to permit the first grand rebel, my
first great deceiver, to be the instrument of my necessary chastisements -- the
Prince of Devils, estranged from all commiseration and tendern^ss, would with
cruel piercing torment me, and hourly hovering around, would scatter the seeds
of despair, at the same time diffuse the venom of his horrid imprecations into
my soul -- at intervals, the power of his fiery indignation would blaze with
the flames of hell to destroy me with the stings of convicted conscience --
again would he change his diabolical machinations, and flatter poor CAIN with
the smooth speeches of feigned sympathy, conveying hypocrisy under the mask of
friendship; and under disguised consolation would hellishly pretend to relieve
me from the oppressive load of continual reflections, and lull poor deluded
conscience into a state of miserable security; so powerful were his
enchantments, so artful were his devices, and so diligent were his exertions,
that it almost predominated over the resolutions and constancy of the infant
convert -- the black veil of his terrible hatred enveloping the unripened
deliberations of the already disconsolate, seemed to presage the unavoidable
destruction of CAIN, and bellowed forth with tempestuous fury his imbittered
rage, and ungovernable malignancy.

'What now supported and delivered CAIN from death? says he to himself --
'Could his own unripe contrition; could his own immature penitence alleviate
the calamities of mind that proceed from such diabolical attacks? No! -- the
sacrifices of CAIN were not yet sufficiently prepared by tribulations and
persecutions to answer in effect such important purposes; the destroyer would
have destroyed him, had not the interference of Almighty clemency preserved him
-- the bountiful succor of Heaven was seasonably manifested, and his plaintive
moans were answered with condescending favors beyond imagination; the
penitential sighs of his broken heart winged their way to Heaven, and were not
rejected, and all his pious purposes were returned with celestial compassion
from the effulgency of Infinite bounty; the defilements of sin, presented
through the channel of lamentations and woe, were purified by the blessings of
the Deity, and the virtue of CAIN expe^ienced a gracious transformation --
these were secrets unrevealed, unknown to CAIN, and remained in obscurity in
the womb of Providence, till ABEL appeared, and thus continued the forsaken
unfortunate in a changeable labyrinth of dubious uncertainties, confounding
hopes and joys with grief and fears.

ABEL became Heaven's Ambassador, and descended from above to complete the work
of praise, to assist the outcast fugitive in the employment of devout
adoration; for this did the angelic spirit of ABEL descend from the mansions of
beatitude, to communicate unto CAIN a portion of that good which proceeds from
the beneficency of the all-wise Creator; influenced by such attributes on the
principles of obedience, and the endeavors of CAIN will be crowned with
success; he can look upwards with estimation to his benefactor, while his
humble gratitude is amiable in the sight of his God -- now can he conceive the
charms of native simplicity and become enamoured with the beauties of holiness;
with serenity and calmness he can call to memory the past sorrows of life, and
rejoicingly look back on former calamities, and under protection of ABEL'S
vision can his past tribulations be obscured; by application he can improve and
become possessed of peace; exulting he can present his thanksgiving, and with
fidelity establish his constancy in virtue.'

After this manner did CAIN commune with himself, and increased in faith and
fortitude on Providence; his daily excursions from his solitary habitation did
not exceed the limits that was necessary to procure the reasonable refreshment
and nourishment, and thereby enjoying a measure of inward happiness, suitably
adapted to his thoughtful life, unincumbered with the vexatious occurrences of
the world -- Again he begins to converse with himself:

Will ABEL make a second descension and discourse with CAIN? Did his departure
leave room for expectation? No, CAIN; it was sudden; no shadow of encouragement
for such hopes; but benignity sat on his countenance, and a radiant
cheerfulness accompanied his ascent; I will therefore devoutly acquiesce with
pious resignation to what the Almighty was not pleased to reveal, and glorify
GOD by submissive obedience; patiently wait his will for future manifestation
without renewing my offense with wilful distrust. Be content, O my soul! thou
have the boundless beauties and conveniences of creation before thee, and all
subservient to thy necessities; thou have prolonged days to taste the sweets of
growing consolatian, and around thee abundantly springs whatever is needful
to constitute health and peace; spontaneously it grows in rude regularity and
plenty for supplying my necessary occasions, and uninterruptedly can I enjoy a
celestial communion with the spiritual workings of Infinity.

ABEL the glorious! ABEL the child of God! as an invisible and protecting
agent, will still support the heavenly commission and imperceptibly unto CAIN
instill into his mind rapturous sensations of holiness; the dark clouds of
SATAN'S assaults will be dispersed by the breath of Heaven, and the Almighty
will essay to console me in the weighty reflections of deep meditation -- here
will I rest, and derive hope and tranquillity from this nourishment.

Unmolested by weighty temptations, and free from oppressive anxieties, did
CAIN now enjoy, with peace of mind, all that his soul could desire; and the
irrational inhabitants of the unfrequented grove by their soothing language,
undefiled with guilt, became naturalized unto his pensive state; the feathered
songsters aided him cheerfully and liberally with their early vocal adorations
to devotion, and imbibed into his mind sentiments of gratitude, to which
mankind, from want of reflective meditations in secret silence, are oftentimes
estranged; with holy delight he could trace the footsteps, and admire with
^cred astonishment, the wonderful works of Previdence; and, devoutly intent
upon his duty, could mount his ripened thoughts with silent pleasure toward
the pinnacle of Heaven -- this was a happiness properly adapted to quell all
his rising tumults, and put a restraint upon his inclinations, when, desirous
of intermingling with the busy world, and entering into scenes of hurried life,
to which he was totally unacquainted.

The considerations of his present comforts and uncertainty of future events
predominated over his imperfect conjectures of worldly enjoyments, and
frustrated his occasional schemes to join himself to mankind, and thus wisely
determining to subject his own unstable desires to the unerring guidance of
eternal wisdom -- Years after years elapsed in this tranquil state before his
resolution began to waver and the beguiling insinuations of the Tempter began
to prevail, when the unfortunate fugitive ventured to conside in the
benevolence of his GOD and deceived himself with the hopes of that protection;
he was partial to his own opinion, and established his future expectations of
pleasure upon his fortitude and Maker's forgiveness; his ignorance of the world
and his want of knowledge of men presented no approaching danger to his mind;
noevils could he bring to his ideas that was needful for him to dread, but the
dark delusions of the Fiends of Hell, to which he had been long accustomed, and
could bid defiance to the most artful attack upon his constancy.

None of the many other misguiding passions, to which corrupted mortals are
subject unto, had yet gained entrance into his soul.

The enemy of his soul being now busily employed in representing the vain
glories of society to his imaginations, and no sympathizing parent or friend to
admonish or advise with; in an unguarded hour, when reason was overcome with
deception and blinded with vanishing fruition, did the forlorn wanderer, the
unfortunate fugitive, drink the bitter draught of conceited pleasure and
dreaming felicity, not waiting the return of sober reason he bid defiance to
the rule of unerring rectitude, and, neglecting to supplicate the influence of
Heaven, resolved to satisfy the desires of his soul, and partake of the
superfluities and enjoyments of life; expecting heavenly benediction (but
trusting his own strength, forgot the needful supplication) amidst enumerable
evils to enable him to maintain his wonted integrity.

Thus resolved, he embraced with the rising sun a bright and promising morning
(when all nature was arrayed in the full gaiety of the fertile season, and the
warmth of lengthening days insured to his imagination a satiety of pleasure)
and sorrowfully, yet hopefully, did he bid adieu to his long and peaceful
dwelling, (that was never failing to produce every needful enjoyment to
constitute his temporal felicity -- disp^lling also many impressive afflictions
of his mind, that did occasionally proceed from intense reflection) while the
little warblers, seemingly agitate^ with mournful concern and uncommon emotion,
finding no resting branch, hopping and flying from bough to bough with
plaintive melody, that echoed through the grove with accents of melancholy,
inviting his longer abode, hovering and fluttering round him, with lopping
wings and broken voices -- even the very brambles and oderiferous shrubs around
him experienced the effects of his presumption, and declined toward the ground
with drooping leaves, as if Autumn had, in opposition to the regular course of
nature, made its approach in the gay and refreshing season of spring.

These alarming mementos were ineffectual on his consideration; he proceeds
forward, and hardly reached the boundaries of the grove ere a more powerful
instance of Heaven's displeasure was displayed.

The weighty and impulsive force of the elementary bodies was all at once
suddenly roused, as if stern Winter was at hand, and showered down their
tempestuous fury upon him with uncommon violence and provoked rage -- Hail,
Rain, and Snow, conjunctively united to strike terror into his soul, and awaken
him to deliberate thoughts, that his wanton and ill-timed progress might be
defeated, and his erroneous judgment of circumstances and things confounded --
amidst this dreary aspect of creation, the wind, as an unperceivable agent from
the skies, forced the other elements with a tumultuous vengeance against him;
and with irregular and boisterous repulses, as appointed by provoked Heaven,
drove the heavy globulars of the watery clouds upon him, like the waves of a
troubled sea.

The feebleness of nature began to give way; CAIN could not withstand the
combined assaults; persuasive reason hastened him to the stately Oak for
refuge, to shelter him from the threatening inclemency under its spreading
branches; but even here danger seemed reclining, for the aged tree itself had
not escaped the general shock that nature felt; its limbs, though large and
extended, bent in a dreadful manner by pliant motions, like the tender rush,
and threatened destruction to the foolish wanderer by its tremenduous fall; no
protection could he expect from this wished retreat, and all external
appearances displayed unto him very deplorable disappointments.

The sun had refused unto him its usual warmth, and declined to administer its
brightened rays, nothing was visible but gloomy clouds that were barely
perceptible through the close unceasing showers of ponderous hailstones, large
blossoms of snow covering the surface of the earth, and unremitting drops of
penetrating rain -- in this dilemma of astonishment his resolutions became
stagnated, and made him exclaim against himself. --

'This is like the horrors of Hell's darkness in midday; this strange
revolution in nature can prognosticate no good -- the enterprise will not be
productive of CAIN'S expectation -- Heaven is offended; I will return.' Thus
said, he hastens back, and the tempest gradually decreased; arriving at his
arbor of peace, all nature assumed its wonted gaiety -- the heavens, and
earth, and all parts of creation appeared unto him with a new face; the pretty
chaunting choristers welcomed their lost sovereign with cheerful music --
harmoniously did their little throats throttle with notes of joy; and the
terrible disaster that was apparently expected by CAIN on the neighboring
bushes, that nearly adjoined his delightful habitation, was not visible on his
closed inspection, nor could his most minute survey perceive the traces of one
displaced leaf from its native sprig -- This elevated his mind to contemplation
-- it raised his speculations to devout reflection and serious aspiration, and
at the entrance of his shrubby cave, before stepping within it, he cries out --

It Is the will of Heaven; CAIN, relinquish all intricate desires for folly, and
subdue thy anxious inclinations for prohibited curiosity.' Thus said, he enters
his fragrant dwelling, and bends himself toward Heaven, and fervently
addresses his GOD in a short ejaculation:

'My Maker, my God, with thee I know that clemency and mercy abound; remember
not my transgression, and forgive the trespasses of my foolishness; reveal thy
will; commisssion Abel to make known thy future ordinations unto me; humble me
under the numerous imperfections that surround me; endue me with wisdom that I
may not toil after folly; let the infirmities of my desires be subdued by a
calm resignation to thy appointments, and my wishes be always subservient to
thy will, that Satan's malevolency may not tempt me again to sin against thee,
nor the principles on which thy mercy is actuated toward me be abused by my
indulgence of sin.' After this manner, in strains of devotion, did the
remaining part of the day elapse with CAIN, almost insensible of that
sustaining refreshment which nature required or to procure those necessaries of
life to which he had been so long accustomed; and at the approach of even lays
himself down on the mossy couch, and slept as composedly as on a bed of down;
Lively and refreshed, the clearness of the morning reminds him of incumbent
duties, and awaking with the early sun, observes the GOD of liberality
dispensing the blessings of good around him; CAIN was now convinced; conviction
possessed his soul; he (...) it needful to suppress all wandering imaginations;
he found his suture obedience must be tempered with reproving himself with
rigorous exactness; with contrition he implores his forfeited beneficence of
Providence, and solicits strength to his fidelity that the desires of his heart
may not be at variance with his duty.

As time did escape him, so did the new schemes of happiness that engrossed his
attention proportionably decrease and forsake him; and he soon began vigorously
to renew his usual contentment, and daily adiniring with resigned obedience the
lenity of Heaven's laws, and meditating upon its bountiful works, drank
plentifully, and partook gratefully of its delicious fruits -- Calmly and
unmoved by ruffled passions did numerous revolving seasons take their annual
circuits, while CAIN could hold converse with irrational creation, with
unintelligent beings, and by the influence of Heaven became familiarized unto
him, while the innocent pleasures of the grove procured him inexpressible
delight.

Years and experience had now made him wise, and CAIN again entertained
inclinations of joining with mankind, and thus reasons with himself.

'The will of GOD must be done; but CAIN would learn to know the decrees of
GOD; must all the days of the years of CAIN be spent in retirement? be lost to
society and unprofitable to mankind? I will first address Heaven and secure
safety from the dreadful wrath that attended my former desire; with sacred
penance I would wish to solemnize that day, and my yearly penance shall
flourish upon its remembrance.'

Thus said he prostrates himself with devour supplication at the footstool of
Omnipotence and presents his petition with sacred devotion to implore direction
from the all-wise GOD; this done he retires to rest, and quietly enjoys the
comforts of night; with the morning light, 'ere the sun had se^rce began to
diffuse its radiant beams through the moistening atmosphere, CAIN awoke, and
again took leave of his domestic companions; the grateful warblers of the wood
had not yet bid adieu to the silent repose of night; so that all was sober and
solemn silence, excepting the more early obedient lark, who had just shook from
his opened wings the dew of the vapourous element, and melodiously hovering
over the head of CAIN, rendering up his morning tribute of grateful harmony to
its great Benefactor; and the congealed particles of the moistened element
dropping as dewy icicles upon the head of CAIN, foretold a pleasant day.

Through the wood he solemnly and slowly pursues his walk, and coming out upon
the open and extensive plain, meditation took possession of him, and he began
to contemplate on the uncultivated wild: The sun was gradually heightening. and
making a feeble and streaming appearance through the azure sky; here he halts
for a while, and awaited the awakening of creation; the four-footed creatures
of savage prey begin to open their yawning mouths, stretch out their extended
tails, and shake their shaggy manes; the feathered tribe of cheerful songsters,
spread their wings, and begin to hop from branch to branch, chirping their
morning gratitude with innocent adoration, while the towering eagle sits
majestically perched on the top of the aspiring cedar, waiting the sun's ^^^e
powerful influence to wing its way toward Heaven.

The morning was captivating, the beauties that adorned nature were enchanting,
and the delicious flavor proceeding from the variegated herbage promiscuously
scattered around the borders of creation was highly alluring -- it brought to
his mind the garden of EDEN, it resembled to his view a second Paradise, such a
promising aspect: such reviving hopes stimulated unto devout praise with
attractive powers, and elevated his soul with ecstasy; he goes forward, every
step raising tumultuous joy within him, his mind religiously dependent upon the
goodness of Infinity -- Solemnly but cheerfully he moves, no obstacle of art or
nature to retard his peaceful passage; and the brightness of the atmosphere,
aided by the reflection of the sun's beams upon the sweets of expanded
productions beneath him, all joined to stimulate him forwards: the scattered
bushes by their gentle motions from the soft and agreeable breezes, all seemed
to combine to pay him obedience, and make his journey pleasant.

Again he halts for a while -- on the grass he sits, and gave way to
rumination, pondering deliberately on the probable advantages that might accrue
by his entrance into the scenes of men, and thus speaks to himself --

'I seek redress,' says he, 'from the grievance of humble happiness -- and can
humble happiness need redress? -- Here his imagination was stretched to the
utmost -- 'can an entire ignorance of the world, and unacquaintance with busy
life, procure a superior degree of happiness to the present? Will not
temptations frustrate delightful expectations?

He could not bring his ideas to any regular conclusion, and found himself in a
labyrinth of doubts how to act not to offend Heaven, or which course to direct
his wandering feet without the intermediate guide of Providence -- In this
state of oppressive consternation he reasons with himself --

"To the LORD will I make supplication to lead me through the spacious and
unbeaten track; CAIN is to the world as one unborn; to its inhabitants or their
manners he is estranged; their residence he knows not, nor the footsteps of one
can he trace; I will make no further advances, but on this spot dedicate my
soul by prayer to Heaven, and with importunity petition the instruction of my
GOD.'

With devout veneration he humbles himself before the Almighty for wisdom and
understanding; and in his sorrowful prayer to the Omniscient One, a voice mild
and pleasing came unto him from the mouth of an invisible Agent -- 'CAIN,
direct thy feet eastward; Angels shall guide thee to a people country; NOD by
name, a land inhabited by the descendants of ADAM.'

From the gound he arises, and looks around, but no appearance of any existing
Spirit or Substance from whence the voice came; his reliance was upon
Providence; he knew the command was from Heaven, and eastward turns his eyes,
and beholds a vast large tract of uncultivated barren and its wild productions
the sole produce of nature, deserts unfrequented and unknown to man; thus
encouraged, he assumeth fortitude, and eagerly proceeds with cheerful footsteps
over the dreary plain. Heaven smiled upon him; no disheartening occurrence
intervenes to interrupt his journey, or render his walk unpleasant for
successive revolving moons; the earth his wants supplied, and his preservation
by day and night the Heavens assumed till he safely arrives within sight of the
desired country; and approaching forward within a sew paces of its dwellings,
he kneels before the Lord, and lifts up his sold as follows:

'Almighty, and beyond the comprehension of mortals, merciful God, by justice
are all thy ordinations established; condescend again to answer the servent
petition of the penitent, by thy gracious dispensations of revelation: protect
me, O Lord, from such abounding iniquities as may be prevailing in the land,
and bless me with thy impressive graces amongst this people: proportion my
constancy to the trials I must conflict with, and endue me with an adequate
measure of wisdom, superior to my present enjoyment, that I may know how to
discern good from evil, and not err from the path of rectitude; let thy
spiritual influences still overshadow me as a guardian from temptations, and
the preservation of my virtue, so that Cain may glorify the Lord in the midst
of mankind.' CAIN now enters the inhabited place amidst crowds of numerous
spectators; he was astonished! 'Twas impossible for him to bring his ideas of
their actions to any conclusions; and according to his conceptions of men and
things, they appeared unto him as running to and fro for naught, very intent
upon doing nothing; busily employed to no purpose, removing their situations,
and making exchange of places.

Here CAIN took him a wife, had children, and built a city. It Is very probable
that CAIN was, at entering the land of NOD, two hundred years old, which is the
smallest computation we can admit; for it was a peopled country, and the
inhabitants must be lineally descended from ADAM, and of course to the third or
fourth generation; and even this itself, in my opinion, comes far short of the
age of CAIN when he entered the land; for at this time there could be no more
than the fourth generation of ADAM in being; and by refering to Sacred Writ,
you will find even at that age he must be married to one of his sisters'
daughters, or his own sister; which almost implies a contradiction, and will
not bear the least possible allusion to sacred record; because, while he lived
in the land, he built a city -- The building a city, be it ever so small, must
indisputably require many hands more than can be reasonably supposed to proceed
from his own loins, or his brothers' or sisters, even if he was married in that
infantile state of the world before mentioned; consequently in my opinion I
think we may justly conclude that CAIN was three or four hundred years old when
he entered the country, or at least before he began building; by which time the
offspring of ADAM and EVE, before and after the death of ABEL, might be
increased, as well as the generations of SETH, and the other sons and daughters
of ADAM born after SETH; and even at this age of the world there could be but
few spare hands when a city was building -- I think a certain Commentator on
the Bible that says, -- ' about the sixtieth year of the world Cain murdered
Abel -- comes short of the truth; especially if he supposes CAIN immediately
flew for shame to the Land of NOD, and took him a wife.


After dwelling among the people of the land for the space of three or four
hundred years, and to see his childrens' children to the fifth generation from
his own loins, according to the Mosaical account, (or there would not been
people enough in the world to have either built, or inhabited a city after it
was built) and still retaining his integrity, by upright walking before the
Lord, with pureness of spirit; long acquaintance with mankind had convinced him
that the children of men were subject to temptation, and prone to embrace evil;
naturally at enmity with goodness and GOD; the Soul of Cain was disturbed; the
ways of men became distressing and oppressive, and made reflection grievous --
his wishes were to be separated; his inclinations prompted him to bid adieu to
vain society, and sensual allurements, and return again to his forsaken spot of
social fellowship, and intercourse with irrational creation; where for
successive uninterrupted seasons he had formerly enjoyed the necessary
tranquillity and serenity that constitutes human felicity.

He is resolved, and takes a parting farewell of his surviving family, even to
the fifth generation; dividing his paternael blessing by a recommendation to
the protection of Heaven; with the admonitions of a tender father would
sympathise for their danger, while he endeavored to establish fortitude in
their minds to encounter the insinuations of SATAN with holy courage, and
cleave unto the Lord of hosts.

CAIN now proceeds forward toward his once delightful bower; nothing uncommon
intervenes during the course of his journey, to impede his progress; and safely
he arrives at the desired spot -- 'Still untainted or defiled by the footsteps
of man!' says he, 'all its inhabitants consist of the offspring of my former
companions -- still cheerful, still harmonious, still innocent -- O CAIN, thou
have to regret thy many years loss of their social and harmless community^'

CAIN now began to resume his former happiness in solitude; and predicted to
himself years of happy retirement, every prospect around him, as far as the
shady enclosure would admit a perspective view, had a lovely appearance, and
soothed his soul with pleasing imaginations; and thus did a circle of mature
years take their revolutions, and increased with delight his sacred
contemplations, free from many of those incidental mutations that, in days of
younger trials, produced tribulation and sad perplexity to his spirits --
experience had made him sage; and he could render up his renewed obligations of
gratitude to the beneficent ONE with a soul calmly serene, as the bountiful
gifts of Heaven in regular rotation succeeded each other.

END OF THE FOURTH BOOK.
CAIN's LAMENTATIONS OVER ABEL. BOOK THE FIFTH.
IN the season of pleasing variety, and all creation beautifully decked with
flowers of variagated plumage; the sun with its luminous orbs just breaking
through the bespangled sky, CAIN awoke from sleep, and walked to the
extremities of the grove, wandering and admiring the mavelous works of GOD
with men and things -- suddenly, instantaneously was he surrounded with a
shining light uncommonly splendid, far exceeding the splendour of ABEL'S vision;
at a distance he beheld a visage -- the resemblance of man -- the luster of an
angel -- but past description luminous -- A pleasing astonishment for awhile
deprived him of speech; but conscience told him it was an omen of good tidings,
that the LORD had not forsaken him -- As he drew nearer to the celestial
Messenger he thus addresses him:

' From whence art thou? arrayed in the apparel of Glory, declare thy mission;
moments are valuable; delay not to reveal thy appointment; my soul is convinced
thou art an Ambassador from the Great Supreme; no deception can be concealed
under thy appearance -- Heaven can descry, and to Heaven are all the
imaginations of my heart open; and God my Creator knows that the resolutions
of CAIN are estranged for ever from future communion or association with busy
life: Bring thou tidings of peace to the peaceful; bring thou tidings of
exultation from Heaven? Does ABEL glorify the LORD? Is he triumphantly joining
in hallelujahs with the heavenly choir? Does he still intercede with his GOD
for CAIN, his undeserving, his worthless brother? Is ADAM, is EVE yet arrived
amongst the celestial band? Are the two first parents of men dwellers on Earth
or in Heaven? Answer me; quickly solve me; CAIN is conversant with Heaven, with
spiritual Beings alone would CAIN wish to join in communion -- Visions from
above cannot disturb me; with immortal shapes I can hold conversation without
fear or dread -- Contemplation has inured me to such vicissitudes, and created
within me pure sensations of pious love and reliance upon my GOD -- My soul is
impatient for heavenly information; speedily remove a painful suspense -- thou
art not my enemy, the first great revolter against his Maker, his assaults on
the poor fugitive were never accompanied with the garb of an Angel of Light --
know thou this; I am prepared; calm resignation has fitted me for the
ordinations of GOD, even if thou art his constituted executioner to confound me
with my original dust -- with humble patience I acquiesce to his dispensations,
and devoutly submit to his Almighty will -- the malignant enmity of Hell's
Infernals, nor all its plausible devices of temptation, can move the soul of
CAIN to abate his confidence in his GOD; No attempts upon his fortitude can
weaken the covenants he has repeatedly entered into with his GOD; the bolts of
immortality would not have been loosened nor thou permitted to visit the
regions of mortals, if the message with which thou art entrusted, did not
affect the first born of men.' --

'Knowest thou CAIN the homicide? the fratricide? the murderer of his brother?'
'I am the man -- my destiny is the decree of Heaven -- solitude is suitable --
retirement is necessary for my soul, and daily do I wait for the fulfillment of
justice; -- wretched darkness and abyss of confusion have at intervals been
hovering about me since the fatal day; but compassionate mercy has still
supported me to the present hour; the influences of eternal clemency have
impressed an aw^^^ and grateful sense of the Deity upon me (...) good.

'With thee I would commune; in the prospect of thy magnificent complacency I
can rejoice; impatience keep pace with the movements of time that escape me --
ABEL, the spirit of my angelic Brother, dispelled all fear, and revived my
hopes that the gates of Heaven were not shut to the penitent. In thy
countenance there is no ferocity; in thy nature there can be no malevolency;
from thee shall not my eyes be withdrawn till the mission of Heaven is
revealed.'

CAIN was now very near the Angel, undauntedly he looks; earnestly he fixes his
eyes; and suddenly a trembling seizes him -- utterance had forsaken him for a
while; presently with a faultering exclamation he breaks out -- ' Imagination
deceive me not! -- delusion, fly thou from me! -- h^^^^ot CAIN beheld these
features in mortality? a nearer survey may fuller convince me.' He assumeth
courage and draws near -- he shrieks! he cries out -- 'My father! my father!
ADAM is thy name -- ABEL has sent thee; thou art also ascended to the regions
of bliss; thou art also admitted into fellowship with spirits made perfect!
Heaven is become thy dewlling place! ABEL may again rest on his Father's
affection, and both conjunctively celebrate praises of celestial harmony to the
GOD of all praise.

Where is EVE, the other parent of CAIN? Has the mother of mankind yet added
one to the angelic tribe? are the days of her transitory pilgrimage expried?
does she yet join in strains, and partake of Heavenly melody? O my Father!
commune with thy firstborn; reveal unto him the mysteries of Omnipotency! Thy
parental injunctions to CAIN, when but a youth in years, and aged in sin, have
to this day occupied a portion of his soul; the GOD of ADAM, EVE, and ABEL has
never forsaken him, but gave him understanding and wisdom to estimate time, and
discern between good and evil; the temptations of SATAN have not prevailed: the
exertions of CAIN for retalliation have been blessed with the gracious
acceptance of GOD, instances of his Almighty beneficence have been manifested
beyond conception or imagination; ABEL was commissioned from Heaven to
administer comfort, and his presence banished all despondency; the radiant
beams of thy countenance predict complacency; with sacred pleasure can I gaze
upon thee; thy mission must be correspondently Celestial and Benign; my
heaving pulse beats with eager irregularity to embrace thee; remove my
conflicting passions already suspended on the pinnacle of hope, and adjust the
innumerable crowd of imaginations that possess me; and with bended knees will I
bow toward the earth and receive the dread injunctions of Sovereignty with
resigned calmness.

'Father, I have done.'

With profound reverence he prostrates himself before the JUDGE of all the
earth, and the spirit of ADAM thus began --

'My child, CAIN my firstborn; see ADAM thy father; into those unfathomable
depths of immortality, thy father but lately received the Almighty mandate to
make his entrance; Angels conducted his flight through the hidden paths of
ether, and joyfully lodged him beside the beatific presence of his Maker; each
eoelestial face was adorned with the smiles of resplendent glory and welcomed
the parent of generations into the mansions of felicity;

'The forwardest; the first approaching transcendant host that was prepared for
the reception of the new visitant from Earth to Heaven, was Abel his son; Abel
thy brother; he conducted; ADAM followed; and in GLORY was the SUPREME DIVINITY
encompassed around with throngs of Angels and Archangels, united in one
universal concord of Praise and Glory to the GREAT CREATOR; no sooner admitted
into Heaven, but ADAM was suffered to make his descent toward the borders of
Creation, to declare the will of GOD to CAIN his son, and prepare him for the
future conflicts that await him on his journey from death to eternity!

'If thy mind is enlightened, improve it to thy spiritual utility; examine the
purity of all thy offerings in prayer, and make conscience undefiled thy
messenger for presentation.'

'Father, know thou not that CAIN has woefully experienced the dire effects
of unsavory sacrifices; behold not yet erased, the MARK of GOD in his
countenance; Wave the discourse, my parent, 'twill be kindling anew the burning
sparks of vital flames, and render CAIN unfit for thy following admonition; no
other reparation can CAIN make for ABEL'S death, but unremitting contrition.'

CAIN the embassy of ADAM is not to add weight to the bitterness of thy
feelings; it is to remove the poignancy of distress, by administering balms of
Heavenly herbage to stop its progress; the LORD is amiable; penitence is
pleasing in his sight; thy sorrows and afflictions have been consecrated at the
altar of lenient justice: thy lamentations have been conspicuous to the
inhabitants of Heaven; and, in the due season of Infinite prescience, will
renewed mercy be displayed, as to transcend thy most extensive conception;
place therefore thy confidence in his promises, for he is punctual; in his
engagements he is never embarrassed; with himself he is consistent with truth;
and never confounded in his performances. Imperfectly may thou form
conjectures, but very defective must be thy comprehensions of the portion of
his gracious influence that has been secretly displayed toward thee; the depth
of his mercy is fathomless, therefore let thy gratitude be the more magnified,
and tranquillity will still find a retreat in thy bosom, and be promulgated by
thy righteous conceptions of things.

'The LORD may at intervals reprove thee with seeming severity, but still have
treasured store of compassion compounded with his authority, and thus, as
lessons of instructive morality, teach thee how (...) serve him with fear, with
love, and humility. Thy guilt still pursued thee, and still would thy anguish
been furiously piercing, had not thy contrition been proportionable to the
magnitude of thy sin; herein have thou assuaged the wrath of offended justice,
and received from Heaven the succors of Divine consolation; at present thou
enjoyest the beatitudes of Heavenly ardour; the benefits of thy creator are
immensely propitious; but their virtuous efficacy is lost, if drowned in the
waves and tempests of undis^^mment; slacken not to render up thy rapturous
sensations of piety unto the seat of the Holy One; and no discouraging
concomitants of dejection will prevail, to sink thee under the necessary
corrections of Almighty chastisement.

'The message of thy father is to announce peace, and declare unto thee the
will of the LORD; he regards thy plaintive supplications with a merciful eye;
his munificence exceeds language, and his wisdom elevates a righteous soul
beyond imagination.'

Here ADAM ceased, and CAIN begins;

'ADAM, my glorified Father, I am not estranged to the lengthened lenity of
Providence toward me; through his abounding love are my days prolonged;
although the twisting reptiles in the grass are more innocent in nature, and
fulfill the intent of Creation with more obedient conformity to his will, yet is
CAIN noticed by his tenderness, and compared to the angels in Heaven.

'Speak again, my father -- Where is EVE my parent, the womb that sustained me?
May CAIN promise himself the pleasing scene of another congratulatory interview
with his mother in the world?'

'ADAM replies -- ' Eve is living -- frequent and fervent have been her
offerings to Heaven since bidding adieu to her child; many have been the tears
of hopeless sympathy dropped compassionately from her still swollen eyes, when
the dreadful scene did occur to remembrance; and, with the weeping of
unrestraining grief, would cry out -- 'Woe be to me! alas, my children! one is
dead, and another lost from me for ever!'

'Oftentimes was the manly fortitude of ADAM staggered to maintain his superior
resolutions; and, at the weak intervals of reason, would imperceptibly draw
from his aged eyes the watery drops of painful memory -- against the flowings of
nature's weakness did he struggle, and combat with the weighty reflections of
his own soul, to abate its immoderate excess in the partner of his life; until
the Messenger of Eternity presented the decree of heaven to ADAM; and he
obeying both cheerfully and reluctantly the powerful dictate, took his worldly
farewell of Eve his Wife, and left the mother of ABEL but a few paces from
whence she bid adieu to CAIN her child.'

CAIN again speaks -- 'Could CAIN meet his mother, and embrace his aged parent
if he goes to seek her? transported would he fly on the wings of rapidity, and
let her witness the triumphant virtue that reigns in the bosom of CAIN --
Advise me my father -- is it safe? Will Heaven be offended? shall I first
supplicate the Deity to know its will? filial duty to my parent, and covenanted
obedience to my Maker, are both pending in the same scale of Justice -- Father,
shall I go? GOD can accompany me there -- EVE cannot come to me here -- Would
it not gladden her heart to have a sight of her child? Would it not be removing
the anxiety that daily prays upon her speculations? Would it not dispel all
dissatisfied motions of uncertainty dwelling within her, whether CAIN is or is
not in the land of the living? Her many sleepless nights would then be buried
in the mass of aged triumph, and her latter days be crowned with rest and
peace, superceded by a thousand delightful images and representations of holy
festivity in her mind.

'How reviving must be the Ianguage to her soul, to hear tidings of ADAM and
ABEL in Heaven, from the lips of her hopeless and banished firstborn -- Cain
the lost -- the forsaken CAIN!'

'CAIN, thy words are dictated upon virtue and duty -- thy expressions are
compounded with tender and sincere gratitude; but know, CAIN, the peculiar
dispensations of Providence displayed toward thee for good in this uncorrupted
solitude demands thy serious and deliberate consideration, that thou do not
in the moment of presumption, invoke his displeasure.

'My son, no actions can be justifiable in the sight of GOD that are
inconsistent with his decrees; nor can thou prudently undertake to be thy own
conductor in matters that come under his special appointment and ordination --
thou have hitherto received from him spiritual benefits proportionably to the
trials of thy body and tribulations of thy mind, all which proceed from the
inexhausted source of his eternal benignity.

'My embassy to thee is peace and consolation -- let sorrow be thy punishment,
and punishment the gate that leads thee from the torrents of misery and death
-- be steadfast, be courageous, for time with thee is precious -- days with thee
are important -- CAIN, believe thou this? Answer thy father.' CAIN replies --

'Father, I know, father, I believe with sorrow, with lamentation, with
repentance, with admiration, and with prayer.' And directly falling with his
face to the earth, cries out -- 'Bless me, O Lord.' And looking up toward his
Father, says -- Father, shall I supplicate Heaven to go and seek my mother, to
pay the debt of dutiful affection, and revive the troubled soul of paternal
affection? Haste, father, speak -- CAIN is eager to open his lips to Heaven.'

'GOD is good, my son; let contrition, humiliation, conviction, fear, and
adoration, accompany thy supplication, and address thy GOD -- CAIN begins --

' My GOD, my father's GOD, my mother's GOD, and the GOD of Abel my brother;
the maker and Creator of all things in Heaven and in Earth, look
compassionately upon Cain the fratricide, the unfortunate firstborn of the
image of heaven, he unto whom thy blessings have been so peculiarly
distributed, with mercy, hear him, O LORD; reject not his petition; permit his
fervent supplication to gain admittance within the borders of heaven; let thy
repeated, thy renewed benevolence add new dignity and luster to his soul -- In
presence of his father immortal parent of the penitent, the angel of God; the
sinful outcast, the desolate fugitive bows before thee, and with humble prayer
at the footstool of thy Throne, lifts up, with pious devotion and awful
reverence, his hopeful, his fearful petition; forget, O Lord, his iniquities,
and cheer his hopes with condescending complacency; Reveal thy gracious will, O
thou Eternal Majesty, unto Cain; If the long lost son may pay the debt of
gratitude and duty to the mother of mankind, the womb that nourished the
rebellious fratricide? Erase from the records of Heaven the premeditated, the
inhuman act that stained the face of nature with the guilt of blood; Reveal thy
will to the spirit of Adam; commission him to declare unto the supplicant thy
gracious approbation, while discharging his already entrusted embassy in the
brightness of a celestial host -- give him the commands of Supremity, what is
thy will for the anxious child to do -- but withdraw not thy benedictive
influence to leave him in dubious speculation to fin unknowingly against thee;
let thy will, O LORD, be done, and make Cain religiousty patient and submissive
to the mandate of his GOD -- O GOD, be it so! be it so, O my GOD.' Here ends
the prayer of CAIN.

With eyes intently fixed upon the ground had CAIN hitherto remained, and now
looks toward the sky to see his father -- he looks, he surveys the expanded
atmosphere, he trembles! and with quivering limbs, unable to sustain nature,
down he fell with a groan to the earth -- Adam is gone! his comforter! the
consolating friend of the suspending penitent has received the summons of
Omnipotency to return to the THRONE of MAJESTY.

The eyes of CAIN began now to overflow and water the ground with grief -- the
whole frame of nature was in a state of perturbation, and in the agonies of his
soul would cry out --

' Heaven is offended! my petition is rejected! God is displeased! my father,
my comforter, in his sudden anger is recalled! Involved now in a gulf of
amazing wretchedness, my Soul, bid thou adieu to all expectations of future
fruition -- again have thou offended GOD! Was not thy desires open unto his
Omnipotency? Was he not acquainted with thy tender sensations for EVE? He
wisely withheld the message from ADAM; then why presumest thou, CAIN, to direct
Omnipotency? Can thou fathom the depth of his wisdom? Vanity has again
deluded thee!'

Thus reflections succeeded each other as a discorded mass of unsettled
imaginations, and terminated instantly, before rumination could adjust its
scattered fragments, and form them into any regularity for hope.

'The attributes of GOD are just the fame,' says he, 'if the prayer was evil,
the heart of CAIN was righteous before God.'

These considerations would rejoice him, and inadvertency procure some
consolation under the deplorable circumstances that his oppressed imaginations
painted unto him -- thus he continues bewailing and groaning under his
tribulations on the ground, till the cheering warmth of the sun was much
exhilerated, and its powerful influence upon creation visibly abated; the
chilling damps were making their progressive motions through the vacuities of
the earth rapidly, and the whole atmosphere loaded with moistening dew -- these
combined evils forewarned the mournful complainant of their forcible effects
and approaching danger, and on his feet he arose -- flowly, and oppressively
loaded, he proceeds toward his melancholy abode; as he walks he halts; around
him he looks, and looks again; nothing to be perceived but solemn silence and
advancing night; his soul was eager for further expostulation with itself -- he
sighed for reconciliation again with God; consternations succeeded each other
by quick rotations; and all the alleviation he could obtain for his unsettled
and disturbed contemplations, was at times to open his lips with ejaculations
to Heaven in the language of hope:

'God is good! God is merciful! CAIN will still rest upon his God!'

With faculties thus deranged, meditations discomposed, and a mind roving from
circumstance to circumstance, forgetfulness had suffered him to be overtaken
with mournful darkness, and memory had forsaken him how to regain his solitary
residence; thus is CAIN, the firstborn of mankind, at present situated,
bewildered in a maze of almost insanity; beclouded with the darkness of dismal
night and loaded mind, and lost from all consolating society.

Thus he traverses the unbeaten desert, thoughtless of safety; but by the hand
of Providence was miraculously brought to his desired home; Conviction was
immediately present with him; no deliberation was requisite at this time to
convince him of the goodness of God, and with requisite of heart he cries out
--

' My God has not forsaken me! a merciful guide and guardian have I found him
through the barren wilderness; unto despair will I bid adieu; melancholy shall
no longer rest on the brow of CAIN, for he can again rejoice in the LORD; there
are hopes,' he cried, 'I will cherish and cultivate them.'

CAIN was now seated in his peaceful bower, surrounded with sable darkness,
while his ejaculations and contemplative thoughts winged their way to Heaven
composedly; when in the midst of his pious meditations, he hears, at a little
distance from him, a soft and tender voice --

'CAIN, be watchful!' Before surprise and astonishment was scarce fettled
within him, he hears the second voice as a whisper in his ear --

'Thy repeated offense has irritated Heaven; there are no hopes left.' Here
faith and resolution were powerfully besieged, and confidence began to waver;
then again reflection assists to support him under the ponderous consideration;
'The voices were two,' says he, 'danger must be at hand, or warning
unnecessary; hopes cannot be banished, or CAIN need not be watchful; SATAN is
still exerting his machinations to overwhelm by his malevolency the already
miserable; I will be comforted, and not by perdition offer aggravated violence
to Heaven.'

Thus communeth CAIN with himself; and after presenting his offerings of
gratitude to Heaven, lays himself down on the mossy couch, and presently falls
into a profound slumber; sleep refreshed him -- his soul required a relaxation
from its turbulent disquietudes; with the early lark he arose, and presented
his morning sacrifice in the following language:

'With unfeigned acknowledgements, O God, I offer up my grateful tributes of
praise; bestow upon me a portion of thy influence, adequate to the powerful
attempts of my adversary, that in an unguarded moment he may not be tr^^^nphant
over me.' From hence did CAIN enjoy for a season his meditations, and converse
with Heaven and Nature undisturbed, and in peace -- when early in the dawn of a
Sabbath, (which he regularly observed, as enjoined by GOD to ADAM) he perceived
in the Heavens a luminous body making its way through the regions of etherial
space. Being twice before warned by similar appearances, his astonishment was
lessened, but still struck an awful consternation into his soul, as its
progressive motions became more and more visible; impatiently he awaits its
nearer approach; and presently it was within a few paces, when its illuminating
transcendency overcame the whole face of nature, and CAIN, with bended knees,
unable to look on the exceeding transparency closes his eyes, and cries out, '
What is this? It has the resemblance of an entrance into Heaven! Can I face my
MAKER? with shame I shut my eyes.'

While in this situation of doubtful and pleasing impulse, a voice entered his
ear as follows:

'CAIN thou art deceived; Heaven is not for thee; Hell waits with open mouth
to receive thee into the bowels of its flaming gulf: prepare therefore for thy
everlasting reward.'

CAIN directly turned round to see from whence the sound came, and immediately
a second voice gently speaks -- 'Cain, I say be watchful.'

This cheers and revives his languishing spirits, and looking up he beheld a
conflict in the clouds betwixt two; he was convinced that the combatants must
be advocates for Heaven and Hell; with bended knees toward the ground and eyes
and hands uplifted, he cries out --

'Strengthen, O God, the hands of thy servant.'

With holy fear and admiration he beheld the dreadful battle, till victory
leaned on the side of heaven; and while the beatitudes of Glory surrounded the
victor, the vanquishment of Satan was evinced by a terrible howling and
vanishing of the infernal Fiend. CAIN beholding the conquest over the Prince of
Darkness, cries out:

' Angels and men are thine, O GOD; Adversaries of heaven must fall woeful
victims to thy superior power.'

The Angel now approaches CAIN, who presently recognized the glorious features,
and with exulting rapture and joy in his countenance, he cries out, ' My
father! my father!

ADAM thus begins -- 'CAIN, my child, hear the injunctions of thy GOD!'

'Father come thou with peace?'

'With peace, my son.'

'Speak my father.'

'My son, thy prayer to Heaven reached the Throne of GOD -- the unexpected
visitations experienced by thee in the intermediate space, was the wise result
of infinite rectitude, for reasons peculiar to his own self-existing will --
Cease therefore, CAIN, to wonder at these dispensations, and be attentive to
the voice of ADAM.'

'The will of GOD must be fulfilled; the present spot occupied by thee is
peculiarly adapted for thy fruition in holiness, and must not be abandoned for
a time -- it is the command of thy Maker through ADAM unto thee -- The LORD
rejected not thy filial petition, and the desires of thy soul will be
accomplished at his appointed time -- wait thou with obedient patience, and
increase thy improvement in the science of humble adoration and praise -- Thou
shall embrace thy mother, and the parent of men shall embrace her child --
Satan shall not overcome thee, nor his assaults dismay thee, while thou restest
with sacred confidence in the LORD -- Having now delivered unto thee the
dictates of Heaven, must again adieu my son and return to the celestial court
of triumphant glory.'

CAIN replies -- 'Go return to ABEL my brother, and join with him in praising
GOD with eternal joy.'

ADAM immediately ascended toward heaven in the clouds, and CAIN saw him no
more.

END OF THE FIFTH BOOK.
CAIN's LAMENTATIONS OVER ABEL. BOOK THE SIXTH.
'AND has ADAM taken his last farewell? says CAIN, 'Wait now patiently my soul,
for the further manifestations of thy God; still enjoy the sweets of solitude;
without rational community thou may be devoutly contemplative, and a
cheerful resignation will be comfortably solacing unto thee, till the will of
the Lord is revealed; swift-footed time is rapidly passing thee, and soon will thou see the termination of thy days; yet the awful summons of Eternity will
not await thee until the mother of men has embraced her child! Oh, all ye
shrill voiced warblers, aid me by your musical instructions to celebrate my
adorations devoutly; let your morning tributes accelerate my reciprocal
adorations in strains of unfeigned gratitude, that with calm contentment I may
be submissively obedient to the ordinations of my Creator; and all ye the
domestic companions of my peaceful retreat, who daily awaken my meditations
upon infinity, inspire me with that native instinct that moves you to punctual
praise, and teach me how to augment our mutual community, and, emulated by your
examples, I shall not offend Heaven; establish the present subsisting
fellowship amongst us till the end of time; with CAIN, your silent and
inarticulate admonitions have been seasonably instructive and useful, and
learned the aged man lessons of morality.'

Thus reasons CAIN with himself and creation, and from hence enjoyed every
requisite happiness his soul needed, or circumstances required; and piously
resigned to his condition, he reaped continual consolation, and dedicated his
hours to the necessary duties of life; diligent and watchful did he nurture and
feed the tender young of his numerous family, and procuring the balms of
nature's herbage to the infirm and wounded, from the creeping reptile to the
majestic lion; every inhabitant of the grove to whom that spot of creation was
friendly, partook of his compassionate caresses and cares; in this exercise of
humanity to brutes he could reap both rational pleasure and profit.

A few seasons had elapsed, and CAIN, in his wonted round through the spreading
branches and entwinements of the grove, heard a sound pleasingly mournful, but
plaintively dreadful; all the agitations to which discomposed nature is
subject, both in joy and sadness, seemed to be conjunctively in motion; it
surprised him; patience would not admit of delay by attention; he proceeds
toward the spot, guided by the unusual accents softly whispering through the
leaves, while the reverberating echo was awful to his ears; he approaches a
close shade of prickly brambles, nicely jointed all around with peculiar
exactness, and curiously interwoven by the artful industry of its occupier; one
small vacuum only open for the admission of its guests. CAIN without hesitation
looks within, and his astonishment ceased with pleasing reflections and
improved sensations, when being convinced of this supernatural effect on his
mind.

He saw worn out with the successive revolution of years, and rendered infirm
and helpless by the decay of age, the once powerful, but now languishing
Lioness: the last remains of lengthened days were diminishing, and around the
dying dam stood the venerable sire and an offspring of tender cubs, joining in
mournful plaints, while the soft accented moans of departing life were conveyed
through the enclosures of the close retreat in strains of sober melancholy.

CAIN'S appearance produced no consternation in this disconsolate dwelling of
solemn sadness; his face, his manners, were familiarized to the brute creation;
they look on him with irrational reverence, not estranged from brutal sympathy,
nor acquainted with human feeling; CAIN with admiration beholds the mournful
spectacle; 'This equals human affections,' says he, ''tis the hour for sacred
meditation; my soul, improve the awful moments! Behold nature undisguised; see
natural instinct approaching toward rationality in perfection; can the minds
of brutes form such exalted ideas of death, which produces to them nonentity
and final dissolution? Let this stimulate thee to an ecstasy of devotion to
speculate on immortality, and improve thy contemplative powers on everlasting
felicity, beyond the reach of death and time.'

The expiring Lioness opens her eyes and sees CAIN, LORD of the creation; for
seasons past she had been accustomed to receive the daily food of his liberal
donation in common with all other creatures; she showed not the least emotion
of terror at his sight, but moved her tail for gladness; gave one doleful moan,
and expired! The faithful family attendants, as by instinct of nature guided,
immediately began to paw the ground, and make an opening to conceal with earth
and leafs the deceased parent; while CAIN began to employ his reasonable
faculties upon the various occurrences of circumstances around him --

'The beast is dead;' says he, she lies as ABEL laid -- breathless! -- I will
assist the diligent survivors to discharge their debt of nature and mine of
duty, and help to commit the perishing corpse to the earth.' Thus said, he
joined the hasty laborers, and fulfilled the obligation that natural feeling
suggested to him. The mournful family afterward turned tail, and fled further
into the wood, and CAIN returned to his own bower, and communeth with himself
after the following manner:

'Like the forgotten beast soon will CAIN the forsaken be! No affectionate
wife, no tender parent, no filial child to bewail his expiring moments, or
discharge the last office of moral duty to his perishing frame; here CAIN will
die; here CAIN will perish as a beast perishes, unpitied of all, unnumbered
with the dead of mankind; Heaven I will supplicate to go and seek EVE, my
parent, before the dreadful day approaches.'

Immediately in a short ejaculation he supplicates the Divine Majesty for the
gracious permission, and betakes him to rest; and at the dawn of the morrow
prepared for his journey.

The morning was clear, the early birds were arisen cheerfully melodious, and
gaiety spread itself on all sides of him; a numerous tribe of faithful
domestics follow him to the opening desert, which CAIN seeing, he exclaims with
admiration -- 'Here is affection irrational! veneration undesigned! esteem
without guile! the poor creatures regret my departure; by melancholy movements
they would convince me of their sensitive sorrow, and by silent motions covet
my longer stay; I will return and sooth every one with a touch.' He walks back,
and not one of the pitiful train attempts to shun his approach, or shrink from
his tender feel; such was the subsisting amity between CAIN and irrational
creation, that the savage verocity of the voracious tiger had forsaken him, and
the natural timidity peculiar to the feathered lineage was now banished from
their nice sensations, and from spray to spray did they hop, silently and
mournfully affected with sagacious discernment, at the loss of CAIN'S society.

With deepness of thought he pauses, and wonders at this strange and powerful
operation on the instinctive faculties of creatures of different natures and
properties; and gently stroking each noble beast, and softly laying the ruffled
feathers of the now silent songsters he bids them adieu, and takes his last
farewell.

No sooner was the face of CAIN turned from them, but a mournful discord of
sorrowful sounds reigned throughout the whole herd of beasts and flocks of
birds, and, taking separate courses and flights, slowly move with sensitive
melancholy, and bid farewell to their departing monarch.

CAIN now proceeds forwards ruminating on the various disasters, conveniences,
and circumstances of life that had befallen him since the murder of ABEL, and
thus begins to reason with himself --

Conscience at times has singed me -- fear at seasons has been terrifying to
me, but reflections on GOD'S mercy, equity and truth, have supported me --
Powerful have been Satan's frequent assailments, and proportionably liberal
have been Heaven's merciful protections; and due obedience to the instructive
lessons of ABEL and ADAM have taught me temperance in my desires, and prudence
in my conduct; and to the years of aged experience, have all my afflictions of
mind been alleviated by the seasonable counsel of improving wisdom, and brought
me to the approaching period of embracing my mother.

He now turns round to take his last view of the peaceful spot, and if one
faithful domestic of his family was still in sight, but every one had taken his
course and departed, like CAIN, from the land of grievous solitude.

'Now,' says he, let my footsteps keep pace with the movements of swift-winged
time -- contemplation will impede progression, and retard my pursuits after the
desirable meeting -- leave me for a while, ye multiplicity of charming ideas,
that crowd promiscuously upon my conceptions, that my speed may bear similitude
to the swift footed deer, and bring me without obstruction within sight of the
happy Eden -- Eastward of that beautiful spot (adorned with the variegated
productions of odoriferous flowers and herbage, cultivated by the diligent hand
of improvement) shall I find the mother of men, surrounded with a numerous
offspring of a later and purer race than CAIN her unfortunate firstborn --
ever now she has erased from recollection the vile miscreant -- while the
horrid act is still retained in memory, while the bloody remembrance produces
bitter anguish to her soul, when she caresses with aged affection the fruits of
her after progeny.'

Thus communeth CAIN with himself, and still proceeds forward without
interruption or delay, taking his nightly repose on the open and untrodden
plain, and rising every morning with the tuneful lark, who punctually warned
him of approaching day. Protected by Heaven and provided by Providence, he
arrives within sight of Eden's Gorden; to the east he bends his course, and
toward the setting sun at a distance, he beholds the heart-wounding, the
melancholy spot! the spot where ABEL died! Nature was overcome! CAIN sunk to
the ground! Reflection was too powerful for him to withstand -- darkness
overtook him before reason could be collected, and all the night was devoted to
supplications to Heaven when the intervals of examination would permit his
addresses to the Throne of God.

In the morning the diligent warbler gave him timely notice of the rising sun,
and he proceeded forward; presently appeared to his view the grassy hillock
that for a series of years had faithfully withstood the tempests and hurricanes
of disturbed creation, and concealed in sacred security the harmless dust.

He stops -- anguish, sorrow, grief, and every reflective concomitant of guilt
brings to remembrance, with torturing remorse the painful scene; his mind
borders now upon wavering inconstancy; hope becomes almost a victim to despair,
and self reproaches as deep wounds to his soul; nothing now could support him
but a confidence in GOD; the glory of ABEL and ADAM in Heaven, and his
encouraging consolation under their former conversations with him -- heavily he
proceeds till within sight of EVE's abode; and still pensively advancing, he
presently beholds the venerable parent of mankind dandling on her knee with the
dalliance of smiling gravity, the infant offspring of the eighth generation --
LAMECH, the firstborn of METHUSELAH, with a numerous family of cheerful and
obedient domestics around her, all diligently employed in the necessary
occupations of fertile industry; the pleasing aspect in every countenance was
nobly visible, and sat on every brow with the tincture of joy and delight;
contentment had taken up its dwelling amongst them with sensible gratitude, and
the bountiful productions of Heaven's beneficence were portioned out with all
their necessary conveniences and useful requisites, untainted with corrupting
superfluities to defile them.

The impression such a sight made on the mind of CAIN, added to his own
reflections, would not, for the present, admit of a serious or unsettled
conclusion how to proceed, which produced the following soliloquy --

'My presence will undoubtedly cause confusion, and probably discording
opinions and unfavourable conjectures in the minds and sentiments of the
peaceful happy -- It Is a generation strangers to the person of CAIN; their
knowledge of the unfortunate criminal extends not beyond the boundaries of
historical relation of him: and, unacquainted with his many years deep
contrition and penitence, can only retain in their bosoms an implacable hatred
and detestation for his memory; for tradition has recorded in the minds of the
descendants of ADAM the premeditated, the hellish deed, that involved CAIN in
years of bitter woe; my further approach may be dangerous; overcome by the
sudden impulse of anger and passion at the first sight of CAIN'S infamous MARK,
they may, before calm consideration gives place to patient hearing and reason,
in one united body be revenged on CAIN for a brother's death.'

In this dubious alternative he petitions Heaven for instructive lessons of
wisdom; a voice charmingly soft and pleasing enters his ear --

'CAIN, proceed and fear not. Thus embolened, he communes with himself --

'First will I approach the grave of ABEL, and be eyewitness to the
devastation that revolving time has made on the once green and flourishing
turf, that entombeth native purity and primitive simplicity; thus shall I be
prepared by calm and mature reflections to join in converse and unite in
harmony with the righteous family unknown.'

Thus said he hastens toward the grave of ABEL, and his eyes beheld the fruits
of paternal and fraternal veneration for a child, for a brother -- every
odoriferous herb and sweet scented flower to which this cultivated spot of
harmless nature was friendly, plentifully surrounded, with their luxuriant
sweets, the tenement of clay, and distributed voluptuously their balmy flavours
all around -- The soul of CAIN now soars aloft with warm emulation at the
affection and love of distant generations for the memory of a brother unknown.

In a posture of bended humility and devout meditation he fixes his eyes on the
hallowed recluse, too intent on the object of his awakening memory to perceive
the playful innocents around him, (the children and grandchildren of ENOCH and
METHUSELAH) that infantile curiosity and admiration had drawn together to gaze
on the unknown stranger; when presently looking up, the ^^^le inoffensive
visitors, equally surprised and frightened, run with speed toward their home,
to take refuge in the arms of their protecting parents.

CAIN, still continuing in an uncomposed state of mind, and his intellectual
powers almost forsaken him, had not fortitude or resolution to quit the grave,
and in a few minutes saw approaching him the image of aged rectitude and
religion -- EVE the parent of mankind -- the mother of Abel, leaning on the arm
of the youthful Lamech, and supported on the other side with the close embraces
of her children's children, clinging their little hands with terrific
imaginations to her covering garments.

CAIN saw and knew his mother, ere she was near him -- ' ' It Is my mother! he
cried, and down he fell with his face on the grave.

The aged parent draws near, and with sympathy commiserates the unhappy
stranger -- in vain she strives for a time to soothe him with the language of
pity and providence.

'Heaven,' said she, 'has directed the wandering footsteps of the unfortunate
to the mansions of reflective sorrow; see how he lies with pulses beating
irregular courses on the turf of silent darkness. Arise, thou distressed;
partake of the bounties of nature's liberality; behold EVE the ancient of
living, the mother of men, prepared to administer the needful consolation and
comfort unto thee; let her assist thee with the soft endearments of tenderness
and compassion; embrace her friendly offers for thy interest, moved toward
thee only by motives of mutual sensation; afflict not thyself with unlimited
grief, nor permit anxiety to prey on thy cheeks, while cordial relief invites
thy acceptance.'

LAMECH now gently touches CAIN, and opens his mouth to him as follows:

'Oh, thou dejected! overcome with the weight of affliction and troubled mind,
Who art thou? arise! be not deaf to the entreaties of sage experience; no harm
awaits thee amongst the descendants of EVE; look up and behold the countenance
of venerable affection, revered by a numerous offspring; the heart of our
univensal parent beats with mournful breathings for the alleviation of thy
distress.'

CAIN now lifts up his eyes and beholds the cheerful, painful smile of
compassionate feeling in the face of his feeble parent, and immediately arose
and cries out;

' My mother! my mother! my mother! Eve my parent! behold CAIN the long lost
firstborn of thy womb! behold the humble Penitent; the sorrowful convert; look
in the face of CAIN, and doubts will fly thy breast; see the immovable STIGMA
of GOD: Art thou now convinced, my mother?

''Tis my child!' cries EVE, embracing him, and with joy and infirmities of
years, sinks to the ground; CAIN assisted ENOCH, the father of METHUSELAH, to
raise her from the earth, but her overflowing faculties of gladness, rendered
her incapable of uttering the joyful language of her soul. Slowly they proceed
toward the fragrant, the delightful abode of EVE, and procuring the necessary
cordials and refreshing juices, she recovered her spirits and began to commune
with her son; her firstborn long lost child! while a large family of each sex
and all ages, some of each tribe from SETH to LAMECH, surrounded them with
sober attention, and listened with pleasing satisfaction to the edifying
discourse.

EVE thus began -- 'How have the days of the years of my son been spent? Has
the LORD been in and out with thee, my son? Is the soul of my firstborn
relieved by any encouraging consolation from his GOD? Is the violence of all
unruly disorders banished from the breast of the elder of men? Has CAIN
resisted all temptations to sin in the interval of long parental absence? And
is he returned to close the eyes of his aged mother in peace?

Here CAIN relates to his mother the various occurrences and circumstances that
had befallen him in the course of his banishment from EDEN'S view, which
produced in EVE different sensations of emotion, as his historical relation
affected her conceptions, and as the successive rotation of events that had
accompanied his solitary as well as busy life impressed upon her reflections;
but the narration of ABEL'S and ADAM'S appearing to him, revived her aged soul
with ecstasy of joy, and produced raptures of unbounded gratitude and devotion
to Heaven.

Here the tears of contemplative powers burst their vent through the weakly
eyelid, and moistened the cheeks of CAIN with affectionate embraces of aged
triumph and joy.

'And is my husband and child in glory?" said she, then EVE will die in peace.
Will my firstborn now take up his dwelling in the bosom of parental
tenderness, and forsake not his mother till her body is committed to its parent
soil? Come, ye children all, the offspring of ADAM, let us unite in one general
concord of harmonious adoration; assemble round the altar of sacred piety, and
increase with your unfeigned devotion the grateful praise; lift up your hearts
and voices with a unity of solemn veneration to Heaven, not only for the
gracious donations enjoyed by ourselves, but for its distinguishable blessings
displayed toward the dead and the living.'

EVE having now summoned all herfaithful family around her, with cheerfulness
and alacrity they pay obedience to the venerable injunction, and silently join
their reverend parent in ejaculation to Heaven, as follows: At the footstool of
thy throne, O GOD, of Heaven, we assemble to render up the feeble accents of
our praise; let not the imperfections of our unripened adorations displease
thee; separate all defilements from the purity of our sacrifices, and reject
not our offerings for being compounded with defects; before us is a living
instance of thy benign love and kindness, and by manifest revelation we are
convinced of thy heavenly benediction to those that are gone before; for those
thy gracious dispensations accept the unfeigned tributes of our souls as
presented with conscientious celebration and pious sensations of devotion:
prepare us also to encounter, with sacred fortitude, the trying conflict of
approaching dissolution and separation; perfect the necessary work that
remains unfinished in the mother of mankind; let her increase the conjunctive
voices of praise in glorifying thee forever and ever -- Leave not the
firstborn of men in his latter days to the power of his awaiting adversary;
complete the work of penitence and atonement within him, and disdain not to
reward his repentance with thy future influence; let the graces of Heaven flow
down plentifully upon this rising seed, and water those plants of future
generations with the dew of divine mercies, that they may escape the suares of
evil designs, and answer the purposes of their creation rightcously, to thy
glory, the good of their own Souls, and guides to succeeding posterity.' Here
EVE ends her prayer, and CAIN addresses himself to the family around --

'Ye children of ADAM, brothers and sisters of ABEL in glory -- behold the
firstborn of mankind; learn from the mouth of dire experience to be wise unto
good, and eschew the paths of evil -- See before you CAIN the guilty! The
gravity of years nor devastation that revolving seasons has made upon the ruddy
countenance and robust complexion of your aged kinsman can erase or diminish
the denounced vengeance of GOD upon him for the unnatuaal arime; from
generation to generation the MARK of infamy distinguishes him from the purer
race of men; unceasing have been his days of lamentation in solitude;
consecrating penitence has accompanied his mournful hours, and revolutions of
scenes unexpected and profitable, have continually attended the wrathful decree
-- let not animosity exist amongst you toward the aged unfortunate -- cherish
not hatred against the worn-out sufferer; admit him cordially into your
fraternity of peace, and let him find comfortable consolation amidst gray hairs
and children, and calmly to end his days in the band of a holy society.' Here
CAIN ceased speaking to his relations, when METHUSELAH thus began:

'Our brother, judgment is the prerogative of GOD; filial duty and love belong
to brothers and sisters: Take up thy abode with us; comfort our aged parent
with thy occasional relations of providential dispensations; it will be
grateful to he ears, and make her privated meditations pleasingly instructive
to herself; while our younger branches will listen with eager curiosity, and be
almost inadvertently brought to awful contemplations on the wisdom and goodness
of GOD; they will thereby increase in sacred knowledge, seemingly by
inspiration; while our youth of constitutions more robust, and inured to
fatigue and labor, shall fulfill the duties of the day with cheerful alacrity
to provide the necessary supplies of sustenance for our aged mother and CAIN
our brother.'

' Dwell with us thou reverend years,' cries the children with one united
voice, 'and with our tender aid we will join to contribute to thy daily
comfort.'

'Peace dwell amongst ye, innocents -- with you I will abide,' says CAIN.

'With delighted hearts, and unspeakable gratitude, may we never cease
presenting our acknowledgments to Heaven, to the giver of all good gifts,' says
EVE.

Now every one partakes him to his necessary occupation, and EVE and CAIN are
left to enjoy the pleasing reflections of the promising unity and happiness.

Daily did CAIN take his thoughtful rounds amongst the cultivated enclosures of
his sociable and beloved companions: tranquillity had taken up her resting place
in his soul, and with his aged mother could enjoy, under the blossoming
branches of shady arbours, the exhaling sweets of variegated flowers, and join
in concord the musical and mellifluous harmony of the warbling inhabitants:
punctually would he go, and pay a pensive and reflective visit to the grave of
ABEL; these occasions made transgression painful to his memory while
consolation was elevated within him by contemplating upon Heaven's many
instances of providence and encouraging mercies: with tears of grief he waters
the flowers, with the language of hope would he embrace the turf, and glorify
GOD in the midst of groans and sighs.

EVE, in one of her solitary and flow excursions on the borders of fertility,
accompanied by a youthful train of cheerful descendants, beheld CAIN reclining
on ABEL'S grave, and approaching him, seated herself by his side, and entered
into discourse with him as follows:

'My child, we rest on a couch, the devoted spot of sanctity; underneath us
abides in peace and quietness the remains of mortality, the dust of primitive
innocence; the parent earth conceals securely the once existing flesh
demolished, and safe in its bowels is wrapped the dust of ABEL -- These are
opportunities which heaven has vouchsafed to my firstborn for reflection and
improvement of mind; conscience may here undisturbed penetrate into the dark
c^^ern below, and ^^^^tate prositably upon the dreadful scene.'

'From thy lips proceed the words of truth, my mother,' replieth CAIN, 'Pensive
years and woeful experience has been productive of improved effects from CAIN'S
meditations; it is true; spiritual instruction can be obtained by conversing
with the entombed silent. Thoughtful serenity is the concomitant of solitary
devotion, and the awakened soul thereby be prepared for Heavenly communion;
rejoice, thou parent of all men, with the greatest criminal, with the greatest
penitent, and marvel at the merciful operations of Almighty goodness to grant
peace of mind to the most iniquitous.

'My son, the language of thy lips is comfortable; the words of thy mouth are
reving; with calm resignation could EVE now render up her soul unto God; with
peaceful tranquillity could she surrender all nature's perfections into the
hands of its creator, and cheerfully bid adieu to all momentary selicity and
transitory enjoyments -- her end is approaching, her moments fly with rapid
progression, and shortly will the dictate be declared that summons the first
sinner and first mother to her everlasting home.'

After this manner discoursed EVE with CAIN, both seated on the consecrated
turf of ABEL, and CAIN perceived a faultering in her speech; a sudden emotion
in her limbs that seemed to predict an immovable calamity; the melancholy
catastrophe was near at hand that was to separate parent from child and
children; the diffolution of mortality was evinced by approaching symptoms of
meagre death; the pale, the wan visage was apparent in her countenance, and age
and nature seemed jointly combined to take a farewell of mortality together;
the mother of ABEL sinks on the bosom of CAIN; the scene is now become awfully
mournful! the young and the youthful cry out,

'Our mother is dying!'

She is speechless! CAIN waters her quivering cheeks with tears of melting
languish, while the little sobbing infants ran to call assistance from the
elder and wise, and prefently was ABEL'S grave furrounded by all ages, of both
sexes, each dutifully applying with diligent exertion the most salutary balm,
productive of the native soil, striving to administer the necessary aid to
restore again the feeble motions of venerable affections, but alas! the decree
of Heaven was fulfilled! their mother is no more! EVE has joined the communion
of spirits; silence has closed her lips, and darkness her eyes for ever?

CAIN cries out, 'Enclose me my mother in the arms of death, and convey me
through the tracts of ether to the regions of immortality.'

And down he drops with EVE on his breast on ABEL'S grave; in a swoon he lies,
while the sympathising family hastens to discharge their duty toward the
living and the dead -- The men prep^red for the concealment of the parent
corp^ with its native earth in the grave with (...), while the women were
busily em^loy^^ (...) ^^covering the almost hopeless facu^^^^ (...) -- now, the
ancient of living; CAIN the first born of men.

Long was the time before reason ^eturned to its wonted composure, and
re^igious resignation acquiesced to Heaven's ^^termination, when CAIN found
himself s^^ted with domestic reverence in the deligh^^^ll arbor of ENOCH'S
son; while the vigo^^ of the youthful had paid the debt of duty and nature to
the body of EVE, and carefully laid to rest on the coffin of ADAM, her husband.

The mind of CAIN became gradually calm and tranquil, while the embracing
fondness and cheerful obedience of all to his will, increased his happiness and
softened his reflections, and also stimulated him to an exercise of his mind by
improving his own declining days, and instructing the rifing youth in the
incumbent duties of virtue, truth and holiness -- Bending under the weight of
years he would nurture with tender love and fondness, children's children to
the latest generation.

On all sides did reverence and esteem unite to fill up the measure of his days
with undisturbed and unmolested peace; and from the circumstances of
revolutions elapsed and reflections on the past and approaching vicissitude
near at hand, he required all the solacing consolation that his faithful family
could render him to support him under those frequent recollections of
occurrences that required his utmost fortitude to surmount, and from whence no
alleviation could be derived but by confidence in his GOD, and improvement of
stying time by holy conversation -- attended by the young and innocent he
compasses the cultivated enclosures with the smiles of aged pleasure, and
partakes of the harmless amusements of the children with cheerful gravity.

Punctually did he observe his daily rounds with feeble footsteps, and visited
his brother's grace in regular course -- here conviction still predominated
over the weakness of human nature, and draw almost imperceptibly the tear of
contrition from his wrinkled eyelid, already near dry with revolving years.

Nothing could eradicate from his memory the painful scene; and when gazing
upon the multitude of variegated flowers that decked the sacred spot and
diflused the sweetest odours all around, thought would sometimes be too
powerful for his aged faculties to maintain, and throw him almost into a
trance, while the little harmless attendants would use every effort peculiar to
their infantile sagacity to divert his attention by playful recreations,
drawing him by the stratagems of inoffensive art from the melancholy spot,
inciting his speculations to objects more suitable to decaying nature, and
delivering him from the loaded anxieties of insupportable impressions.

Thus was CAIN the eldest of the first generation, guided by children the
youngest of the last -- with delight he looks down on their smiling faces, and
follows with pleasure their wanderiag sootsteps; forgetting for a while, the
fatal stroke of ABEL, would become like one of them, and join their healthy
diversion with the cheerfulness of infirmity; and at the same time listen with
delight to the tuneful choristers on the waving branches, spiritualizing their
harmonious voices into melodious devotion -- All nature to him was now become
natural; and from even the inanimate as well as irrational works of creation he
could derive in ward consolation, and meditate profitably upon all GOD's works.

Resting upon the branches of a bending cedar, thoughtfull on eternity, he
reasons with himself as follows --

'Revolving years have taken their rapid ^ourses through the space of
swift-winged time, and attended with circuitous events to CAIN -- the hour is
approaching when the first, the greatest-premeditated delinquent will bid adieu
to mortality, and feel unalterably the powerful force that now separates life
from death, and know what IMMORTALITY is -- then can hejudge of the power of
penitence, and if contrition can accomplish the pardon, and appease the wrath
of offended Heaven.

'The reflection is awfully penetrating* it impresses with ponderous ideas on
the aged mind; still is CAIN loaded with sorrowful meditations when the death
of ABEL intrudes upon his silent ejaculations -- neglect not to embrace with
sensible gratitude the season of flying Graces to meet thy Judge! -- O CAIN! --
God has not avowedly manifested unto thee his forgiveness; what are his
declarations from Heaven toward thee more than thy hopes founded upon his
repeated clemency and thy lengthend days for penitence? Let not thy dependence
rest entirely upon those past encouragements, but persevere in thy duty of
contrition, that the Tempter may not destroy thy hopes at last.'

CAIN'S contemplative powers were now very much impaired, and his aged
faculties soon overpowered with the infirmities of nature, and the weight of
intense thought were more than his years could support although the love,
veneration, and obedience of his whole family was evident in all their conduct
-- for those were all unacquainted with the weight of his malady, though not
strangers to its cause -- every effort was administered to erase the dreadful
transacti, on from his memory, so far as to abate its rigor on his solitary
devotions; but his greatest consolation was derived from contemplating upon
ABEL'S and ADAM'S visitation; these reflections would preponderate and footh
him under the burden of his weighty considerations.

On the eve of a sabbath CAIN, with LAMECH, a youth of the last generation went
forth to feed the flocks -- 'Behold,' says he to the youth,' let the purity and
in^^cense of the playfull lambs be exemplary for thy futurelife; let their
harmless diversions stimulate thee to the love and practice of friendship and
peace; these are virtues that ornament the soul; qualifications that beautify
the whole frame of nature; in unity dwell thou amongst thy brethren; cherish
not hatred against thy bitterest ennemy, and thy days will be prolonged, and
thy soul calmly glide on the surface of those tumultuous waves that ebb and
flow with the continul vicissitudes of the world; despise not the admonition of
experienced years; let the reasoning of the ancient predominate over the
immature judgment of thy youth, and sage advice be effectual on thy pliant
mind; survey the flock; behold the native simplicity of harmless creation; unto
sin they are estranged, neither are their pleasures compounded with evil; and
equally unknown to them are those exalted degrees of sublime reasoning, and
forming ideas of the excellencies of their Maker's attributes, and the
knowledge of future glory with which man is nobly endowed by his GOD. As the
hours of time elapse so do the seasons of preparation for eternity escape us;
look up; view the counte^^^ce of the guilty aged! the stigma of conscience
wounded, and the dire MARK of iniquity always accompanies the worthless
criminal, and naught but abounding mercy has hitherto secured him from the jaws
of everlasting-death; a death conjugal with the never-ending torments of
languishing life; these are the concomitants of sin; these are the unavoidable
companions of hardened and impenitent transgressors, the direful sentence of
offended majesty; As thy moments fly let deliberations on these important
revelations weigh on thy mind, thou sou of METHUSELAH.'

CAIN having ended, LAMECH the youth thus began;

'Thou eldest of the aged, veneration is due to thy years -- from thee sage
counsel is esteemed expedient -- advice from the grave experienced cannot be
otherwise than salutary and productive of real good; rooted in my soul shall
thy persuasive admonitions be established, and may a portion of CAIN'S virtues
be bountifully conferred by the GOD of all good upon the youthful LAMECH.'

'Child, with all its imperfections, may my blessing attend thee -- Arise, let
us be gone! thy parents will seek thee as lost, while the aged will beforgotten
in the hurry of anxious immaginations for the young? distracted thoughts will
irregularly flow and intermix with the cares of dejection for the promising the
hopeful boy; See yonder they come, and the motion of their footsteps keep pace
with the velocity of paternal embraces, and deliver the tender mother from
doubtful apprehensions.'

The youth ran to meet his Father and console his mother, and brings them with
joy to the spot where CAIN was seated.

'Father,' says METHUSELAH,' diligently have we sought thee; and with plaintive
voices dreaded to find thee, foreboding some disastrous calamity had befallen
our Father; Thy sight revives our drooping spirits and chears our almost
despairing hopes; behold the assembly of gladness that surrounds thee; joy sits
smiling on every brow, and dejection is banished from every face at sight of
thee; return with us to the disconsolate bower, and dispel the gloomy moans of
the painful mother and children of ENOCH.'

'Ay, ye virtuous,' says CAIN, 'I go; be quick, let us not retard the pleasing
interview, nor suffer grief affectionately founded upon groundless
speculations, to abide in those religious dwelings of peaceful felicity.'

They all retire, and a concord of tranquil joy echoes throughout the grove,
while every dwelling partook of the harmonions community.

'Leave us not again,' ^^ies ^ARED, with minds bordering on distraction, and
with painful anxiety dubious of thy welfare; take with thee the elder to
accompany thy contemplative walks, and render the needful aid thy feeble nerves
may require, in case of sudden calamity; Children may divert thee, youth may
rejoice thee, but it is riper years that must procure the necessary succor in
thy helpless days; from hence limit thy walks to a shorter space, and never
outgo the sound of ENOCH'S voice; in thee is our comfort; we lose all when thou
art lost; but when Heaven decrees that fate, we can calmly resign to its
irrevocable dictate; till then, let not our thoughts be again suspended on the
pinnacle of fear for CAIN our father; we call thee parent, for years ch^^^le
thee to that duty from us.

Thus speaks JARED to CAIN; and brought the man of sorrow to his arbor of
quietude, and rejoiced the whole family around, while a sober sadness was
settled on the furrowed cheeks of CAIN, a reluctant melancholy overshadowed his
countenance, and excited the family to an interrogation as follows --

'CAIN,' says the mother of Methuselah 'What grief of mind oppresses thy riper
meditations? From whence flows this alteration in thy features, and appearance
of woe in the aged man? reveal to the wife of ENOCH the original cause, and by
our joint assistance the effects may cease; nature with thee is too far gone to
support the load of depression; it is a baneful weed that shoots forth in the
soul, and unless cropped at its rising will bring our father's gray hairs to
the grave in sorrow; the years are past for CAIN to encounter in conflicts with
powerful reflections, or to combat with the forces of united enemies; The
adversary of thy youth is still mighty; the venom of his envy is still
flourishing, and the darts of his inveteracy always ready to wound thee in the
weakest part; let not thy retirements be frequent or solitary, but associate
with our community, and the conversations of fellowship and friendship will be
solacing unto thee, beneficial to the youth, and edifying to maturer years;
S^eak now, CAIN.'

'What aileth our Father?'

' Nothing, ye righteous seed of SETH.'

From hence were the watchful guardians of CAIN diligent in the duty of
observation, and never permitted his private walks to exceed the bounds of
hearing.

ADAM and EVE had recorded the mournful day of ABEL'S death, and revealed the
same to succeeding posterity -- on this same day, after revolving centuries and
successive generations, did the venerable wanderer, weak and feeble, unknown to
his family, once more attempt to reach the grave of ABEL; fatigue overtook him,
and with weary limbs did painfully arrive at the pensive spot. The expected
time of his return was elapsed, the whole family was in consternation, and
eagerly fled to the mournful place, where CAIN in deep contemplation was
seated, as the image of death, on ABEL'S grassy tomb: his countenance evinced
the approaching change, and all were preparing to convey him home; Cain looks
up and sees an infant in the mother's arms, the wife of ENOCH, he says, 'Come
near, let me bless the child before I die: What is his name?'

'We call him Abel,' says Enoch.

'ABEL, you call him;' and taking the child from his mother, he says, May he be
endued with Abel's virtues, and with eyes and hands uplifted, he falls back on
the grave with ABEL in his arms, and, looking toward Heaven, with one smiling
groan, he gave up the ghost, and died.

FINIS.

