RECOMMENDATION BY GEORGE WASHINGTON.
Mount-Vernon, July, 3 d, 1799. REV. SIR,
For your kind compliment -- "The IMMORTAL MENTOR," I beg you to accept my best
thanks. I have perused it with singular satisfaction; and hesitate not to say
that it is in my opinion at least, an invaluable compilation I cannot but hope
that a book whose contents do such credit to its title, will meet a very
generous patronage.

Should that patronage equal my wishes, you will have no reason to regret that
you ever printed the Immortal Mentor.

With respect I am Rev. Sir, Your most obedient Humble Servant, GEORGE
WASHINGTON.

The Rev. MR. WEEMS.
THE IMMORTAL MENTOR: OR, MAN's UNERRING GUIDE TO A HEALTHY, WEALTHY, AND HAPPY
LIFE. In three Parts. BY LEWIS CORNARO, DR. FRANKLIN, AND DR. SCOTT.

"Reason's whole pleasure, all the joys of sense,
"Lie in three words -- health, peace, and competence.
"Blessed health consists with temperance alone,
"And peace, O virtue! peace is all thy own."
POPE. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE REV. MASON L. WEEMS, BY FRANCIS AND ROBERT
BAILEY, NO. 116, HIGH STREET. 1796.

CONTENTS.
PART I.
CHAP. I. MAN's unerring Guide to a Long and Healthy Life. 1 II. The Method of
Correcting a Bad Constitution 41 III. A Letter from Sig. Lewis Cornaro, to the
Right Rev. Barbara, Patriarch of Aquileia 52 IV. Of the Birth and Death of Man
62 APPENDIX. Golden Rules of Health, selected from Hippocrates, Plutarch, and
several other eminent Physicians and Philosophers. 81
PART II.
INTRODUCTION. 97 The Way to Wealth. 107 Advice to a Young Tradesman. 126
PART III.
CHAP. I. A sure Guide to Happiness. 133 II. On Social Love. 234
THE IMMORTAL MENTOR, etc.
IT is an unhappiness into which the people of this age are fallen, that luxury
is become fashonable and too generally preferred to frugality. Prodigality is
nowadays tricked up in the pompous titles of generosity and grandeur; whilst
blessed frugality is too often branded as the badge of an avaricious and sordid
spirit.

THIS error has so far seduced us, as to prevail on many to renounce a frugal
way of living, though taught by nature, and to indulge those excesses which
serve only to abridge the number of our days. We are grown old before we have
been able to taste the pleasures of being young. And the time which ought to be
the summer of our lives is often the beginning of their winter.

OH unhappy Italy! Do thou not see, that gluttony and excess rob thee, every
year, of more inhabitants than pestilence, war, and famine could have done? Thy
true plagues, are thy numerous luxuries in which thy deluded citizens indulge
themselves to an excess unworthy of the rational character, and utterly ruinous
to their health. Put a stop to this fatal abuse, for God's sake, for there is
not, I am certain of it, a vice more abominable in the eyes of the divine
Majesty, nor any more destructive. How many have I seen cut off, in the flower
of their days by this unhappy custom of high feeding! How many excellent
friends has gluttony deprived me of, who, but for this accursed vice, might
have been an ornament to the world, an honor to their country, and have
afforded me as much joy in their lives, as I now feel concern at their deaths.

IN order, therefore, to put a stop to so great an evil, I have undertaken this
little book, and I attempt it the more readily, as many young gentlemen have
requested it of me, moved thereto by seeing their fathers drop off in the
flower of their youth, and me so sound and hearty at the age of eighty-one.
They begged me to let them know by what means I attained to such excellent
health and spirits at my time of life. I could not but think their curiosity
very laudable, and was willing to gratify them, and at the same time do some
service to my countrymen, by declaring, in the first place, what led me to
renounce intemperance and lead a temperate life; secondly, by showing the rules
I observed; and thirdly, what unspeakable satisfaction and advantage I derived
from it; whence it may be very clearly seen how easy a thing it is for a wise
man to escape all the curses of intemperance, and secure to himself the
inestimable felicities of vigorous health and cheerful age.

THE first thing that led me to embrace a temperate life, was, the many and
sore evils which I suffered from the contrary course of living; my constitution
was naturally weakly and delicate, which ought in reason to have made me more
regular and prudent, but being like most young men, too fond of what is usually
called good eating and drinking, I gave the rein to my appetites. In a little
time I began to feel the ill effects of such intemperance; for I had scarce
attained to my thirty-fifth year, before I was attacked with a complication of
disorders, such as, head-achs, a sick stomach, cholicky uneasinesses, the gout,
rheumatic pains, lingering fevers, and continual thirst; and though I was then
but in the middle of my days, my constitution seemed so entirely ruined that I
could hardly hope for any other termination to my sufferings but death.

THE best physicians in Italy employed all their skill in my behalf, but to no
effect. At last they told me, very heartily, that there was but one thing that
could afford me a single ray of hope, but one medicine that could give a
radical cure, viz. the immediate adoption of a temperate and regular life. They
added moreover, that, now, I had no time to lose, that I must immediately,
either choose a regimen or death, and that if I deferred their advice much
longer, it would be too late for ever to do it. This was a home thrust. I could
not bear the thoughts of dying so soon, and being convinced of their abilities
and experience, I thought the wisest course I could take, would be to follow
their advice, how disagreeable soever it might seem.

I THEN requested my physicians to tell me exactly after what manner I ought to
govern myself? To this they replied, that I should always consider myself as an
infirm person; eat nothing but what agreed with me, and that in small quantity.
I then immediately entered on this new course of life, and, with so determined
a resolution, that nothing has been since able to divert me from it. In a few
days I perceived that this new way of living agreed very well with me; and in
less than a twelvemonth I had the unspeakable happiness to find that all my
late alarming symptoms were vanished, and that I was perfectly restored to
health.

No sooner had I began to taste the sweets of this new resurrection, but I made
many very pleasing reflections on the great advantage of temperance, and
thought within myself, if this virtue has had so divine an efficacy, as to cure
me of such grievous disorders, surely it will help my bad constitution and
confirm my health. I therefore applied myself diligently to discover what kinds
of food were properest for me, and made choice of such meats and drinks only as
agreed with my constitution, observing it as an inviolable law with myself,
always to rise with an appetite to eat more if I pleased. In a word, I entirely
renounced intemperance, and made a vow to continue the remainder of my life
under the same regimen I had observed: A happy resolution this! The keeping of
which entirely cured me of all my infirmities. I never before lived a year
together, without falling once, at least, into some violent illness; but this
never happened to me afterward; on the contrary, I have always been healthy
ever since I was temperate.

I MUST not forget here to mention a circumstance of considerable consequence.
I have been telling of a great, and to me, a most happy change in my way of
living. Now all changes, though from the worst to the best habits, are, at first,
disagreeable, I found it so; for having long accustomed myself to high feeding,
I had contracted such a fondness for it, that though I was daily destroying
myself, yet did it, at first, cost me some struggle to relinquish it. Nature,
long used to hearty meals, expected them, and was quite dissatisfied with my
moderate repasts. To divert my mind from these little dissatisfactions, I used
immediately after dinner, to betake myself to some innocent amusement or useful
pursuit, such as, my devotions, my book, music, etc.

BUT to return. -- Besides the two foregoing important rules about eating and
drinking, that is, not to take of any thing, but as much as my stomach could
easily digest, and to use those things only which agreed with me. I have very
carefully avoided all extremes of heat and cold, excessive fatigue,
interruption of my usual time of rest, late hours, and too close and intense
thinking. I am likewise greatly indebted for the excellent health I enjoy, to
that calm and temperate state in which I have been careful to keep my passions.

THE influence of the passions on the nerves, and health of our bodies, is so
great, that none can possibly be ignorant of it. He therefore who seriously
wishes to enjoy good health, must, above all things, learn to conquer his
passions, and keep them in subjection to reason. For let a man be never so
temperate in diet, or regular in exercise, yet still some unhappy passion, if
indulged to excess, will prevail over all his regularity, and prevent the good
effects of his temperance; no words, therefore, can adequately express the
wisdom of guarding against an influence so destructive. Fear, anger, grief,
envy, hatred, malice, revenge and despair, are known by eternal experience, to
weaken the nerves, disorder the circulation, impair digestion, and often to
bring on a long train of hysterical and hypochondriacal disorders; and extreme
sudden fright, has often occasioned immediate death.

ON the other hand, moderate joy, and all those affections of the mind which
partake of its nature, as cheerfulness, contentment, hope, virtuous and mutual
love, and courage in doing good, invigorate the nerves, give a healthy motion
to the fluids, promote perspiration, and assist digestion; but violent anger
(which differs from madness only in duration) throws the whole frame into
tempest and convulsion, the countenance blackens, the eyes glare, the mouth
foams, and in place of the most gentle and amiable, it makes a man the most
frightful and terrible of all animals. The effects of this dreadful passion do
not stop here; it never fails to create bilious, inflammatory, convulsive, and
sometimes apoplectic disorders, and sudden death.

SOLOMON was thoroughly sensible of the destructive tendencies of ungoverned
passions, and has, in many places, cautioned us against them. He emphatically
styles envy a rottenness of the bones; and says, that wrath slays the angry
man, and envy kills the silly one THE reader will I hope excuse me for
relating the following tragical anecdote, to confirm what the benevolent
Cornaro has said on the baneful effects of envy, etc.

IN the city of York in England, there died some time ago, a young lady by the
name of D -- n. For five years before her death, she appeared to be lingering
and melancholy. Her flesh withered away, her appetite decayed, her strength
failed, her feet could no longer sustain her tottering emaciated body, and her
dissolution seemed at hand. One day she called her intimate friends to her
bedside, and as well as she could, spoke to the following effect:

"I KNOW you all pity me, but alas! I am not worthy of your pity; for all my
misery is entirely owing to the wickedness of my own heart. I have two sisters;
and I have all my life been unhappy, for no other reason but because of their
prosperity. When we were young, I could neither eat nor sleep in comfort, if
they had either praise or pleasure. As soon as they were grown to be women,
they married greatly to their advantage and satisfaction: this galled me to the
heart; and though I had several good offers, yet thinking them rather unequal
to my sisters, I refused them, and then was inwardly vexed and distressed, for
fear I should get no better. I never wanted for any thing, and might have been
very happy, but for this wretched temper. My sisters loved me tenderly, for I
concealed from them as much as possible this odious passion, and yet never did
any poor wretch lead so miserable a life as I have done, for every blessing
they enjoyed was a dagger to my heart. It Is this Envy, which, preying on my
very vitals, has ruined my health, and is now carrying me down to the grave.
Pray for me, that GOD of his infinite mercy may forgive me this horrid sin; and
with my dying breath I conjure you all, to check the first risings of a passion
that has proved so fatal to me."


; and, that the wicked shall not live out half their days. For as violent gales
of wind will soon wreck the strongest ships, so violent passions of hatred,
anger, and sorrow, will soon destroy the best constitutions.

HOWEVER, I must confess to my shame, that I have not been at all times so much
of a philosopher and Christian, as entirely to avoid these disorders: but I
have reaped the benefit of knowing by my own repeated experience, that these
malignant passions have in general a far less pernicious effect on bodies that
are rendered firm and vigorous by temperance, than on those that are corrupted
and weakened by gluttony and excess.

IT was hard for me to avoid every extreme of heat and cold, and to live above
all the occasions of trouble which attend the life of man; but yet these things
made no great impression on the state of my health, though I met with many
instances of persons who sunk under less weight both of body and mind.

THERE was in our family a considerable lawsuit depending against some
persons, whose might overcame our right. One of my brothers, and some of my
relations, were so mortified and grieved on account of the loss of this suit,
that they actually died of broken hearts. I was as sensible as they could be,
of the great injustice done us, but thank GOD, so far from breaking my heart,
it scarcely broke my repose. And I ascribe their sufferings and my safety, to
the difference of our living. Intemperance and sloth had so weakened their
nerves, and broken their spirits, that they easily sunk under the weight of
misfortune. While temperance and active life had so invigorated my
constitution, as to make me happily superior to the evils of this momentary
life.

AT seventy years of age, I had another experiment of the usefulness of my
regimen. Some business of consequence calling me into the country, my
coach-horses ran away with me; I was overset and dragged a long way before they
could stop the horses. They took me out of the coach with my head battered, a
leg and an arm out of joint, and truly in a very lamentable condition. As soon
as they had brought me home, they sent for the physicians, who did not expect I
could live three days: however, I was soon cured, to the great astonishment of
the physicians, and of all those who know me.

I BEG leave to relate one more anecdote, as an additional proof what an
impenetrable shield temperance presents against the evils of life.

ABOUT five years ago, I was over-persuaded to a thing, which had like to have
cost me dear. My relations, whom I love, and who have a real tenderness for me;
my friends, with whom I was willing to comply in any thing that was reasonable;
lastly, my physicians, who were looked upon as the oracles of health, did all
agree that I eat too little; that the nourishment I took was not sufficient for
one of my years; that I ought not only to support nature, but likewise to
increase the vigor of it, by eating a little more than I did. It was in vain
for me to represent to them, that nature is content with a little; that with
this little I had enjoyed excellent health so many years; that to me the habit
of it was become a second nature; and that it was more agreeable to reason,
that as I advanced in years and lost my strength, I should rather lessen than
increase the quantity of my food, especially as the powers of the stomach must
grow weaker from year to year. To strengthen my arguments, I urged those two
natural and true proverbs; one, that he who would eat a great deal must eat but
little; that is eating little makes a man live long, he must eat a great deal.
The other proverb was, that what we leave, after making a hearty meal, does us
more good than what we have eaten. But neither my proverbs nor arguments could
silence their affectionate entreaties. Wherefore to please persons who where so
dear to me, I consented to increase the quantity of food, but with too ounces
only. So that, as before I had always taken but twelve ounces of solid food in
the day, I now increased it to fourteen, and as before I drank but fourteen
ounces of wine in the day, I now increased it to sixteen. This increase had in
eight days time such an effect on me, that from being remarkably cheerful and
brisk, I began to be peevish and melancholy, and was constantly so strangely
disposed, that I neither knew what to say to others, nor what to do with
myself. On the twelfth day I was attacked with a most violent pain in my side,
which held me twenty-two hours, and was followed by a violent fever which
continued thirty-five days, without giving me a moment's respite. However GOD
be praised, I recovered, though in my seventy-eighth year, and in the coldest
season of a very cold winter, and reduced to a mere skeleton; and I am
positive, that, next to GOD, I am most indebted to temperance, for my recovery.
O how great is the evil of intemperance, which could, in a few days bring on me
so severe an illness, and how glorious are the virtues of temperance, which
could thus bear me up, and snatch me from the jaws of death! Would all men but
live regularly and temperately, there would not be a tenth of that sickness
which now makes so many melancholy families, nor any occasion for a tenth part
of those nauseous medicines, which they are now obliged to swallow in order to
carry off those bad humors with which they have filled their bodies by over
eating and drinking. -- To say the truth would every one of us but pay a
becoming attention to the quantity and quality of what he eats and drinks, and
carefully observe the effects it has upon him, he would soon become his own
physician; and indeed the very best he could possibly have, for people's
constitutions are as different as their faces; and it is impossible, in many
very important instances, for the most skilful physicians to tell a man of
observation, what would agree with his constitution so well as he knows
himself. I am willing to allow that a physician may be sometimes necessary; and
in cases of danger, the sooner the better. But for the bare purpose of
preserving ourselves in good health, there needs no better physic than a
temperate and regular life. It is a specific and natural medicine, which
preserves the man, how tender soever his constitution be, and prolongs his life
to a above a hundred years, spares him the pain of a violent death, sends him
quietly out of the world, when the radical moisture is quite spent, and which,
in short, has all the properties that are fancied to be in potable gold, which
a great many persons have sought after in vain.

BUT alas! most men suffer themselves to be seduced by the charms of a
voluptuous life. They have not courage enough to deny their appetites; and
being over-persuaded by their inclinations so far, as to think they cannot give
up the gratification of them, without abridging too much of their pleasures,
they devise arguments to persuade themselves, that it is more eligible to live
ten years less, than to be upon the restraint, and deprived of whatever may
gratify their appetites. Alas! they know not the value of ten years of healthy
life, in an age when a man may enjoy the full use of his reason, and turn all
his wisdom and experience to his own, and the advantage of the world. To
instance only in the sciences. It Is certain that some of the most valuable
books now extant, were written in those last ten years of their authors lives,
which some men pretend to undervalue; let fools and villains undervalue life,
the world would lose nothing by them, die when they will. But it is a loss
indeed, when wise and good men drop into the grave; ten years of life to men of
that character, might prove an inestimable blessing to their families and
country. Is such an one a priest only, in a little time he might become a
bishop, and by living ten years longer, might render the most important
services to the world by his active dissemination of virtue and piety. Is he
the aged parent of a family, then though no longer equal to the toils of
younger years, yet by his venerable presence and matured counsels, he may
contribute more to the harmony and happiness of his children, than all their
labors put together. And so with all others, whether in church or state, army
or navy, who are advanced in years, though not equal to the active exercises of
youth, yet in consequence of their superior wisdom and experiences, their lives
may be of more service to their country, than the lives of thousands of
citizens. Some, I know, are so unreasonable as to say that it is impossible to
lead such a regular life. To this I answer, Galen, that great physician, led
such a life, and advised others to it as the best physic. Plato, Cicero,
Isocrates, and a great many famous men of past and present times, have
practiced it, and thereby arrived to an extreme old age.

YOU will tell me that Plato, as sober a man as he was, yet affirmed, that it
is difficult for a man in public life to live so temperately, being often in
the service of the state, exposed to the badness of weather, to the fatigues of
traveling, and to eat whatever he can meet with. This cannot be denied; but
then I maintain, that these things will never hasten a man's death, provided he
accustoms himself to a frugal way of living. There is no man, in what condition
soever but may keep from over-eating; and thereby happily prevent those
distempers that are caused by excess. They who have the charge of public
affairs committed to their trust, are more obliged to it than any others: where
there is no glory to be got for their country, they ought not to sacrifice
themselves: they should preserve themselves to serve it; and if they pursue my
method, it is certain they would ward off the distempers which heat and cold
and fatigues might bring upon them; or should they be disturbed with them it
would be but very lightly.

IT may likewise be objected, that if one who is well, is dieted like one that
is sick, he will be at a loss about the choice of his diet, when any distemper
comes upon him. To this I say, that nature, ever attentive to the preservation
of her children, teaches us how we ought to govern ourselves in such a case.
She begins by depriving us so entirely of out appetites, that we can eat little
or nothing. At that time, whether the sick person has been sober or
intemperate, no other food ought to be used, but such as is proper for his
condition; such as broth, jellies, cordials, barley-water, etc. When his
recovery will permit him to use a more solid nourishment, he must take less
than he was used to before his sickness; and notwithstanding the eagerness of
his appetite, he must take care of his stomach, till he is perfectly cured.
Should he do otherwise, he would overburden nature, and infallibly relapse into
the danger he had escaped. But notwithstanding this, I dare aver, that he who
leads a sober and regular life, will hardly ever be sick; or but seldom, and
for a short time. This way of living preserves us from those bad humors which
occasion our infirmities, and by consequence heals us of all those distempers
which they occasion. I do not pretend to say that every body must eat exactly
as little as I do, or abstain from fruit, fish, and other things from which I
abstain, because such dishes disagree with me. They who are not disordered by
such dishes, are under no obligation to abstain from them. But they are under
the greatest obligations to feed moderately, even on the most innocent food,
since an overloaded stomach cannot digest.

IT signifies nothing to tell me that there are several, who, though they live
very irregularly, yet enjoy excellent health and spirits, and to as advanced an
age, as those who live ever so soberly. For this argument is founded on such
uncertainty and hazard, and occurs so seldom, as to look more like a miracle
than the regular work of nature. And those, who, on the credit of their youth
and constitution, will pay any regard to so idle an objection, may depend on
it, that they are the betrayers and ruiners of their own health.

AND I can confidently and truly affirm, that an old man, even of a bad
constitution, who leads a regular and sober life, is surer of a longer one,
than a young man of the best constitution who lives disorderly. All therefore
who have a mind to live long and healthy, and die without sickness of body or
mind, must immediately begin to live temperately, for such a regularity keeps
the humors of the body mild and sweet, and suffers no gross fiery vapors to
ascend from the stomach to the head; hence the brain of him who lives in that
manner enjoys such a constant serenity, that he is always perfectly master of
himself. Happily freed from the tyranny of bodily appetites and passions, he
easily soars above, to the exalted and delightful contemplation of heavenly
objects; by this means his mind becomes gradually enlightened with divine
truth, and expands itself to the glorious enrapturing view of the Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness of the Almighty. -- He then descends to nature, and
acknowledges her for the fair daughter of GOD, and views her varied charms with
sentiments of admiration, joy, and gratitude, becoming the most favored of all
sublunary beings. He then clearly discerns, and generously laments the wretched
fate of those who will not give themselves the trouble to subdue their
passions; and those three most ensnaring lusts, the lust of the flesh, the lust
of honors, and the lust of riches, which all wise and good men have firmly
opposed and conquered, when they passed through this mortal state; for knowing
such passions to be inconsistent with reason and happiness, they at once nobly
broke through their snares, and applied themselves to virtue and good works,
and so became men of good and sober lives. And when in process of time, and
after a long series of years, they see the period of their days drawing nigh,
they are neither grieved nor alarmed. Full of acknowledgments for the favors
already received from GOD, they throw themselves into the arms of his future
mercy. They are not afraid of those dreadful punishments, which they deserve
who have shortened their days by guilty intemperance. They die without
complaining, sensible that they did not come into this world to stay for ever,
but are pilgrims and travelers to a far better. Exulting in this faith, and
with hopes big with immortality, they go down to the grave in a good old age,
enriched with virtues, and laden with honors.

AND they have the greater reason not to be dejected at the thought of death,
as they know it will not be violent, feverish or painful. Their end is calm,
and they expire, like a lamp when the oil is spent, without convulsion or
agony, and so they pass gently away, without pain or sickness, from this
earthly and corruptible to that celestial and eternal life, whose happiness is
the reward of the virtuous.

O HOLY, happy, and thrice blessed temperance! how worthy art thou of our
highest esteem! and how infinitely art thou preferable to an irregular and
disorderly life! Nay, would men but consider the effects and consequences of
both, they would immediately see, that there is as wide a difference between
them, as there is betwixt light and darkness, heaven and hell. Some there are
who tell us that old age is no blessing, that when a man is past seventy, his
life is nothing but weakness, infirmity, and misery. But I can assure these
gentlemen, they are mightily mistaken; and that I find myself, old as I am,
(which is much beyond what they speak of) to be in the most pleasant and
delightful stage of life.

TO prove that I have reason for what I say, they need only enquire how I spend
my time, what are my usual employments; and to hear the testimony of all those
that know me. They unanimously testify, that the life I lead, is not a dead and
languishing life, but as happy a one as can be wished for in this world.

THEY will tell you, that I am still so strong at fourscore and three, as to
mount a horse without any help or advantage of situation; that I can not only
go up a single flight of stairs, but climb a hill from bottom to top, a-foot,
and with the greatest ease; that I am always merry, always pleased, always in
humor; maintaining a happy peace in my own mind, the sweetness and serenity
whereof appear at all times in my countenance.

BESIDES, they know that it is in my power to pass away the time very
pleasantly; having nothing to hinder me from tasting all the pleasures of an
agreeable society, with several persons of parts and worth. When I am willing
to be alone, I read good books, and sometimes fall to writing; seeking always
an occasion of being useful to the public, and doing service to private
persons, as far as possible. I do all this without the least trouble; and in
such times as I set apart for these employments.

I DWELL in a house, which, besides its being situated in the pleasantest part
of Padua, may be looked on as the most convenient and agreeable mansion in that
city. I there make me apartments proper for the winter and summer, which serve
as a shelter to defend me from the extreme heat of the one, and the rigid
coldness of the other. I walk out in my gardens, along my canals and walks;
where I always meet with some little thing or other to do, which, at the same
time, employs and amuses me.

I SPEND the months of April; May, September, and October, at my country house,
which is the finest situation imaginable: the air of it is good, the avenues
neat, the gardens magnificent, the waters clear and plentiful; and this seat
may well pass for an enchanted palace.

SOMETIMES I take a walk to my Villa, all whose streets terminate at a large
square; in the midst of which is a pretty neat church, and large enough for the
bigness of the parish.

THROUGH this Villa runs a rivulet; and the country about it is enriched with
fruitful and well cultivated fields; having at present a considerable number of
inhabitants. This was not so formerly: It was a marshy place, and the air so
unwholesome, that it was more proper for frogs and toads, than for men to dwell
in. But on my draining off the waters, the air mended, and people resorted to
it so fast, as to render the place very populous; so that I may, with truth,
say, that I have here dedicated to the LORD, a church, altars, and hearts to
worship him; a circumstance this, which affords me infinite satisfaction as
often as I reflect on it.

IT is with great satisfaction that I see the end of a work of such importance
to this STATE, I mean that of draining and improving so many large tracts of
uncultivated ground, a work which I never expected to have seen completed; but,
thank GOD, I have lived to see it, and was even in person in these marshy
places, along with the commissaries, for two months together, during the heats
of summer, without ever finding myself the worse for the fatigues I underwent.
Of such wonderful efficacy is that temperate life which I constantly observe.

IF in discoursing on so important a subject as this, it be allowable to speak
of trifles, I might tell you, that at the age of fourscore and three, a
temperate life had preserved me in that sprightliness of thought, and gaiety of
humor, as to be able to compose a very entertaining comedy, highly moral and
instructive, without shocking or disgusting the audience; an evil too generally
attending our comedies, and which it is the duty, and will be the eternal honor
of the magistracy to discountenance and suppress, since nothing has a more
fatal tendency to corrupt the morals of youth, than such plays as abound with
wanton allusions, and wicked sneers and scoffs on religion and matrimony.

AS an addition to my happiness, I see myself immortalized as it were, by the
great number of my descendants. I meet with, on my return home, not only two or
three, but eleven grandchildren, all blessed with high health, sweet
dispositions, bright parts, and of promising hopes. I take a delight in playing
with the little pratlers; those who are older I often set to sing and play for
me on instruments of music. -- Call you this an infirm crazy old age, as they
pretend, who say, that a man is but half alive after he is seventy? They may
believe me if they please, but really I would not exchange my serene cheerful
old age, with any one of those young men, even of the best constitution, who
give the loose to their appetites; knowing as I do, that they are thereby
subjecting themselves every moment to disease and death.

I REMEMBER all the follies of which I was guilty in my younger days, and am
perfectly sensible of the many and great dangers they exposed me to. I know
with what violence young persons are carried away by the heat of their blood.
They presume on their strength, just as if they had taken a sure lease of their
lives: and must gratify their appetites whatever it cost them, without
considering that they thereby feed those ill humors, which do most assuredly
hasten the approach of sickness and death; two evils, which of all others are
the most unwelcome and terrible to the wicked. The first of these, sickness, is
highly unwelcome, because it effectually stops their career after this world's
business and pleasures, which being their sole delight and happiness, must be
inexpressibly sad and mortifying. And the impatience and gloom of sickness is
rendered tenfold more insupportable to them, because it finds them utterly
destitute of those pious affections, which alone can soothe the severity of
sickness and charm the pangs of pain. They had never cultivated an acquaintance
with GOD, nor accustomed themselves to look up to him as to a merciful Father,
who sends affliction to wean us from this scene of vanity. They had never, by
prayers and good works, endeavored to secure his friendship, or cherish that
love which would make his dispensations welcome. So that unblest with these
divine consolations, the season of sickness must be dark and melancholy indeed;
and besides all this, their hearts often sink within them at the prospect of
DEATH, that ghastly king of terrors, who comes to cut them off from all their
dear delights in this world, and send their unwilling souls to suffer the
punishment which their own guilty conscience tells them is due to their wicked
lives.

BUT from these two evils, so dreadful to many, blessed be GOD, I have but
little to fear; for, as for death, I have a joyful hope that that change, come
when it may, will be gloriously for the better; and besides, I trust, that HE
whose divine voice I have so long obeyed, will graciously support and comfort
his aged servant in that trying hour. And as for sickness, I feel but little
apprehension on that account, since by my divine medicine TEMPERANCE, I have
removed all the causes of illness; so that I am pretty sure I shall never be
sick, except it be from some intent of Divine mercy, and then I hope I shall
bear it without a murmur, and find it for my good. Nay I have reason to think
that my soul has so agreeable a dwelling in my body, finding nothing in it but
peace and harmony between my reason and senses, that she is very well pleased
with her present situation; so that I trust I have still a great many years to
live in health and in spirits, and enjoy this beautiful world, which is indeed
beautiful to those who know how to make it so, as I have done, and likewise
expect (with GOD'S assistance) to be able to do in the next.

NOW since a regular life is so happy, and its blessings so permament and
great, all I have still left to do, (since I cannot accomplish my wishes by
force) is to beseech every man of sound understanding to embrace, with open
arms, this most valuable treasure of a long and healthy life; a treasure,
which, as it far exceeds all the riches of this world, so it deserves above all
things to be diligently sought after, and carefully preserved. This is that
divine sobriety, so agreeable to the Deity, the friend of nature, the daughter
of reason, and the sister of all the virtues. From her, as from their proper
root, spring life, health, cheerfulness, industry, learning, and all those
employments worthy of noble and generous minds. She is the best friend and
safest guardian of life; as well of the rich as of the poor; of the old as of
the young. She teaches the rich modesty; the poor frugality; men continence;
women chastity; the old, how to ward off the attacks of death; and bestows on
youth, firmer and securer hopes of life. She preserves the senses clear, the
body light, the understanding lively, the soul brisk, the memory tenacious, our
motions free, and all our faculties in a pleasing and agreeable harmony.

O MOST innocent and divine sobriety! the sole refreshment of nature, the
nursing mother of life, the true physic of soul as well as of body. How ought
men to praise thee for thy princely gifts, for thy incomparible blessings! But
as no man is able to write a sufficient panegyric on this rare and excellent
virtue, I shall put an end to this discourse, lest I should be charged with
excess in dwelling so long on so pleasing a subject. Yet as numberless things
may still be said of it, I leave off with an intention to set forth the rest of
its praises at a more convenient opportunity.

CHAP. II. THE METHOD OF CORRECTING A BAD CONSTITUTION.
I WAS born with a very choleric, hasty disposition; flew into a passion for
the least trifle, huffed every body about me, and was so intolerably
disagreeable, that many persons of gentle manners absolutely shunned my
company. On discovering how great an injury I was doing myself, I at once
resolved to make this vile temper give way to reason. I considered that a man
overcome by passion, must at times, be no better than a madman, and that the
only difference between a passionate and a madman, is, that the one has lost
his reason for ever, and the other is deprived of it by fits only; but that in
one of these, though never so short, he may do some deed of cruelty or death,
that will ruin his character, and destroy his peace for ever. A sober life, by
cooling the fever of the blood, contributed much to cure me of this frenzy; and
I am now become so moderate, and so much a master of my passion, that no body
could perceive that it was born with me.

IT is true indeed, the most temperate may sometimes be indisposed, but then
they have the pleasure to think that it is not the effect of their own vices;
that it will be but moderate in its degree, and of short continuance.

MANY have said to me, " How can you, when at a table covered with a dozen
delicious dishes content yourself with one dish, and that the plainest too at
the table? It must surely be a great mortification to you, to see so many
charming things before you, and yet scarcely taste them." This question has
frequently been put to me, and with an air of surprise. I confess it has often
made me unhappy; for it proves that such persons are got to such a pass, as to
look on the gratification of their appetites as the highest happiness, not
considering that the mind is properly the man, and that it is in the affections
of a virtuous and pious mind, a man is to look for his truest and highest
happiness. When I sit down, with my eleven grandchildren, to a table covered
with various dainties, of which, for the sake of a light easy stomach, I may
not, at times, choose to partake, yet this is no mortificaton to me; on the
contrary, I often find myself most happy at these times. How can it otherwise
than give me great delight when I think of that goodness of GOD, which blesses
the earth with such immense stores of good things for the use of mankind; and
which, over and above all this goodness, has put me into the way of getting
such an abundance of them for my dear grandchildren; and, besides must it not
make me very happy to think that I have gotten such a mastery over myself as
never to abuse any of those good things, but am perfectly contented with such a
portion of them as keeps me always in good health. O what a triumph of joy is
this to my heart! What a sad thing it is that young people will not take
instruction, nor get benefit from those who are older and wiser than
themselves! I may use, in this matter, the words of the wise man, "I have seen
all things that are done under the sun." I know the pleasures of eating, and I
know the joys of a virtuous mind, and can say from long experience, that the
one excels the other as far as light excels darkness; the one are the
pleasures of a mere animal, the other those of an angel.

SOME are so thoughtless as to say, that they had rather be afflicted twice or
thrice a year with the gout, and other distempers, than deny themselves the
pleasure of eating and drinking to the full of such things as they like; that
for their part they had rather eat and drink as they like, though it should
shorten their lives, that is, "give them a short life and a merry one." It is
really a surprising and sad thing, to see reasonable creatures, so ready to
swallow the most dangerous absurdities. For how, in the name of common sense,
can the life of a glutton or a sot be a merry one? If men could eat to excess,
drink to silliness, and rust in sloth, and after all, suffer no other harm than
the abridgement of ten or a dozen years of life, they might have some little
excuse for calling it a merry life, though surely it could appear so to none
but persons of a sadly vitiated taste. But since an intemperate life will
assuredly sow in our bodies the seeds of such diseases as will, after a few
short years of feverish pleasure, make life a burden to us, with what face can
any reasonable being call this a merry life?

O SACRED and most bountiful Temperance! how greatly am I indebted to thee for
rescuing me from such fatal delusions; and for bringing me, through the divine
benediction, to the enjoyment of so many felicities, and which, over and above
all these favors conferred on thine old man, have so strengthened his stomach,
that he has now a better relish for his dry bread than he had formerly for the
most exquisite dainties, so that, by eating little, my stomach is often craving
after the manna, which I sometimes feast on with so much pleasure, that I
should think I trespassed on the duty of temperance, did I not know that one
must eat to support life; and that one cannot use a plainer or more natural
diet.

MY spirits are not injured by what I eat, they are only revived and supported
by it. I can, immediately on rising from table, set myself to write or study,
and never find that this application, though so hurtful to hearty feeders, does
me any harm; and, besides, I never find myself drowsey after dinner, as a great
many do; -- the reason is, I feed so temperately, as never to load my stomach
nor oppress my nerves, so that I am always as light, active, and cheerful after
meals as before.

O THOU vile wicked intemperance, my sworn enemy, who art good for nothing but
to murder those who follow thee; how many of my dearest friends have thou
robbed me of, in consequence of their not believing me! But thou have not been
able to destroy me according to thy wicked intent and purpose. I am still alive
in spite of thee, and have attained to such an age, as to see around me eleven
dear grandchildren, all of fine understandings, and amiable dispositions, all
given to learning and virtue; all beautiful in their persons and lovely in
their manners, whom, had I not abandoned thee thou infamous source of
corruption, I should never have had the pleasure to behold. Nor should I enjoy
those beautiful and convenient apartments which I have built from the ground,
with such highly improved gardens, as required no small time to attain their
present perfection. No, thou accursed hag, thy nature is to impoverish and
destroy those who follow thee. How many wretched orphans have I seen embracing
dunghills; how many miserable mothers, with their helpless infants, crying for
bread, while their deluded fathers, slaves to thy devouring lusts, were wasting
their substance in rioting and drunkenness!

BUT thou art not content with consuming the substance, thou would destroy
the very families of those who are so mad as to obey thee. The temperate poor
man who labors hard all day, can boast a numerous family of rosy cheeked
children, while thy pampered slaves, sunk in ease and luxury, often languish
without an heir to their ample fortunes. But since thou art so pestilential a
vice, as to poison and destroy the greatest part of mankind, I am determined to
use my utmost endeavors to extirpate thee, at least in part. And I promise
myself, that my dear grandchildren will declare eternal war against thee, and
following my example, will let the world see the blessedness of a temperate
life, and so expose thee, O cruel intemperance! for what thou really art, a
most wicked, desperate, and mortal enemy of the children of men.

IT is really a very surprising and sad thing to see persons grown to men's
estate, and of fine wit, yet unable to govern their appetites, but tamely
submitting to be dragged by them into such excesses of eating and drinking, as
not only to ruin the best constitutions, and shorten their lives, but eclipse
the luster of the brightest parts, and bury themselves in utter contempt and
uselessness. O what promissing hopes have been shipwrecked, what immortal
honors have been sacrificed at the shrine of low sensuality; Happy, thrice
happy, those who have early been inured to habits of self-denial, and taught to
consider the gratification of their appetites as the unfailing source of
diseases and death. Ye generous parents who long to see your children adorned
with virtue, and beloved as the benefactors of their kind; O teach them the
unspeakable worth of self government. Unsupported by this, every advantage of
education and opportunity will avail them but little: though the history of
ancient worthies, and the recital of their illustrious deeds, may at times
kindle up in their bosoms a flame of glorious emulation, yet alas! this glow of
coveted virtue, this flush of promised honor, is transient as a gleam of winter
sunshine; soon overspread and obscured by the dark clouds of sensuality.

CHAP. III. A LETTER FROM SIGNIOR LEWIS CORNARO TO THE RIGHT REVEREND BARBARO,
PATRIARCH OF AQUILEIA.
MY LORD,
WHAT thanks do we not owe to the divine goodness, for this wonderful invention
of writing, whereby we can easily communicate to our absent friends, whatever
may afford them pleasure or improvement! By means of this most welcome
contrivance, I shall now endeavor to entertain you with matters of the
greatest moment. It is true indeed, that what I have to tell you is no news, --
but I never told it you at the age of ninety-one. Is it not a charming thing,
that I am able to tell you, that my health and strength are in so excellent a
state, that, instead of diminishing with my age, they seem to increase as I
grow old? All my acquaintance are surprised at it; but I, who know the cause of
this singular happiness, do every where declare it. I endeavor, as much as in
me lies, to convince all mankind, that a man may enjoy a paradise on earth even
after the age of four-score.

Now my Lord, I must tell you, that within these few days past, several learned
Doctors of this University came to be informed by me, of the method I take in
my diet, having understood that I am still healthful and strong; that I have my
senses perfect; that my memory, my heart, my judgment, the tone of my voice,
and my teeth, are all as sound as in my youth; that I write seven or eight
hours a day, and spend the rest of the day in walking out a-foot, and in taking
all the innocent pleasures that are allowed to a virtuous man; even music
itself in which I hear my part.

AH, Sir! how sweet a voice would you perceive mine to be, were you to hear me,
like another David, chant forth the praises of GOD to the found of my Lyre! You
would certainly be surprised and charmed with the harmony which I make. Those
gentlemen particularly admired, with what easiness I write on subjects that
require both judgment and spirit.

THEY told me, that I ought not to be looked on as an old man, since all my
employments were such as were proper for a youth, and did by no means resemble
the works of men advanced in years; who are capable of doing nothing after
fourscore, but loaded with infirmities and distempers, are perpetually
languishing in pain, not half so cheerful, pleasant and happy as I am.

SEVERAL physicians were so good as to prognosticate to me, ten years ago, that
it was impossible for me to hold out three years longer: however, I still find
myself less weak than ever, and am stronger this year than any that went
before. This sort of miracle, and the many favors which I received from GOD,
obliged them to tell me, that I brought along with me at my birth, an
extraordinary and special gift of nature; and for the proof their opinion, they
employed all their rhetoric, and made several elegant speeches on that head. It
must be acknowledged, my Lord, that eloquence has a charming force on the mind
of man, since it often persuades him to believe that which never was, and never
could be. I was very much pleased to hear them discourse; and could it be
helped, since they were men of parts who harangued at that rate? But that which
delighted me most, was to reflect, that age and experience may render a man
wiser than all the colleges in the world can. And it was in truth by their
help, that I knew the error of that notion. To undeceive those gentlemen, and
at the same time set them right, I replied, that their way of arguing was not
just: that the favor I received was no special, but a general and universal
one: that I was but a man as well as others: that we have all judgment and
reason, which the Creator has bestowed on us to preserve our lives: that man,
when young, being more subject to sense than reason, is too apt to give himself
up to pleasure; and that when arrived to thirty or forty years of age, he ought
to consider, that, if he has been so imprudent as to lead, till that time, a
disorderly life, it is now high time for him to take up and live temperately;
for he ought to remember, that though he has hitherto been held up by the
vigor of youth and a good constitution, yet he is now at the noon of life, and
must bethink himself of going down toward the grave, with a heavy weight of
years on his back, of which his frequent pains and infirmities are certain
forerunners; and that therefore, if he has not been so happy as to do it
already, he ought now, immediately to change his course of life

I MUST confess, it was not without great reluctance that I abandoned my
luxurious way of living. I began with praying to GOD, that he would grant me
the gift of Temperance, well knowing that he always hears our prayers with
delight. Then, considering, that when a man is about to undertake any thing of
importance, he may greatly strengthen himself in it, by often looking forward
to the great pleasures and advantages that he is to derive from it. Just as the
husbandman takes comfort under his toils, by reflecting on the sweets of
abundance; and as the good christian gladdens in the service of GOD, when he
thinks on the glory of that service, and the eternal joys that await him; so I,
in like manner, by seriously reflecting on the innumerable pleasures and
blessings of health, and beseeching GOD to strengthen me in my good
resolutions, immediately entered on a course of temperance and regularity. And
though it was at first highly disagreeable, yet I can truly say, that in a very
little time, the disagreeableness vanished, and I came to find great delight in
it.

Now on hearing my arguments, they all agreed that I had said nothing but what
was reasonable; nay, the youngest among them told me, that he was willing to
allow that these advantages might be common to all men, but was afraid, they
were seldom attained; and that I must be singularly favored of Heaven to get
above the delights of an easy life, and embrace one quite contrary to it; that
he did not look on it to be impossible, since my practice convinced him of the
contrary, but however, it seemed to him to be very difficult.

I REPLIED, that it was a shame to relinquish a good undertaking on account of
the difficulties that might attend it, and that the greater the difficulty, the
more glory should we acquire: that it is the will of the Creator, that every
one should attain to a long life, because in his old age, he might be freed
from the bitter fruits that were produced by sense, and might enjoy the good
effects of his reason; that when he shakes hands with his vices, he is no
longer a slave to the devil, and finds himself in a better condition of
providing for the salvation of his soul: that GOD, whose goodness is infinite,
has ordained that the man who comes to the end of his race, should end his life
without any distemper, and so pass, by a sweet and easy death, to a life of
immortality and glory, which I expect. I hope (said I to him) to die singing
the praises of my Creator. The sad reflection, that we must one day cease to
live, is no disturbance to me, though I easily preceive, that at my age, that
day cannot be far off; nor am I afraid of the terrors of hell, because, blessed
be GOD, I have long ago shaken hands with my sins, and put my trust in the
mercy and merits of the blood of Jesus Christ.

To this my young antagonist had nothing to say, only that he was resolved to
lead a sober life, that he might live and die as happily as I hoped to do; and
that though hitherto he had wished to be young a long time, yet now he desired
to be quickly old, that he might enjoy the pleasures of such an admirable age.

SOME sensual persons give out, that I have troubled myself to no purpose, in
composing a treatise concerning temperance, and that I have lost my time in
endeavoring to persuade men to the practice of that which is impossible. Now
this surprises me the more, as these gentlemen must see that I had led a
temperate life many years before I composed this treatise, and that I never
should have put myself to the trouble of composing it, had not long experience
convinced me, that it is a life which any man may easily lead, who really
wishes to be healthy and happy. And, besides the evidence of my own experience,
I have the satisfaction to hear, that numbers on seeing my treatise have
embraced such a life, and enjoyed from it the very same blessings which I
enjoy. Hence, I conclude, that no man of good sense will pay any regard to so
frivolous an objection. The truth is, those gentlemen who make this objection,
are so unhappily wedded to the poor pleasure of eating and drinking, that they
cannot think of moderating it, and as an excuse for themselves, they choose to
talk at this extravagant rate. However, I pity these gentlemen with all my
heart, though they deserve for their intemperance, to be tormented with a
complication of distempers, and to be the victims of their passions a whole
eternity.

CHAP. IV. OF THE BIRTH AND DEATH OF MAN.
THAT I may not be deficient in that duty of charity, which all men owe to one
another, or lose one moment of that pleasure which conscious usefulness
affords; I again take up my pen. What I am going to say will be looked on as
impossible, or incredible; but nothing is more certain, nor more worthily to be
admired by all posterity. I am now ninety-five years of age, and find myself as
healthy and brisk, as if I were but twenty-five.

WHAT ingratitude should I be guilty of, did I not return thanks to the divine
Goodness, for all his favors conferred upon me? Most of your old men have
scarce arrived to sixty, but they find themselves loaded with infirmities: they
are melancholy, unhealthful; always full of the frightful apprehensions of
dying: they tremble day and night for fear of being within one foot of their
graves; and are so strongly possessed with the dread of it, that it is a hard
matter to divert them from that doleful thought. Blessed be GOD, I am free from
their ills and terrors. It is my opinion, that I ought not to abandon myself to
that vain fear: this I will make appear by the sequel.

SOME there are, who bring along with them a strong constitution into the
world, and live to old age: but it is generally (as already observed) an old
age of sickness and sorrow; for which they are to thank themselves; because
they most unreasonably presume on the strength of their constitution; and will
not on any account, abate of that hearty feeding which they indulged in their
younger days. Just as if they were to be as vigorous at fourscore as in the
flower of their youth; nay, they go about to justify this their imprudence,
pretending that as we lose our health and vigor by growing old, we should
endeavor to repair the loss, by increasing the quantity of our food, since it
is by sustenance that man is preserved.

BUT in this they are dangerously mistaken; for as the natural heat and
strength of the stomach lessens as a man grows in years, he should diminish the
quantity of his meat and drink, common prudence requiring that a man should
proportion his diet to his digestive powers.

THIS is a certain truth, that sharp four humors on the stomach, proceed from
a slow imperfect digestion; and that but little good chyle can be made, when
the stomach is filled with fresh food before it has carried off the former
meal. -- It cannot therefore be too frequently, nor too earnestly recommended,
that as the natural heat decays by age, a man ought to abate the quantity of
what he eats and drinks; nature requiring but very little for the healthy
support of the life of man, especially that of an old man. Would my aged
friends but attend to this single precept which has been so signally
serviceable to me, they would not be troubled with one twentieth of those
infirmities which now harrass and make their lives so miserable. They would be
light, active, and cheerful like me, who am now near my hundredth year. And
those of them who were born with good constitutions, might live to the age of
one hundred and twenty. Had I been blessed with a robust constitution, I should
in all probability, attain the same age. But as I was born with feeble stamina,
I shall not perhaps outlive an hundred. And this moral certainty of living to a
great age is to be sure, a most pleasing and desirable attainment, and it is
the prerogative of none but the temperate. For all those who (by immoderate
eating and drinking) fill their bodies with gross humors, can have no
reasonable assurance of living a single day longer: oppressed with food and
swollen with superfluous humors, they are in continual danger of violent fits of
the cholic, deadly strokes of the apoplexy, fatal attacks of the cholera
morbus, burning fevers, and many such acute and violent diseases, whereby
thousands are carried to their graves, who a few hours before looked very hale
and hearty. And this moral certainty of long life is built on such good grounds
as seldom ever fail. For, generally speaking, Almighty GOD seems to have
settled his works on the sure grounds of natural causes, and temperance is (by
divine appointment) the natural cause of health and long life. Hence it is next
to impossible, that he who leads a strictly temperate life, should breed any
sickness or die of an unnatural death, before he attains to the years to which
the natural strength of his constitution was to arrive. I know some persons are
so weak as to excuse their wicked intemperance, by saying, that "the race is
not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong," and that therefore, let
them eat and drink as they please, they shall not die till their time comes.
How scandalously do these men misunderstand Solomon and abuse truth! How would
it startle us to hear our friends say, "that let them sleep and play, as they
please, they shall not be beggars till their time comes."

SOLOMON does indeed say, that "the race is not always to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong;" but he must be no better than a madman, who thence
infers, that it is not generally so. For the invariable and eternal experience
of mankind demonstrates, that ninety-nine times in an hundred, the race is to
the swift, and the battle to the strong, bread to the industrious, and health
to the temperate.

BUT it is a matter of fact, and not to be denied, that, though temperance has
the divine efficacy to secure us from violent disease and unnatural death, yet
it is not to be supposed to make a man immortal. It is impossible but that
time, which effaces all things, should likewise destroy that most curious
workmanship of GOD, the human body: but it is man's privilege to end his days
by a natural death, that is, without pain and agony, as they will see me, when
the heat and strength of nature is quite exhausted. But I promise myself, that
day is a pretty comfortable distance off yet, and I fancy I am not mistaken,
because I am still healthy and brisk, relish all I eat, sleep quietly, and find
no defect in any of my senses. Besides, all the faculties of my mind are in the
highest perfection; my understanding clear and bright as ever; my judgment
sound; my memory tenacious; my spirits good; and my voice, the first thing that
fails others, still so strong and sonorous, that every morning and evening,
with my dear grandchildren around me, I can address my prayers and chant the
praises of the Almighty. O, how glorious this life of mine is like to be,
replete with all the felicities which man can enjoy on this side of the grave;
and exempt from that sensual brutality which age has enabled my better reason
to banish, and therewith all its bitter fruits, the extravagant passions and
distressful perturbations of mind. Nor yet can the fears of death find room in
my mind as I have no licensed sins, to cherish such gloomy thoughts: neither
can the death of relations and friends give me any other grief than that of the
first movement of nature, which cannot be avoided, but is of no long
continuance. Still less am I liable to be cast down by the loss of wordly
goods. I look on these things as the property of heaven; I can thank him for
the loan of so many comforts, and when his wisdom sees fit to withdraw them, I
can look on their departure without murmuring. -- This is the happiness of
those only, who grow old in the ways of temperance and virtue; a happiness
which seldom attends the most flourishing youth who live in vice. Such are all
subject to a thousand disorders, both of body and mind, from which I am
entirely free: on the contrary, I enjoy a thousand pleasures, which are as pure
as they are calm.

THE first of these is to do service to my country. O! what a glorious
amusement, in which I find infinite delight, in showing my countrymen how to
fortify this our dear city of Venice, in so excellent a manner, as to make her
a famous republic, a rich and matchless city. Another amusement of mine is,
that of showing this maid and queen of cities, in what manner she may always
abound with provisions, by manuring untilled lands, draining marshes, and
laying under water, and thereby fattening fields, which had all along been
barren for want of moisture. My third amusement is in showing my native city,
how, though already strong, she may be rendered much stronger; and, though
extremely beautiful, may still increase in beauty; though rich, may acquire
more wealth, and may be made to enjoy better air, though her air is excellent.
These three amusements, all arising from the idea of public utility, I enjoy in
the highest degree. Another very great comfort I enjoy is, that having been
defrauded when young, of a considerable estate, I have made ample amends for
that loss, by dint of thought and industry, and without the least wrong done to
any person, have doubled my income, so that I am able not only to provide for
my dear grandchildren, but to educate and assist many poor youth to begin the
world. And I cannot help saying, I reflect with more pleasure on what I lay out
in that way, than in any other.

ANOTHER very considerable addition to my happiness is, that what I have
written from my own experience, in order to recommend temperance, has been of
great use to numbers, who loudly proclaim their obligations to me for that
work, several of them having sent me word from foreign parts, that, under GOD,
they are indebted to me for their lives. But that which makes me look on myself
as one of the happiest of men, is, that I enjoy as it were, two sorts of lives;
the one terrestrial, which I possess in fact; the other celestial, which I
possess in thought; and this thought is attended with unutterable delight,
being founded on such glorious objects, which I am morally sure of obtaining,
through the infinite goodness and mercy of GOD. Thus I enjoy this terrestrial
life, partly through the beneficent influences of temperance and sobriety,
virtues so pleasing to heaven; and I enjoy, through cordial love of the same
divine Majesty, the celestial life, by contemplating so often on the happiness
thereof, that I can hardly think of any thing else. And I hold, that dying in
the manner I expect, is not really death, but a passage of the soul from this
earthly life, to a celestial, immortal, and infinitely perfect existence. And I
am so far charmed with the glorious elevation to which I think my soul is
designed, that I can no longer stoop to those trifles, which, alas! charm and
infatuate too great a part of mankind. The prospect of parting with my
favorite enjoyments of this life, gives me but little concern; on the
contrary, I thank GOD, I often think of it with secret joy, since by that loss
I am to gain a life incomparably more happy.

O! WHO then would be troubled, were he in my place? what good man, but must
instantly throw off his load of worldly sorrow, and address his grateful homage
to the Author of all this happiness? However, there is not a man on earth, who
may not hope for the like happiness, if he would but live as I do. For indeed I
am no angel, but only a man, a servant of GOD, to whom a good and temperate
life is so pleasing, that even in this world he greatly rewards those who
practice it.

AND whereas many embrace a holy and contemplative life, teaching and preaching
the great truths of religion, which is highly commendable, the chief employment
of such being to lead men to the knowledge and worship of GOD. O that they
would likewise betake themselves entirely to a regular and temperate life! They
would then be considered as saints indeed upon earth, as those primitive
christians were, who observed so constant a temperance, and lived so long. By
living like them, to the age of one hundred and twenty, they might make such a
proficiency in holiness, and become so dear to GOD, as to do the greatest
honor and service to the world; and they would besides, enjoy constant health
and spirits, and be always happy within themselves; whereas they are now too
often infirm and melancholy. If indeed they are melancholy, because they see
GOD, (after all his goodness) so ungratefully requitted; or because they see
men (notwithstanding their innumerable obligations to love) yet hating and
grieving each other: such melancholy is truly amiable and divine.

BUT to be melancholy on any other account, is, to speak the truth, quite
unnatural to good christians; such persons being the servants of GOD and heirs
of immortality; and it is still more unbecoming the ministers of religion, who
ought to consider themselves, as of all others, in the most important,
serviceable, and delightful employment.

I KNOW, many of these gentlemen think that GOD does purposely bring these
occasions of melancholy on them that they may in this life do penance for their
former sins; but therein, as I think, they are much mistaken. I cannot
conceive, how GOD, who loves mankind, can be delighted with their sufferings.
He desires that mankind should be happy, both in this world and the next; he
tells us so in a thousand places in his word, and we actually find that there
is not a man on earth, who does not feel the good Spirit of GOD, forbidding and
condemning those wicked courses, which would rob him of that happiness. No; it
is the devil and sin which bring all the evils we suffer, on our heads, and not
GOD, who is our Creator and Father, and desires our happiness: his commands
tend to no other purpose. And temperance would not be a virtue, if the benefit
it does us by preserving us from distempers, were repugnant to the designs of
GOD in our old age.

IN short, if all religious people were strictly temperate and holy, how
beautiful, how glorious a scene should we then behold! Such numbers of
venerable old men as would create surprise. How many wise and holy teachers to
edify the people by their wholesome preaching and good examples! How many
sinners might receive benefit by their fervent intercessions! How many
blessings might they shower upon the earth! and not as now, eating and drinking
so intemperately, as to inflame the blood and excite worldly passions, pride,
ambition, and concupiscence, soiling the purity of their minds, checking their
growth in holiness, and in some unguarded moment, betraying them into sins
disgraceful to religion, and ruinous to their peace for life. -- Would they but
feed temperately, and that chiefly on vegetable food, they would as I do, soon
find it the most agreeable, (by the cool temperate humors it affords) the best
friend to virtuous improvement, begetting gentle manners, mild affections,
purity of thought, heavenly mindedness, quick relish of virtue, and delight in
GOD. This was the life led by the holy fathers of old, who subsisted entirely
on vegetables, drinking nothing but pure water, and yet lived to an extreme old
age, in good health and spirits, and always happy within themselves. And so may
all in our days live, provided they would but mortify the lusts of a
corruptible body, and devote themselves entirely to the exalted service of GOD;
for this is indeed the privilege of every faithful christian as Jesus Christ
left it, when he came down upon earth to shed his precious blood, in order to
deliver us from the tyrannical servitude of the devil; and all through his
immense goodness.

TO conclude, since length of days abounds with so many blessings, and I am so
happy as to have arrived at that state, I find myself bound (in charity) to
give testimony in favor of it, and solemnly assure all mankind, that I really
enjoy a great deal more than what I now mention; and that I have no other
motive in writing on this subject, than to engage them to practice, all their
lives, those excellent virtues of temperance and sobriety, which will bring
them, like me, to a happy old age. And therefore I never cease to raise my
voice, crying out to you, my friends, may your days be many, that you may long
serve GOD, and be fitter for the glory which he prepares for his children!

APPENDIX. GOLDEN RULES OF HEALTH, SELECTED FROM HIPPOCRATES, PLUTARCH, AND
SEVERAL OTHER EMINENT PHYSICIANS AND PHILOSOPHERS.
OF all the people on the face of the earth, the Americans are under the
greatest obligations to live temperatly. Formed for commerce, our country
abounds with bays, rivers and creeks, the exhalations from which, give the air
a dampness unfriendly to the springs of life. To counteract this infelicity of
climate, reason teaches us to adopt every measure that may give tone and vigor
to the constitution. This precaution, at all times necessary, is peculiarly so
in autumn, for then the body is relaxed by the intense heat of the dog days,
the air is filled with noxious vapors from putrid vegetables; Nature herself
wears a sickly, drooping aspect; the most robust feel a disagreeable weariness
and soreness of their flesh, a heaviness and sluggishness in motion, quick
feverish flushings, and sudden chills darting along their nerves, (all plain
proofs of a sickly atmosphere, and tottering health). Now, if ever, we need the
aid of all-invigorating temperance, now keep the stomach light and vigorous by
moderate feeding, the veins well stored with healthy blood, and the nerves full
braced by manly exercise and comely cheerfulness. Be choice of your diet, fruit
perfectly ripe, vegetables thoroughly done, and meats of the easiest digestion,
with a glass or two of generous wine at each meal, and all taken in such
prudent moderation, as not to load but strengthen the constitution. For at this
critical juncture, a single act of intemperance, which would scarcely be felt
in the wholesome frosts of winter, often turns the scale against nature, and
brings on obstinate indigestion, load at stomach, loss of apetite, a furred
tongue, yellowness of eyes, bitter taste in the mouth in the morning, bilious
vomitings, agues, fevers, etc. which in spite of the best medicines, often wear
a man away to a ghost. If blessed with a good constitution, he may perhaps
crawl on to winter, and get braced up again by her friendly frosts; but if old
or infirm, it is likely death will overtake him, before he can reach that city
of refuge.

"THE giddy practice of throwing aside our winter clothes too early in the
spring, and that of exposing our bodies, when overheated, to sudden cold, has
destroyed more people, than famine, pestilence and sword." I SAW (says an
American officer) thirteen grenadiers lying dead by a spring, in consequence of
drinking too freely of the cold water, while dripping with sweat in a hard
day's march, in summer. And many a charming girl, worthy of a tenderer husband,
has sunk into the icy embraces of death, by suddenly exposing her delicate
frame, warm from the ballroom, to the cold air. And since "the universal cause
acts not by partial, but by general laws," many a good soul, with more piety
than prudence, turning out quite warm from a crowded preaching into the cold
air without cloak or surtout, has gone off in a galloping consumption to that
happy world, where pain and sickness are unknown. What a melancholy thing it
is, that people cannot take care of their souls, without neglecting their
bodies, nor seek their salvation without ruining their health!
-- Sydenham.

THOSE who, by any accident, have lost a meal, (suppose their dinner) ought not
to eat a plentiful supper; for it will lie heavy on their stomach, and they
will have a more restless night than if they had both dined and supped
heartily. He therefore, who has missed his dinner, should make a light supper
of spoon victuals, rather than of any strong solid food." Hippocrates.

HE who has taken a larger quantity of food than usual, and feels it heavy and
troublesome on his stomach, will, if he is a wise man, go out and puke it up
immediately The wise son of Sirach confirms this precept, and says, Eccles.
xxxi. 21. "If thou have been forced to eat, arise, go forth and puke, and thou
shall have rest." And most certain it is, (adds an ingenious physician) that
hundreds and thousands have brought sickness and death on themselves, by their
ignorance or neglect of this rule. But at the same time people should carefully
avoid a repetition of that excess, which renders such an evacuation necessary,
for frequent vomitings do greatly tend to weaken and destroy the tone of the
stomach.
. Hippocrates.

AND here I cannot omit mentioning a a very ruinous error into which too many
are fond of running, I mean, the frequent use of strong vomits and purgatives.
A man every now and then feeds too freely on some favorite dish; by such
excess the stomach is weakened, the body filled with superfluous humors, and
he presently finds himself much out of sorts. The only medicine in this case,
is moderate exercise, innocent amusement, and a little abstinence, this is
nature's own prescription, as appears by her taking away his appetite. But
having long placed his happiness in eating and drinking, he cannot think of
relinquishing a gratification so dear to him, and so sets himself to force an
appetite by drams, slings, elixir of vitriol, wine and bitters, pickles,
sauces, etc. and on the credit of this artificial appetite, feeds again as if
he possessed the most vigorous health. He now finds himself entirely
disordered, general heaviness and weariness of body, flatulent uneasiness,
frequent eructations, loss of appetite, disturbed slumbers, frightful dreams,
bitter taste in the mouth, etc. He now complains of a foul stomach, or (in his
own words) that his stomach is full of bile; and immediately takes a dose of
tartar emetic or a strong purgative, to cleanse out his stomach, and so prepare
for another course of high living. Of all the Apollyons or destroyers of
nerves, health and life, this is the greatest; and I have no sort of doubt on
my own mind but it has broken down more constitutions, brought on more
distempers, and sent more people to an early grave, than all the vices of this
bedlam world put together. How much wiser would it be in this case to follow
the advice of the celebrated Boerhaave, i. e. to use a little abstinence, take
moderate exercise, and thereby help nature to carry off her crudities and
recover her springs. I have been often told by a lady of quality, whose
circumstances obliged her to be a good oeconomist, and whose prudence and
temperance preserved her health and senses unimpaired to a great age, that she
had kept herself out of the hands of the physicians many years by this simple
reigmen. People in health should never force themselves to eat when they have
no appetite; Nature, the best judge in these matters, will never fail to let us
know the proper time of refreshment. To act contrary to this rule, will
assuredly weaken the powers of digestion, impair health and shorten life.
Plutarch.

"LET us beware of such food as tempts us to eat when we are not hungry, and of
such liquors as entice us to drink when we are not thirsty." Socrates.

IT is really surprising (says Plutarch) what benefit men of letters would
receive from reading aloud every day; we ought therefore to make that exercise
familiar to us, but it should not be done immediately after dinner, nor
fatigue, for that error has proved hurtful to many. But though loud reading is
a very healthy exercise, violent vociferation is highly dangerous; it has in
thousands of instances burst the tender blood vessels of the lungs, and brought
on incurable consumptions Would to God, all ministers of religion (I mention
them because they are generally most wanting in this great article of prudence)
would but attend to the advice of this eminent Philosopher. They would, many of
them, live much longer, and consequently stand a good chance to be more useful
men here on earth, and brighter saints in heaven. What can give greater pain to
a man who has the prosperity of religion at heart, than to see an amiable,
pious young divine, (who promised great services to the world) spitting up his
lungs, and dying of a consumption brought on by preaching ten times louder than
he had need! Since the world began, no man ever spoke with half the energy
which the interests of eternal souls deserve, but there is a wide difference
betwixt an instructive, moving, melting eloquence, and a loud, unmeaning
monotony.
.

"THE world has long made a just distinction betwixt men of learning, and wise
men. Men of learning are ofttimes the weakest of men: they read and meditate
incessantly, without allowing proper relaxation or refreshment to the body; and
think that a frail machine can bear fatigue as well as an immortal spirit. This
puts me in mind of what happened to the camel in the fable; which, refusing
though often premonished, to ease the ox in due time of a part of his load, was
forced at last to carry not only the ox's whole load, but the ox himself also,
when he died under his burden. Thus it happens to the mind which has no
compassion on the body, and will not listen to its complaints, nor give it any
rest, until some sad distemper compels the mind to lay study and contemplation
aside; and to lie down, with the afflicted body, upon the bed of languishing
and pain. Most wisely, therefore, does Plato admonish us to take the same care
of our bodies as of our minds; that like a well matched pair of horses to a
chariot, each may draw his equal share of weight. And when the mind is most
intent upon virtue and usefulness, the body should then be most cherished by
prudence and temperence, that so it may be fully equal to such arduous and
noble pursuits." -- Plutarch.

NOTHING is more injurous to health than hard study at night; it is inverting
the order of nature, and ruining the constitution.

BUT most of all, it is improper to lie reading in bed by candle light; for it
not only partakes of the usual inconveniences of night study, such as straining
the eyes, weakening the sight, fatiguing the mind, and wearing away the
constitution, but is oft-times the cause of the saddest calamities; thousands
of elegant houses, with all their costly furniture, have been reduced to ashes
by this very imprudent practice.

BUT how can giddy youth, hurried on by strong passions and appetites, be
prevented from running into those excesses, which may cut them off in the prime
of their days, or at least hoard up diseases and remorse for old age? Why,
their passions and appetites must early be restrained by proper discipline and
example. This important office must be done by their parents, whose first and
greatest care should be "to train up their children in the way they should go,
that when they are old they may not depart from it."

"O THAT parents (says the excellent Mr. Lock) would carefully instill into
their children that great principle of all virtue and worth, viz. nobly to deny
themselves every wrong desire, and steadily follow what reason dictates as
best, though the appetite should lean the other way. We often see parents by
humouring them when little, corrupt the principles of virtue in their children;
and wonder afterward to taste the bitter waters of their undutifulness or
wickedness, when they themselves have contributed thereto. Why should we wonder
that he who has been accustomed to have his will in every thing, when he was in
coats, should desire and contend for it when he is in breeches? Youth is the
golden season to inure the mind to the practice of virtue, on which their
future health and respectability depend, and without which it will be
impossible to deliver their constitutions, unbroken, to manhood and old age.
Vice is utterly inconsistent with health, which can never dwell with lewdness,
luxury, sloth and violent passions. The life of the epicure and rake, is not
only short, but miserable. It would shock the modest and compassionate, to hear
of those exquisite pains, and dreadful agonies, which profligate young persons
suffer from their debaucheries, before they can even reach the friendly shelter
of an untimely grave. Or if some few stop short in their career of riot, before
they have quite destroyed the springs of life, yet those springs are generally
rendered so feeble and crazy, by the liberties which they have already taken,
that they only support a gloomy, dispirited, dying life, tedious to themselves,
and troublesome to all around them; and (which is still more pitiable) often
transmit their complaints to an innocent unhappy offspring."

PART II. THE WAY TO WEALTH, BY DOCTOR FRANKLIN.
INTRODUCTION.
"But for one end, one much neglected use, are riches worth your care:
"This noble end is -- to show the virtues in their fairest light;
"To make humanity the minister of bounteous Providence,
"And teach the breast the generous luxury of doing good."
Dr. ARMSTRONG.
THERE is scarcely among the evils of life, any so generally dreaded as
poverty. Many other kinds of misery a man may easily forget, because they do
not always force themselves upon his regards. But it is impossible to pass a
day or an hour, in the company of men without seeing how much poverty is
exposed to neglect and insult; and in its lowest state, to hunger and
nakedness; to injuries, against which, every passion is in arms; and to wants,
which nature, without the aids of religion, cannot sustain.

OF these calamities, mankind in general seem to be sensible. We hear on every
side the noise of trade; and see the streets thronged with numberless
multitudes, whose faces are clouded with anxiety, and whose steps are hurried
by precipitation, from no other motive than the hope of gain. The whole world
is put in motion by the desire of that wealth, which is chiefly to be valued as
it secures us from poverty and its miseries. But there are always some whose
passions or follies lead them to a conduct widely different from the general
practice of mankind. I mean the thoughtless and the negligent, who, from an
excess of carelessness, or the seductions of company, indulge habits of
pleasure and expense above their fortunes; and thus mispend their time, or
waste the inheritance of their fathers, without ever seeming to reflect on the
great sacrifice they are making, or the gulf to which they approach, till
poverty, like an unexpected winter, comes upon them with all its chilling
calamities, and awakens them to a pungent sense of their folly and
wretchedness. The young, and those of the most generous and unsuspecting
tempers, often fall into this evil net, out of which they seldom escape without
suffering injuries, which they painfully feel and seriously lament through
life. No man had a heart more disposed to pity, nor a head more able to counsel
these unfortunates, than the sage Dr. FRANKLIN, the friend of man, and the
great economist of AMERICA. His little work, entitled, "THE WAY TO WEALTH," is
universally considered as a masterpiece, on the art of making and preserving a
fortune. But before we give the Reader a sight of this, we will exhibit to his
view some of the many felicities of wealth, that on seeing how much happiness
he may derive from it to himself, and how many services he may therewith confer
on others, he may apply with vigor and perseverance to the means conducive to
so desirable an end.

IN the first place -- WEALTH always commands respect, unless its owner be an
infamous wretch indeed; and even in that deplorable case, it has the magic
powers of charity, to cover and hide a multitude of fins. It gives a man an air
of consequence, and like true beauty, without any exertion of its own, wins the
favor of all beholders. When the rich man goes into company, every body rise
up to salute him: no features too hard to assume a smile; no back so stiff but
can afford him a bow. He is placed in the uppermost seat at the table, and men
covet to direct their conversation to him. The poor man speaks, but no one
regards: the rich opens his mouth, and lo! silence is kept.

WHAT can be more pleasing to a man than to see himself thus honored by his
friends? But besides this satisfaction, which to the good, is very exquisite;
it has a very happy moral effect on the mind. In a mind possessed of common
sensibility, it must kindle the soft fire of good humor, and good humor
naturally inspires benevolence and affection. Whence we infer, that a rich man,
who is prudent, stands a much fairer chance to be good humoured than the poor,
whose poverty exposes them to such frequent slights and neglects.

IN the second place -- WEALTH places a man in a state which all must covet; a
state of INDEPENDENCE. To owe no man any thing; to be able to go wither-soever
we please; and to face any company without dread of dunning, is a luxury too
divine, even to be conceived by any who have not been haunted and hag ridden by
creditors. Say, ye debtors, ye poorest of mankind, say, ye who cannot look at a
creditor without confusion, nor hear the name of justice without a pang; who
startle at the sound of a shaken leaf, as though the feet of the sheriff were
at the door, and fly as the murderer flies from the avenger of blood, whose
sorrowful days are wasted in meditating fruitless plans of payment, while your
midnight slumbers are frightened by dreams of bankruptcy, and apparitions of
merciless creditors, sales, and houseless children: say, wherein is the life of
a debtor better than the life of a dog. Are not the prospects of independence
as reviving to your hearts, as the prospects of paradise to souls that have
long pined in purgatory?

BUT, on the other hand, never to go in debt; or, if accident should render a
trifling debt necessary; to have at home more than enough to defray it; to
receive a creditor with a smiling countenance; to delight his eyes with the
promised gold, and to dismiss him charmed with our punctuality and honor: Must
not this, to a good man, afford a series of satisfactions, too complicated for
detail, and too exquisite for description?

IN the third place -- WEALTH enables us to enjoy the purest and sublimest
pleasures that are to be found on earth -- the pleasures of doing good.

To a tender parent, the interests of his children are dear, as the blood which
feeds the fountain of life. When he looks at them, his bowels are moved within
him, because he remembers the evils which await them; He considers that
ignorance leaves them an easy prey to the crafty and cruel; and that want
betrays them to dishonesty and falsehood. Happy the parent who possesses
wealth; he places before his children the lamp of knowledge, and they perceive
the snares of the artful; be surrounds them with the blessings of competence,
and they despise the gains of iniquity. He has sisters and brothers, perhaps,
poor in worldly goods, but whom he loves as his own soul; and young relatives,
whose little strong embraces, kindle all the parent within him. Is there on
earth a happiness equal to that which he feels in supplying their wants; giving
them education, and thus leading them, as by the hand, to usefulness and honor?

To welcome the weeping widow; to provide for her a place of rest; to dry up
her tears; to feed and educate her little orphans, and to put them in a way to
gain an honest livelihood.

To take by the hand poor young tradesmen; to lend them money; to set them up,
and thus to enable them to be very useful to the community, and to make
comfortable livings for themselves.

To build in the neighbourhoods of the poor, places of public worship, where
the people may learn the knowledge of GOD, and the happiness of a good life.

To assist in providing houses where the sick and aged poor, who are not able
to work for themselves, may be taken in, and have medicines and physicians to
cure their sicknesses, and food and clothing to make the remainder of their
days happy.

To feel for a tenant's misfortunes, and to abate something of his rent in a
bad season.

To silence the excuses of a poor debtor with a "well, well; don't be uneasy on
account of this trifle; I know you are an honest man, and I am willing to wait
till you can make it convenient to pay me."

THESE are some of the numberless luxuries of beneficence which wealth enables
a good man to enjoy. If you would enjoy them, listen to the instructions of Dr.
FRANKLIN, and let the words of his mouth sink deep into your heart. Despise
them not for their simplicity; for simple and unlearned is the multitude to
which they are addressed.

THE WAY TO WEALTH.
COURTEOUS READER,
I HAVE heard, that nothing gives an author so great pleasure, as to find his
works respectfully quoted by others. Judge, then, how much I must have been
gratified by an incident I am going to relate to you. I stopped my horse,
lately, where a great number of people were collected at an auction of
merchant's goods. The hour of the sale not being come, they were conversing on
the badness of the times; and one of the company called to a plain, clean old
man, with white locks, "Pray: father, Abraham, what think you of the times?
Will not these heavy taxes quite ruin the country? How shall we be ever able to
pay them? What would you advise us to?" -- Father Abraham, stood up, and
replied, "If you would have my advice, I will give it you in short; "for a word
to the wise is enough," as Poor Richard says." They joined in desiring him to
speak his mind, and gathering round him, he proceeded as follows:

"FRIENDS, says he, the taxes are, indeed, very heavy; and, if those laid on by
the government, were the only ones we had to pay, we might more easily
discharge them; but we have many others, and much more grievous to some of us.
We are taxed twice as much by our idleness, three times as much by our pride,
and four times as much by our folly; and from these taxes the commissioners
cannot ease or deliver us, by allowing an abatement. However, let us hearken to
good advice, and something may be done for us; God helps them that help
themselves," as Poor Richard says.

I. "IT would be thought a hard government that should tax its people one-tenth
part of their time, to be employed in its service: but idleness taxes many of
us much more; sloth, by bringing on diseases, absolutely shortens life. "Sloth,
like rust, consumes faster than labor wears, while the used key is always
bright," as Poor Richard says. "But do thou love life, then do not squander
time, for that is the stuff life is made of," as Poor Richard says. How much
more than is necessary do we spend in sleep? forgetting that "The sleeping fox
catches no poultry, and that there will be sleeping enough in the grave," as
Poor Richard says.

"If time be of all things the most precious, wasting time must be," as Poor
Richard says, "the greatest prodigality;" since, as he elsewhere tells us,
"Lost time is never found again; and what we call time enough always proves
little enough:" Let us then up and be doing, and doing to the purpose; so by
diligence shall we do more with less perplexity. "Sloth makes all things
difficult, but industry all easy; and, he that rises late, must trot all day,
and shall scarce overtake his business at night; while laziness travels so
slowly, that poverty soon overtakes him. Drive thy business, let not that drive
thee; and early to bed and early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy, and
wise," as Poor Richard says.

"So what signifies wishing and hoping for better times? We may make these
times better, if we bestir ourselves. "Industry need not wish, and he that
lives upon hope will die fasting. There are no gains without pains; then, help
hands for I have no lands," or if I have they are smartly taxed. "He that has
a trade, has an estate; and he that has a calling, has an office of profit
and honor," as Poor Richard says; but then the trade must be worked at, and
the calling well followed, or neither the estate nor the office will enable us
to pay our taxes. If we are industrious, we will never starve; for at the
working man's house, hunger looks in, but dares not enter." Nor will the
bailiff or the constable enter, for "Industry pays debts, while despair
increases them." What, though you have found no treasure, nor has any rich
relation left you a legacy, "Diligence is the mother of good luck, and God
gives all things to industry. Then plough deep, while sluggards sleep, and you
shall have corn to sell and to keep." Work while it is called today, for you
know not how much you may be hindered tomorrow. "One today is worth two
to-morrows," as Poor Richard says; and farther, "Never leave that till
tomorrow, which you can do today." If you were a servant, would you not be
ashamed that a good master should catch you idle? Are you then your own master?
be ashamed to catch yourself idle, when there is so much to be done for
yourself, your family, your relations, and your country. Handle your tools
without mittens: remember, that "The cat in gloves catches no mice," as Poor
Richard says. It is true, there is much to be done, and, perhaps, you are
weak-handed; but stick to it steadily, and you will see great effects; for
"Constant dropping wears away stones; and by diligence and patience the mouse
ate in two the cable; and little strokes fell great oaks."

METHINKS I hear some of you say, Must a man afford himself no leisure? I will
tell thee my friend what Poor Richard says; "Employ thy time well, if thou
meanest to gain leisure; and, since thou art not sure of a minute, throw not
away an hour." Leisure is time for doing something useful; this leisure the
diligent man will obtain, but the lazy man never; for, "A life of leisure and a
life of laziness are two things. Many, without labor would live by their wits
only, but they break for want of stock;" whereas industry gives comfort, and
plenty, and respect. "Fly pleasures, and they will follow you. The diligent
spinner has a large shift; and now I have a sheep and a cow, every body bids me
good morrow."

II. "BUT with our industry, we must likewise be steady, settled, and careful,
and oversee our own affairs with our own eyes, and not trust too much to
others; for, as Poor Richard says, "I never saw an oft-removed tree,
Nor yet an oft-removed family,
That throve so well as those that fettled be."
"And again, "Three removes is as bad as a fire;" and again, "Keep thy shop,
and thy shop will keep thee;" and again, "If you would have your business done,
go; if not, send." And again, "He that by the plough would thrive,
Himself must either hold or drive."
"And again, "The eye of a master will do more work than both his hands;" and
again, "Want of care does us more damage than want of knowledge;" and again,
"Not to oversee workmen, is to leave them your purse open." Trusting too much
to others care is the ruin of many; for, "In the affairs of this world, men are
saved, not by faith, but by the want of it;" but a man's own care is
profitable; for, "If you would have a faithful servant, and one that you like,
serve yourself. A little neglect may breed great mischief; for want of a nail
the shoe was lost; for want of a shoe the horse was lost; and for want of a
horse the rider was lost," being overtaken and slain by the enemy; all for want
of a little care about a horse-shoe nail.

III. "So much for industry my friends, and attention to one's own business;
but to these we must add frugality, if we would make our industry more
certainly successful. A man may, if he knows not how to save as he gets, "keep
his nose all his life to the grindstone, and die not worth a groat at last. A
fat kitchen makes a lean will;" and "Many estates are spent in the getting,
Since women for tea forsook spinning and knitting,
And men for punch forsook hewing and splitting."
"If you would be wealthy, think of saving, as well as of getting. The Indies
have not made Spain rich, because her outgoes are greater than her incomes."

"AWAY, then, with your expensive follies, and you will not then have so much
cause to complain of hard times, heavy taxes, and chargeable families; for
"Women and wine, game and deceit,
Makes the wealth small, and the want great."
And farther, "What maintains one vice, would bring up two children." You may
think, perhaps, that a little tea, or a little punch now and then, diet a
little more costly, clothes a little finer, and a little entertainment now and
then, can be no great matter; but remember many a little makes a mickle."
Beware of little expenses; "A small leak will sink a great ship," as Poor
Richard says; and again, "Who dainties love, shall beggars prove?" and
moreover, "Fools make feasts, and wise men eat them." Here you are all got
together to this sale of fineries and nick-nacks. You call them goods; but if
you do not take care, they will prove evils to some of you. You expect they
will be sold cheap, and, perhaps, they may for less than they cost; but, if you
have no occasion for them, they must be dear to you. Remember what Poor Richard
says, "Buy what thou have no need of, and ere long thou shall sell thy
necessaries." And again, "At a great pennyworth pause a while:" he means, that
perhaps the cheapness is apparent only, and not real; or the bargain, by
straitening thee in thy business, may do the more harm than good. For in
another place he says, "Many have been ruined by buying good pennyworths."
Again, "It is foolish to lay out money in a purchase of repentance;" and yet
this folly is practiced every day at auctions, for want of minding the
Almanac. Many a one, for the sake of finery on the back, have gone with a
hungry belly, and half starved their families; "Silks and sattins, scarlet and
velvets, put out the kitchen fire," as Poor Richard says. These are not the
necessaries of life, they can scarcely be called the conveniences: and yet
only because they look pretty, how many want to have them? By these and other
extravagancies, the genteel are reduced to poverty, and forced to borrow of
those whom they formerly despised, but who, through industry and frugality, have
maintained their standing; in which case it appears plainly, that a ploughman
on his legs is higher than a gentleman on his knees," as Poor Richard says.
Perhaps they have had a small estate left them, which they knew not the getting
of: they think "It is day, and will never be night:" that a little to be spent
out of so much is not worth minding; but always taking out of the meal-tub, and
never putting in, soon comes to the bottom," as Poor Richard says; and then,
"When the well is dry, they know the worth of water." But this they might have
known before, if they had taken his advice. "If you would know the value of
money, go and try to borrow some; for he that goes a borrowing goes a
sorrowing," as Poor Richard says; and, indeed, so does he that lends to such
people, when he goes to get in again. Poor Dick farther advises, and says,
"Fond pride of dress is sure a very curse;
Ere fancy you consult, consult your purse."
And again, "Pride is as loud a beggar as Want, and a great deal more saucy."
When you have bought one fine thing, you must buy ten more, that your
appearance may be all of a piece; but Poor Dick says, "It is easier to suppress
the first desire, than to satisfy all that follow it:" And it is as truly folly
for the poor to ape the rich, as for the frog to swell, in order to equal the
ox. "Vessels large may venture more,
But little boats should keep near shore."
It is, however, a folly soon punished; for, as Poor Richard says, "Pride that
dines on vanity, sups on contempt; Pride breakfasted with Plenty, dined with
Poverty, and supped with Infamy." And, after all, of what use is this pride of
appearance for which so much is risked, so much is suffered? It cannot promote
health, nor ease pain; it makes no increase of merit in the person, it creates
envy, it hastens misfortune.

"But what madness must it be to run in debt for these superfluities? We are
offered, by the terms of this sale, six months credit; and that, perhaps, has
induced some of us to attend it, because we cannot spare the ready money, and
hope now to be fine without it. But, ah! think what you do when you run in
debt; you give to another power over your liberty. If you cannot pay at the
time, you will be ashamed to see your creditor; you will be in fear when you
speak to him; you will make poor pitiful sneaking excuses, and by degrees, come
to lose your veracity, and sink into base downright lying; for, "The second
vice is lying, the first is running in debt," as Poor Richard says; and again,
to the same purpose, "Lying rides upon Debt's back:" whereas a free American
ought not to be ashamed, nor afraid to see or speak to any man living. But
poverty often deprives a man of all spirit and virtue. "It is hard for an empty
bag to stand upright." What would you think of that nation, or of that
government, who should issue an edict, forbidding you to dress like a gentleman
or gentlewoman, on pain of imprisonment or servitude? Would you not say, that
you were free, have a right to dress as you please, and that such an edict
would be a breach of your privileges, and such a government tyrannical? And yet
you are about to put yourself under that tyranny when you run in debt for such
dress! Your creditor has authority, at his pleasure, to deprive you of your
liberty, by confining you in gaol for life, or by selling you for a servant, if
you should not be able to pay him: when you have got your bargain, you may
perhaps think little of payment; but as Poor Richard says, "Creditors have
better memories than debtors, creditors are a superstitious sect, great
observers of set days and times." The day comes round before you are aware, and
the demand is made before you are prepared to satisfy it; or, if you bear your
debt in mind, the term, which at first seemed so long, will, as it lessens,
appear extremely short: Time will seem to have added wings to his heels as well
as his shoulders. "Those have a short Lent, who owe money to be paid at
Easter." At present, perhaps, you may think yourselves in thriving
circumstances, and that you can bear a little extravagance without injury; but
"For age and want save while you may,
No morning-sun lasts a whole day."


GAIN may be temporary and uncertain, but ever, while you live, expense is
constant and uncertain; and, "It is easier to build two chimneys, than to keep
one in fuel," as Poor Richard says: So, "Rather go to bed supperless, than rise
in debt.

" Get what you can, and what you get hold,
It Is the stone that will turn all your lead into gold."
AND when you have got the philosopher's stone, sure you will no longer
complain of bad times, or the difficulty of paying taxes.

IV. "THIS doctrine, my friends, is reason and wisdom: but, after all, do not
depend too much upon your own industry and frugality, and prudence, though
excellent things; for they may all be blasted, without the blessing of Heaven;
and therefore, ask that blessing humbly, and be not uncharitable to those that
at present seem to want it, but comfort and help them. Remember, Job suffered,
and was afterward prosperous.

"AND now to conclude, "Experience keeps a dear school, but fools will learn in
no other," as Poor Richard says, and scarce in that; for, it is true, "We may
give advice, but we cannot give conduct:" However remember this, "They that
will not be counseled cannot be helped;" and farther, that "If you will not
hear Reason, she will surely rap your knuckles," as Poor Richard says.

THUS the old gentleman ended his harangue. The people heard it, and approved
the doctrine, and immediately practiced the contrary, just as if it had been a
common sermon; for the auction opened, and they began to buy extravagantly. I
found the good man had thoroughly studied my Almanacks, and digested all I had
dropped on those topics during the course of twenty-five years. The frequent
mention he made of me must have tired any one else; but my vanity was
wonderfully delighted with it, though I was conscious, that not a tenth part of
the wisdom was my own, which he ascribed to me; but rather the gleanings that I
had made of the sense of all ages and nations. However, I resolved to be the
better for the echo of it; and, though I had at first determined to buy stuff
for a new coat, I went away, resolved to wear my old one a little longer.
Reader, if thou will do the same, thy profit will be as great as mine. I am, as
ever, thine to serve thee.

RICHARD SAUNDERS.

ADVICE TO A YOUNG TRADESMAN.
REMEMBER that time is money. He that can earn ten shillings a day by his
labor, and goes abroad, or sits idle one half of that day, though he spends
but sixpence during his diversion or idleness, ought not to reckon that the
only expense; he has really spent, or rather thrown away, five shillings
besides.

REMEMBER that credit is money. If a man lets his money lie in my hands after
it is due, he gives me the interest, or so much as I can make of it during that
time. This amounts to a considerable sum when a man has good and large credit,
and makes good use of it.

REMEMBER that money is of a prolific generating nature. Money can beget money,
and its offspring can beget more, and so on. Five shillings turned is six;
turned again, it is seven and three pence; and so on till it becomes an hundred
pounds. The more there is of it, the more it produces, every turning, so that
the profits rise quicker and quicker. He that kills a breeding sow, destroys
all her offspring to the thousandth generation. He that murders a crown,
destroys all that it might have produced, even scores of pounds.

REMEMBER that six pounds a year is but a groat a day. For this little sum,
which may be daily wasted either in time or expense, unperceived, a man of
credit may, on his own security, have the constant possession and use of an
hundred pounds. So much in stock, briskly turned by an industrious man,
produces great advantage.

REMEMBER this saying, "The good paymaster is lord of another man's purse." He
that is known to pay punctually and exactly to the time he promises, may at any
time, and on any occasion, raise all the money his friends can spare. This is
sometimes of great use. After industry and frugality, nothing contributes more
to the raising of a young man in the world, than punctuality and justice in all
his dealings: therefore never keep borrowed money an hour beyond the time you
promised, lest a disappointment shut up your friend's purse for ever.

THE most trifling actions that affect a man's credit are to be regarded. The
sound of your hammer at five in the morning, or nine at night, heard by a
creditor, makes him easy six months longer; but if he sees you at a billiard
table, or hears your voice at a tavern, when you should be at work, he sends
for his money the next day; demands it before he can receive it in a lump.

IT shows, besides, that you are mindful of what you owe; it makes you appear a
careful, as well as honest man, and that still increases your credit.

BEWARE of thinking all your own that you possess, and of living accordingly.
It is a mistake that many people who have credit fall into. To prevent this,
keep an exact account, for some time, both of your expenses and your income. If
you take the pains at first to mention particulars, it will have this good
effect; you will discover how wonderfully small trifling expenses mount up to
large sums, and will discern what might have been, and may for the future be
saved, without occasioning any great inconvenience.

IN short, the way to wealth, if you desire it, is as plain as the way to
market. It depends chiefly on two words, industry and frugality; that is, waste
neither time nor money, but make the best use of both. Without industry and
frugality nothing will do, and with them every thing. He that gets all he can
honestly, and saves all he gets, (necessary expenses excepted) will certainly
become rich; if that Being who governs the world, to whom all should look for a
blessing on their honest endeavors, does not, in his wise providence,
otherwise determine.

AN OLD TRADESMAN.

PART III. A SURE GUIDE TO HAPPINESS, BY DOCTOR SCOTT.
A SURE GUIDE TO HAPPINESS.
"Oh Happiness! our beings end and aim,
"Good, pleasure, ease, content; whatever thy name.
"That something still which prompts the eternal sigh.
"For which we bear to live, or dare to die.
"Plant of celestial seed, if drops below,
"Say in what favored soil thou deign'st to grow."
POPE.
IF there be any truth fully ascertained by reason and revelation, it is this,
That " Man is not but to be happy." Surely the mighty author of our being can
have no selfish view in our creation. His happiness is too immense and too
secure to receive increase, or to suffer diminution from any thing that we can
do. " Can a man profit his Maker, or what need has the Almighty of our
services?"

A MORE important question claims our regard. Wherein consists the happiness of
Man?

IN order to answer this, we must remember, that man is composed of two
natures, an animal and a rational, each of which is blessed with capacities of
enjoyment, and must have its correspondent objects of gratification before man
can be happy. Hitherto we have considered him in the first of these, in his
animal capacity: We have placed before us, a creature of noble shape, erect and
fair, formed of nerves and fibers, and endued with appetites and feelings.

THOUGH this his animal nature be infinitely inferior to his rational, yet
since the happiness of the latter cannot be complete, while the former is
destitute of its proper goods, we have devoted the two preceding books to the
best interests of his animal nature. We have taken the liberty to send him to
Old CORNARO and Dr. FRANKLIN, to hear their excellent lectures on health and
competence, which all allow to be two very choice ingredients in the cup of
happiness. Nay, some entertain so high an opinion of these, as to declare, that
if CORNARO and FRANKLIN could insure a quantum sufficit of them, they would be
content, and ask no better happiness than what they could extract from these.

BUT let it be remembered that this is not the language of the wise, but of the
slothful, and of such as are pushed for money, who frequently experiencing the
painfulness of being dunned, and sometimes tasting the sweets of ease and
pleasure, are ready to conclude, that if they had but money enough; Oh if they
had but money enough to retire from the fatigues and vexations of business, and
to spend delicious days and nights in all the varied joys of feasted sense, how
blessed as the immortal Gods they would be!

AND truly, if man was but a more elegant sort of beast, and capable of no
higher pleasures than those of sense, these Mohammedan dreamers might be more
than half in the right. In that case, health and competence might very well
serve our turn; as with the one we might purchase, and with the other enjoy,
all the happiness of which we were capable. But since God has been so good as
to raise us many degrees above mere animal nature; since he has together with
bodies, given us immortal minds, endowed with faculties and affections capable
of angelic joys, it follows very delightfully, that another guess bill of fare
must be made out for us, than that which would serve Epicurean hogs.

THOSE gentlemen who are so fond of stinting themselves to mere bodily
pleasures, would do well to remember, that every rank of animated nature must
have its proper gratifications or be miserable. Furnish earth and water to a
plant, and it shall look green, and flourish like a cedar in Lebanon; but give
nothing but this to a horse, and he shall presently perish for want of
nutriment. Again, give grass and water to a horse, and he shall look plump as
pampered speculation; but confine a man to grass and water, and you shall soon
write hic jacet on his tomb. Thus every link in the great chain of being has
its respective capacities and enjoyments. Man is favored with these in a
degree of perfection above all the creatures that we have seen. He possesses,
harmoniously blended in himself, the various excellencies of two different
natures; together with a relish for all the pleasures of the most perfect
animal, he can boast capacities equal to the sublime delights of celestial
spirits; now to suppose that so exalted, I had almost said so divine a creature
as this, can be satisfied with enjoyments that belong to the poorest and
meanest part of his nature, were a far greater absurdity, than to suppose that
an animal of the most delicate taste and sense, can be content with earth and
water, the simple nutriment of a plant.

ACCORDINGLY we find that experience has ever evinced the mistake of those, who
have expected, that sensual goods alone could make them happy. This is not a
novel opinion, but seems to have been a favorite notion of some in the days of
King Solomon, who resolved to examine the truth or falsehood of it. Never man
enjoyed equal opportunities; he had gold and silver as the stones in the
valleys for abundance; and in wisdom he far exceeded all the sages of the East.
The whole force of this wisdom and wealth he determined to employ on the
experiment. " Behold (said he) I will get me down and make me great works, and
build me houses; and plant me vineyards, and make me gardens and pools of
water. I will get me men singers and women singers, and all the delights of the
sons of men; and whatever mine eyes desire, I will not keep from them." When
every thing is thus planned by himself, and executed according to his
direction, surely he is arrived to the accomplishment of his wishes, and has
ascended to the summit of all human happiness. The poor, who are taken with
fine shows, would conclude so: Solomon certainly knows best; let us ask him,
What does he say?

" Lo! I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labor
that I had labored to do, and behold all was vanity and vexation of spirit,
and there was no profit under the sun." Well, gentlemen, you, I mean who think
that if you had but an abundance of riches, and health to enjoy them, you could
not fail to be happy. What do you think of having against you such a formidable
case in point as this? Are you not beginning to suspect that you may have been
under a mistake all this time? Suppress not the friendly suspicion: Instead of
repining, you should rejoice to find that you have been in an error. Have you
not abundant cause of joy, that riches and health with all their springs and
streams of pleasure, are not alone sufficient to quench your thirst of
happiness, nor able to fill up the vast capacities of your nature? After
conquering one world, Alexander sat down and wept, that he had not another into
which he could push his victories: But, thank God, we have not his cause of
complaint.

FOR after having pushed our conquests through all those regions of innocent
enjoyment which belong to our animal nature, we can enter upon the far wider
provinces of REASON and AFFECTION, and possess ourselves of all the sublime
pleasures of angels, i. e. the pleasures of knowledge, imagination, virtue,
friendship and love. When asked therefore, Wherein consists the true happiness
of Man? We readily answer, that as the happiness of a mere animal consists in
exercising its appetites on such goods as are suited to its nature, and capable
of gratifying all its senses; so the true happiness of man consists in
exercising his faculties on such objects as are suited to his rational nature,
and capable of delighting his soul through all her various affections. But
where is that infinite good? Who is that wondrous being that can feast the
faculties, and satisfy the desires of an immortal mind? It Is God; and he alone
in whose ineffable perfections the whole world of rationals will find enough,
and more than enough, to employ their admiration and delight through eternal
ages.

ACCORDINGLY we find that Christ, when asked what a man should do to be truly
happy, replied, " Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy mind; and thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself."

IN this admirable reply, which for sublimity of piety and philanthropy, and
for profound wisdom and philosophy, deserves everlasting veneration. We learn
three very important lessons. I. That the chief good or true happiness of man
consists in his mind. II. In the affections of his mind. And III. In those
affections directed to worthy objects.

I. HE who was perfectly acquainted with our nature, places the supreme
happiness of man in the mind. How strange soever it may seem, yet most certain
it is, that this ever was, and still is a new doctrine to the bulk of mankind.
For not only the numerous sect of ancient Epicureans, and sensual Mahometans,
but the generality of Christians to this day, place the seat of happiness in
the body.

TALK to them about the pleasures of the understanding, or the still sublimer
pleasures of devotion, and your words seem not to be understood; but shift the
subject, and talk about the pleasures of inheriting large estates, of living at
ease and faring sumptuously every day, and immediately you perceive, by their
smiling countenances and ready conversation, that you have awakened their
favorite ideas, and that these are the things which lie nearest to their
hearts.

THAT the goods of the body constitute some small part of man's happiness, and
that therefore they ought to be valued, and, as far as conscience and a regard
to higher interests will permit, should be sought after, is evident. But that
these goods and pleasures of the body, constitute man's supreme happiness, is
one of the most degrading, damnable errors, that ever was broached. No man who
understands the dignity of his immortal part, and who entertains a proper love
for himself and his fellow men, can hear such a proposition without abhorrence
and indignation. What! shall happiness which all so vehemently desire, and so
heartily pray for, both for themselves and for others; shall happiness, the
bare hope of which revives the heart, and does good like a medicine; which
gives strength to the weak, and courage to the fearful; which animates us
through life; nor deserts us in death -- Shall this fondest wish, this sweetest
expectation of all men, consist merely in the goods and pleasures of the body.
Consider, thou cruel murderer of thyself; thou barbarous assassin of human
kind, how few over attain those pleasures to which thou stupidly confinest the
happiness of man; how fewer still ever enjoy them, and how soon death will
snatch them out of the hands of those who are so fortunate! Reflect what
unnumbered millions are born to no better inheritance than poverty and bondage,
and who, instead of being caressed in the soft lap of ease and pleasure, are
driven through life by the scourge of cruel tyrants, or more cruel wants! hard
put to it to get a little bread, and sometimes never get it, at least not
comfortably; but from various causes, eat it all their lives long in bitterness
of soul! And of those seemingly happy ones who possess all the goods of the
body, How few enjoy them without alloy? How many, by abusing these blessings,
contract diseases which render fleeting life one continued scene of sorrow and
suffering? And in those apparently fortunate cases, where the greatest
abundance of sensual goods is accompanied with health and power of enjoyment;
yet, alas! how soon does enjoyment consume the little good which they
contained, and leave the wealthy glutton to languish under indifference, to
fret through disappointment, and to sigh for something else?

CAST your eyes on that pale bloated figure. It is the Emperor Heliogabalus,
corrupted by the brutalizing sophistry of Epicurus, i. e. that the pleasures of
the body constitute man's only happiness, he resolved to be happy to some
purpose. All Italy was taxed; all Asia robbed to support his luxury; every
region of the earth was explored; every element ransacked to furnish his table.
All that bounteous nature bestows of rare and delicious among her birds,
beasts, fishes, fruits and spices; and all these prepared by the nicest hand of
cookery, were served up to feast and delight his appetites. Surely, if
luxurious ease and delicious fare were happiness, Heliogabalus must have been
blessed indeed. The discontent visible in his countenance proves the reverse.
Could you ask him, he would tell you that his pleasures are at best but vain,
and too frequently vexatious. Sometimes he was mortified, because, through
defect of appetite, he could not enjoy his delicious morsels. At other times,
tempted by their luscious flavor, he fed to an excess, which brought on him a
variety of painful and loathsome diseases. And at all times it was matter of
grief to him, that the pleasures of eating and drinking should so soon be over.
This circumstances caused one of the Roman Emperors to quarrel with his own
constitution, and to wish, in all the rage of disappointed pleasure, that he
had the stomach of a horse, that he might enjoy the satisfaction of eating ten
times as much as its present scanty capacities would allow. And another
Emperor, for the same swinish reason, preferred his petition to the Gods, that
they would grant him a neck as long as that of a crane, vainly hoping, that he
should thereby the longer enjoy the dear pleasure of swallowing.

BUT granting the sensuality an utter exemption from all the ills and vexations
of gluttony; that his coveted dainties are all served up in the most inviting
style of perfection; that his fruits are luciously ripe and fresh; his meats
tender and deliciously flavoured; his cookery the most exquisite in the world,
and his wines equal to the nectar of Jove. And granting too that he has an
appetite to season, and health to enjoy all these dainties, yet, alas! how soon
must the season of enjoyment be over with him forever! Old age will presently
steal on him; his nerves must soon grow hard and dull, and lose their delicate
edge and sensibility, and then, though he may sit down, yet can he not enjoy
his dainty morsels.

BEHOLD, I am now (said the rich old Barzillai) fourscore years old, and can I
discern what is savoury? Can I taste what I eat or what I drink; or can I hear
the voice of singing men and singing women? After this humiliating period, what
sad dishonours will sickness and death soon bring upon the body, the gluttons
pampered pride! His cheeks once so plump and rosy, are now pale and emaciated.
His skin, formerly so smooth and polished, is now deformed with wrinkles. His
body once straight and erect, is now crooked and bent with years. His limbs,
late so nimble and active, are now stiff and scarcely able to move. And he who
forty years ago possessed all the bloom and vigor of full formed manhood, is
now shrunk away to mere skin and bone, and experiences all the helplessness of
a second childhood.

SUPPORTED on his crutches or cane, he attempts to move, but it is with
difficulty and pain. His knees knock against each other through weakness. His
hands tremble, and his whole body shakes as with an ague. In a little time his
infirmities prevail; his body, though but the shadow of his former self, is now
too heavy for his exhausted strength. In a low faultering voice, he begs to be
led to his bed, and there lies down never more to rise. Nature now sinks apace;
his heart labors; his breast heaves; his breathing becomes short and quick;
his eyes are hollow and sunk; his voice grows hoarse; he rattles in the throat;
his limbs wax cold; his teeth turn black; he foams at the mouth; a feeble
convulsion shakes his frame, and, with a deep groan, his unwilling spirit takes
her leave. Immediately putrefaction and worms begin their loathsome office; and
in a little time, this pampered, idolized flesh, returns to the dust of which
it was formed.

WHO can contemplate this picture, and not bewail with tears of blood, the
madness of those who expect their only happiness from such a vile body! O how
infinitely superior to these miserable delusions is the Heaven descended
philosophy of Jesus Christ! In that divine religion, the body, instead of being
exalted as the seat of our happiness, is depreciated as the principal cause of
our misery, being, as the poet expresses it, not only a nest of pain and bag of
corruption, but the most fruitful source of our sins and sorrows. Christ seldom
mentions the body, except to expose its comparative worthlessness, and to
caution us against its defiling lusts. In every part of the sacred volume, you
hear his voice exclaiming with all the earnestness of parental affection: " Woe
be to him who trusts in the body, and makes flesh his hope, for wherein is
it to be relied on? Its origin is but dust, its beauty but a flower, its life
but a vapor, and its duration but a moment. Pain and weariness accompany it
while living, corruption and worms seize on it when dead. O let not thine heart
decline to its lusts, and yield not to its enticements, for they have cast down
many wounded; yea, many strong men have been slain by them; their way is the
way to hell, going down by the chambers of death. But though in the body thou
can find no true content, yet think of thy soul and rejoice, for she is more
precious than silver, yea much fine gold is not to be compared unto her. Her
beginning is from the breath of the Almighty, and her duration is as the days
of eternity. She was made but a little lower than the angels, and heaven was
prepared of old for the place of her habitation. Would thou be happy, deck
her with the jewels of piety, and cloth her with virtue as with a garment;
then shall the lamp of the Almighty shine into thy heart, and joy shall be thy
constant companion. When thou walk by the way, thy foot shall not stumble;
and when thou lie down, thy sleep shall be sweet. In the day of sickness thou
shall not be afraid, and when death comes upon thee, thou shall laugh him to
scorn; for the Lord of hosts is thy friend, and underneath thee are the
everlasting arms. He shall say unto thee, fear not, thou worm Jacob, for I am
with thee; be not dismayed for I am thy God. Then shall he strip off thee the
vile rags of mortality, and cloth thee with the garments of salvation. He
shall wipe from thine eyes the tear of sorrow, and anoint thy face with the oil
of gladness. He shall conduct thee into his own city, the city of the living
God, and unto the general assembly of angels, and spirits of just men made
perfect. He shall give thee to drink with them of his rivers of pleasure, and
to feast on joys at his right hand forever more."

THUS splendid are the honors and felicities of which the soul of man is
capable. These are the eternal goods to which Christ entreats us to aspire, and
for the sake of which, he bids us despise the low unsatisfactory pleasures of a
dying body.

WHAT divine goodness, what perfect wisdom, are blended in that philosophy,
which enjoins us to seek our happiness in the mind and not in the body. In that
part of our nature which exalts us to God, and not in that which depresses us
to the brute. In that part of us which will live forever, and not in that which
is daily in danger of dropping into the grave. In that part of us which can
enjoy the noble pleasures of the glorious ones in Heaven, and not in that whose
few pleasures are in common with the creatures of the stalls and styes.

BUT our divine Philosopher places the supreme happiness of man, not only in
the mind, as we have just seen, but

II. IN the affections of the mind.

THIS also will appear to many as a strange saying. It must expect to combat,
not only the prejudices of coarse Epicures, but the more serious doubts of many
who seem to be more refined and rational in their schemes of happiness. Many,
even of those, who disdaining a vile body, sunk their happiness in the immortal
mind, have never yet dreamed that it consists in the affections, but have
sought it rather in the improvements of the understanding. Observing the great
respect that is paid to men of learning, and remembering the high entertainment
which they themselves have derived from the conversation of such men, they
conclude, that learning must be the brightest ornament and highest happiness of
human nature. In their estimation, the man whose comprehensive mind takes a
wide survey of the works of God, and of the inventions of men; who soars into
the Heavens, and calls the stars by name; calculates eclipses, and fortells
comets; who thence goes down into the depths of the sea, and explains the
causes of its ceaseless motions; who traverses the boundless regions of the
earth, knows all their kingdoms, with the glory of them; who speaks various
languages, fathoms the depths of arts and sciences, understands the history of
nations, the laws and government of all people. This, in their estimation, is
the truly happy man. In a mind thus richly furnished, he possesses (as they
suppose) the materials of an enjoyment, of which nothing can ever deprive him.

FAR be it from me to speak disrespectfully of learning, for certainly learning
or wisdom is the pia matter, or first attribute of God himself, and the vast
circumference within which lies all the happiness that human or angelic minds
can enjoy. But this I say, that all the learning in the world, if separated
from the affections, can never make us truly happy: And that these splendid
seize in science were never intended to form the supreme happiness of
man, is evident, because the bulk of mankind are not capable of becoming great
scholars and philosophers. Alas! What numbers, after all the pains that have
been taken with them, never learn even to read their mother tongue with
propriety! How many, who after a seven years apprenticeship, and a whole life's
employment, never learn to fit on a handsome boot or shoe! Many born with
genius equal to the attainment of learning, are constrained to live and die in
ignorance, for want of means to defray the expense of education; while others
are obliged to stop in the middle of their career, and to give up the fond
hopes of knowledge, because of a constitution too delicate to bear the fatigues
of study. But granting to the lover of learning, every advantage of genius,
constitution and fortune, that ever fell to the lot of the most favored of
mankind, what mighty acquisitions can be made by him whose genius is, at best,
but dullness, and whose days are but a moment! When he considers the secrets of
art, so multiplied and mysterious, he sits down in despair. When he
contemplates the works of God, so infinite and unsearchable, the spirit faints
within him, and he seems to himself, but as a feather floating on the surface
of a mighty ocean, whose wonders he can never explore. And were he asked for
the sum of his learning, he would, if honest, take up the lamentation of the
old philosopher, and reply, that after the vain toils of threescore years, he
has learned to know that he knows nothing.

BUT admitting that he has acquired that stock of learning on which vain
mortals are so adventurous as to set up for masters and doctors. Admitting that
he has learned languages, studied arts and sciences, etc. etc. What is there in
all this to make him happy, or to satisfy the desires of an immortal mind? As
to languages, what folly to dream as some do, of great wisdom and honor to be
found in learning them! For, What is language but words or sounds by which we
communicate our thoughts to one another? If these words or sounds had the power
like charms, to brighten our wits, or to better our hearts, this
language-mongery would be a noble speculation; but, alas! instead of making us
wiser, these learned languages often make us greater fools. For, allowing, that
after an expense of five years, and of at least as many hundred pounds, a young
man has learned enough to give his horse a Latin or Greek name; What mighty
advantages does he derive from this pretty art of nick-naming God's creatures?
Does it teach him any new ideas relative to the nature and qualities of a
horse? Or can it furnish him one useful receipt in farriery, or a single rule
for the better management and choice of that noble animal?

EVIDENTLY, therefore, the summum bonum, or chief good of man does not consist
in dead languages.

AND as to systems of human learning, from which some fondly expect unfailing
pleasure and eternal honor, what are they, frequently, but systems of human
error, monuments of the pride of man, who, impatient to be thought ignorant of
any thing, boldly seizes fancy for fact, and conjecture for evidence, and with
these fairy workmen, presently runs up vast Babels of philosophy, vainly so
called. A whole lifetime is hardly sufficient to understand these pompous
errors; and scarcely are they understood, before they are exploded to make room
for some other set of notions, equally vain and perishable.

BUT, admitting that we have turned our studies to the noblest of human
sciences, sciences founded on truth, and promising much entertainment and
useful knowledge; yet, alas! full soon shall experience prove the truth of the
remark made by Solomon, that " In much learning is much trouble; and he who
increases knowledge, increases sorrow." See! how enviously, sharp thorns and
briars shoot up among the sweet flowers which we expected to gather. To make
any considerable progress in sciences, we must renounce some of the freedom and
amusements of life; this is mortifying; confinement is wearisome; hard study
fatigues the brain; intense thinking sours the temper; slow progress is
disheartening; doubts are vexatious; and presently darkness and thick clouds
gather over the path of science, and forbids us to proceed any farther. Surely
man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain.

BUT supposing that we could understand all human sciences in the most perfect
degree, how very short lived would be the pleasures arising from them! When
first made, and fresh on the mind, the discoveries of truth are highly
gratifying to curiosity, but in a short time they become familiar, and thence
almost insipid. Hence we often see learned men as discontented and peevish as
others; a plain proof that human learning opens no spring of lasting happiness
in the mind. Indeed, so far from producing this very desirable effect, it
frequently nurses passions the most unfriendly to his happiness, both in this
world and the next. The brighter talents and superior fame of a rival wit,
often pierce his heart with the keenest pangs of envy; success puffs him up
with pride, and renders him insufferably disagreeable; disappointment fires him
with rage, or sinks him into despondency: While the flash of an unguarded
witticism often loses him a valuable friend, or creates a mortal enemy. But
allowing that he were the greatest scholar and orator of the age, and could
harangue on any subject, with all the force of argument and charms of
eloquence: that whenever he appeared the impatient crowds repaired to hear the
magic of his enchanting tongue: that princes were his patrons, and the great
ones of the earth his admirers; yet how vain and treacherous a good would all
this be! How utterly unworthy to be coveted as the chief good of man! For yet
but a few fleeting years, and the cold hand of age will be on him, and then,
alas! all these fine talents and blooming honors, shall perish as the lovely
flower perishes when touched by the killing frosts of winter. His wit shall
sparkle no more; no more shall his fancy charm us with the splendour of its
images, nor his mind astonish us with the vastness of her conceptions; his
memory must then give up all her precious treasures; and dumb forever will be
that tongue whose eloquence, like sweetest music, soothed each listening ear,
and led in triumph all the obedient passions.

AND are such fading accomplishments as these, fit food for an immortal soul
that was born for heaven?

BUT although this acknowledged vanity and vexation of human learning,
sufficiently proves the sad mistake of those who make an idol of it; yet let us
not, on the other hand, run into the equal error of such as trample it under
their feet as vain and worthless altogether. Along with its dross, it contains
much useful metal, for the sake of which we may well afford to toil.

EVEN the languages, though the least necessary of all human learning, are not
entirely without their uses. We may chance to fall in with a poor foreigner who
has not broken English enough to tell us his wants. We may get honest bread by
interpreting, translating, or teaching languages. Or should it be our fortune
to stand behind a counter, we may, with the help of a little bad French, sell a
great deal of good merchandise. We may likewise find much pleasure in reading
the enchanting works of foreign poets, historians, etc. and this effect may
lead to one still more valuable; it may inspire us with sentiments of
friendship for the nation to which these excellent men belong, and thus happily
moderate that resentment, which, under certain circumstances we might feel
against them. These effects, in a very comfortable degree, I have myself
experienced. I have found, that my passions, kindling into pain from the blows
struck our unoffending country, by the British, have been considerably calmed
by recollecting, that these our injurers, are the children of the same once
glorious island which gave to us and to all mankind, a Milton, a Newton, a
Lock, a Barrow, and other UNEQUALLED LIGHTS of philosophy and divinity, whose
friendly splendors have contributed so happily to repel the coming clouds of "
chaos and old night," and to establish the empire of reason and pure religion.

HITHER TO we have endeavored to point out the mistake of those, (a numerous
race) who look for happiness among sensual pleasures, and in human learning.
Two other orders of candidates, equally numerous, and, as I think, equally
mistaken, present themselves, -- I mean the hardy sons of avarice and ambition.
The first of these, the miser, blesses God; wonders how people can be so weak
as to throw away their time and money on book learning and silly pleasures. He
has juster notions of things. Gold is with him the one thing needful. He rises
early, early, late takes rest, and eats the bread of carefulness and toil, in
order to join house to house, and field to field, and thus to remove himself
far from all dread of want.

BUT of wealth it may be said, happiness is not here. Gold, it is true, is the
quintessence of lands, houses, soft clothing, sumptuous fare, and of every
other pleasure that flesh and blood is heir to. But evident it is to reason,
that all the treasures on earth can never satisfy an immortal soul: And
Scripture asserts, that " A man's life consists not in the abundance of the
things which he possesses." And whose experience does not witness it? We call
the rich happy! Alas! could we but see their anxious cares, their inward
restlessness, the miseries of desires delayed or disappointed, which sometimes
attend even the most fortunate; could we know their constant fears of losing,
and their thirst for more, which suffers them not to enjoy their present gains;
could we follow one who is " making haste to be rich," through all his toils
and labors, his weary days and sleepless nights, and all his various
vexations, we should be fully convinced of the truth of this, that he who
increases riches, increases sorrow.

I MAY appeal to every man's heart who has sought happiness from this quarter,
if this has not been his constant experience. You promised yourself that you
should be perfectly happy when the other thousand was added to your stock, or
the next purchase enlarged you estate: You had your wish, and yet you still
wanted: Something was lacking. You proposed new additions, and waited for your
happiness again; but a new thirst urged you again to new cares and to new
toils. And if the time should ever come, that you shall think that you have
enough, and like the rich man in the gospel, " begin to pull down your barns
and build greater; and to say to your soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up
for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry:" Then expect the
final disappointment in that alarming message, " Thou fool, this night shall
thy soul be required of thee; then whose shall all those things be which thou
have so laboriously laid up?" -- Such is the happiness of those who trust in
uncertain riches.

THE ambitious seeks his happiness in the attainment of honor: And indeed to
be distinguished in the world, treated with respect, spoken of with admiration,
caressed and courted by all around us, is highly pleasing to the heart of man,
and, in the eyes of many, possesses charms far superior to the vanities of
pleasure, or the sordidness of gain; yet does the desire of wordly esteem
remove the soul as far from true happiness as the former. The enjoyment arising
from the honor which comes from man, stand continually on a precarious
foundation; it totters before every blast of disrespect, and every rumor of
malevolence. Like grass on the house top, it often withers before it is
plucked up; For what can stand before envy? The hopes of men, like bubbles in
the air, usually burst as they expand. The labors of ambition are
disappointed, the pride of honor mortified, the idol of reputation broken to
pieces, and the friendships of the world generally faithless.

ALAS! That man, born for heaven, should waste his short day of grace in
torturing himself to conform to the humors of a vain world; seeking a phantom
of fame lighter than air; grasping at distinctions vain and insignificant;
staking his happiness on the beck or breath of worms like himself; and after
all, too frequently obliged to take up the lamentation of the once great
Cardinal Woolsey: " Had I but served God as faithfully as I have served the
world, he would not thus have forsaken me in my gray hairs."

BUT the vanity of seeking happiness from riches, honors and pleasures, is yet
more convincingly felt when death comes to put a final close to this mortal
scene. Ah! my friends, this is the awful hour that strips off the tinsel
coverings of folly, stamps vanity on all beneath the sun, and shows that "Too
low they build, who build beneath the stars."


IN that day of terror and despair, what can a rain world offer its poor
deluded followers? Will a party of pleasure suit the chamber of sickness? Or
the songs of folly delight the ear that listens with trembling to the striking
hour? What music will sound in concert with dying groans? Or what joy can
jewels and brocades afford when the shroud is ready to supplant them? Will the
sparkling bowl revive any longer, when the parched tongue begins to faulter? Or
beauty kindle the unhallowed fire when death sits on the fixed eye balls, and
spreads his chilling damps over the heart? Alas! my brother, vanity of
vanities, all is vanity, is now seen in characters too legible to be
overlooked. The remembrance of a life misspent in vain or in guilty pleasures,
will fill the soul with pangs of remorse, with agonies of horror, of which none
but the wretched sufferers can form any idea. " Ah pleasure, pleasure, Thou
vile sorceress! Thou cursed destroyer of my soul! Thou once smiledst as with
the charms of innocence, now I feel thee sting as a viper. Where are thy
promises of delight? Fool that I was to believe thee! For thy sake I have
enslaved my soul to the lusts of a brute, and cherished the passions of a
demon! I have neglected God, and sold my birthright to heaven! Me, miserable!
Whether am I going? My golden sands are all run out! The sun of my life is
about to set, and, utterly unprepared, I am going to appear before God. Oh!
that I had but my precious days to go over again! Eternal God, if thy mercy be
infinite, exert it now to save such a self-ruined wretch as I am!"

BUT will riches better stand the test of that day's trial? Alas! they who have
put their confidence in fine gold, will find that it profits not in the day of
wrath. When death lifts his arm, and swift as lightening, disease and pain
enter the heart, vain is the hoarded treasure. See that generally esteemed
happy man who trusted in riches, stretched upon the bed of languishing; his
body is panting for breath; his throat is parched; his heart flutters; his eyes
grow dim; and life's silver cord is loosing: What joy now can riches bring?
Surround his dying bed with bags of gold, will they alleviate the pains of the
body, purchase a moment's respite from death, or silence the agonizing
remonstrances of conscience? Alas! a golden God is but a dumb idol, neither
able to kill nor make alive.

THEN, when earth, and only earth, has been the pursuit, what wretchedness to
be torn from all that was counted happiness; to leave this dear world behind
them forever, to go -- Ah! Whither? Not to treasures laid up for them in
heaven; not to the place where they have made themselves friends of the mammon
of unrighteousness; but where that rich man went who lift up his eyes in
torment, because, though rich in this world, he was not rich toward God.

NOW, this is the boasted happiness of numbers. This is the unutterable
pleasure of dying worth so many thousand pounds. "Guilt's blunder, and the
loudest laugh of hell."
YOUNG. Nor will HONOR and FAME render our departure at all more comfortable.

SEND forth your imagination to view the last scene of the greatest and
proudest man who ever awed and governed the world. See a poor, infirm,
miserable, short-lived creature, that passes away like a shadow, and is
hastening off the stage where the theatrical titles and distinctions, and the
whole mask of pride which he has worn for a day, will fall off and leave him
naked as a neglected slave. Behold the empty vapor disappearing! One of the
arrows of mortality this moment sticks fast within him: See, it forces out his
life, and freezes his blood and spirits.

APPROACH his bed of state, -- draw aside the curtain, -- regard a moment with
silence.

ARE these cold hands and pale lips all that are left of him who was canonized
by his own pride, or made a god of by his flatterers?

O GOD! What is man? Even a thing of naught.

ALAS! That a being whose existence on earth is but for a moment, and whose
future mansion is heaven; a being whose immortal soul carries its hopes far
beyond time, and extends them even to eternity, should set his mind on objects
which time destroys! What is this but to mistake the changeable colors of the
dew-drop for the luster of the ruby, or the radiance of the diamond?

" LAY not up for yourselves treasures on earth," says the divine Teacher. Long
tossed by tumultuous passions, enraptured and alarmed with hopes and fears, we
at last find earth's boasted treasures to be vain; its riches, honors, and
pleasures utterly insufficient to make us happy. Full seldom are they obtained
by the anxious candidate, and seldomer still without much pain and labor; and
after all, made tasteless by disease or age, or embittered by vexation, they
are held but a few feverish years, and then forgotten forever in the grave.

" LAY not up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust do
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; but lay up for yourselves
treasures in heaven; for where the treasure is, there will the heart be also."
-- What treasures? Why love, -- Love to God and to our neighbor.

THESE are the true treasures; the treasures of the heart. No pleasures are
comparable to those that affect the heart; and there are none that affect it
with such exquisite delight, as loving and being beloved by a worthy object.
Ask the young Theodosius, and he will tell you, that the most delicious
feelings his heart ever experienced, were those of virtuous love; and that he
never knew what rapture was until he saw the incomparable Constantia, in whose
person and manners are concentered all the charms of beauty, and all the graces
of virtue.

NOW, if love, when directed to a creature, can open such a heaven in our
bosoms, what must it do when directed to God, the eternal fountain of all
perfection and goodness? Would you know the blessing of all blessings, it is
this love dwelling in the soul, sweetening our bitter, lightening our dark,
enlivening our sad, and filling to the full of joy the souls that must ever
thirst until they come to this great fountain of all happiness. There is no
peace, nor ever can be for the soul of man, but in the exercise of this love;
for as love is the infinite happiness that created man; so love is the only
perfection and felicity of man; and no one can live in happiness, but as he
lives in love. Look at every pain and disorder in human nature, you will find
it to be nothing else but the spirit of the creature turned from love to
selfishness; and thence, in course, to anxiety, fear, covetousness, wrath,
envy, and all evil: So that love alone is, and only can be, the cure of every
evil; and he who lives in love is risen out of the power of evil into the
freedom and joy of one of the spirits of heaven. All wants are satisfied, all
disorders of nature are removed; no life is any longer a burden; every day is a
day of peace; every thing is a spring of joy to him who breathes the sweet
gentle element of love.

BUT some men, of gloomy and melancholic humors, will ask, Is it certain that
God loves mankind? Surely the innumerable favors which he lavishes upon us,
must set his love beyond all doubt.

To ask whether God loves mankind, is indeed to ask whether he is good, which
is the same as questioning his very existence; for how is it possible to
conceive a God without goodness? And, what goodness could he have were he to
hate his own works, and to desire the misery of his creatures?

A GOOD prince loves his subjects; a good father loves his children: We love
even the tree we have planted; the house we have built; and is it possible for
God not to love mankind? Where can such a suspicion rise, except in the minds
of those who form a capricious and barbarous being of God; a being who makes a
cruel sport of the fate of mankind; a being who destines them, before they are
born, to hell, reserving to himself one, at most, in a million, and that one no
more meriting that preference, than the others have deserved their damnation?
Impious blasphemers, who endeavor to give me an aversion to God, by persuading
me that I am the object of his aversion!

YOU will say, he owes nothing to man; well, but he owes something to himself;
he must necessarily be just and beneficent. If a virtuous heathen could declare
that he had much rather it should never be said that there was such a man as
Plutarch, than that he was cruel and revengeful, how must the Father of mercies
be displeased to find himself charged with such hateful qualities?

BESIDES, I know he loves me, by the very love I feel for him; it is because he
loves me that he has engraved on my heart this sentiment, the most precious of
all his gifts. His love is the source of mine, as it ought to be, indeed, a
motive to it.

GIVE me leave, in order to convey an idea of the love of God, to describe the
passion of a virtuous lover for his mistress. The comparison in itself has
nothing indecent. Love is a vice only in vicious hearts. Fire, though the
purest of all substances, will yet emit unwholesome and noxious vapors when it
is fed by tainted matter; so love, if it grow in a vicious mind, produces
nothing but shameful desires and criminal designs, and is followed with fear,
vexation and misery. But let it rise in an upright heart, and be kindled by an
object adorned with virtue as well as beauty, it is safe from censure; far from
being offended, God gives it his approbation. He has made amiable objects only
that they might be loved.

NOW let us see what passes in the heart of a person deeply smitten with love.
He thinks with delight of the person beloved; he hurries with impetuosity
toward the charming object, and whatever keeps or removes him from her is
tormenting; he is afraid of giving her any displeasure; he inquires into her
taste and inclinations, in order to comply with and gratify them; he likes to
hear her commended; talks of her with satisfaction, and caresses every thing
that renews the agreeable idea.

IT is a mistake to think that there is an essential difference between this
and divine love. We have but one way of loving: Men love God and their friends
in the same manner; and these affections differ only in the diversity of their
objects and ends. Thus a pious man filled with sentiments toward God, like
those of a virtuous lover, would be glad to behold him, and to be united to
him; he thinks of him with delight, and speaks of him with reverence; he
rejoices to see him honored, and is happy to hear him praised; he meditates on
his laws with pleasure, and obeys them with alacrity.

THAT this love by which a pious mind is united to its Creator, is a source of
the purest pleasures, we now proceed to show, not solely on the authorities of
scripture, but by the force of reason and common sense.

THE man who loves God, enjoys that first of felicities, the consciousness of
having placed his affections on the only object in the universe that truly
deserves them. Our love is the most precious thing we possess; it is indeed the
only thing we can properly call our own, and therefore to bestow it unworthily,
is the greatest shame and sorest mistake that we can ever commit. A man must
needs be infinitely mortified and troubled, when he finds that the object of
his love possesses not that excellence which he fondly expected would satisfy
his wishes and make him completely happy. Alas! What is a little skin deep
beauty, a few flashes of wit, or some small degrees of goodness? We soon see to
the bottom of such shallow goods, and consequently must experience a decay of
that admiration and affection which constitutes happiness in the first degree.
But to no such mortifying disappointment is he liable, who directs his love to
God. In him the enlightened eye of true philosophy discovers so much of all
that is great and good, as to keep the happy mind in an eternal extacy of
admiration and love.

DIVINE love advances the happiness of man, because it tends, above all other
attachments, to refine and ennoble his nature. The most inattentive must have
observed, that love has a surprising force to give our manners a resemblance to
those of the person we love. Seen through the eyes of a tender affection, even
blemishes appear like beauties, and heaven born virtue puts on charms more than
human. No wonder then that we so easily adopt the sentiments, and imitate the
manners of those we love. This is a conduct so natural and common, that to tell
the character of any man, we need but be told that of the person's he loves.

HENCE, the anxious parent rejoices to see his child fond of the society of the
virtuous and wise: he knows that such an attachment indicates a relish for
virtue, and promises an honorable and happy event: while, on the other hand,
he deplores his attachment to the vain and vicious, as a sad, but certain
presage of folly and depravity.

CERTAINLY then, in order to be happy, it most nearly concerns us to direct our
love to the proper object. But who, or what is that object? The creatures all
have their imperfections. They are all utterly unworthy, and beneath the
supreme love of an immortal mind. And to love these in the extreme, is
infinitely to demean ourselves, to disgrace our understandings, to contract low
earthly passions, and consequently to make ourselves miserable. Would we do
honor to our reason, would we dignify our affections, ennoble our nature, and
rise to true happiness, let us give our hearts to God. The man who loves God is
animated with an ambition becoming the dignity of his birth; he is inspired
with a greatness of soul that spurns all grovelling passions and base designs.
The love which he has for God impells him, by a sweet and powerful influence,
to imitate his all lovely and adorable perfections, and consequently renders
him every day a more divine and heavenly creature.

GOD is the only worthy object of our love, because he is the only one who will
certainly and generously reward it. Love, as we have observed, was designed to
be the spring of joy, but, alas! when placed on the creature, it often proves a
source of sorrow, because it is too often treated with ingratitude and neglect.
The lover in giving his heart, gives his all; and, if after so great a
sacrifice, he cannot obtain the fond return he coveted, what can be expected
but that he should sicken with grief, and sink under an oppressive load of
melancholy? But though our fellow worms should reject our love with disdain,
yet it is always -- O! adorable goodness! it is always acceptable to God.
Amidst the adorations of millions of glorious angels, he graciously observes
the attentions we pay him, and receives with complacency our smallest tribute
of affection. He knows that the souls which he has made cannot be happy until
they return to him. Unceasingly he calls to them --

" SEEK ye my face." And if, convinced by a thousand disappointments, of the
vanity of all other loves, we should at length, happily take up our resolution
and say, " Thy face, O God, we will seek." Immediately his preventing love
meets us more than half way; the harps of Heaven swell with louder strains of
joy, and songs of congratulation fill the eternal regions.

DIVINE love infinitely exceeds in point of true happiness, all other
attachments, because, it does not, like them, expose us to the pangs of
separation. If that sweet passion, which, with chains dearer than those of
gold, unites earthly lovers, were never to be dissolved, it would be well: But,
alas! this is a felicity which Heaven has not thought fit to confer on erring
mortals. The iron hand of necessity or duty often tears us away from our
dearest friends, and consigns us to wearisome months of mutual fears and
restless longings for reunion. Sometimes, in the happiest moments of
friendship, the thought of death occurs and throws a sudden damp on our rising
joys. Sometimes it is our lot to sit by the sick beds of those we love, and
hear their piercing moans, to mark, with unutterable anguish, the faultering
speech and sinking eye, or wipe the cold damps of death from those cheeks which
we have kissed a thousand times. Such scenes and separations, and all mortal
loves are liable to such, occasion a grief not to be equalled by all the
misfortunes of life, and make us dearly pay for all the past pleasures of
friendship.

IN these melancholy moments we are made to feel how truly blessed are they who
have made the eternal God their love, nothing can ever separate them from him.
When the fairest of the human fair are gone down into the dust, and have left
their lovers to mourning and woe. Nay, when after millions of revolving years,
the sun is extinguished in the skies, and the lamps of heaven have lost their
golden flames; when old time himself is worn away, and nature sunk under the
weight of years; even then the God Jehovah will be the same, and his days shall
never fail. Even then shall his triumphant lovers behold his glorious face
clothed in eternal beauty, and shall drink of the rivers of pleasure that flow
at his right hand forevermore. Neither will the lovers of God ever experience,
even in this world, the pangs of separation from him, while they walk firmly in
the golden path of duty. Should they be driven from their homes, and obliged to
forsake their dearest friends; should they be compelled to plough distant seas,
or to toil in the remotest regions of the earth; even there they will sweetly
feel that "They cannot go where universal love reigns not around."
THOMPSON. Even there they meet and rejoice in their ever present friend; with
sacred pleasure they inhale his breath in the fragrant gale, they mark his
pencil adorning the fields and meadows in their flowery pride; or with
sublimest awe, they behold his hand swelling the everlasting mountains, or,
"Hanging the vast expanse in azure bright, and clothing the sun in gold."
YOUNG.

HENCE it is, that the man who loves God is seldom lonesome, seldom knows what
it is to want agreeable company. A great addition this to our happiness! For as
man is by nature a social being, he must be miserable unless he has some
beloved friend to converse with. But, as those who do not love God, take little
or no delight in conversing with him, they become more dependent on the company
and conversation of their earthly friends. And, when destitute of these, they
are often found, though in palaces, to be restless and wretched.

OH! how disconsolate is the condition of the man, who, though always present
with his maker, yet finds no joy nor satisfaction in his presence! Though every
particle of matter is actuated by this almighty being; though nature, through
all her works, proclaims his wisdom, power, and goodness, unutterable; yet the
man who is a stranger to divine love, views all this wonderful scenery "With a
brute unconscious gaze."
THOMPSON.

HE tastes none of that sacred joy which these things were meant to inspire.
The divinity is with him and in him, and every where about him, but is of no
advantage to him. It is in fact the same thing to him as if there were no God
in the world.

HAPPILY different is the condition of the man who loves the great author of
his being! When that divine passion, (the soul's true light) is set up in our
hearts, the scales of blindness fall from our eyes, the shades of night fly far
away, and God, the blessed God, stands confessed before our admiring view. Though
we cannot behold him with the eyes of sense, yet, we can feel his presence, we
can taste and see his adorable perfections which shine so brightly on all his
glorious works.

WHEN we consider the infinite host of stars which adorn the evening skies;
when, enlarging the idea, we contemplate another heaven of suns and worlds
rising still higher, and these again enlightened by a still superior firmament
of luminaries, overwhelmed by such an immensity of prospect, we scarcely
breathe out -- " Eternal God! what is man that thou art mindful of him, or the
Son of Man that thou regardest him!"

WHEN, leaving these amazing scenes, we contemplate other parts of the divine
dominions; when we walk through the fields and observe his wondrous workmanship
in the touring trees or humbler shrubs; in the gentle rill or majestic flood;
in the birds winging their airy flight, or perched on branches warbling their
melodious lays; in the peaceful flocks grazing their simple pastures with herds
of nobler cattle; or, in the swarms of gilded insects that, with ceaseless
buzz, and vigorous motion, present their golden wings to the sun. In these, in
all his infinitely varied creatures, we see, we admire, we adore the great
creator.

THE man whom love has thus taught to correspond with God, enjoys the most
delightful and improving society. In the deepest solitude where others are
depressed, he is happy, because he knows that he is with the greatest and best
of beings: and when his earthly friends have withdrawn their agreeable company,
he returns with still superior pleasure to that of his heavenly.

DIVINE love adds greatly to our happiness, because it disposes us to rejoice
in every thing that seems connected with the honor of God. His Sabbath, his
house, etc. become objects of our most hearty love and delight.

WE live in a country, where one day in every week is set apart for the public
worship of God. To the man who loves not his maker, this disposition of the
seventh day is not very likely to be pleasing. As he is not a religious man, it
is more than probable that he is a man of the world, a man of business or
pleasure; and in either case the Sabbath must be unwelcome, as it is an
interruption, and indeed a clear loss of one day's pleasure or profit in every
week. A loss, which in the course of years must grow to be very serious: For,
if we take fifty, (the number of tasteless and unprofitable Sabbaths in the
year,) and multiply those by seventy, (the years in a veteran's life) we shall
find that it will amount to eight or ten years. Now, out of so short a life as
threescore and ten, to be obliged to spend eight or ten years in lounging,
moping, tiresome Sabbaths, must appear to men who have their interests and
pleasures at heart, a heavy tax, a great drawback. Surely such men would give
their thanks; nay, I suppose, would cheerfully vote the thanks of all
christendom to him, who should put them in the way to make the Sabbath the most
agreeable day in the week. Let us love God, and the work is done. We shall then
rejoice that there is such a day, because our hearts will then approve the
purposes for which it was appointed. A day that is taken from the cares of a
short life, and laid out on the interests of eternity. A day that is spent in
considering our obligations to God, in thanking him for his favors, confessing
our unworthiness, and imploring his forgiveness; in short, a day spent in a way
so admirably adapted to instruct the ignorant, to reclaim the bad, to
strengthen the good, to honor God, and to make ourselves happy; such a day
must, to him who loves God and man, be the most joyful day of the whole week.

ON this account too, the man who loves God, will see a church in quite another
light, and with sentiments happily different from those of the man who loves
him not. To the latter, prayers, psalms and sermons, have always been
wearisome; and, as it is in the church that he has been accustomed to do such
penance, he insensibly contracts a dislike to it, and comes at last to view it
with sentiments such as those with which an idle boy regards his school-house.

BUT the pious man, considering the church as the place where people meet to
honor the God whom he delights to honor, to learn and love that goodness which
he sees to be so essential to the happiness of the world, such a man regards
the church as the most beautiful and lovely building in the world; and the view
of it gives him a more sincere pleasure than that which others feel in viewing
the places of their most favorite amusement.

" How amiable are thy tabernacles, O God of hosts; how pleasant is the place
where thine honor dwells!"

BUT if gratitude, when exerted from man to man, produces so much pleasure, it
must exalt the soul to rapture, when it is employed on this great object of
gratitude, on this infinitely beneficent being, who has given us every thing we
already possess, and from whom we expect every thing we yet hope for. When a
good man looks around him on this vast world, where beauty and goodness are
reflected from every object, and where he beholds millions of creatures in
their different ranks, enjoying the blessings of existence, he looks up to the
universal Father, and his heart glows within him. And in every comfort which
sweetens his own life, he discerns the same indulgent hand. Is he blessed with
tender parents, or with generous friends who press him with their kindness? Is
he happy in his family rising around him, in the wife who loves him, or in the
children who give him comfort and joy? In all these pleasing enjoyments, in all
these beloved objects he recognizes the hand of God. Every smile of love, every
act of tenderness is an effect of his goodness. By him was kindled every spark
of friendship that ever glowed on earth, and therefore to him it justly returns
laden with the purest incense of gratitude. Has God prepared a table for him,
and caused his cup to overflow? Instead of ascribing it to the policy of his
own councils, or to the strength of his own arm, he gives the praise to him
alone, who strews the earth with good things for man, and teaches him wisdom to
improve and convert them to his own use.

THUS it is that gratitude prepares a good man for the enjoyment of prosperity;
for not only has he as full a relish as others of the innocent pleasures of
life, but, moreover, in these he holds communion with God. In all that is good
or fair, he traces his hand. From the beauties of nature, from the improvements
of art, from the blessings of public or private life, he raises his affections
to the great fountain of all the happiness which surrounds him, and thus widens
the sphere of his enjoyments, by adding to the pleasures of sense, the far more
exquisite joys of the heart.

BUT divine love adds greatly to our happiness, not only by giving a fresh
flavor to the sweets of prosperity; but by correcting in an eminent degree,
the bitterness of adversity.

AS in times of prosperity, among perhaps a few real friends, many pretended
ones intrude themselves, who in the hour of distress are quickly dispersed and
know us no more; so in those times also, many false and pretended joys court
the affections and gain the heart of inconsiderate man. But, when calamity
comes, those vain joys immediately discover their deceitful nature, desert the
astonished man in his greatest need, and leave him a prey to shame, sorrow and
remorse. Adversity is the grand test of what is true and what is false among
the different objects of our choice; and our love of God, tried by this test
will soon discover its infinite value and excellence. Persons of every
character are liable to distress. The man who loves God, and he who loves him
not, is exposed to the stroke of adversity. But on the bad man, adversity falls
with double weight, because it finds them without defense and without resource.
When his health, his riches and pleasures, in which he placed his happiness,
are all torn from him, overwhelmed with sadness and despair, he knows not
whether to turn for relief. If, as is most natural for a creature in distress,
he lifts his supplicating eyes to his maker, conscious ingratitude and
disobedience to God, immediately check him: if he turn to his fellow-men, whom
he has abused or neglected, consciousness of meriting their contempt or
aversion, discourages him. If he seeks relief in his own mind, there, shame,
remorse and self-condemnation, must overwhelm him.

BUT to the man whose soul rejoices in his God, adversity has nothing gloomy
and terrible. Believing every thing in the world to be under the administration
of God, and looking up to that God, as to an all-wise and benevolent father and
friend, he welcomes every thing that comes from him. Persuaded that the Father
of Mercies, delights not needlessly to grieve the children of men; and well
knowing that he foresaw this impending affliction, and could easily have
prevented it: he concludes, that, since it is come, it is come on some errend
of love. "Since all the downward tract of time,
God's watchful eye surveys,
O who so wise to choose our lot,
To regulate our ways!
Since none can doubt his equal love,
Unmeasurably kind,
To his unerring gracious will,
Be every wish resigned.
Good, when he gives, supremely good,
Nor less when he denies,
Even crosses from his sovereign hand,
Are blessings -- in disguise."
O the sweetly powerful influences of love! Love can enable the sugar-doating
child cheerfully to take the cup of wormwood, from the hand of the parent whom
he loves. Love can cause the delicate woman to forget better days, and to smile
in poverty and toil with the husband whom she loves. Aye, and if we loved God
as we ought, none of his dealings would seem grievous to us. The very idea,
that this or that affliction was brought on us by him, would sweetly reconcile
us to it, and kindle in us a divine ambition to please him by the cheerfulness
of our submission. Afflictions we should look on not as marks of God's
displeasure, but as certain evidences of his love -- "As many as I love, I
chastise." JEHOVAH.

" I HAVE smitten you with blasting and mildew, your vineyards and your fig
trees did the palmer worm devour." -- JEHOVAH.

AND then the love that did this, makes this complaint, " Yet ye have not
returned to me."

" PESTILENCE have I sent amongst you; I have made the smell of your dead to
come up even in your nostrils."

AND then the same love that inflicted this wholesome chastisement repeats the
complaint. O my brethren, see here the design and end of all God's
chastisements! " Yet have ye not returned to me."

THESE are the views in which the divine lover is taught to contemplate the
afflictive dispensations of his God; not as the messengers of his wrath, but as
the ministers of his mercy, and the great means of wisdom and virtue. Such
views of God's adorable government, impart the most sensible consolation to
every pious heart. They place the compassions of the universal Father, in the
most endearing light. And these afflictions, which human follies render
necessary; instead of estranging, do but the more closely attach a good man to
his God. " Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in
the vine; the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no
meat: yea, though the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be
no herd in the stalls; yet, will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation."

BUT a supreme love of God adds unspeakably to the happiness of life, because
it raises us superior to the dread of death. To form a tolerable idea of the
magnitude of this blessing, let us visit the death bed of him who is about to
depart without love or hope in his God.

BEHOLD him arrested by the strong arm of death, and stretched out hopeless and
despairing on that last bed from which he is to rise no more. Art has done its
all; the mortal malady mocks the power of medicine, and hastens with resistless
impetuosity to execute its dreadful errand. See the thick gloom that covers his
ghastly countenance, and the wildness and horror that glare on his rolling
eye balls! Whither now is fled that giddy thoughtlessness which marked his mad
career through life? Where now are his scoffs, his sneers, his pleasantries on
religion? Where are his boon companions who joined him in his dull profanity,
and who applauded the keeness of his satire and the brilliancy of his wit?
Alas! such scenes as these are not for them. To cheer the drooping spirits of
wretchedness, and to administer consolation to a dying friend is no employment
of theirs. In far different scenes they are now forgetting their no longer
entertaining friend, and their present alarming thoughts.

UNHAPPY Man! wherever he turns his eyes, he sees none but subjects of sorrow
and distress. Forsaken by those whom he fondly called his friends; cut off from
all the pleasures and cheerful pursuits of men, abandoned to the horrors of a
dying chamber, with no sensations but those of a tortured body; no comfortor
but a guilty conscience, and no society but such as fills his troubled mind
with shame and remorse; a weeping wife whom he has injured; children whose best
interests he has neglected; servants whom he has treated with cruelty; and
neighbors with whom he has long lived at shameful variance -- Whither shall he
look for help? If he look backward he sees nothing but scenes of horror, a
precious life misspent, an immortal soul neglected; and, O insupportable
thought! his day of trial about to set forever. If he looks forward, he sees an
offended God, a fearful reckoning, and an awful eternity. If he looks up to
Heaven for mercy, conscious guilt depresses his spirits and overwhelms him with
despair. Ah! what mortal scene can well be conceived more fraught with
wretchedness! Shuddering, he stands upon the dreadful brink, afraid to die, and
yet, alas! unable to live.

IN that dread moment, how the frantic soul raves round the walls of her clay
tenement; runs to each avenue and shrieks for help, but shrieks in vain: how
wishfully she looks on all she is leaving, now no longer hers! a little longer,
yet a little longer: O! might she stay to wash away her crimes and fit her for
her passage! Mournful sight! her very eyes weep blood; and every groan she
heaves is big with horror; but the foe, like a staunch murderer, steady to his
purpose, pursues her close through every lane of life, nor misses once the
track, but presses on, till forced at last to the tremendous verge -- at once
she sinks.

BLAIR.

THIS, or very similar to this, is often the end of him who has lived without
God in the world.

BUT turning from so distressing a scene, to its happy opposite, let us view
the man who loves his God, and who enamoured with its beauty, and sensible of
its blessed effects, has lived a life of piety and virtue. Let us behold him
when about to leave this world of sorrow and suffering and to wing his way to
that which is far better. Lo! the time is come that Israel, the lover of God,
must die. The last sickness has seized his feeble frame. He perceives that the
all conquering foe is at hand, but marks his approach without dismay. He is not
afraid of death because he fears God, " and he who fears God has nothing else
to fear."

HE is not afraid of death, because it has long been his care to make a friend
(the almighty and everlasting Jehovah), who shall stand by him in that awful
hour. He is not afraid of death, because he loves God above all things; and to
him, to die, is to go to see and live with God.

IS the poor hireling afraid of the earning, which is to refresh him with
repose, and to rejoice him with his reward?

IS the soldier, covered with scars and tired of wars alarms, afraid to hear
the cry of victory? O no! delightful sound, sweeter than music to his longing
ear; it is the signal to return to his native country, and to resign the din
and dangers of war for the sweets and safety of long coveted peace.

EVEN so, to the good Christian this world is the field of hard, though
glorious warfare. In the service, and under the eye of God, he is now fighting
against the armies of his own fleshly lusts, and of his own malignant passions.
Ever and anon, he hears the voice of his great Captain -- Persevere and thou
shall conquer; endure unto the end and thou shall be crowned. To him therefore
the day of death is welcome as the last day of his toils and dangers. He is now
going to exchange a long conflicting war for the blessings of everlasting
peace: having fought the good fight, he is about to receive his wages, even
eternal life, and to put on a crown of glory that shall never fade away. Sure
that serene look, beaming all the sweetness of love and hope, bespeaks the
already half-formed seraph; and the heaven, almost opened on his placid
countenance, gives glorious evidence of his intended journey. Soon bidding
farewell forever to these realms of woe, and haunts of malignant beings, he
shall join the blessed society of angels and spirits of just men made perfect.
There he shall see health blooming eternal on each immortal face, friendship
smiling on every glorified countenance, and a perfection of love forming a
paradise of happiness, unknown and unconceived by us who have dwelt in the
tents of hatred.

BUT, above all, the sweetest motives to resignation in death, he is now going
to see him, whom oftentimes with trembling joy, he has longed to see, even his
God, his first, his last, his only friend, the author of his being and of all
his mercies. Shortly shall he see his glorious face unclouded with a frown, and
hear from his ambrosial lips the language of approbation and affection -- "
Well done good and faithful servant."

PRAISING God for advancing him to such an height of honor, and for setting
before him such an eternity of happiness: Praising God for all the loving
kindnesses that have accompanied him through life, and especially for that
greatest of all, the grace that brought him to repentance and a good life:
earnestly exhorting his friends to that love of God, which now not only
supports, but enables him even to triumph in this dying hour, an hour so
alarming to the fears of nature: rejoicing in a sense of the pardon of his
sins, and exulting in the hopes of the glory to be revealed, he breathes out
his soul with these victorious words, -- " into thy hands, O God, I commend my
spirit."

WELL may his friends, edified by such an example, cry out with weeping joy, --
" Who can count the rewards of wisdom, or number the fourth part of the
blessings of virtue? Let us die the death of the righteous, and let our latter
end be like theirs."

BUT divine love not only renders life pleasant, and death peaceful, but it
accompanies us into heaven, and there gives us to enjoy the most exquisite
pleasures, that God himself can confer on happy souls: For there we shall
always live in the presence of God, the great fountain of all loveliness and
glory, and shall love him with ten thousand times more ardour than we now do,
or even can imagine; for the longer we behold, the more we shall know him, and
the more we know, the better we shall love him; and so through everlasting
ages, our love shall be extending and enrapturing itself with his infinite
beauty and loveliness. Now love is the sweetest and happiest of all passions,
and it is merely by accident that it is accompanied with any disquieting or
painful feelings. Either the person beloved is absent, which corrodes it with
unquiet desire, or he is unhappy, or unkind, which imbitters it with grief; or
he is fickle and inconstant, which inflames it with rage and jealousy; but,
separated from all these disagreeable accidents, and it is all pure delight and
joy.

BUT in heaven, our love of God will have none of these disquieting
circumstances attending it; for there he will never be absent from us, but will
be continually entertaining our amorous minds with the prospect of his infinite
beauties. There we shall always feel his love to us in the most sensible and
endearing effects, even in the glory of that crown which he will set upon our
heads, and in the ravishing sweetness of those joys which he will infuse into
our hearts. There we shall experience the continuation of his love in the
continued fruition of all that an everlasting heaven means, and be convinced,
as well by the perpetuity of his goodness to us, as well as by the immutability
of his nature, that he is an unchangeable lover. And there we shall find him a
most happy being, happy beyond the vastest wishes of our love; so that we shall
not only delight in him, as he is infinitely lovely, but rejoice and triumph in
him too as he is infinitely happy. For love unites the interests, as well as
the hearts of lovers, and gives to each, the joys and felicities of the other.
So that in that blessed state we shall share in the felicity of God
proportionably to the degree of our love to him: For the more we love him, the
more we shall still espouse his happy interest; and the more we are interested
in his happiness, the happier we must be, and the more we must enjoy of it.
Thus love gives us a real possession and enjoyment of God; it makes us
copartners with him in himself, derives his happiness upon us, and makes it as
really ours as his. So that God's happiness is, as it were, the common bank and
treasury of all divine lovers, in which they have every one a share, and of
which, proportionably to the degrees of their love to him, they do all draw and
participate to all eternity. And could they but love him as much as he
deserves, that is infinitely, they would be as infinitely blessed and happy as
he is: For then all his happiness would be theirs, and they would have the same
delightful sense and feeling of it, as if it were all transplanted into their
own bosoms. God, therefore being an infinitely lovely, infinitely loving, and
infinitely happy being, when we come to dwell forever in his blessed presence,
our love to him can be productive of none but sweet and ravishing emotions; for
the immense perfections it will then find in its object, must necessarily
refine it from all those fears and jealousies, those griefs and displeasures
that are mingled with our earthly loves, and render it a most pure delight and
complacency. So that when thus refined and grown up to the perfection of the
heavenly state, it will be all heaven, it will be an eternal paradise of
delights within us, a living spring whence rivers of pleasures will flow for
evermore.

THESE, O man, are some of the golden fruits that grow upon the tree of divine
love. Happy, therefore, is the man, beyond all expression of words, beyond all
conception of fancy, happy is he who obtains this angelic virtue!

" FOR the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the
gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies, and all the
things that thou can desire are not to be compared unto her. She is a tree of
life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that retains her."

SINCE a supreme love of God is the only true wealth of an immortal mind, O!
with what diligence should we apply ourselves to obtain it! We are all ready
enough to acknowledge our obligations to God, and to own that it is our duty to
love him, but still complain of the difficulty that attends it. But let us
remember that this difficulty is chargeable upon ourselves, and is the effect
of our own shameful inconsideration. Taken up with the little cares of life, we
neglect and forget God; hence, it is not surprising that we do not love him.
Would we but often think of him, what he is in himself, and contemplate him in
the full blaze of his wonderful and amiable perfections, we should be
overwhelmed with delightful admiration of him, and easily take up the most
exalted esteem and friendship for him. And were we but frequently to consider
him, what he is to us, how infinitely condescending, generous and good, we
should soon feel our hearts melting into all the tenderness of love and
gratitude. We, none of us think it hard to love the tender mother who brought
us into the world, the fond father who supplies our wants, or the attentive
teacher who instructs us in useful and ornamental knowledge; ah! why then
should we think it hard to love our God? Did we but reflect, we should soon
perceive that he is really and truly our mother, our father and our teacher;
and that those whom we honor as such, are, properly speaking, only the
instruments of his goodness to us.

SYLVIA arrived to years of maturity, receives the addresses of a young and
accomplished lover. Sylvia blushes and likes him. Youthful modesty causes her
to hesitate a while, yet, unable to resist so much merit, she at length yields
to the impulse of a virtuous passion and marries. In due season she becomes a
mother. Now, what has Sylvia hitherto done for her child? The whole is the work
of God. When he laid the foundations of the heavens and the earth, he had this
child in view, and disposed, from so remote a period, a long chain of events,
which were to terminate in his nativity. The time being come for the opening of
this bud, he was pleased to place it in Sylvia's womb, and took care himself to
cherish and unfold it.

THAT this child should love and honor his mother is what he certainly ought to
do, for she has suffered, if not for his sake, at least through him, the
inconveniences of pregnancy, and the pains of childbirth. But let him carry
his grateful acknowledgments still higher, and not imitate those superstitious
idolators, who, seeing the earth yearly covered with corn, fruits and pastures,
stupidly worshipped this blind instrument of the bounties of their Sovereign
Lord, without ever thinking to praise the powerful arm from whence it derives
its fruitfulness.

CHARLES loves his father Eugenis, Charles does well; but what has Eugenis done
for Charles? Eugenis has not, it is true, resembled that proud parent who
beggars the rest of his children in order to swell the fortune of an elder
brother. Nor is he like that stern tyrannical father who never looks at his
children but with fury, never speaks to them but in passion, never instructs
them but by threats, and corrects them like a butcher and a murderer. Nor yet
does he act like Florimond, that unnatural father, who lives like a stranger in
his own house; goes in and out, drinks, games, and saunters; meanwhile his
neglected children grow up to the years of maturity; happy indeed if of
themselves inclinable to virtue, they make any seize in useful knowledge
and accomplishments, or think of settling in the world; for as to his part, he
never troubles his head about them. No, far unlike these, Eugenis is the best
of parents; he spares no pains nor expense to render his son Charles an
ornament and a blessing to his country. He accustoms him by times to a
temperate diet, furnishes him with decent apparel, and charges the ablest
masters with his instruction; he carefully teaches him his relation to God, and
his obligations to that best of beings; and, at the same time, by precept and
example, endeavors to inspire him with the love of justice, honor and
industry. These are, to be sure, the dearest expressions of a father's love,
and hard and detestable indeed would be Charles' bosom, if he could refuse to
love such a parent; but let him remember, that all this comes ultimately from
God; for we should always ascend to this original of blessings. When Eugenis
watched for his son's preservation; it was God who preserved him; when he took
care to instruct him, it was God who opened his understanding; and when he
entertained him with the charms of virtue, it was God who excited him to love
it.

" THE labourer digs the mine; the philosopher directs the work; but neither of
them furnish the gold which it contains."

BUT what heart so hard as to resist the golden shafts of love, especially when
coming from a friend that is far superior to us? If some good and mighty prince
were to invite us to his court, and to treat us with all the tenderness of
parental affection, should we not find it a very easy thing to love him? Now,
has not this been the conduct of God our Maker? When we lay in all the
obscurity of dust, he sent a message of love, and called us into life, not the
life of fluttering insects, but of infant immortals. For us, and for our sakes,
he built this vast world; he covered it with the canopy of the heavens, and
stored it with good things innumerable. At his command the sun rises to gladden
us with the golden day; and the moon with silver beams to cheer the darkness of
the night. He waters the hills from his secret chambers, and bids the clouds
pour down their fattening showers upon the earth. Thus he covers our tables
with bread to renew our strength, and with wine that makes glad our hearts.

BUT he has not only compassed us round, like so many fortunate islands, with a
vast ocean of good things for our bodies; but he has likewise inspired us with
immortal minds, and has induced them with the high capacities of knowledge and
love, whereby, as on golden ladders, we may ascend to the perfection and
happiness of celestial beings. And to gratify these our noble capacities, he
has prepared for us a glorious heaven, and has furnished it with all the
pleasures and delights that heavenly spirits can desire or enjoy. Besides all
this, he has sent his own son from heaven to reveal to us the way thither, and
to encourage us to return into it by dying for our sins, and thereby obtaining
for us a public grant and charter of mercy and pardon, on condition of our
return: and, as if all this were too little, he has sent his spirit to us in
the room of his son, to reside amongst us, and, as his vicegerent, to carry on
this vast design of his love to us, to excite and persuade us to return into
the way leading to heaven, and to assist us all along in our good travels
thither. Such wonderful care has he taken not to be defeated of this his kind
intention to make us everlastingly happy. " O that men would therefore love the
Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children of
men."

THAT these dear pledges of God's love may inspire our hearts with suitable
returns of gratitude, we should often reflect on them, and spread them before
our minds in all their endearing circumstances. We should frequently set our
cold and frozen affections before these melting flames of his love, and never
cease fanning the smoking flax until we feel the heavenly fire beginning to
kindle in our bosoms.

AND, while we are seeking this Israel of great price, let us, as we hope for
success, guard our innocence, as the trembling miser guards his hoarded gold.
The bosom that burns with impure desires, or that is corroded with malignant
passions, finds no delight in God. No, that is a happiness reserved only for
the pure in heart, and for him who knows how to pity an offending brother.

AND, together with our own exertions, we should often implore the aid of all
assisting heaven. To him, who alone knows its inestimable worth, let our
fervent prayers be constantly ascending.

" FATHER of life and love, thou God supreme, O teach our hearts to love thee:
For to whom, O Lord, shall we give our hearts but to thee? Thou alone have
generously created them; thou alone have infinitely deserved them; and thou
alone can completely and eternally satisfy them."

THESE prescriptions, faithfully observed, will soon produce in our hearts that
love, whose joy passes all understanding, that love, possessed of which, the
poorest slave is passing rich; while without it, the sceptered monarch walks
but in splendid poverty.

HE who loves God is the alone wise, dignified and happy man. For he loves the
only good that is worthy the affections of an immortal mind. He loves a friend
who alone possesses almighty power to protect him, unerring wisdom to counsel
him, and infinite love to bless him. He loves an immortal friend who can never
die and forsake him, and an unchangeable friend who will never requite his love
with neglect.

HIS love of God sweetens every duty, and makes the yoke of obedience to sit
light. It heightens the smile of prosperity, and cheers the gloom of adversity.
Blessings are doubly dear coming from such a friend; and afflictions not
unwelcome, when looked on as tokens of his no less tender love. Under the
languors of sickness he remembers, not without sacred comfort, that the end of
his sufferings is at hand; and even when this earthly tabernacle of his flesh
is pulling down, he is not disconsolate; he rejoices in the hope of that
glorious house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. There, far removed
from all the miseries of this mortal life, advanced into the presence of him
who made him, and accompanied by millions of loving and blessed spirits, he
shall enjoy a happiness as far exceeding his expectations as his deserts: -- "
A happiness which eye has not seen nor ear heard, nor has entered into the
heart of man to conceive."

CHAP. II. ON SOCIAL LOVE.
"This only can the bless bestow,
"Immortal souls should prove,
"From one short word all pleasures flow,
"That blessed word is -- LOVE."
PROUD.
THE first fruits of a creature's love are due to God, as to his Creator and
the author of all his good; the second are due to men, as to his brethren and
fellow sharers in the bounties of their common parent. Having in the preceding
chapter, demonstrated the importance of loving God, proceed we in this to
consider the beauty and blessedness of social love.

To be caressed and beloved by all around us, is one of the dearest wishes of
the human heart. It is a natural, it is a laudable wish. Great pains have been
taken, and infinite expense incurred to attain this coveted honor, and yet the
greater part never attain it, merely through defect of love on their own part.
Let beauty, wit, gold, etc. boast and do all they can, yet will it be found in
the end, that "In spite of all the dull mistaken elves,
"They who would make us love, must love, themselves."


LOVE is the universal charm. It possesses a beauty that wins and ravishes
every heart. A single spark of it in generosity of dealing excites our
admiration; a glimpse of it in courteous behavior secures to a man our esteem,
and sweetly endears him to us. How charming is the countenance that is
brightened by the smiles of love! How sweet the voice that is tuned by the
melody of love! How gladdening to the heart, the beams that sparkle from the
eye of love! Indeed love, or goodness, which is but another name, is the only
amiable thing in nature. Power and wealth may be respected, wit and beauty may
be admired, but if separated from goodness, they neither deserve nor can
command our love: For the worst and most wretched of beings possess them in a
very high degree. The prince of darkness has more power, and tyrannizes over
more slaves by far than the Great Turk. One devil may have more wit than all
the Achitophels in the world, and yet, with all his wit, he is very odious and
miserable. And such, in proportion, is every one who partakes in his accursed
disposition of hatred and malice.

SEE how Pandorus is beloved and caressed. Is it because of his honesty? This
virtue only gains our esteem, but does not captivate the heart. Is it because
he is beneficent and friendly? Many who are so fond of his company have no need
of his assistance. Is it because he is gay, humorous, and entertaining? This
would render him agreeable, only when gaiety is seasonable. No, he is more
beloved than any other man in the world, only because he is the most
affectionate man in it. He seems to live but to please, to oblige, and to serve
his friends. If he find out what will please you, he prevents your desires, and
does it with such an air of cheerfulness, that, while he has no other view than
to oblige you, he seems to follow nothing but his own choice and inclinations.
This charming complaisance of Pandorus was not learned in the school of the
world; but is the rich fruit of his genuine benevolence. Hence it renders him
equally endearing and equally agreeable, at all times, and to all ranks. He is
not a sycophant to the great, and scornful or negligent of the poor; he does
not treat you today as a dear friend, and tomorrow knows you not, but
uniformly his looks and manners are those of the man who considers both the
rich and the poor as his brethren. If you love like Pandorus, and like him take
a pleasure in contributing to the happiness of others, I will answer for the
friendship of all who know you; this is a perfection that will engage people at
all times, in all places, and on all occasions.

BUT love not only renders us thus dear and desirable to others; but it
spreads the sunshine of sweetest peace over our own minds. It delivers us from
the tyranny of all those bad passions which make us miserable. Like a golden
curb it checks the fierceness of anger, that dangerous storm and hurricane of
the soul. A man can hardly be incensed against those whom he tenderly loves: an
accidental neglect, a hasty word, a small unkindness, will not agitate a loving
spirit, much less work it up to hateful fire-eyed fury.

IT banishes envy, that severely just vice which never fails to punish itself;
for it is impossible to repine at the wealth or prosperity, at the virtue or
fame of him whom we cordially love. It excludes revenge, that cruel canker of
the heart; for who can indulge bitter resentments, or form dark designs of evil
against him whom he tenderly loves, and in whose good he heartily delights?

IT subdues ambition and avarice, those aspiring painful passions. For who
could domineer over those whom he loves, and whose honor he tenders as his own?
Who could extort from and impoverish those whom he earnestly wishes and would
gladly see to prosper? A competence will seem like abundance to him who lives
as among brethren, taking himself but for one among the rest, and can as ill
endure to see them want as himself.

IT is in the prevalence of such bad passions as these, that human misery
chiefly consists. Love is their only sovereign antidote. It alone subdues and
expels their fatal poison, and thus restores health and happiness to our long
tortured bosoms. Love, like a celestial queen, walks before, meekness and
gentleness follow as her eldest daughters, while joy and peace, with all the
sister graces, make up the immortal retinue.

BUT love preserves us not only from our own, but from the malignant passions
of others. Like sweetest music, it has power to sooth the savage breast, to
melt hearts of flint, and to tame the fiercest spirits. Its mild and serene
countenance, its soft and gentle spirit its courteous and obliging manners, its
fair dealing, its endearing conversation, its readiness to do good services to
any man, is the only charm under heaven to disarm the bad passions of men, and
to guard our person from assault, our interest from damage, and our reputation
from slander. For who can be so unnatural as to hate the man who loves us and
is ever ready to do us good? What wretch, what demon, can find in his heart to
be a foe to him who is a warm friend to all? The vilest sinner cannot be so
vile, so destitute of goodness. If you love those who love you what reward have
you, do not even sinners the same?

OF this wonderful power of love, to convert foes into friends, we have many
pleasing examples in holy writ. Esau was a rough man, and exceedingly angry
with his brother Jacob, and yet how easily did Jacob's meek and affectionate
behavior overcome him! " Esau ran to meet Jacob, and felt on his neck and
kissed him, and they wept."

SAUL was possessed with a furious envy and spite against David. Yet what
acknowledgments did David's generous dealing extort from him? --

" IS this thy voice my son David? Thou art more righteous than I, for thou
have rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded the evil; behold I have played
the fool, and erred exceedingly."

THOUGH gratitude is not so common a virtue as it ought to be, yet the
remembrance of his former kindnesses often surrounds a good man in distress,
with many warm friends and generous comforters. Is he in danger, who will not
defend him? Is he falling, who will not uphold him? Is he slandered, who will
not vindicate him?

LOVE disposes us to put to their proper uses every blessing that may fall to
our lot; while, without it, the most splendid advantages that we could desire,
the largest fortunes and brightest parts, will become vain and fruitless, if
not pernicious and destructive to us. For, what is our reason worth if it serve
only to contrive little sorry designs for ourselves? What is wit good for, if
it be spent only in making sport, or creating mischief? What signifies wealth,
if it be uselessly hoarded up, or vainly thrown away on the lusts of one poor
worm? What is our credit but a mere puff of air, if we do not give it substance
by making it an engine of doing good? What is our virtue itself, if buried in
obscurity it yield no benefit to others by the luster of its example, or by its
real influence? If these advantages minister, only to our own particular
pleasure or profit, how mean and inconsiderable they appear!

BUT under the management of love, see what worth and importance they assume.
Our wealth becomes the bank from which the weeping widow, the indigent young
tradesman, and the helpless orphan, draw the supply of their wants. Our wit is
employed to expose the deformities of vice, and to paint virtue in her
loveliest colors. Our knowledge is applied to instruct the ignorant, to
admonish the guilty, and to comfort the wretched. Thus love enables us to lay
out our talents in so excellent a manner as to secure those inestimable
blessings -- the love of God, the friendship of mankind, and all the exquisite
pleasures of doing good. How great then is the worth of love, since without it
the goods even of the wealthiest are but temporal and transient, such as too
often prove dangerous snares and baneful poisons, and are at best but
impertinent baubles.

LOVE gives worth to all our apparent virtues, insomuch, that without it no
quality of the heart, no action of life is valuable in itself or pleasing to
God. Without love, what is courage, but the boldness of a lion or the
fierceness of a tiger? What is meekness but the softness of a woman, or the
weakness of a child? What is politeness, but the grimace of a monkey, or the
fooleries of a fop? What is justice, but passion or policy? What is wisdom but
craft and subtilty? Without love, and what is faith but dry opinion? What is
hope but blind presumption? What is almsgiving but ostentation? What is
martyrdom but stubborness? What is devotion but a mockery of God? What is any
practice, how specious soever in itself, or beneficial to others, but the
effect of selfishness and pride? " Though I have faith so that I could remove
mountains, and have not love, I am nothing. Though I give all my goods to feed
the poor, and have not love, it profits me nothing."

BUT love sanctifies every action, and converts all that we do into virtue. It
is true bravery indeed, when a man, out of love to his neighbor, and a hearty
desire to promote his good, encounters dangers and difficulties. It is genuine
meekness, when a man out of love, and an unwillingness to hurt his neighbor,
patiently puts up with injuries. It is politeness indeed, when cordial
affection expresses itself in civil language, respectful manners, and obliging
actions. It is excellent justice, when a man regarding his neighbor's case as
his own, does to him as he would have it done to himself. It is admirable
wisdom, which studies to promote our neighbor's welfare. It is a noble faith,
which, working by love, produces the rich fruits of obedience. It is a solid
hope, which is grounded on that everlasting basis of love which never fails. It
is a sincere alms, which not only the hand but the heart reaches out. It is an
acceptable sacrifice, which is kindled by the holy fire of love. It is an
hallowed devotion which is offered up from a heart pure and benevolent like the
being whom it adores.

LOVE is a grand instrument of our happiness, because it alone renders sweet
and pleasant all the duties which we owe to our neighbor. All agree, that the
second great business of men in this life is to learn to love one another. And
since the constant performance of kind and generous services to each other,
tends most effectually to fan the flame of love, our heavenly Father is
perpetually calling on us to perform those good offices to our brethren. He
commands the strong to bear the burdens of the weak, the rich to abound in good
works to the poor, the poor to be cheerfully obliging to the rich, and all of
us to exercise meekness, gentleness, hospitality, justice, honor, truth, etc.
Such sentiments and works of beneficence and love, make a considerable part of
our duties, duties that occur every day and hour of our lives. To perform these
with alacrity and pleasure must add greatly to our happiness, because, since
they occur so frequently, if we have but the art to turn them into pleasures,
our whole life must be one continued round of pleasure. Whereas, on the
contrary, if we take no delight in them, we stand a fair chance to lead very
uneasy lives; as we shall be continually called on by duties which we cannot
perform without reluctance, nor yet neglect without much vexation and regret.

WOULD we have this, our field of trial, to become a garden of pleasantness?
Let us love. Love is the great wonder-worker. It converts duties into delights,
and penances into pleasures. Are you wealthy? In making you so, heaven kindly
intended for you the joy of acting as the friend and benefactor of the poor.
That you may be sensible how essential love is to the cheerful discharge of the
duties of beneficence, turn your eyes toward Dives: In him you behold one of
the wealthiest of the sons of fortune. His cellars, his barns, his coffers, are
all bursting out with abundance; but his heart possesses not one spark of love.
Alas! the sad consequences of his lacking this one thing needful. Hence, though
possessed of wealth sufficient to enable him, like the good angel of his
neighborhood, to scatter blessings around him on at least fifty needy
families; he loses the joy, and they the benefit of such noble charities.
Destitute of love, Dives takes no delight, even in feeding the hungry, in
clothing the naked, or in soothing the sorrows of sickness and poverty.
Unhappy Dives! Works of love which blessed angels would prefer to their nectar
and ambrosia, are set before thee, but thou have no relish for them. Dives
keeps a splendid table, has vast apartments, rich furniture, costly jewels, a
large number of servants, and sumptuous equipages; and that is enough for him;
his poor childish fancy has no idea of any thing superior.

BUT see the noble and excellent Demophilus. Demophilus possesses an estate not
inferior to that of Dives; but his estate, though ample, is not half so ample
as his heart. Demophilus denies himself all the pomps and superfluities of
life, in order that he may swell the tide of his liberality to the poor. It
were an endless, though pleasing task, to relate how many friendless little
children he has educated, how many poor young tradesmen he has set up in good
business; and how many helpless old persons, provided for by his bounty, are
now spending the evening of their days in peace and comfort. Every day is to
Demophilus a day of happiness, because it is spent in offices of kindness to
those whom love has taught him to view in the endearing light of relations;
and, in serving whom, he acts with all the alacrity of a brother. Thus love
employs him in such good works as yield the purest pleasures while he is
engaged in them, and the remembrance of which will be a well of sweetest waters
springing up in his bosom to eternal life.

ARE you a poor man? You will find love to be equally essential to your
haphapiness. Love will not only preserve you from all the pangs of envy and
discontent; those infernal vipers which pry on the vitals of too many of our
poor brethren! But it will enable you to look with the joy of a brother on the
superior prosperity of your neighbor. It will inspire you with that sublimest
devotion, prayers for your wealthy neighbor, that he may be sensible of the
blessings he possesses in possessing wealth and power, that he may be thankful
for them, and put them to such good use as at once to please the supreme giver,
to win the gratitude of the poor, and to fill his own heart with joy.

ARE you in debt to your neighbor? Then it nearly concerns you to love him. I
will not indeed say, that if you do not love, you will never pay your debts,
for a sense of honor may incline you, as it does many who are destitute of
love, to be honest; but this I will say, that if you love your neighbor, you
will pay him with much more certainty and satisfaction than you otherwise
could. If you love your neighbor, you will not be able to run in debt to him,
when you forsee that you can never pay him.

A CERTAIN lawyer -- a case in point -- made application to a certain
hair-dresser for a wig. The generous tradesman, who was just about to sit down
to dinner, invited his customer to take pot-luck with him. After having made a
plentiful repast, and emptied the second bowl, " Now Sir," said the benevolent
shaver, addressing his guest, " I Will make you as handsome a wig as ever graced
the head of a counselor." -- "No, that you shall not." -- "Hie! what is the
matter? Did you not come to bespeak a wig?" -- "True, I did, but I have altered
my mind. You are so clever a fellow that I have a great liking for you, and
this makes me scorn to take an advantage of you: For were you to make me a wig,
I do not know that I should ever be able to pay you for it." -- What a generous
thing must love be, (...) a few feathers of it only could th^^ ^ear a man up
above a dishonest action! Would God, that not only all lawyers, but that all
men also had more of it!

To the man who loves not, the payment of his debts is often a great penance.
Avaro owes 500 guineas -- 500 guineas! Avaro had as lieve it were 500 drops of
his heart's blood. Tomorrow is the day of payment; a sad day to Avaro! Avaro
goes with a heavy heart to his strong box to take one more view of his dear
poor guineas. He takes them up in his hands; he hugs them to his breast: -- "
Sweet precious gold, and must I part with you! Dear delight of my eyes and joy
of my heart, must I tomorrow resign you for ever!" Avaro sighs piteously, and
locking them up again in his box, goes out groaning like one who follows his
first born to the grave.

Now turn your eyes to a very different character; I mean Benevolus. It is love
only that makes the difference. Benevolus owes a sum of money to his neighbor
Agathos. Benevolus possesses not only that delicate sense of honor, and that
nice regard to reputation, those laudable motives to duty which animate all men
of honor; but he feels some of a sweeter and still stronger nature. --
Benevolus loves his neighbor Agathos; hence he takes an interest in his
welfare. Agathos, in lending this money, showed a confidence in Benevolus.
Benevolus is eager to evince that it was well-founded. Agathos, may by this
time be wanting his money, -- Benevolus feels an anxiety to replace it.
Benevolus has reason to believe that it would be a pleasure to Agathos to
receive it -- Benevolus hastens to give him that pleasure.

"I ONCE, said the charming Pulcheria, owed a neighboring woman, a sum: On
going to her house to pay it, I met one of her daughters, whose dress showed a
tattered wardrobe: my heart rejoiced that the supply of their wants was at
hand: and had I, continued the dear girl, been in sufficient circumstances,
nothing would have made me happier than to have owed them ten times as much."
-- O for more love; more love! Without this, there can be not only no pleasure,
but indeed no steadiness in the payment of debts. -- Great stress I know has
been laid on what is called a sense of honor: But a mere man of honor is an
unsafe debtor. In those corrupted countries, where the laws and fashions are
not very decidedly in favor of justice, men of honor have been found to sit
perfectly easy under the weight of their debts.

MISOCHRISTIS is a man of honor; but he lives in a country where it happens not
to be the fashion for men of honor to pay their debts under three or four
years. Misochristis, you see, is surrounded by a crowd of creditors, who are
importunate with him for their money. Often had he avoided them before by
making his servants deny him; but, unfortunately, that stratagem would not
answer to day, for they poped in upon him before his usual hour of rising. He
at first determined not to stir out of his chamber; but they as obstinately
determined not to stir until they saw him. He then ordered his servant to tell
them that he was indisposed and could speak to no body; but the news of his
indisposition did not soften them in the least: -- See him they must. Whereon
he sent word that he would surrender, and immediately comes to a parley.

"How now, gentlemen," says he, cannot a person be sick in his own house? Give
me leave to tell you, that you don't behave handsomely.

WHAT have you to say, Mr Rhedon? You made me a coach I fancy about three years
ago; and have I not paid you twenty pistoles on account? Indeed you are vastly
to be pitied! Go, go, don't be afraid of your money; no body loses any thing by
me. See there is an honest man who has been my baker these six years; he knows
how to behave himself to a person of my distinction; he has had great patience,
and he shall not be a sufferer by it. Mr Rhedon, your servant, -- I have
something to say to these gentlemen, -- you will call again.

My good friend, Artopolus, I have really a regard for you: You serve me
extremely well. How do you manage to make such good bread as you send me? It Is
excellent; there can be no fault found with such bread. Let me see what it is I
owe you? Two thousand three hundred and forty-six livres -- That Is just what I
owe you. -- Well, I shall not examine your account; I don't question but it is
right. Two thousand three hundred and (...) livres. I shall be able to pay you.
-- Well, Mr. Artopolus, the first money I receive shall be yours. You shall not
be at the trouble of coming for it; it is not reasonable you should; -- why man
it is you who keep me alive.

So, here is my wine merchant: -- I have longed for an opportunity, my friend,
to take you to task. You know full well, Mr. Vintner, that you have a pleasure
in poisoning me with your wine. What the devil is it you put into it? I cannot
drink three bottles but it deprives me of my understanding; and yet it is money
you want -- Go about your business -- go; people who expect to be paid never
serve their customers in that manner. You shall have no money till every body
else is paid, if it were only to teach you to sell good wine.

As for you, (...) Guillaumet, I am quite ashamed to have been so long without
paying you. I am sensible of all the complaints you have against me. You have
clothed me and my whole family these five years, and I have not as yet paid
you a sous. I promised to pay you toward the end of the last year, but I
disappointed you. -- Is not that all you have to say to me? You know me very
well, Monsieur Guillaumet; do you imagine I could be so cruel as to let you be
all this time out of your money, after you had disbursed such considerable sums
for my use, if my tenants did but pay me? I must be a great villain if I could
behave after that manner: But they will pay me by and by, and then you shall
have your money. -- Your servant, -- Give me leave to speak to that gentlewoman.

GOOD morrow, Mrs. Pernelle, I suppose you are come to demand your money for
those thirty pieces of linen which I had of you two years ago? Well, I cannot
pay you very soon. You see what a number of people I have promised already. But
you can afford to wait a little. You are well to pass! -- No, Sir, you are
mistaken, my circumstances are very indifferent. -- Oh, so much the worse, my
good mistress: when people cannot afford to give credit, they should never
pretend to sell.

As to the rest of you, my good friends, says Misochristis, addressing himself
to those creditors who had not as yet received audience: I fancy I don't owe
you any great matters. You see I am endeavoring to regulate my affairs. Give
me a little more time; and if I can do no better at present, I will at least
look over and settle your accounts.

As soon as Misochristis had finished these words, the flew from them like
lightening, leaving his creditors so astonished at his impudence, that he was
quite out of their hearing before they had recollected themselves sufficiently
to make him a reply.

BUT if men of honor have been bad pay-masters, because punctuality was
unfashionable, they have been found equally so in those happy play-times, when
their good old master, the LAW, fell drowsy, and took no notice of his pupils
actions.

YOUNG Adrastus, hard run for money, determines to try his friends. He goes to
Agathocles, and in the bated breath and whispering humbleness of a borrower,
begs the loan of a thousand guineas. -- A good round sum! But the benevolent
Agathocles, a stranger to suspicion, grants the loan. Adrastus pockets the
money and rides off, the happiest man in the world. For three years the good
Agathocles got nothing from Adrastus but empty promises and sorrowful details
of disappointments and loses. At length a war breaks out, and the country
wanting money, the press is converted into a mint, and paper dollars are struck
off by the ream. These the legislator pronounces to be of equal value with gold
and silver, and threatens trouble to the tory that shall refuse them as such. "
Hurra for us debtors," is now the cry. Blessed times! Whole caravans of honest
men are now in motion to pay their debts. Adrastus joins the happy throng; and
taking a witness with him, waits on the good old Agathocles, whose generous
loan of a thousand guineas, he pays off with half a quire of paper currency --
worth about L. 40.

ALAS! poor honor! when severed from the love of God, and of man, what art thou
but an empty name! Had Adrastus loved his God, could he thus have despised that
golden precept which enjoins him -- to do unto others as he would that others
should do unto him? -- Had Adrastus loved the generous Agathocles, could he
have thus requited him evil for good -- could he have thus repayed the noblest
friendship with the basest ingratitude? -- Let the following true story reply.

A YOUNG gentleman, whom we shall call Leander, had the good fortune to be born
of parents, who well knew that happiness consists rather in the good qualities
of the heart, than in the rich contents of the strong box. He was therefore
early taught to look on the love of God and of his neighbor, as the best
wealth that man or angel can possess. His progress in virtue was equal to the
fondest expectations of his parents. Truth, honor and goodness, shone so
conspicuously in all his conduct, that to love him, one needed but to know him.
At the age of three and twenty he lost his father; and possessing but a very
small fortune, he resolved to go into trade. Leander had five or six mercantile
friends, each of whom throwing in a couple of hundred pounds worth of goods,
made him up a pretty assortment. With great alacrity he entered upon this new
employment; but, as it would seem, merely to evince the error of those parents,
who think that religion alone is sufficient to make their children happy. His
father had taken great pains to fit him for heaven; but had not sufficiently
instructed him to make his way good here on earth. He had scarcely ever told
Leander, that though it be happiness to love, it is still virtue to be prudent;
and, that to mingle the harmlessness of the dove with the wisdom of the
serpent, and to take head of men, even while he loves them, are commandments of
the Great Teacher himself. He had hardly ever mentioned to Leander, the
importance of receipts, vouchers, and written contracts; nor related to him the
many sad instances of unsuspecting goodness snared and ruined by insidious
villainy; and how often, for want of receipts, the best men have been compelled
to a second payment of debts that have kept their noses to the grindstone half
their lives after. No; but to consider all men as the children of God, and
coheirs of glory; to love them as himself, and to think evil of no man -- these
were the only sentiments which Leander was taught: These he carried with him
behind the counter. Leander was soon found out to be a fine young man! every
body admired his goods, and wished to buy if they could but have a little
credit. Leander anticipated every wish, and credited every body.

IN a very short time, out of a thousand pounds worth of goods, he had not a
remnant left. His rivals were sit to burst with spleen and envy at such
prodigious sales; while his friends ascribed such singular success to divine
interposition. At the appointed time his creditors demanded their money. The
too credulous Leander was not prepared to pay. Unable to wait longer, they
seized on his little patrimony, and threw him into prison. Cruel parents, who
thus expose your children uncovered by the shield of prudence, to the fiery
darts of fraud and villainy! O remember that the want of prudence, is too
often, even in the best men, succeeded by the want of virtue; and that, in many
instances, the devil himself asks not an abler advocate for vice than poverty.
Happily for Leander, his virtue was full grown, and of a good constitution. He
did not, as thousands have done, curse that easiness of nature, that
benevolence of sentiment, which had duped and betrayed him; he did not vow
eternal war against his species, and resolve to practice in future the same
arts which had wrought his ruin. No! fraud and injustice now appeared to him
hateful as the hags of hell. While, by contrast, his love of virtue was exalted
to adoration. To have deceived, though unintentionally, and thence to have
injured his patrons, caused Leander much grief; but it was grief unimbittered
by the gall of guilt. To have discovered such a want of virtue and humanity
among men, excited emotions, but they were the emotions of compassion, not of
resentment. Still his prayers and his benevolence went up before God. After
fifty days confinement, the still virtuous Leander was discharged from prison,
and from all legal obligation to pay his former debts. He then went round again
among his debtors; many of whom affected by his pathetic remonstrances,
discharged their accounts. With this money, purchasing a small assortment of
goods, he entered a second time into trade, and with becoming caution. At the
expiration of five years, having saved enough for that purpose, he hastened up
to town to pay off his former debts, and to evince the divinity of that love,
which cannot be happy while it owes any man any thing. He called together his
former creditors to a tavern, where, by his orders, a handsome dinner was
prepared for them. He received them with the utmost cordiality, and, without
having as yet gratified their curiosity as to the occasion of the meeting, he
politely pressed them to sit down to dine. On turning up their plates, every
man beheld in a heap of shining gold, the full amount, principal and interest,
of his former claim against Leander.

" Lord, who is the happy man that may
" To thy blessed courts repair?
" Not stranger like to visit them.
" But to inhabit there.
" It Is he who to his vows and trust,
" Has ever firmly stood;
" And though he promise to his loss,
" He makes his promise good."
WE have been copious on this part of our subject, for a very plain reason: the
payment of our debts is a duty that occurs so frequently, that whatever tends
to make it a pleasure, must consequently add greatly to our happiness; and have
abundantly shown it is love, and love alone that can make honesty at all times
a pleasure.

BUT there are many other duties, of equal importance to our own, and to the
happiness of society, to the cheerful performance of which, love is as
indispensibly necessary. This man's avarice may claim a part of our estate; or
that man's unprovoked rage may insult our person, or slander our name; now, to
bear all this with temper, and to negociate so discreetly with these our
ungenerous neighbors, as to disarm their passions, and to make an honorable
and lasting peace, is certainly a most desirable event; but it is an event
which nothing but almighty love can accomplish. And through defect of this
love, how frequently have we seen the slightest encroachments, or provocations
to stir up such horrid passions, in the bosoms of neighbors, and to hurry them
into such shameful excesses of injury and revenge, as have ended in the
destruction of each others souls, bodies, and estates!

LET the real history of goodman Gruff and his neighbor Grub, elucidate this
melancholy truth.

THESE two men, whose fortunes were ample, lived near neighbors to each other;
so near, that their lands, unmoved by the passion of their owners, lay and
slept together in the most friendly embraces. That good being who had thus
appointed their lots together in the same pleasant places, had unquestionably
intended, that they should learn from their own experience, how happy a thing
it is for brethren to dwell together in unity. But alas! the ways of peace they
knew not, for they were both strangers to love; and, by natural consequence,
both proud, selfish, irascible and vindictive. On a resurvey of his plantation,
goodman Gruff found that his neighbor Grub had about two acres and a quarter
of his ground in possession.

NO sooner had he made this important discovery, than he sent orders to Mr
Grub, and not in the most gentle terms, instantly to remove his fences, from
that spot of ground, or he should adopt measures to compel him. From no friend
on earth, would Mr. Grub have brooked such a message; but from Gruff, it was
altogether insupportable. A reply, such as pride and hatred could dictate, was
immediately made. A law suit, of course, commenced.

THIS produced the effect that usually attends lawsuits, -- "a death unto
friendship, and a new birth unto hatred." Every expense incurred in the course
of the suit inflamed their mutual hatred; for they never failed to set down
these expenses to the account of each others roguery: They never deigned to
salute, or to exchange a word; and, if accident at any time threw them into the
same company, they cast such eyes of death on one another, and were so
pointedly brutal in their manners, as to shock all who were not lost to
humanity. To be threatened with the loss of two acres of land, or to have that
much withheld, though each possessed many more than they could cultivate, was
enough in such sordid souls, to awaken the most deadly passions. These were
soon communicated to the rest of their families. The wives and daughters, could
not, even at church, treat each other with common civility; and the sons often
disgraced themselves in bloody battles. Nor was this all, for their poor
unoffending cattle, their hogs and horses, who, poor things! knew not the right
leg from the left, were made to feel the sad effects of this unnatural strife:
For, if carelessly wandering in quest of grass or roots, their homely fare,
they happened in luckless hour, to stray within the hostile lines, straight a
troop of angry slaves, with worrying dogs and furious stones, attacked them: or
slily taking and loading them with yokes, doomed them to waste full many a day
in woe and pain.

CURSED be their anger, for it was fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel. O
my soul! come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly; mine honor, be
not thou united!

JACOB.

THUS we see men, though born to walk with angels high in salvation, and the
clims of bliss, acting, because destitute of love, just as if they were
candidates for the society of infernal spirits!

A STRANGER to the origin of this shameful contest, would reasonably have
supposed, from the fury with which it was conducted, that the actors in it,
expected some signal advantages from it. "Surely," would he have said, vast
fields of fertile earth, with mighty forests, and flocks and herds, with heaps
of golden treasure, must depend on this important suit. But what would have
been his astonishment, on finding, that the dear bought purchase of two acres
of poor land, was the whole extent of their hopes!

" Verily, man without love is as the wild ass's colt, and stupid as the beast
that Perishes."

BUT to return to our litigious farmers, whom we left just engaged in a suit,
Gruff against Grub, for two acres and a quarter of land, held and cultivated by
the latter, but found by a resurvey to belong to the former. The case seemed
sufficiently simple, and, as was generally thought, would soon be knocked off
the doquet, and with but small damages. But being found, as generally happens,
much more complicated than it had at first appeared; it was kept so long in the
different courts in which it had the fortune to be tried, that goodman Gruff
was often heard to say, that though he had gained his suit, yet, through loss
of time, neglect of business, tavern charges, and extra fees to lawyers, he had
expended at least one hundred half-joes. While poor Grub, obliged to carry on
so long a suit with moneys borrowed on an exorbitant premium, incurred a debt
which cost him the whole tract, together with the two acres and a quarter which
he had so obstinately defended.

" BLESSED are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth."

HAD these unfortunate men but loved, they might have lived happy. Like good
Job's children, " they would have gone and feasted in their houses each man his
day, and sent and called for his neighbor to eat and to drink with him." And
then having his heart warmed and expanded with generous love, had goodman Gruff
discovered that his neighbor held unknowingly an acre or two of his land, he
would have scorned to notice it.

ASK the benevolent old Ralph, whether he would thus have threatened and
persecuted his neighbor Paul for a couple of acres? Observe how he shakes his
venerable locks, and, with a countenance strongly marking his abhorrence of
such a thought, thus replies: --

NO, my friend, two acres of land should never have set me and my neighbor
Paul at variance. Forty years have we lived near each other, and, thank God, it
has been forty years of peace and friendship. Paul appears to me now like a
brother; and the affection that I have for him, gives me a double enjoyment of
what I have, because of the pleasure I find in communicating of it to him. If I
take a hive, he is sure to receive a plate of the choicest comb. If I kill a
fat mutton, the best quarter is sent to him. His company heightens my joys, his
counsel and assistance lessen the weight of my sorrows. Together we enjoy the
good things of this life, and together we often converse about the happiness of
that better life to come. Now, shall I mar all this sweet heavenly peace, and
plunge myself into hellish hatred and strife, by quarrelling with my good
friend Paul on account of two acres of ground? No, no, no; sooner than see that
hated day, let these eyes be closed for ever; and let my gray hairs go down
with joy to the grave! Take two acres of land from Paul? O how gladly would I
give him a thousand!

BUT supposing, Father Ralph, that instead of the gentle Paul, it had been your
destiny to dwell in the neighborhood of the churlish Mr. Gruff, how would you
have relished his orders to relinquish two acres of your land?

WHY, I would have endeavored an accommodation, by proposing a reference of
our matter to some of our well informed and impartial neighbors.

BUT, what if he had replied, that since by the late variation of the compass,
the limits of his tract were so enlarged as to take in those two acres of
yours, he claimed them by virtue of the law, and would have nothing to do with
arbitrators?

WHAT would I have done? Why, I would have pitied him -- from the bottom of my
heart would I have pitied him for such a sentiment. And on taking my leave,
would have addressed him in such words as these: -- Neighbor Gruff, the good
for which you seem so ready to contend, deserves not to be put in the scale
against the numerous evils of a lawsuit. Let famished seamen quarrel and fight
for a morsel of bread, or draw lots for each others lives, but for us who live
in a land so thickly strewed with the blessings of heaven, that we need but
stretch forth the hand of industry and we shall gather abundance -- for us to
go to law for a slip of ground, were a reproach to us, both as men and as
christians. I feel, neighbor Gruff, that love and peace are the greatest
blessings of life, and, well knowing that lawsuits are no friend to those,
but, on the contrary, their most mortal enemies, I wish never to have any thing
to do with lawsuits -- I mean on such trifling occasions. Therefore, for the
sake of God, the lover of peace, and for our mutual good, I cheerfully
compliment you with these two acres for which you are so ready to go to law
with me. And I think my heart gives me comfortable assurance that I shall never
want them.

" BLESSED are the peace makers, for they shall be called the children of God."

LOVE adds greatly to the happiness of man, because it puts us in possession
and gives us the enjoyment of every thing that is good and desirable in this
life. By it, we may, without greedy avarice, or its cares and drudgeries, swim
in tides of wealth. Without proud ambition or any of its difficulties and
dangers, we may ascend to the highest seats of honor: without sordid
voluptuousness, or its diseases and disgust, we may bask in the lap of true
pleasures; without its pride, luxury or sloth, or any of its snares and
temptations, we may feast at the table of prosperity. We may pluck the richest
fruits of science and learning, without the pain of laborious study: and we may
taste the sweets of virtue and goodness without their toils. For, are not all
these things ours, if we make them so, by finding much delight and satisfaction
in them? Does not out neighbor's wealth enrich us, if we are happy in his
possessing and using it? Does not his preferment advance us, if our spirit
rises with it into a cordial complacency? Does not his pleasure delight us, if
we are pleased with his enjoyment of it? Does not his prosperity bless us, if
our hearts exult and triumph in it? This is the true Philosopher's stone, the
divine magic of love which conveys all things into our hands, giving us a
possession and use in them of which nothing can deprive us.

BY virtue of this, (as Paul justly observes) Being sorrowful we yet always
rejoice; having nothing we yet possess all things. Neither is this property in
our neighbor's goods merely imaginary, but real and substantial; indeed, for
more real to the true lover of men, than it is generally to the legal owners of
them. For how is property in things otherwise to be considered than by the
satisfaction which they yield to the presumed owner? And if the benevolent man
find this satisfaction in them, and in a high degree, why are they not truly
his? May not the tree with some degree of propriety be called yours if you can
pluck and enjoy its fruits at pleasure? Nay, does not the propriety more truly
belong to you, if you equally enjoy the benefit, without partaking the trouble
and expense which fall on the real owner? A loving man therefore can never be
poor or miserable, except all the world should come to want and distress, for
while his neighbor has any thing, he will enjoy it -- rejoicing with those who
rejoice.

BUT love not only advances us to the highest pitch of happiness attainable in
this life, but, like a true friend, it will accompany us into heaven, and there
complete our felicity, by exalting us to the society of angels and spirits of
just men made perfect.

AMONG all the nations of the earth, the pleasing persuasion has prevailed,
that the souls of good men shall pass away after death into brighter climes
than these, where assembled in the sweetest society, they shall enjoy pleasures
which were never permitted them to taste in this vale of tears.

THIS strongest and dearest sentiment of nature, is confirmed by revelation,
which assures us, that heaven, the city of the eternal King, is inhabited by a
great multitude, which no man can number, composed of all the wise and good
that ever existed in the universe of God; and who, now separated from every
infirmity, dwell together in the dearest amity and peace.

DESIRABLE indeed must an access to such a society appear to us, who dwell in
these abodes of frail humanity, whose passions are so much at variance with our
repose! This man wounds us by a mortifying neglect, that insults us with scorn
and contempt. A third cruelly envies our felicity. A fourth inhumanly slanders
our good name. And a fifth goes to law with us for our estate. While those few
who love us, often add to our uneasiness by their follies or vices. Who would
not leave such a wretched society as this, and gladly go to mingle with those
blessed friends, who can no more be miserable themselves, nor render us so?
Where every countenance will shine upon us with smiles of undissembled
affection; and every eye will beam unutterable love? Where mighty angels will
be as endearingly attentive to us, as fondest brethren; while heavenly sages
will pour forth the treasures of their wisdom to entertain us, though the
feeblest of saints?

BUT, alas! is it for us whose hearts are defiled, and who drink in iniquity
like water, to be numbered with these children of God, and to have our lot
among such saints? Yes it is. For though the precious gold of Ophir could not
purchase such high honors for us; and though rocks of proffered diamonds would
not be received in exchange; yet there is a power, a secret charm, that can
open for us the everlasting doors, and admit us into those courts of glory.
That charm is LOVE, which, by exercising every odious passion, and adorning us
with its own celestial graces, will secure our welcome, and render us dear to
every saint in paradise. And were it not for love, which thus refines our
nature, and transforms us into angels of light, never could we mingle in the
society of those heavenly lovers.

BIRDS of a feather flock together. -- As gentle doves, who delight in mutual
caresses, fly on wings of terror, from those birds whose fiery eyes threaten
hateful strife; so angels of love, must retire with as natural an abhorrence,
from the society of dark and malignant spirits. Between no two things in
nature, does there exist so irreconcilable an opposition, as between love and
hatred. Water and oil -- fire and snow, may, by the powerful arts of chemistry,
be taught to forget their native antipathies, and to rush together into
friendly embraces: But by no arts can tenderhearted love be brought to look
with complacency on any appearance of hatred and misery. And the more ardent
our love, the more exquisite will be our distress, at the view of such scenes.

PHILANDER, whose life is a series of beneficence that reflects honor on human
nature, was, during the earlier part of his days, strangely fond of that most
vulgar practice, boxing. But happening to read Dr. Blair's sermon on
gentleness, he was brought to see so clearly, the beauty and blessedness of a
benevolent temper, that he has ever since cultivated it as the brightest
ornament, and highest happiness of his life. Philander often now observes to
his friends, that nothing surprises him more than the difference which he finds
between the feelings, of the present and past periods of his life. That
formerly, when a stranger to love, the sight of a battle was matter of fun to
him; and a broken head, or a bloody nose, a mere bagatelle, quite a trifle. But
that now, were he compelled to see two men striving in battle, and with furious
countenances and eyes darting hatred, inflicting cruel blows on each other, he
verily believes it would harrow up his soul and sill him with insupportable
horror. And such, I am confident, would be the feelings of every truly
benevolent heart. Now, if we who are but babes in love, and whose hearts still
retain much of their former hardness and insensibility, are, notwithstanding,
so shocked at the sight of bad passions; how much more would the blessed
angels, those pure spirits of love, be shocked at the sight of such things?
Hence, it clearly appears, that were God to throw open the gates of heaven, and
to invite us to enter with all our pride, haughtiness, scorn, envy and hatred
about us; so far from being welcome to the angels, we should turn their heaven
into hell. It would grieve their generous bosoms, to see us so completely
damned; and it would equally shock their feelings to see us so perfectly
loathsome and abominable; and they would, no doubt, prefer their joint
petitions to God, for permission to retire into some other part of his
dominions, where, far removed from such disquieting scenes, they might renew
their joys in contemplating the beauty of each others virtues, and in rejoicing
in the greatness of their mutual bliss. Would we therefore gain a welcome
admission into those blessed abodes, where angels and the youngest sons of light,
spend their blissful days in joys unknown to mortal sense -- Let us Love. This
is the darling attribute of God; " For God is love." And this is the grace that
gives to ministering spirits all their surpassing joys and glories. Washed in
this heavenly Jordan, the foulest leper becomes fresher than the newborn babe.
Bathed in this divine Bethesda, the blackest heart and most malevolent spirit
becomes whiter than snow. Mark the glorious change. His eyes, lately glaring
with infernal fires, now emit the softest beams of benevolence. His cheeks,
once pale with envy, now bloom with the rosy-red of joy. His countenance, ever
while dark with angry passions, now wear the opening radiance of friendship.
His voice, lately broken and discordant with rage, is now sweeter than music;
his heart, once the den of poisonous adders, is now the abode of gentlest
affection; and he who some time ago was the terror or hatred of all who knew
him, is now become the delight of each eye and joy of every heart. His admiring
friends, view him with transport as a dear monument of the mighty power of
love; while holy angels welcome him with sweetest symphonies, and fill the
eternal regions with acclamations of joy. " Behold, this our brother was lost,
but is found, he was dead, but is alive."

AND though on our first entrance into the company of blessed angels, we cannot
be half so loving and lovely as they are, yet will not this diminish their
affection for us; for, clearly perceiving, that though but babes, we yet
possess the fair features and precious qualities of godlike souls, they will
cordially love and tenderly embrace us, as their younger brethren, and as
infant angels. While meeting with no cruel obstructions to our love, as in this
world, but on the contrary, finding ourselves beloved and caressed by each
saint and angel, we shall daily become more grateful and affectionate, and
consequently more lovely in the eyes, and more dear to the hearts, of those
blessed people. And now, what words can express, what fancy can conceive the
various and exquisite pleasures, that we may expect to meet with, in so wise,
so all-accomplished and endearing a society? If the conversation of great and
good natured wits, be so highly entertaining, that men of taste would give any
thing to spend an evening with a party of such; how much more desirable must
it be to spend an eternity in the company of angels? For, as in point of
knowledge, wit, and eloquence, they must be far superior to the brightest
geniuses of our world, and incomparably more affectionate, they cannot but make
the most delightful company. From the vast stores of their wisdom and
experience, they can easily draw an almost infinite variety of the most
entertaining topics, on which such good and gentle spirits, will not fail to
converse in the most free and endearing manner. Then, what a heavenly
conversation must theirs be, whose scope is the most glorious knowledge, and
its law the most perfect friendship?

WHO would not willingly leave a childish, forward and ill natured world, for
the blessed society of those wise friends and perfect lovers? And what a
felicity must it be to spend an eternity, in such a noble conversation? Where
we shall hear the deep philosophy of heaven communicated with mutual freedom,
in the wise and amiable discourses of angels, and of glorified spirits, who,
without any reserve or affectation of mystery, without passion or peevish
contention for victory, do freely philosophize and impart the treasures of each
others knowledge? For since all saints there are great philosophers, and all
philosophers perfectly saints, we may conclude, that knowledge and goodness,
wisdom and love, will be most charmingly intermixed throughout all their
conversation, and render it delightful in the highest degree. When therefore we
shall leave this vain and unsociable world, and on our landing on the shores of
eternity, shall be met by all our good old friends, who are gone to heaven
before us, and who now with infinite joy for our safe arrival, receive and
conduct us into the splendid society of all the good and generous souls, who
ever lived in the world: when we shall be familiar friends with angels and
archangels; and all the shining courtiers of heaven shall call us brethren,
and welcome us into their glorious society, with all the tender endearments and
caresses, of those heavenly lovers, O how will all these mighty honors and
joys, swell our bosoms with tides of transport almost too big to bear!

BUT love not only renders us thus happy, by adorning us with such graces as
give us a hearty welcome to the society, and joys of angels; but, O godlike
power of charity! it even enables us to make all their joys our own.

IT is a natural property of love, when sincere, to unite so closely the hearts
o lovers, as to make their interests common, and thus to render the joys of the
one, the joys of the other. Every man carries in his own bosom a proof of this
delightful truth. Do not the virtues of a dear brother, give us as exquisite
joy, as if we ourselves were adorned with them? Have not the high commendations
bestowed on a beloved sister, thrilled through our hearts, in as pure streams
of pleasure as if we ourselves had been the honored subject of them? Now, if
love, which is a native of heaven, produces, even in the cold soil of the human
heart, such delicious fruits of joy at the sight of our neighbor's happiness,
how much more copious and exquisite must be its growth and flavor, when
restored to heaven, it enjoys all the energies of its native soil and climate?
If therefore, while here on earth, we make such progress in brotherly love, as
to relish our neighbor's happiness as our own, " heartily rejoicing with him
when he rejoices;" we may rest assured, that on going to heaven, and entering
into the society of blessed angels, we shall find the joys of congratulating
love, far superior to what we ever experienced in this world. With what sacred
delight shall our hearts overflow, when, on opening our eyes in those blissful
mansions, we behold around us, such bright bands of glorious beings? The sight
of these lovely and happy people, will open new springs of joy in our bosoms.
With what wonder, love, and praise, shall we contemplate that hand which drew
such magnificent scenes; these streets paved with gold, these gorgeous palaces
hewn from diamond quarries, these walls flaming with the stones of heaven,
these rivers flowing with liquid silver, these fields decked with immortal
flowers, these sacred shades formed by the trees of God; and which, after
having clothed these regions in such godlike splendors, raised up so many
myriads of glorious beings to inhabit them forever? There, among those favored
spirits, we shall meet with none of those melancholy scenes which here so often
embitter our lives. Here, the strong pains and cries of those whom we love,
often wring our hearts and call tears of bitterest sorrow from our eyes; but
there, God shall wipe all tears from our eyes, and pain and sickness are
unknown. Here, the pale cheek, the hollow eye, and trembling voice of
languishing friends, often sicken our hearts, and press our spirits to the
earth; but there, health blooms with freshest roses on each immortal cheek, and
imparts a vigor that shall never know decay. Here, we often behold our dearest
relatives struggling in the agonies of death, and hear, with stupifying grief,
their last expiring groans; but there, among those holy angels, death never
showed his ghastly countenance, and their glorified bodies are deathless as the
eternal Jehovah. Now, what words can express the joys of those blessed people,
who love each other with a tenderness unknown to mortal bosoms, and whose love
is continually feasted with the view of each others happiness, a happiness
which no time can terminate, and which neither man nor devil can impair! For
perfect lovers have all their joys and griefs in common between them; but the
heavenly lovers having no griefs among them, do only communicate their joys to
one another. And where they love so perfectly as they do in heaven, there can
be no such thing as a private or particular happiness, but every one must have
a share in that of every one, and consequently in this, their mutual
communication of joys, every one's happiness, will, by his friendship to every
one, be multiplied into as many happinesses as there are saints and angels in
heaven; and thus, every joy, of every member of the church triumphant, runs
round the whole body, in an eternal circulation. For that blessed body being
all composed of consenting hearts, that, like perfect unisons, are tuned up to
the same key, when any one is touched, every one echoes, and resounds the same
note: and while they thus mutually strike upon each other, and all are affected
with every one's joys, it is impossible, but, that in a state where there is
nothing but joy, there should be a continual concert of ravishing harmony among
them. For such is their dear concern for one another, that every one's joy not
only pays to, but receives tribute from the joy of every one: so that when any
one blessed spirit rejoices, his joy goes round the whole society, and then all
their rejoicings in his joy, reflow upon, and swell and multiply it; and so as
they thus cordially borrow each others joys, they always pay them back with
interest, and by thus reciprocating, do everlastingly increase them. And now,
what unspeakable rejoicing and congratulations will there be among us, when we
shall pass all heaven over, through ten thousand millions of blessed beings,
and meet none but such as we most dearly love, and are as dearly beloved by?
especially when we shall find no defect either of goodness, or happiness in
them, nor they in us, to damp our mutual joy and delight, but every one shall
be what every one wishes him -- a perfect and blessed friend.

WHAT eternal thanks do we not owe to the author of all good, for giving us
souls that are capable of ascending to the society of these glorious beings,
and of participating forever in their exalted delights? And how must it inflame
our gratitude to him for appointing LOVE to be the golden road leading to those
celestial regions, and for employing so many arguments, and taking, if we may
thus speak, so much pains to persuade us to walk in it? For, take all the laws
of God, whether written on hearts of flesh, or tables of stone, or on softer
leaves of evangelic paper, and cast them up -- What is their amount? LOVE. --
Love is the bond of perfection. Love is the fulfilling of the law. He has
showed thee, O man! what is good, and what does the Lord thy God require of
thee but to love him, thy Parent God, with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as
thyself.

AND as God has thus enjoined love, so has he disposed every thing in an order
the most favorable to the production of it.

FOR who is this neighbor whom we are enjoined to love? Is he some vile
inferior creature whom it were hard, if not impossible to love? No, he is, on
the coutrary, a most noble being, and descended from the greatest family in the
universe. He is no less a personage, than a young prince, a son of the Great
King eternal, whom he is not only allowed but even commanded to call his
father. If some young nobleman clothed in silks and broad-cloaths, scented
with rich perfumes, and richly equipaged, were to call at our houses, we should
instantly be impressed with sentiments of respect, and good will for him, and
readily invite him to the hospitalities of our tables. But what are silver and
gold? what are silks and broad-cloths? what are fine horses and servants? in
comparison of that immortal soul which this neighbor possesses, and those
eternal beauties of which his soul is capable? know, that he was made but a few
degrees lower than the angels, and that God, the true judge of merit, has, on
account of the rich excellencies of his nature, created this world, with all
the goodly brightness of heaven, and all the costly furniture of earth, to
serve him.

" THOU made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou have put
all things under his feet."

HE possesses a soul capable of so exceedingly great and eternal a weight of
glory, that rather than he should be deprived of it forever by sin, God himself
came down on earth to expiate it, and by his own most perfect and amiable life
and lessons, to allure him back to love heaven. God has adopted him as his son,
and made him a free denizen of his heavenly city; and has appointed his own
glorious angels to wait on him, as on the heir of salvation and candidate for
eternal glory. Can we then think it hard to love him whom God thus loves and
thus delights to honor?

BUT if it be easy to love a person of eminent dignity and excellence, it
becomes easier and pleasanter still to love him, if he be a near kinsman and
friend. Well, this is truly the case betwixt our neighbor and us. He is our
near relation -- our brother -- bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh. God
kindly raised him up to be unto us as a companion and a help-mate, to lighten
our burdens, to multiply our comforts, and, like dear children walking in love,
to enjoy together the rich fruits of our mutual industry, rejoicing in the
present bounties of our common parent, and exulting in the hopes of better yet
to come.

AND as if all these tender and endearing circumstances were not sufficient,
God himself has put forth his hand, and touched our hearts with sentiments of
good will toward each other.

THESE native sentiments of love, these dear remains of God's own image,
originally stamped on our minds, appear very visible in all, even in those
unfortunates, whose hard lot and corrupting companions have done much to stifle
them.

TAKE you poorest of men! who gleans precarious and scanty bread, by hard and
humble toil. His sour looks and crabbed manners give room to suppect that he is
a misanthrope, an utter stranger to natural affection; but the slightest
experiment will soon discover what tender sympathies unite him to his kind.

YOU need not tell him of flourishing cities, with all their gay inhabitants,
swallowed up by the devouring sword, or ruthless flames, while mourning
millions loaded with chains, are driven far from their native homes to make
room for new masters. No; such horrid tragedies are not necessary to touch the
springs of his compassion. Let him but hear the song of Chevy Chase, or the
tender ballad of the Babes in the Wood; or carry him to the Theater, and let
him hear, though but in a play, in mere fiction, the story of poor Barnwell,
let him behold that unfortunate young man, who set out in life charmed with
comely virtues, and the darling of all who knew him; but soon alas! too soon,
arrested by a beauteous harlot, he falls an easy prey to her wiles, is stripped
of all his virtues and honors, and betrayed into crimes for which he dies on
the ignominious gallows. -- It Is enough, this simple tale of woe calls up all
his feelings of generous distress, and bathes his cheeks in floods of
sympathetic tears.

DOES not this our ready disposition to suffer with our suffering neighbor,
and to weep with him when he weeps, plainly prove how much God has done to make
it easy for us to love one another. To this he has added another charming
evidence, I mean the inexpressible joy which he infuses into our hearts on
doing works of love to the necessitous.

"PRAY sir," said a young Virginian to his friend, on what act of your life do
you reflect with the highest complacency? "Why sir," replied the other,
happening to hear that an old slave of my father's was sick, I went up to his
quarter to see him. On enquiry, I found, that in consequence of his extreme
age, and inability to render further services in the crop, he was cruelly
neglected by the overseer, and often made to suffer for a meal of victuals.
Blushing to find that this was the principal cause of his present
indisposition, I instantly returned, and taking a negro lad, carried up a
flitch of bacon, a loaf of bread, and a peck of meal. On seeing the present
which I had brought him, his half-famished nature revived, and a sudden gush of
tears trickled down his cheeks. Lifting up his eyes, he gave me such a look of
gratitude and love, as pierced my very soul, and kindled a pleasure, which
time, instead of diminishing, does but increase!

THE pleasures which we find in eating and drinking, we gratefully consider as
given by the Creator, to attach us to those refreshments so necessary to life.
With equal wisdom and gratitude, let us remember that the heartfelt delight
which accompanies and succeeds our deeds of love, were meant to allure us to
cherish that divine affection which is better than life.

FOR the same benevolent purpose, the author of our being is pleased to exert
on us the whole force of another powerful spring of action; I mean interest.
Our dearest interests in this world are best promoted, by maintaining a loving
correspondence with our neighbors. So uncertain is our condition, so liable
are we all to the changes and chances of this mortal life, that no man can tell
how soon he may owe his very life and fortune to the gratitude of a poor
neighbor or slave who loves him. How many accounts have we heard of poor
negroes, whose love for a good master has made them bravely to step in betwixt
him and danger; sometimes, like faithful spaniels, plunging in, and drawing him
out of deep waters, where he was in the very act of drowning? Sometimes, like
Salamanders, rushing upon and extinguishing furious fires, that were destroying
his houses, and perhaps half the labors of his life? And sometimes, like
Hectors, fighting with desperate courage in his defense, when attacted, and in
danger of being severely beaten and killed by his enemies?

BUT love not only thus marshals an army with banners around us for our safety;
it also pours a sweet sunshine of peace and harmony over our days.

ST. PAUL, who was a much safer guide in matters of religion, than Mr. Pain,
advises us to walk in love with our neighbors, if we would lead a quiet and
peaceable life. For as men naturally perceive a fragrance in the rose, and a
sweetness in the honeycomb; so naturally do they discern a heavenly charm and
beauty in love. Adorned therefore with the friendly dispositions, the fair
dealings, and gentle manners of this divine passion, we shall not fail to find
favor in the eyes of our neighbors, and to be beloved and caressed by them.
Hence we walk among them as among brothers, in every face we see a friendly
smile, at every house a hearty welcome, never devising any mischief against
them, we never dream of their devising any against us. Our hearts are now at
rest, our countenances are serene, our voices melodious, our manners mild, our
sleep sweet, and our whole life quiet and peaceable: And, as a blessed
consequence of all this, together with the highest enjoyment of the present
life, we are in the best frame of mind to prepare ourselves for that which is
to come. Happily freed from the anxiety and vexation of all bad passions, we
profitably contemplate our numberless obligations to love God and one another,
and thus, in the multitude of our good thoughts, daily grow in virtue and piety.

BUT all this goodly Canaan, this land of love, flowing with richest milk and
honey of peace, is snatched from our eyes by the demon-hand of hatred, and
naught appears in its place but a land of darkness and of death, whose streams
are of gall, and its fruits of bitter ashes.

BY overreaching a neighbor in a bargain (which we shall be too apt to do if
we love him not), we make him our enemy. Perhaps he has the spirit to tell us
of our baseness to our faces, or to talk of it behind our backs. This fires our
bosoms with odious and painful passions. Challenges or lawsuits, with all
their ignominious vexations, hurtful, and often fatal consequences, ensue.

OR by treating him with unreasonable severity (a thing very feasible if we
love him not), we inflame his resentment to such an height, that not content
with stabbing our reputation, he threatens our property and lives. Our curses
now multiply thick and fast upon our heads. We can no longer sleep in quiet,
from dread of having our houses fired over our heads. We are actually afraid
(the memory of those who read may help them to instances) to stir out, or, like
people in the neighborhood of hostile Indians, must make our visits with
pistols in our pockets, and carabines in our hands.

THUS, through defect of love, we are often dragged upon the stage against our
wills, and there made to act parts in tragedies, which neither become nor
please us. Our thoughts taken off from all delightful subjects, are turned to
solicitous cares of self-preservation and defense. Our minds are discomposed by
vexatious passions. Our credit is blasted by false reports and slanderous
defamations. Our hearts are kept continually boiling with choler, our faces
overclouded with discontent, our ears filled with discordant noises of
contradiction, clamor and reproach; and our whole frame of body and soul
distempered with the worst of passions. In the meantime our natural rest is
disturbed, our necessary business is hindered, our happiness in this life is
utterly wretched and lost, and the great concerns of heaven and eternal glory
are entirely laid aside. O how much better it is to walk in the smooth and
flowery paths of love, than thus to wander in the rugged ways of hatred,
overgrown with briars, and beset with snares; to sail gently down the course of
life on the silver current of friendship, than to be tossed on the tempestuous
sea of contention; to behold the lovely face of heaven smiling with a cheerful
serenity, than to see it frowning with clouds or raging with storms! How much a
peaceful state resembles heaven, into which no strife nor clamor ever enter,
but where blessed souls converse together in perfect love, and perpetual
concord! And how a condition of enmity resembles hell, that black and dismal
region of dark hatred, fiery wrath, and horrible tumult! How like a paradise
the world would be flourishing in joy and rest, if men would but cheerfully
conspire in love, and generously contribute to each others good: and how like a
savage wildness it now is, when like wild beasts, they vex and persecute, worry
and devour each other.

AND to conclude, let us remember, that " Love shall never fail," and that, the
man of love " shall be had in everlasting remembrance, and his memory shall be
blessed." No spices can so embalm a man, no monument can so preserve his name,
as works of love. The renown of power, of wit, and of learning, may rest on the
minds of men with some admiration; but the remembrance of love reigns in their
hearts with sincerest affection, there erecting trophies triumphant over death
and oblivion. The good man's very dust is fragrant, and his grave venerable.
His name is never mentioned without the tribute of a sigh, and loud
acclamations of praise. And even when he is gone hence, and in person is no
more seen, he remains visible in the footsteps and fruits of his goodness. The
poor man beholds him in the comfortable subsistence which he still receives
from his bounty. The sick man feels him in the refreshments which he yet enjoys
from his charity. He survives in the hearts of the afflicted, who still
remember the services which he rendered them so cheerfully. And his weeping
friends dry up their tears when they think of his virtues, the rich fruits of
which they doubt not, he is now enjoying in a better world. His memory shall
likewise endure forever, in the favor of God, and in those glorious rewards
which he will bestow upon him for his love to his brethren. God will not forget
his labor of love, but will raise him up after the short slumbers of the
grave, to receive that unfading crown, and that precious pearl of eternal life:
-- " Well done good and faithful servant, -- I was hungry and you gave me food,
I was thirsty and you gave me drink, naked was I and you clothed me, sick and
in prison and you visited me, enter now into the joy of your lord."

THUS, when all the flashes of sensual pleasure are quite extinct; when all the
flowers of secular glory are withered away; when all earthly treasures are
buried in darkness; when this world with all its fashions are utterly vanished
and gone, the good man's state will be still firm and flourishing, and his
righteousness shall endure for ever.

IF then you would be happy indeed; happy in every condition, and in the
discharge of every duty; happy in life and in death; happy in this world and in
that which is to come; learn to LOVE.

THIS having learnt, thou have attained the sum of wisdom. Hope no higher,
though all the stars thou know by name, and all the etherial powers; all
secrets of the deep; all nature's works, or works of God in heaven, earth, air,
or sea; and all the riches of this world enjoyedst, and all that rule one
empire. Only add deeds to thy knowledge answerable. Add faith, add virtue,
patience, temperance; add LOVE, the soul of all the rest; then shall thou not
be loath to leave this world, but shall inherit a world that is happier far.

MILTON. FINIS.

