TIT FOR TAT; OR, A PURGE FOR A PILL: BEING AN ANSWER TO A SCURRILOUS PAMPHLET,
LATELY PUBLISHED, ENTITLED "A PILL FOR PORCUPINE."

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A POETICAL RHAPSODY ON THE TIMES. DESCRIBING The Disasters
of an Emigrant.

"To bear an open Slander is a Curse,
"But not to find an Answer is a worse."
"This you get, Booby Squirt,
"Because you would abetter:
"Since you're for flinging dirt,
"We'll try who best can spatter."
By Dick Retort.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
A PREFACE is, in common, like the Bill of Fare to an Entertainment; where the
reader sees what he has to set down to. But the author of the Pill for
Porcupine treats his customers a little in the Irish style, and introduces his
essay with something which he might, with more justice, have called a
postcript. So Paddy's reason never fails
To geer draft horses by their tails.
However, he calls it a Preface, and as such we will consider it. -- The
principal intention of this said preface is to give us a taste of the author's
wit against the story-tellers and pumpkin-vines of Connecticut and
Massachusetts; and to drag Mr. CAREY limping in, by the head and shoulders, in
order to tell the reader that Porcupine had dubbed him a man of honor, that he
was a good democrat, and had risen from care to contentment, without being
elated by his prosperity.

With these compliments to Mr. CAREY I perfectly acquiesce, for as Porcupine
has not been very liberal in conferring praise, there is the more reason to
suppose it merited in the present instance; and he is quite as welcome to a
place of honor among the democrats, for as these gentry are not remarkable for
their attachment to the constitution and government of the United States, God
forbid I should ever envy him his fame. If there is any credit to be gained by
opposing the government and its chief magistrate, under which many a citizen,
besides Mr. CAREY, has risen from care to contentment, from the state of a
needy adventurer to that of independance and ease, he is welcome to it all.

But I plainly see that no order of society, no change of circumstances will
destroy inveterate habits and the prejudices of education, if engrafted on a
natural stock. Some men, we know, are distinguished through their lives by a
love of peace, order, and stability; others again are ever restless, turbulent
and vindictive, and wherever they go, they both carry their distinctive habits
along with them.

"Coelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt." He has now a chance,
therefore, of partaking of that "esteem" and of "those caresses" of the world,
so pleasing to the ingenuous mind, and of becoming, as well as Mr. YOUNG, "one
of your fine modern gentlemen of yesterday." But it is not only here; in all
the civilized countries of the world (...) riches give consideration to their
possessors: it is so in Scotland as well as Ireland; it is so even in France,
that ill-fated country of sans-culottism: riches have made many a man taken
notice of there, and marked his head for the guillotine; if the owner even was
innocent, his wealth was a liberticide.

Having now said all that I intended of the Preface, I will make a few remarks
on the manner in which the piece was introduced to the public. There was as
much mystery used in bringing it to market as if the author thought the ware
was contraband, and his life was in danger; but surely so much caution was not
necessary in Philadelphia, one of the freest places in the world for scandal;
where men deal without fear or restraint in all that is abusive and scurrilous,
and where neither wisdom nor virtue give protection to their owners. -- On its
first appearance the sale was confined to the publishers, and to the
warehouses of Messrs. CAREY, RICE, and CAMPBELL, as if it had been a company
adventure, and they were resolved, contrary to the common usage, to engross it
all to themselves; as they did for some time, though they afterward permitted
others to partake with them, finding it necessary, I suppose, in order to
dispose of their ware.

But no part of this mysterious business deserves more notice than the choice
that was made of a publisher. It looked as if the author intended to give the
whole an air of burlesque, by choosing out of all the printers and booksellers
in the city, a sober old gentleman, with the phiz of a covenanting elder, to
midwife his scurrility. This was a grave preface indeed to a dirty subject; but
though a little singular, was not altogether without example. It is likely he
took the hint from Dr. SWIFT's Tale of a Tub. The Dean tells us in his history
of the three brothers, that when Jack had an itch for throwing dirt, he always
began the work with a down-looking, psalm-singing face, in order to draw the
people about him, and then pelted away manfully. Our author, I suppose, thought
the trick a good one, and resolved to try it in vending his pamphlet; with this
difference only, that the one distributed his filth in the streets, and the
other was to do it from behind his counter.

As it would be tiresome to myself, as well as disgusting to the reader, to
follow this writer through the whole of his misrepresentations, scurrility and
nonsense, in the following answer I shall only select some particular parts of
the performance, and offer a few observations on them; which I will do with as
much connection and order as the subject will admit, or is possible in pursuing
a Jack of Lanthorn, who dances from place to place, without any other apparent
plan than to scatter abuse as he goes.

TIT FOR TAT, etc.
"WHAT a cabal was raised" says this writer in the first page of his pamphlet,
"against citizen GENET, because a certain party had asserted, that he
interfered in the internal government of our country: was he more culpable than
the other (the British agent) who does it by means of a hireling?" as if there
was any analogy between the conduct of GENET and that of Peter Porcupine, who
is the hireling alluded to. In one case, a foreign minister questioned the
authority of the Executive of the United States; threatened to appeal from it
to the people at large, and really did so; caballed with turbulent and
ambitious men; set on foot popular clubs to embarrass the government; and in
short carried his insolence and intrigues to such an alarming height, as to
oblige the President to insist on his recall: in the other, it is in defense of
this government, against the emissaries that GENET left behind, and his
successors have since raised up, that most, if not all the essays under the
signature of Porcupine have been levelled. So that if the British minister or
agent had any concern in setting him to work, which sincerely I do not believe,
he certainly acted a friendly part by by our government: but as there is not
the least evidence of such a connection, it would be unjust to deprive Peter of
any part of the credit he has gained by a spontaneous act.

As far as I am able to judge of his motives from his writings, he has been
provoked to take up the pen by the scurrilous abuse that has been wantonly
heaped on his native country; and to defend the government of this against its
worst enemies, the creatures of France, who have endeavored to reduce America
to the same subjection to her ambitious polititics as every other nation that
has been cursed with her alliance. This sprightly and ingenious writer expects
no other reward nor patronage than such as he has received already, from a
liberal and enlightened public: his enemies therefore may be assured that he
neither feels "a contrition" for what he has published, nor "has the fountain
nearly ran dry." Long may he continue the champion of order and the federal
government, as well as a scourge to all its enemies, whether of American,
English, French or Irish growth! The peaceable and good citizens of the United
States, from whatever nation derived, he never designed to offend, and he is
happy in being assured that few of them are his real enemies, whatever the
cutthroats of France or the thieves of Ireland may be. The base attempt,
therefore, of this pamphleteer, and others, to accuse him of vilifying the very
respectable citizens of Philadelphia, as a "mob or banditti," is of a piece
with other democratic tricks, and is doubtless intended to collect a mob, in
order to answer his wit and arguments by the rhetoric of stones and brick-bats.

As we proceed in the examination of this pamphlet, we shall find the writer is
as much an enemy of human nature, and of all its amiable feelings, as he is of
candor and truth. In page 10, "With regard" says he "to the murders and
outrages committed by the French nation, there are none will believe a single
fact stated by Porcupine, except credulous children or prejudiced old women,
sinking into their dotage." Why he excepts children and old women I cannot
guess: it would have been nearer the mark had he said they only disbelieve, for
few others are so ignorant of what has passed on the sanguinary theater of
France, as to doubt what Porcupine has narrated in his "Bloody Buoy." The
murders at Paris on the 2d and 3d of September; the massacres at Avignon and
Versailles; the shootings and drownings at Lions and Nantes; and all the other
horrid scenes in the various departments, which fix an indelible stain on the
name of liberty, have all been confirmed by such a cloud of evidence, that none
but those who are determined to shut out conviction, can entertain a doubt.
Their own public papers, to go no further, contain undeniable proofs of the
ferocious character of this people, from the first year of the revolution to
this day -- from JOURDAN, the cutthroat of Avignon, to BUONAPARTE, the modern
Attila, and scourge of Italy; and the histories of all their former civil wars
are stamped with the same character, although none of them equalled the present
in bloody scenes. Formerly they had some sense of Religion to restrain them,
but now the Stygian philosophy of their Diderots, their Ceruttis and their
Condorcets has not only soured the small mixture of humanity they had in their
natures, but removed all fear of God and love of man from their hearts. In aid
of native ferocity, they now possess the sang froid of demons.

The hecatombs of innocent women and children, sacrificed on the altar of their
Moloch, the Goddess of Liberty, are "no evidence" says this pamphleteer, none
at all "of the cruelty and injustice of the nation, but are the fullest proofs
of their lenity and forbearance." What think you, Reader, of a monster who
would venture to contaminate an American press with such sentiments? Beware of
such men, for he that would advocate such cruelties, would imitate them, if he
dared. He is worse, indeed, than the very instruments who committed them, for
he cannot plead the same excuse of example, of fear or revenge: he sits down,
coolly, at his desk, three thousand miles removed from the terrible scene, and
enjoys, with the complacency of a demon, the sacrifice of thousands of
victims, whose cruel fate would make an American savage shudder with horror.
With him it is all "lenity and forbearance, short-lived prejudice, or the
result of irresistible necessity": and so said Robespierre and his satellites,
when engaged in their murdering work: their cant phrase for murder was
travailler a la Revolution. One of these monsters, writing of the Royalists in
la Vendee, very coolly remarked, that if the remaining population did not
exceed thirty or forty thousand souls, -- "certainly the quickest way to finish
the war, is to cut all their throats" (...)
: and he said right, but it would require an army of such cannibals as himself,
or as our pamphleteer, to execute the order, and such, unhappily, were found.
This very humane delegate, reader, was one of your modern philosophers! the
author of a treatise entitled Prejudices Destroyed! and these monsters are
still held up by their American admirers as worthy of imitation.

But to repeat proofs of the unparalleled atrocities committed in France, would
be painful to the humane reader, and to those of the same temper as this writer
it would be labor lost; they would not "believe a single fact" because
recorded in the Bloody Buoy. To such I recommend the perusal of Miss HELEN
WILLIAMS'S last letters from Paris. She is a republican, as well as a great
admirer of the French nation: her sister is married to one of the
Revolutionists. "When the future historian," says this elegant writer, "whose
faithful pen must trace the hideous features of the Vendean war, in all their
deformity, shall describe scenes which I dare not name, let no one, because he
may consider such crimes as scarcely within the verge of human possibility,
doubt that they have been committed."

But, according to this writer, Porcupine is not alone "in his abuse of the
French nation; Mr. HAMILTON has trodden the same path before him. The latter in
his writings has endeavored to prove that it was not from disinterested motives
that France took an active part in the American Revolution, but to pull down
the enormous and overbearing pride of England" -- and is there a single
Democrat weak enough to think otherwise? "But" adds he, admitting this was the
motive, they certainly loved us more than Great Britain did; and if they loved
us more, ought not our gratitude to be in proportion to that love, in
preference to Britain, as theirs was in preference to us. There is something
very much like nonsense both in meaning and construction of this whining
sentence about love, but as I am not fond of quarrelling with men for the
blunders of mere ignorance, I will endeavor to guess at his meaning. It is
then, if I understand him, that, although France entered into the American war
from mere hatred and jealousy of Great Britain, she thereby evinced her
superior affection for the people of these States, and has, in consequence, a
just claim to a preference when her interest and that of her rival are brought
(...)

But if we admit the premises, the conclusion by no means follows. The British
colonies in America were planted, cherished and protected by the parent state
at a great expense; she thought she had a legitimate authority over them, and
when they revolted, she considered them as rebellious children, whom she had a
right to reduce to obedience and submission: had Ireland or any part of the
island of Great Britain revolted, she would have acted in the same manner: but
it does not follow, because she carried her parental claims too far, that she
had less friendship for her children than a foreign nation had, whose
government was an absolute despotism, whose religion and manners were
diametrically opposite -- a nation which had been the inveterate enemy of the
name of an Englishman for ages, and which, not twenty years before, had invaded
this country with fleets and armies, with an intention to subjugate or expel
the inhabitants. For a bigoted tyrant to be converted into a patron of civil
and religious liberty, an avowed enemy into a real friend, without any apparent
cause, is too great a miracle to meet with belief now a days. If a man does me
a good office to serve himself or to injure a third person who is his enemy, or
for both reasons combined, there is no merit whatever in the act. The case
between this country and France was exactly parallel. She considered the
British colonies as part of the national strength, as a limb of the body
politic, and if she could but cut it off, she would not care if it rotted
immediately afterward, unless she expected to derive some future benefit from
it.

Her motives to assist America were just the same as induced her to aid the
Pretender and the rebels of Scotland in 1715 and 1745; to excite the patriots
in Holland, who, by the bye, were all aristocrats, against the Stadtholder; to
support the party in Sweden called the Hats against another called the
Night-Caps, to the great detriment of the nation; and to assist the Genoese in
subjugating the brave inhabitants of Corsica. All these acts originated in the
same base and cowardly policy, that ever governed the cabinet of Versailles,
and that still predominates in the secret councils of the nation, as we have
woefully experienced. A tenth part of the money they have spent, and a twentieth
part of the pains they have taken, to disturb and injure their neighbors,
wisely bestowed on their own people and government, would long ago have placed
them with real dignity at the head of the nations, the great object of their
ambition; whereas by their most splendid successes hitherto they have never
risen to eminence but with the curses of all good men on their heads. This, so
far as relates to the ancient government, has the consent of the republicans
themselves, and how applicable it is to the present rulers, posterity will
decide.

But if we leave motive out of the question, and admit that "one good turn
deserves another", and that it does, has grown into a maxim, it was certainly
due to the party who did the action; to the royal family and nobles of France;
to men who have been murdered, or have fled from the daggers of the assassins,
and whose memories the democrats of this country, the vile ingrates, as well as
the Jacobins of France, pursue with incessant yells of defamation. Their
enemies in France would not allow them to breathe the vital air, and those of
America will not admit that they possess a single virtue. The merit of all
their actions in promoting the independence of America, by some kind of hocus
pocus, is instantly transferred to the Republicans, who had no more voice in
the business than the slaves of Algiers. All the benefits we received from
Louis XVI. are carried to the credit of the republic, and all the evils we
suffered under Louis XV. are charged to the despotism of the king. This is the
way these democrats keep their accounts: God preserve my affairs from such
rascally book-keepers!

"National pride, ambition, folly and interest," this scribbler asserts, "are
the governing and only motives, which actuate kings toward each other," and
yet France, [mark the man's inconsistency, France, under an absolute monarch]
more enlightened and magnanimous than all the rest, gave America early proofs
of her friendship, by entering into a treaty of alliance with her. Enlightened
and magnanimous! Ah! poor Louis, he would have been less magnanimous, indeed I
think he would, had he been more enlightened! Little did he imagine, when he
sent his La Fayettes, his D'Estaings, De Grasses, and Rochambeaus, to fight our
battles, that they would bring back with them a tiger from the woods of
America, that in the course of twelve years would destroy him and all his
family! -- and that after he was dead the people of America would curse his
memory! No, no, magnanimity was as far from the heart of this unfortunate king
as foresight was from his head. He intended to dig a pit for his neighbor, and
fell into it himself. It is a lesson of importance to kings; and no country was
so sit to teach the lesson as France, whose kings, for more than three
centuries before, had been constantly employed in embroiling the affairs of
their neighbors.

But we will leave these monarchs to their own designs: I grant that, in
general, they are ambitious and interested enough, and I am afraid the motives
of the ill-fated Louis were not purer than those of kings in common -- if they
were, I am sure we have been vastly ungrateful -- and we will now turn to the
connection between republics. Here, if we believe this writer, and all of the
same stamp, the scene brightens: it is on the republican floor we are told to
look for "universal benevolence", "disinterested friendship", and "cordial
attachment" -- a mere Millenium!

I do not know from what sources this writer has derived his historical
knowledge; to judge from what he asserts, one would imagine that he had studied
the History of Utopia, the Republic of Plato, the Social Contract of Rousseau,
and other political reveries: I never read them but as ingenious romances: my
information concerning men in civil society, is drawn from the annals of
governments not quite so visionary. I have looked into the history of
Switzerland, cantoned into a number of petty republics; surrounded and
intersected by almost impassable mountains; poor, frugal, and in a good degree
virtuous: yet the demon of discord found his way among them, and often
impelled one diminutive commonwealth to draw the sword against another. Venice
and Genoa, two commercial republics, have engaged in long and frequent wars, to
extend their trade or enlarge their power. Every schoolboy knows that Rome and
Carthage, two of the most eminent republics of antiquity, were the slaves of
avarice and ambition, and contended for empire with unrelenting animosity,
until one of them was wholly ruined. Carthage had her Hamilcars and her
Hannibals, and Rome had her Catos, the patriots of those days, who were
constantly impelling there fellow-citizens to destroy fleets, burn towns, and
cut the throats of the inhabitants, or to drag them into captivity. The
Republics of Lacedaemon, Athens and Thebes were always at daggers drawn. The
States of Greece were never at peace among themselves, except when the swords
of the Persians were at their doors: and their common danger was not sufficient
to unite them perfectly, until they were bound together by the authority of one
head, a Philip or an Alexander. Had it not been for some such power, to silence
their demagogues, patriots such as we are cursed with, nothing is more likely
than that they would have yielded at last to the arms or the gold of the great
king; who, when he could not conquer, knew, as well as any French minister,
that "Patriots have their price."

What shall we think then of this silly writer, when he talks of the interest,
ambition and pride of kings, and of the virtues and friendship of Republics?
shall we not say that he talks like one that dreams? But these quacks have a
plaster for every sore. They will tell you, that the ancients were ignorant
beings, unacquainted with the principles of government, with the due
arrangement of power, the checks and balances discovered by modern politicians.
This is not so clear as some may imagine; but be it as it may, it is certain
that they possessed quite as much public virtue, and as much love of country,
the grand cement of society, as we do; and were quite as free from the selfish
passions, the bane of public and private happiness, as we are, after so many
centuries of improvement. It is virtue that gives stability to empire, it is
righteousness that exalts a nation, more than any chosen form of government
whatever.

We have already had a scantling, in our own infant country, the best
constructed republic that ever existed, of the propensities of these same
fellows, called patriots: we have seen how they would manage our affairs if God
in his wrath should put them into their hands: have we not experienced, in a
time of universal peace, and a state of unexampled prosperity, that there are
men among us proud, ambitious, discontented and stupid enough to attempt to
subvert this goodly structure, to prostrate its honor in dust, and to rush
madly into a war, without cause, or means, or end?

These men should either cease clamouring against the government of their own
country, and vomiting their gall against its best citizens, or say no more in
praise of republican virtue and happiness. Let us first show an example of the
love of peace, without which no country can prosper, of harmony, of moderation
and wisdom, that the world may see what good the system is really capable of
producing; as we are the only republic now existing, except a few insignificant
communities nestled among the rocks of Italy: and if, after the experience of
one hundred years, which is a short age for an empire, we have proved the
excellence of the form and materials, we may exult. Until then, every wise man
will be modest, and forbear joining in cry with those yelping curs who are ever
disturbing the world with their noise.

But let us follow this writer; to convince America and the world more fully"
says he, "that her former services were not the effect of a temporary, sordid,
selfish interest, she (France) has since made overtures for entering into a
treaty anew; on principles the most honorable and flattering to the national
dignity of America, and advantageous to her interrests. But Mr. HAMILTON, stiff
in opinion and always in the wrong, not content with questioning the purity of
Louis's motives in the former treaty, "by his influence in the cabinet council
of America, defeated her friendly designs, and rendered all her (generous)
overtures (for another) abortive." Sad fellow! But as it is not just to condemn
him, before we examine these overtures, nor to take things on the word of this
writer, we will recur to Citizen GENET'S account of the affair: he was better
acquainted with the business than any other person on this side the Atlantic,
being the agent employed to bring it forward. In his Instructions, which he
afterward published in his own defense, we were informed that the United
States were invited to the honor of making "a common cause" with the French, in
their war with all the world; of "guaranteeing their West India islands"; of
"receiving commissions", as generals, colonels, captains, etc. in and under the
authority of the Republic; "of suspending all our other commercial pursuits;
and" of refusing admission into our ports to all nations with whom they were or
might be at war; in order -- for what, think you -- " to befriend the Empire of
Liberty!! -- and on condition of our compliance with these very honorable and
flattering terms, and on this condition alone; we are promised "a free commerce
with the French West Indies"; where, by the bye, the whites, blacks and yellows
were too busy in burning towns and plantations, and in cutting of throats, in a
little dispute they had of their own, about the empire of liberty, to attend
much to commerce. If the British had not landed, and snatched part of the
country from destruction, I believe they would by this time have had no
commerce at all.

This is the treaty the French citizen had to propose, and which the President
and his council thought proper to reject. Indeed what plea could they offer to
the world, or to their own consciences; what temptation had they for
contracting any kind of treaty with a band of daring usurpers, whose hands were
still reeking with the blood of their own king, our benefactor, whom they had
murdered in violation of the most solemn contract. The alliance might have been
useful and glorious to them, but to us it would have been disgraceful and
ruinous. What think you, my fellow-citizens, of a foreigner, who at this time
of day undertakes to advocate such insidious and inimical overtures? is there
any degree of contempt and detestation adequate to such insolence? A man must
either be a fool himself, or have a very mean opinion of the understanding of
his readers, before he would venture to pollute paper with so daring an insult.

Were it not for the great pains that have been taken and still are taking to
mislead the public mind, it would be unnecessary to take any notice at this
time, of a subject that has been so often and so fully handled before; but
before I quit it, I will make one more remark, and it will come in more a
propos in this place than in any other. Whatever advantages the United States
derived from their treaties with France, they ceased with the death of the
king: since that epoch they have produced nothing but discord: and happy had it
been for us if the Executive, when citizen GENET first set his foot in America,
had, with his wonted firmness, declared that the relation between the two
countries was dissolved; that the guillotine of Robespierre and Orleans had cut
the tie. He would then have had but one battle to fight: whereas, by admitting
the revival of a contract extinguished by themselves, he has had to contend
with the republic and her American allies about the interpretation of every
material article; and planted thorns in his own administration, which have at
length goaded him to a resignation, when his virtues, talents, and good name
are still necessary to the preservation of his country.

However heterodox this opinion may sound in the ears of some men, I am sure it
is not singular, and I think the recent conduct of the French sufficiently
proves that it is not unfounded. They have manifested by their actions, which
speak louder than words, that they consider the treaties as null and void, so
far at least as they bind on themselves, and that they never intended to make
use of them as any thing more than a stepping stone to the new one projected:
and as they have failed answering this purpose, they are resolved that they
shall not protect our ships and cargoes from their rapacity. After this short
digression, reader, we will now step back to the spot where we left our author
discharging his venom against Mr. HAMILTON.

"From the influence" says he, "Mr. HAMILTON'S writings has had, in giving a
tinge to the American character, I am convinced it will render them the
contempt and scorn of Europe." That is, his writings first tinge the American
character, then it renders them the contempt and scorn of Europe -- which is a
droll kind of a battle between it and them: however, we shall by this means be
fully revenged of these wicked writings, for if they once become the scorn of
Europe, it will not be long before they will become the scorn of America too.
-- But I do not believe a word of all this nonsense: -- it is a beautiful tinge
that Mr. H's writings have given to the American character -- it is the
sky-blue of peace See "Pacificus"
; and if such publications as the one now before me do not communicate any
worse impression, which from their fleeting nature I hope they will not, I am
convinced she long will retain her present amiable color in the eyes of the
world. God, in his mercy, preserve her from the blood-coloured tinge of France!

"Have we not daily striking proofs of my assertion," adds he. "Have not the
American citizens been treated with coldness by the French"? Yes, if by
coldness he means that they have seized, and plundered, and detained our
property, to the value of four or five millions of dollars, for which we shall
never receive a single sous. This is the coldness of death, and is a miserable
return for the animating warmth American hospitality has communicated to their
half-dead, distressed emigrants. "Have they not been harassed, vexed, and
buffetted by the English? Yes, God confound the plunderers of both nations: but
it is unjust not to make this distinction, that the latter owed us no favors,
and that by the last treaty with them, we shall recover full compensation for
all our legal demands. "And have not the Algerines compelled us to purchase a
treaty, at the enormous sum of twelve hundred thousand dollars?" Yes, and they
have, to the eternal disgrace of Europe, compelled her most powerful states to
buy treaties on still more humiliating terms: but I hardly think those
blackguard Mussulmen ever saw any of Mr. HAMILTON'S writings; or care in the
least whether we hate the French or the English most. They hate all men, who
are not circumcised according to the law of Mahomet, and if they have any
property, consider it as a natural game.

We have now done with his abuse of the French; the only nation from which
America could expect to receive real acts of friendship! and shall next follow
our author in viewing his conduct with regard to the United States internally,
"where" he says "we will find as little cause of approbation and panegric."
Then he proceeds to tell his readers that in the Convention, summoned to frame
the Federal Constitution, Mr. HAMILTON was foiled in his attempt to introduce a
monarchical government, and that, on finding the constitution was popular, and
"admitted great latitude of construction," he at length signed it: but as this
was forced work, he did it grudgingly, and not only "meditated but sought
revenge" for his disappointment.

However, from the account given his resentment was not very deep, or he had an
excellent knack at concealing it; for the first act of public notoriety that we
find him engaged in, was "in conjunction with Mr. MADISON, to write in support
of the constitution"; and he did it so successfully that "he not only
established his reputation as a man of abilities, but as a firm federalist, and
that too among the real friends of the constitution." Whether he has persevered
in supporting what he did not altogether approve, we shall see further as we
proceed; but it is certain Mr. MADISON has changed in his conduct greatly, for
he has openly and strenuously opposed the constitution and its whole executive
branch. The one has been the champion of what he did not approve, because it
was popular, and the other has combated what he did approve, because he has
been disappointed. Which, reader, is the most virtuous public character?

But resentment still rankled in Mr. HAMILTON'S breast; he still cherished a
predilection for royalty and the pomps of government -- and of course a secret
aversion for our plain republican manners. To this source may be traced, says
our equality-man, the introduction of Etiquette, Bustle, Levees, and a train of
other aristocratic creatures, who daily mounted guard at the President's door,
to the great scandal and terror of all good sans culottes: indeed it is
strongly suspected that these same gentry, in conjunction with HAMILTON and
others, formed a conspiracy to blow up the Constitution and all its friends,
some dark night, when they were fast asleep; but happily the design was
discovered time enough to prevent it. --

One of the principal persons engaged with him in the hellish plot was a
certain Mr. JOHN FENNO, editor of the United States Gazette. The part he was to
act, was to insert time after time, in his Courtly paper, certain insidious
paragraphs, calculated to poison the public mind, and to give it an
aristocratic tinge; such, for instance, as "Just arrived in town, the Honorable
Mr. such a one" -- and "The Honorable Mr. --, from Richmond, Norfolk or
Charleston, on his way to Boston" -- and, to carry on the "Diabolical Scheme"
still better, he was directed to "intersprerse, occasionally, some pious saying
of some good old woman to the eastward, who had been drowned for witchcraft,"
and a thousand other incantations, all tending to the same dreadful purpose.
Happily, as I have said the plot was discovered before it was ripe for
execution; by which "the paper lost it is circulation, and the printer was
obliged to change it into a daily Gazette," as well as to raise the price from
three to eight dollars pr. annum!!

When this machiavelian scheme failed, Mr. HAMILTON was obliged, says our
Sansculottes, to vary his plan, and to attack some other quarter. As soon as he
came into the office of Secretary of the Treasury, for which the President was
weak enough to think him well qualified, finding the finances of the United
States, void of order, and void of hope, something like mother Chaos, before
time began; when the domestic creditors apprehended all their scraps of paper
would become, like old Conti, fit for nothing but to light a pipe with, and the
foreign creditors began to look upon us as a nation of swindlers and
pick-pockets -- at this time, I say, he contrived his d -- d funding system, by
which hope was brought back to the widow and orphan at home, and foreigners
recovered their ancient faith in American honor. This, it is plain, was a home
stroke at the Democratic part of the Constitution, for, in direct opposition to
Democratic principles, it was calculated to pay off our debts; and every body
knows that a man, and by the same reason, a government out of debt, is out of
credit. Besides, to pay debts is a mark of a pitiful spirit, unworthy the
high-mettled Democrat, whose principal inducement to engage in the war, was to
put his creditors at defiance.

But all that preceded was nothing, says our Pampheteer, to his last nefarious
attempt, the Excise law. In this he manifested the whole depth of his malice,
as well as the extent of his talents. As he knew that the patriots beyond the
mountains, where they are as "Thick as leaves that strew the brooks
In Val' Ombrosa" --
were passionately fond of whiskey, he resolved that, as it was a Democratic
liquor, they should not drink it duty free. He pretended that in the
distilleries they wasted a grain, by which they might fatten hogs, horses and
cows, and thereby increase the real wealth and strength of the state; instead
of which, by drinking so much ardent spirits, they not only injured their
healths, but continued poor and drunkards, as their fathers had been before
them. For this reason he taxed it at the enormous rate of seven or eight cents
pr. gallon; and as it is not uncommon in that country for a man to consume a
quart or more a day, so every day he chose to get drunk, he was obliged to pay
two or three cents toward the discharge of the public debt. This any body will
allow, was sufficient to shake the fidelity of the Whiskey counties, was it
ever so firmly rooted, and to produce a revolt. It had the effect: and
Braddock's field was the Mons sacer to which the plebeans seceded, to consult
and organize their force. Warm debates took place: some of the most wary,
willing to secure a retreat, if things went contrary to their wish, proposed
moderate measures, but Others apart sat on a hill retired,
And reasoned high of war and separation,
Of Independence, and the de'il knows what.


As is common on such occasions the violent prevailed: the standard of
rebellion was unfurled, alias liberty-poles were erected, and damnation drank
to HAMILTON and the Excise law in many gallon of whiskey. This our author says
was the crisis that the Secretary wished for. It was not submission to the law
he desired, it was opposition, which would pave the way for a military force.
"Hence we find him giving encouragement to the opposition, by an ill-timed
forbearance of urging the judiciary authority." Had he at the commencement,
"ordered suits in law to be commenced against the refractory, it is universally
believed, by those who know better than Mr. HAMILTON, the temper of people in
the western counties of Pennsylvania, and the respect which they have always
manifested for the judiciary authority, that submission would have been
obtained:" or in other words, had the Secretary assumed a bold decided tone at
first, the business would have been brought sooner to a close.

Let us examine this statement a little further: let us suppose Fox, the
cowardly deputy-marshal, who fled from among them to save his life, had been
sent back with peremptory orders to execute his process at all risques
whatever; or in case he could not be prevailed with to go, had the marshal
himself been ordered to proceed on the business, and to summon all the civil
authority to his aid; the worst that could have happened, was, that some of
them might have been scalped, and others of them perhaps only branded, or
tarred and feathered, to the no small entertainment of the rebels. In such a
case the militia would have been called out in 92 instead of 94, and sooner
this had happened the better, as so much time would have been saved; for no
body is foolish enough to believe, after the amendments made in the law, and so
much pains taken to reconcile them to it without success, they would have
submitted, 'till they were forced. Force at length, and nothing but force,
wrought submission: it was the logic of fifteen thousand bayonets that
convinced the Western Sansculottes of their mistake, and taught them what they
had never learned before, due "respect to the judiciary authority."

It is true enough therefore that the Secretary "was unacquainted with the
temper" of the people. Accommodation or lenient measures were not calculated to
operate successfully on their licentious spirits. After banishing the excise
from among them, and the officers too, they might have returned to an imperfect
submission, such as suited their own palates, for the benefit of protection and
defense, but it would ever have been precarious and uncertain. A man who by an
excursion on the highway, or on the high seas, acquires a booty worth
preserving, thinks the laws of some use, when they protect him in the enjoyment
of his acquisitions. That is a dreadful villain indeed, who does not
acknowledge the necessity of respecting the laws some part of his life.

After the massacre of the Indians at Conestogo and Lancaster, and the attempt
that followed, to cut the throats of a remnant that fled to Philadelphia for
shelter, some thirty years ago; and after butchering the inhabitants of three
or four Moravian towns in cold blood, at the close of the continental war; the
heroes, these very whisky boys for aught I know, returned, very quietly, to
their homes and to the respect they always had and since have manifested to the
laws. These licentious pranks, these overleapings of law, are too habitual with
some of the back settlers of Pennsylvania: at one time it is a thirst for
blood, and at another for whiskey; but at all times it manifests a wild,
disorderly, and somewhat a cruel temper.

But Mr. HAMILTON not only betrayed his ignorance, in the estimate he formed of
the character of the Western people, he was equally mistaken when he took so
much pains to procure evidence, to impeach those old foxes FINDLEY, SMILIE and
GALLATIN. However active these gentlemen were at first, in spreading the
whiskey mania, they soon found their authority with the populace was supplanted
by new favorites, men of greater daring; and they wheeled to the right about,
and left the poor deluded devils in the lurch. They took care to make their own
peace by complying with the President's Proclamation, -- the door left open for
repenting sinners, -- and HAMILTON might have earthed a fox in the forests of
Alleghany, sooner than he could have entrapped one of them. No, no; "they
became active in suppressing the Insurrection" -- when they found it was likely
to miscarry: they had raised the devil, and they were resolved to snatch at
some credit in laying him too. Whether the ignorant herd will re-elect these
betrayers to represent them in the general and state legislatures is uncertain;
if they do, it will be considered hereafter as a proof either that they are
extremely ignorant, or not sincere in their repentance.

But it is amazing, if we believe this writer, what a number of different forms
the Secretary assumed to come at evidence to criminate these leaders. One
moment we find him in the character of an "hospitable friend"; next he put on
the "subtilty of a fiend"; and when these failed, we find him "like the frog in
the fable"; and this frog is clothed with all the "terrors of an inquisitorial
monk, with knitted brow and angry look". In short old Proteus was a fool to our
American secretary for variety of shapes: that slippery god could not assume
more than one at a time; but here we find the secretary like a frog, and a
monk, and looking as angry as the d -- l, all at one instant: certainly if
Major POWERS One of the Witnesses interrogated.
and the rest of them had not been as wily as himself and as brave as Caesar,
he would have extorted something from them. But it was all labor lost: he
never once reflected that the whiskey-boys wanted true and real representatives
in Congress; none of your shams; -- and that had they betrayed their
candidates, a chamber in the Penitential House, or a hempen collar would have
put them to the necessity of choosing others not quite so fit.

We come next to our author's elaborate defense of Irish honesty -- a task
equal in honor to that of Hercules, in cleansing the Augean stable -- but as I
always hated lengthy calculations, and am sure I should soon grow tired of one
applied to determine the exact number or proportion of Irishmen hanged in
America, I leave this job to Porcupine. It is a national question, and I dare
say he can determine with mathematical precision, whether our author's
calculation be exact or not. In the meanwhile I will be so candid as to declare
that we have more than a quantum sufficit both of English and Irish rogues
among us; though the natives of Hibernia are vastly the most numerous. What is
the precise cause of the difference; whether the English make a shift to hang
most of their own rogues at home, and the Irish send theirs abroad, to
propagate the breed, is hard for me to determine: but this I will say, for I
love to give the devil his due, that, if war and justice must, for the good of
mankind, have a certain number of victims in every country, we are most
indebted to the Irish for our sacrifices: and as, of course, there is some
merit in being shot or hanged, as well as in laboring for the benefit of the
world, in this respect, Hibernia, the palm is thine! -- The preceding view
regards only the moral character of the two nations, their propensities for
picking of pockets or cutting of throats, but it is necessary to do justice
also to their respective political talents, which the reader will see, if he
has patience, in the sequel.

Politics, however abstruse a science it was formerly esteemed, has been so
thoroughly explored by modern essayists, and the knowledge has been so
thoroughly disseminated by those laborious servants of the public, the editors
of Gazettes, that every mechanic knows more now about civil rights and duties,
than LOCK, HARRINGTON, or SIDNEY. Every barber can tell you, to a hair's
breadth, how far the line of submission goes, and where the right of
insurrection begins; when the voice of the majority ought to govern, and when
the minority have a right to interpose their veto; whether a government divided
into three branches, or spreading, like a gooseberry bush, all into branches,
is best; whether the power of making treaties is superior to the power of
breaking them, and whether they both exist together, like the principles of
Good and Evil, in the Magian theology, always at loggerheads, or whether, like
Castor and Pollux, they live and die by turns; how to manage the freedom of the
press so that, like a cogged die, it shall always show one side only; and a
thousand other difficult and delicate questions, where the shades of right and
wrong meet, and almost run into one another. Although the present war is a
contest for power among the leaders, with the people at large it is a mere war
of opinions, and has been as zealously maintained by the pen, as by the sword:
rivers of ink as well as of blood have been spilt on the occasion. But when the
king and ministry of Great Britain thought proper to check the ardour of one
part of these quilled warriors, as somewhat dangerous to their own government,
the party and its friends were so offended that they fled from England and
Ireland, boiling hot with resentment. And now, courteous reader, we come to
discriminate the political characters of the two sorts of emigrants.

The exiles from England have not been as numerous as those from the sister
Island; but what they have wanted in number, they have made up by superior
qualifications for mischief. They are, generally speaking, pupils of the
Parisian school, whole-blood Philosophers, who think of nothing but cutting the
throats of all the kings in the world, and establishing an universal republic
over the whole, or having it cantoned into a number of smaller confederacies:
there are others again who have something that they call religion, in their
heads, the mad disciples of BROTHERS, the mad prophet, and these look forward
with joy to an approaching millenium. But however these two English sects of
revolutionists differ in the object or end, they agree perfectly about the
means. Two hundred years of destruction and misery, and an hundred millions of
lives are nothing, if weighed in the balance against the extermination of Kings
and Nobles. I have heard one of these enthusiasts rejoicing that he had escaped
from the tyranny of Great Britain, and saying that he looked forward with
rapture to the period, when the tower of London will be in flames, and the
kennels running with blood: nothing, he said, caused him so much regret, as the
thought, that he had not distinguished himself, by cutting the King's throat,
before he left England.

Now, I acknowledge that there are not many of the Irish patriots of this
dreadful breed. They are mostly a mongrel race of reformers, neither so deeply
skilled in politics, nor so very zealous about one form of government, more
than another: they love liberty well enough, but could put up with a little
tyranny, if the laws were not so d -- d severe about the transfer of property;
and to pay taxes for the support of those very laws they think is more than
flesh and blood can bear. On the whole, I acknowledge that the English
enthusiasts, whose heads in general are absolutely crazed, are much more to be
dreaded than the patriots from Ireland. One of those blood colored
philosophers, with TOM PAINE'S Rights of Man in his hand, and a traveling
guillotine by his side, would do more mischief in a month, than a brace of
raggamuffins from Ireland, who only make free with a man's "horse or cow, from
mere ignorance," would do in half a century.

Having now settled, with the utmost impartiality, this very important question
between the two nations, for which I expect the thanks of the Emigration
Society delivered by their President, I will take my leave of them both, with
this friendly advice; "cease vilifying the country you sprung from, whatever or
wherever it be, it is a mark of a base mind; and if you prefer this, stay among
us, and pursue some honest vocation with industry, leaving it to the natives to
manage their own government, to their own liking, as they understand it best."
When a foreigner intermeddles with the politics of the country, he never fails
to tinge it, as far as he is able, with his own national prejudices and
attachments. If he has fled from the severity or justice of the laws of his
former country, you discover his resentment in every thing that he either says
or does, that relates to it. Such a man, if he even prints a copy of an English
work, cannot suffer it to pass through his hands, without transfusing some of
his gall against the nation or it is government, into his American edition. This
not only betrays a mind, overflowing with the malignant passions, but is an
insult to the reader, who does not pay his money to know the editor's politics,
but to obtain information or entertainment from the author. -- Such a person I
have in my eye, who looking round a book store one day, in search of a book,
that would answer to be reprinted, at length made his choice, when this, or
some such soliloquy took place:

Mr. -- said he, supposing the author to be present," you have published a very
useful work, and may I add, in universal demand, of which I intend to print an
American edition, with improvements. These improvements, except a few blunders
of my own, shall consist principally of all the abuse I can invent against your
nation, and your government, for I never can love, or forgive either of them.
The thought of them only, makes my blood to boil. May ten thousand d -- ls fly
away with them all! just before I left -- I had like to have lost my ears on a
pillory, for only modestly exciting the people to cut one another throats.

This national business dispatched, we will now attend to the claims of Master
SWANWICK, and if I know my own mind, I intend to do him equal justice. It is of
no importance to me, whether his father was a tide-waiter, or a waggon-master,
or a Methodist teacher, or all three in one; whether the gentleman himself be
the favorite of the ladies at the other end of the town, or the topic of their
diversion; whether he is content to mumble orations in the Senate or boarding
school, in humble prose, or diverts himself at the foot of Parnassus in prose
run mad; whether he is most vain of his fine Italian marble, and rich
paintings, or of his palace, where as in the Indian temples, the meanest
article of furniture, is the idol himself. I care not a farthing about all
these things: they may all apply to a wise man or a fool, and in my estimation
neither add nor subtract from the real merit of the man. It is Mr. SWANWICK,
the representative in Congress, the bold and intrusive public character that I
intend to examine.

The first time he commanded my notice, was when on the State-house ground in
Philadelphia, he canvassed for a seat in the State legislature. This was an
unusual sight: in all the elections for thirty years preceding I had never once
seen a candidate, passing off his own ticket. In that space of time I had known
some ambitious men, and many weak ones, solicitous for seats in the
legislature, but modesty or some other old fashioned virtue generally kept them
from the ground on the day of election, or if they attended, it was only as
spectators, leaving it to their friends and well-wishers to take care of their
interest. How shall we account for this novelty? Shall we suppose him vain
enough to think himself above the common rules of decorum, or stupid enough to
despise them?

When by dint of art and industry he got into the house, it might have been
expected that, as representative for the Metropolis, one of the greatest
trading cities of the Union, in which he possessed a considerable real estate,
and carried on an extensive trade, her prosperity would be the principal object
of his care. But Mr. SWANWICK had no head for speculations of this kind. The
vanity of being of some consequence in the state, was more easily gratified,
and by means at the same time less opposed to his ruling passion, avarice. In
consequence of a quarrel with the stockholders in the Bank of North America,
his first step after he got into the Legislature was to obtain a charter for
another Bank, under the auspices of the state. To effect this, he united
himself with a predominant party in the house, which had always been adverse to
the prosperity of the city and interior counties; and a large capital belonging
to the state, was embarked in the purchase of shares in the new Bank. By this
measure he embraced two objects; the indulgence of his spleen against the
ancient bank, and opening a large field for speculation as a subscriber, and
afterward as a director of the new; both which he has managed to great
account. Thus the public money has been employed in the Jew trade of usury, in
order to accommodate a few ambitious and daring speculators; the commerce of
city has not been enlarged by it, but engrossed by a few avaricious men, who
were able to command discounts at any time, when others were refused. It is
reported that some of these very directors have discounted notes at the
extravagant rate of 3 pr. centum pr. month, with the very money they have
obtained at the bank at 6 pr. cent. pr. annum.

The only honorable use of public money is public improvements, the
melioration of the roads, the construction of bridges, opening of inland
navigation, and the establishment of a loan office: by these means the activity
and benefits of the capital are diffused and felt through every part of the
community, not confined, as it disgracefully has been, to a few avaricious
individuals. Part of this same stock employed in the various canals, and
turnpike roads would have given labor to many thousand hands, and enabled the
farmer to carry his produce to market at a cheap rate, from the most distant
parts; and another part lodged in a loan office for the use of both the farmer,
and the mechanic, would have enabled them to pay off their encumbrances, and
advance their own and the general riches of the country. --

On the contrary, men of public spirit, who embarked in works of general
utility, after spending large sums of their own money, have been reduced to the
necessity either of losing all that they had expended, or applying to the
legislature, for permission to raise more by a lottery to complete them. Thus a
taste for gambling, only one degree above that of the Faro tables, has been
sanctioned by law; and the people have been seduced from the honest pursuits of
industry, by the temptation of making their fortunes by the turn of a wheel.
And these things have taken place among men, who make a mighty parade about the
necessity and benefits of public schools, and an improved education; as if it
were possible to make virtuous citizens, merely by furnishing their heads with
knowledge, while their hearts are poisoned with a spirit of gambling and
idleness. Industry and temperance are the two cardinal virtues, on which the
prosperity of a republic depends, and when they have fled, liberty and
patriotism will soon follow, however scientifically men may learn to reason
about them.

After this little puffing orator, by his crooked politics, and the assistance
of his tramontane colleagues, had disgraced the commonwealth of Pennsylvania
for a year or two, by some fatality or other he was removed to the legislature
of the United States. Here he pursued the same perverse system, and attached
himself to that party in Congress, which had always opposed the Federal
Constitution, and every salutary act of government. His infamous conduct on the
important question of the British treaty is so well known, that little more
need be said about him. A volume cannot convey more than his own confession,
when he said, Mr. MUHLENBURGH, who voted for the treaty had "saved his country"
although he, himself had struggled with all his might, and even at last voted
against it. Can words describe more detestable duplicity! --

From celebrating Irish honesty, the sincerity of Dr. FRANKLIN, and the
transcendant merit of little Master SWANSKIN, the author passes, by a very
natural transition, to calumniating the great and good President of the United
States, the illustrious founder of Pennsylvania, and the most virtuous citizens
of the Union in a lump; and his pen is equally well adapted to both offices, as
an insect gorged with filth from a dunghill flies and drops it of choice on
the whitest garment. "To be ill spoken of by such a man, is conferring that
sort of honor, which it is alone within his competence, and which it is
certainly most congenial to his nature and his manners to bestow" -- as to
receive praise from him is the surest proof that can be given, of inherent
infamy in the object, on which it is bestowed.

It seems Dr. FRANKLIN chose to keep up the farce to the last. In his will he
bequeathed a few trifling legacies, as mementos of his friendship, or, if you
like the style of our author better, as proofs "of the goodness of his heart,
and a wish to part in peace with all mankind." To the Philadelphia Library,
where his statue stands in the front, like the pale monument of Guilt, or like
a Swiss at the door of an hotel, he gave one old set of French works of little
value; to the Pennsylvania hospital, the balances of his unsettled accounts,
provided the managers would undertake to pay, as well as to receive, which they
prudently chose to decline; and to his worthy friend GEORGE WASHINGTON, he
bequeathed his gold headed cane, surmounted with the cap of liberty, adding,
"if it were a scepter, he is worthy of it." From this last article, this candid
writer infers, that the Doctor thought the President always held "a scepter in
higher estimation than a liberty cap," and if he really did, I should esteem it
as a mark of his good sense: but it is very clear, from the only natural
construction of the words, that the Doctor thought so himself -- for however
the Bonnet rouge may fit the head of an emancipated Frenchman, or the pileum
suited the rabble of Rome, in celebrating their Saturnalia, and qualified every
blackguard to insult a Metellus or a Cato, the old fox had more wit than to
think that the modern liberty cap was a real badge of honor: No! no! he had
carried it himself, only as a mask, and thought proper to qualify this
sansculotte legacy to General WASHINGTON, by adding, "if it were a scepter he
is worthy of it." But to suppose that, because he thought the General worthy of
a scepter, as who is there that does not think so, he aspired to any higher
dignity than that of President of the United States, is not only an insult to
the office, but betrays a soul overflowing with ingratitude.

The whole of his life, the forty years of faithful services devoted to the
good of his country; his retirement from the army at the close of the war, when
a discontented soldiery, who idolized their general, would have given him a
scepter if he had chosen it; his present secession from the office of Chief
Magistrate, with universal love and esteem, so completely disprove this base
insinuation, that it needs only to be mentioned, to excite general indignation
against the author. But when it is known that this author is a foreigner by
birth, every virtuous citizen will resolve, that such an ungrateful miscreant
is unworthy of an asylum among us, and be ready to chase him back to the
justice he fled from. It is not sufficient that these vermin find shelter and
protection in the United States, but as soon almost as they come ashore, they
fall to their old trade of abusing government, as if the two could not exist
together. The Jacobins of France, the Defenders and Peep o'Day Boys of Ireland,
the Revolutionists of England, and the Democrats of America, form a band of
Buccaniers, the sworn enemies of law and order, whom it behooves all good men to
watch against, as a shepherd would against the approaches of a Wolf.

The following lines contain so good a description of our Imported Patriots,
that I cannot resist the temptation to insert them here. They made their
appearance in the Gazette of the United States about the time when these vermin
first began to interfere in American politics; and have doubtless contributed,
with other liberal publications, to draw down on the Editor, the bitter hatred
of the party.

THE JACOBIN OATH.
WITH every righteous government at odds,
I swear by all the goddesses and gods,
That wheresoever law and justice send me,
A restless disposition shall attend me.
The soil that gave me birth I found too hot,
And many a legal threshing there I got.
My mind a storm, I never could be quiet --
My only sustenance was mobs and riot --
Until a pack, with wigs and gowns and bands,
And arms so long, none could escape their hands,
To check the boiling of my patriot fury,
Condemned me by that bane of rogues, a jury;
But, thank kind fortune, I escaped a jail,
And gave them for security -- leg-bail
Free from their cursed gripe, to this blessed shore,
A friendly bark my precious carcass bore.
But here, alas, I find it to my cost,
That all my virtuous deeds are labor lost;
The people free, and happy, and well fed.
Cannot be persuaded that they have no bread,
Or, that for plundering there exists a cause,
So long as truth and justice prop the laws.
And though the industrious live in peace and ease,
Some folks I find cannot do just as they please:
Courts, Judges, Juries, Lawyers, and such things,
Contrived for rogues, are here, although no kings.
This will not do -- the Devil whom I serve,
Knows, if the times are tranquil I must starve.
After growling and gnashing his teeth against one of the greatest men living,
-- who is the glory and safeguard of his country, our Irish wolf attempts to
root up the graves: the virtues of both living and dead are his enemies, and he
theirs. WILLIAM PENN, a name dear to all the real friends of civil and
religious liberty, and venerated by the savage tribes to this very day, for his
upright and peaceable conduct in the first settlement of Pennsylvania, is
treated with the same illiberal freedom as the great WASHINGTON: but it is
natural, for ingratitude will ever pursue distinguished merit as its evil
genius, as long as envy exists in the world. Had this illustrious Quaker lived
in the ancient ages of Greece, he would have been ranked with the greatest
benefactors of Mankind, with MINOS, SOLON and LYCURGUS: or had the Aborigines
of this State been taught to believe in the existence of tutelary Spirits, they
would have canonized Brother Onas, The Indian name for WILLIAM PENN.
as their guardian saint; and I believe in my soul they would have invoked him
daily, to protect them against the red beards of Ireland, and all their
attribute vices and vermin.

There are some prominent features in the face of this slovenly brat, which
prove it incontestibly to be the offspring of an Irish daddy. The most striking
are his frequent Hibernicisms, and a clumsy attempt to wit, very much like
nonsense -- yes, indeed Paddy, they are as much akin as two potatoes. These
added to the author's antipathy to the yankees, leave not the shadow of a doubt
as to his country: for the inhabitants of those states, called Yankee, are
generally attached to law and government, of superior morals, and watchful of
strangers that come among them: thieves and vagabonds don't thrive there: the
air will poison them as quick as that of Ireland will a toad. Besides, their
select men encircle and guard their little societies, and an Irishman is as
much afraid to enter the enclosure, as a wolf is to enter a circle of fire in
the night time: so that there is no credit to be given, not the least, to what
this lying varlet says of horse-stealing in Connecticut, or bundling in
Massachusetts: they are only idle tales that he has picked up some where else,
for take my word for it, reader, he has never been in either State.

Having now nearly done with this scribbler and his pamphlet, before I take my
leave of him, I will just whisper in his ear a piece of wholesome advice in the
style of the inimitable Cervantes: Let every man take care how he speaks or
writes of honest people, and not set down at a venture the first thing that
comes into his joulter-head" -- "Tell me, thou modern Sansculottes, and ancient
rebel! was it thy province to dishonor and affront persons so worthy of
reverence and respect. For the love of God, Paddy, set a guard upon thy tongue
and thy pen, and behave so that the people may not discover by the thread, the
coarse countryweb of which thou art woven. Consider, sinner, as thou art, and
ruminate well, before thou offend in like sort again. Should I ever find thee
hereafter mounted on a stage, like a quack-doctor, distributing thy poisonous
pills among the people, I will give thee a stronger dose, better adapted to thy
coarse constitution and habit of body; one that will purge thee off thy legs,
and make thee stink worse than a skunk pursued by the hounds.

A POETICAL RHAPSODY ON THE TIMES. DESCRIBING THE DISASTERS OF AN EMIGRANT.

RHAPSODY ON THE TIMES.
LO! in these most accomplished times
How impudence can varnish crimes,
And prove, by syllogistic rule,
That turpitude is virtue's tool.
The Devil, prank'd in holy guise,
A cherub is to vulgar eyes;
And fortune-hunting folk agree
That lawless rage is liberty.
Thus often they cause a compromise
'Twixt wrangling contrarieties:
Or, in the topsy turvy cause,
Invert both offices and laws:
As Irish logic never fails
To geer draught-horses by their tails.
Hence bold reformers make appear
That Prudence is a name for Fear;
That Rapine, Sacrilege, and Treason,
Do constitute the Age of Reason;
That gentle love is deadly spite;
That right is wrong, and wrong is right;
And clear, beyond belief of some,
That civil war is peace at home.
Hence, in this period of reform,
They woo the Goddess in a storm;
Or, blessed with paper-spoiling skill,
Transfuse their madness through a quill:
Secure of coming in for shares,
Set other people by the ears;
And make, of unsuspecting elves,
A pussey's paw to serve themselves.
It Is they who strive to patch and press
Democracy in Freedom's dress.
To lead the multitude astray
They clothe her out in colors gay.
What wore a gorgon face before,
With liberty they lacker over;
To Athens swiftly they repair
To cull for her a laurel there,
And pass her on the giddy throng,
For a fresh beauty fair and young.
But lo! beneath her placid mien
The fiend licentiousness is seen:
See frantic horror at her side,
Her hands with guiltless blood bedy'd,
And, ill concealed by sophist art,
See all the Devil in her heart;
Then, gentle people, all beware,
And ever shun her deadly snare.
Let not the painted lure deceive,
'Twill turn your brightest morn to eve.
Death lurks beneath her Circean charms,
Take not the harlot to your arms,
For should her cup his lips pollute
The noblest man becomes a brute.
BUT you who still with faith run over,
And are too lazy to explore;
Who hold that caution is a jest
Where things are with appearance blessed;
With some content, and little pain,
Instruction from a Tale may gain
A hungry Frenchman, starved and lank,
To try a sansculottish prank,
Of filthy mud and God knows what,
With Honey gilded over a Pot;
And, sprightly through the gaping throng,
With pot and pottage skip'd along,
Bawling for life, at every leap.
Excellent Quelque-chose! vera cheap!
The people gathered round Monsieur,
In haste to view his wondrous ware;
When one, more bold, the rest among,
Conveyed a sample to his tongue:
And, calling Monsieur Fourbe a sot,
Swore it was honey in the pot.
Ma foi, quoth he, de name be all,
I cannot tell vat you may call.
Me call it Quelque-chose, fair with you --
It shall be honey, s'il plait vous
The man resolved with no more fuss,
To back his judgment with his purse;
The price demanded, tip'd the pay,
And proudly lug'd the goods away.
But who can paint the Dupe's surprise
With mouth a-gape, and saucer eyes,
When, dipping for a second taste
He found he would bargained in a haste;
And thence discovered, luckless wight,
'Twas little better than a bite.
Le Fourbe, again one day he met
And thus the artful rogue beset:
No doubt, to you, the sport is brave,
You lean, soup meagre, juggling knave,
That I contribute, not a little,
To find your frogship's paunch in vittle.
But know that I, with other folks,
Don't altogether like your jokes,
And will not, kindly, understand
Your honey mong'ring slight of hand.
Whoever acts an honest part
Will pay you soundly for your art,
And drub some penitential tones,
You lying rascal, from your bones,
For offering in the open street,
Your filthy trash for honey sweet.
Pardonnez moi, quoth he, it is you
A qui dat complement est due,
Who swore, before you pay de money,
Dat Quelque chose be de French for honey:
Quelque chose me call, Quelque chose it be,
Who tell de lie sir, you or me.
THUS will you find, in every state,
Experience teaches wit too late;
And, if you heed th'insidious crew,
In The end they will turn the laugh on you.
But, in the end, you will also find
The Devil pays his friends in kind;
As I shall give you proof enough in
The history of a raggamuffin.
THOUGH it is allowed that France the most
Anarchs superlative can boast;
Yet Ireland makes, of suchlike ware,
For Lucifer an ample share.
I therefore, from Shelalah Land,
The Knave of clubs will take in hand;
A mask, to shuffling rogues, of use,
Who, nothing staking, play the deuce:
Will show how, being in the dumps,
He put his partners to their trumps;
And ere the tricks of the game were done,
How he was forced to cut and run.
WHETHER he drew his bogster blood,
Like Memphian Monster, from the mud;
Or was from vagrant meteor shotten;
Or on a cloud was storm-begotten;
Was never promulg'd nor would't I trow,
Much edify the World to know*
Yet did he live; but in what year?
No matter, so the rest is clear.
He was a man, on truth it is founded,
Of every evil thing compounded.
His brain, an emblem of foul weather,
Where jarring atoms fight together,
Was copied in the smallest print:
His mental optics looked asquint,
And, to the fashion of his eye,
The thoughts were couple'd so awry,
That often his words, a motley crew,
Most whimsically squinted too.
A beast he was of such a grain
No switch could move, or bit restrain,
In legal sense; but in a fray,
If cudgel'd well, he ran away.
The laws, he thought, were ever meant,
As certain bars to his preferment;
For 'twas his fortune still to stray,
And keep the interdicted way.
Thus, if a wish to pilfer rose,
Justice, good wench, would interpose,
By twitching him beneath the ear,
As who should say, beware! beware!
Whenever he sought a fresh supply,
She like a halter rattle'd by;
And often, when Paddy would proceed,
She cuff'd him soundly for the deed.
The Constitution too he saw
Was Parent of the smallest law;
Which guarded her, from head to heel,
Like Wantley's Knight, with pikes of steel;
And made our hero own, by styx,
'Twas hard to kick against the pricks.
Thence was it that he daily sent
His curses forth on Parliament;
And, from his soul abominated
The King, and all to him related.
THE inward man, one might discern,
Was Prototype to the extern,
Which, take it altogether, could
Not boast two members of a mould.
Thus edified, and thus endowed,
Our brave Turf-cutter took the road,
To where a dark cabal resorted,
And thus the yelping pack exhorted;
In language gleaned from uncouth pratings
At Boxing matches, and Bear-baitings.
"Ogh honee! jewels are you there then,
"And after tanking off you borthen,
"If I don't len a han at that
"The D -- I may run away with Pat.
"What, shall the dogs our tricks prevent,
"And bridle us wi' government.
"Den every Irish Sanculotte
"May get de halter round his troat;
"And after being saddle'd too
"Be rode to death widout a shoe.
"The Sansculottes at the head of things,
"Live just, my dears like Lords and Kings;
"While, for de welfare of de nation,
"Poor folk must undergo starvation:
"And I, for this confounded law,
"Can never accommodate my maw;
"Widout I live on stick and stone,
"Or to my fingers work de bone.
"Sure God sent all things here in common,
"Nor made a deed, to man nor woman,
"Of copy hold or simple fee,
"By right of which to jockey me.
"Adam it is true, with his heirs male
"Of Paradise was seized in tail;
"But, when h'unwisely sought an heir,
"Was driven, in a trice from dear.
"Snug, wid his coushins all alone,
"De Bear, in safety knaws his bone;
"While we, as hungry every straw,
"Poor Democrats, get none to know.
"Our hungry brod'ren in de West
"In troth have lately had one dressed;
"A present from Dan Porcupine,
"Where every moder's son may dine:
"With which dey may, as children do,
"Bote eat their cake, and have it too!
"Or like de Scandinavian Boar,
"Of Odin's Hall in days of yore,
"Who gorged by Ghosts from tail to chin,
"At dinner time was dear agin.
"B'your leave" exclaimed another wight,
"I Will set my brother Paddy right;
"It was no bone upon my word,
"For when they met with one accord
"To pick a bit, and wet their whistle,
"Lo! in their chaps, they mouthed a thistle;
"And den were told, as the story passes,
"That thistle is the food for asses.
"Well well! quoth Pat, the time may come
"When things will shaft dear feet at home;
"When we, dat harnt a wholesome rag on,
"May drive de governmental wagon:
"For by my shoul, when once we rise,
"We'll take de Kingdom by surprise,
"Seize all de Garters, Stars and strings,
"And all my coushins shall be kings.
"Arah, honeys, why not now proceed,
"We Are all united, sure, indeed!
"Then let us wid bludgeons, spades and axes,
"Go make reprisal of de taxes;
"And, if de dogs refuse to gi'em,
"By Jases, cross a cudgel wi'em."
He said: the kindling faction ran
From brain to brain, from man to man;
And hey go mad! like fleas the fly on,
With open mouths, to eat the Lion.
In quest of Parliament, the rogues,
With hoofs well fortified with brogues,
And tongues wi' the same as roughly shod,
Away, in a hurly-burly, trod.
The People they had heard declare
The burden was too much to bear;
So, as they trudged along the road,
Humanely eased them of their load.
But Paddy and his brother quacks,
To a worse burden brought their backs:
To stripes, of various sorts and sizes,
Fit medicine for such enterprises,
That might, on Paddy's constitution,
Provoke reform or dissolution.
Now having cursed his foiled assurance
While penance doing months in durance,
Our restless Knave found means to doff
His gentle gyves, and scamper off.
But this he deemed a certain rule,
That Government would kick a fool;
That all seditious clubs must fail
Against her mob-repelling mail;
And that their whiskey-bred attacks
Recoiled, with interest, on their backs.
He therefore quickly cast about,
To smell some safer project out.
FROM many a grove and rosey vale,
America perfumed the gale;
But also, from her nestled foes,
The foetid breath of Faction rose,
And wafted bliss to Paddy's nose.
'Twas then his hopes were all alive
A more successful trade to drive;
The Government to draw and quarter
Among folks on the other side the water;
THEN view our bog-bred cub on board,
The sails expand, the Ship unmoor'd,
And every loyal breeze at play
To puff the monster far away.
Now here, now there, aloft, below,
Would Paddy, with his comrades, go:
And would to gain a Sailors ear,
Without a murmur, reef and steer.
All this to animate his wishes
About the land of loaves and fishes,
Would he perform, while they regale
His ears with many a golden tale:
That schemes were forming, with ablution,
To wash away our Constitution;
And try, for Ills they say she has,
Virginia chabybeate bath;
And if she there should make a leg,
To take the Goddess down a peg.
As rusty pipe of Indian Squaw
The candle flame delights to draw,
And proudly swells to take with joy,
What must in time it is life destroy;
So Paddy sucked, with joyous grin,
Their monstrous tales, and humbugs in;
And was inflated with the joke,
(As little sparks may make a smoke,
When mid a heap of chaff they are cast)
That Paddy must consume at last.
Great plans, from forth his brain asleep,
Would rise like demons from the deep:
To pluck the pigeons in the West
And feather for himself a nest;
The fed'ral prop of state to level;
To drive our Eagle to the Devil;
And to reform the Legislature,
And bad economy of nature.
These and a thousand pretty schemes
Ran nightly through his drunken dreams:
But, when awake, he swore 'twas strange
The moon should have the face to change;
That every brook and little drain
Should bear its tribute to the Main,
Superfluously bestowing more
On that which had too much before;
And that it was a burning shame
The day and night were not the same.
He would, to mend Miss Luna's case,
Spread glowing blushes in her face;
Each nameless rill or flood of fame,
He Would drive to the place from whence it came:
And, if the blessed Sun so bright,
Was not more equal in his light,
He Would rend away his flaming robe,
And scatter it around the Globe.
Thus as, sublimed, his transport went
Even to the acme of content,
Mad Pat, to pad the hoof once more,
Of freedom landed on the shore.
But folly, wheresoe'er inclined,
Bears her sharp recompense behind;
As often our meddling thing of mire.
Experienced to his heart's desire.
OF markets and their gains to prattle
Of fruit, of poultry, corn, and cattle.
Some Farmers on the wharf together
Had met, when Paddy blunder'd thither.
These to encounter, beard to beard,
No time nor impudence he spared;
But whispered that to show them play
He came from Ireland all the way.
With threadbare saws, and oaths unmatched,
His stupid gab was all over patched.
To cry the British Min'stry down,
He thought it stood him much upon;
For which his tainted brain was stored
With many a senseless magpie word:
And, storming on, with might and main,
He railed, took breath, and railed again.
Thus it is that patriots prate,
In noise and nonsense only great,
Of politics; when in their gears
They Would mount, ye Gods, beyond the Spheres;
Without reflecting, by the by,
An Ass must get him wings to fly.
Says one of these "the effect I see,
"What then is principle to me;
"This watch instructs me over and over;
"I view her face, and ask no more."
That watch, however you came by it,
Much like your head, is seldom right:
Yet let some skilful artist well
Adjust the motive principle,
The cause correct, I Am bold to say
The face will lead you not astray.
But is the time piece, ever so true,
It still must change to pleasure you;
Or wrong, or right, or fast, or slow,
Just as your veering passions go;
Which, as the weather is inclined,
Are blown ahead, or left behind.
WHAT can your monkey meddling mean?
It Is you who spoil the whole machine:
Your thumbs without, by frequent change,
In every part the works derange:
And that which merit did enhance
You ruin by your ignorance.
If right by you it must be made,
'Twere prudent first to learn the trade;
And ere you censure or repair,
Gain some slight knowledge of the affair.
But to resume the thread, again,
Of the argument: where now amain
See cit'zen Pat, and farmer John,
In altercation pro and con.
To every province Paddy ventured,
And church or state at random censured.
Religion he could never find
In cut or cloth to suit his mind;
For why? he saw her angel breath
To his dark politics was death.
Therefore he held himself in trim
To curse that faith which curses him.
Quoth he, "To the Priests we are bound to give,
"Just to get dying while we live;
"And when we die, oh hone, so clever,
"We den begin to live for ever.
"But ogh! de teefs don't know we'll have
"But meagre living in de grave,
"Widout one offal beggars bone
"For poor Pilgarlick but his own.
"Long life to maestress France, so civil,
"Dat cries hands off to God and Devil;
"But dat's all one, mere puppy's play,
"De Devil knows his own dey say."
Quoth John, "Your latter words are true,
"And may as safe be said of you;
"Who have so long, with France, by Heaven,
"To Satan's buffetings, been given:
"But, still to bind your shackles faster,
"You Have made a Treaty with your master;
"For every novice understands
"You play into each others hands;
"Exchange a monkey for a Devil,
"To give and take is counted civil.
"Thus comes it how in France are found
"So many devils above ground;
"And, if your brethren people hell,
"Sir Paddy Whack, you best can tell.
Quoth he, "I Will prove it on your creed,
"The French are very good indeed.
"To hold dear own, de saints declare.
"'Against sinful flesh, a holy war;
"How pious den are Frenchmen, since
"They Have almost none to quarrel with.
Quoth he, "to settle that account,
"The mind and flesh are tantamount:
"If you would a friend, God mend the few,
"To pay a compliment to you,
"He might aver, what all confess,
"The great arch-devil lies in dress;
"And that your rogueship must be sainted,
"Who Are not with dressing much acquainted;
"Whose back can scarcely boast a coat;
"You mungrel, bog-brain'd sansculotte.
"What nether wind, or hide-bound weather,
"Was It blowed your rotten carcass hither?
"Was It here to lime your twigs for game,
"Or to illumine us you came?
"If one, you may yourself be caught,
"If the other, you must first be taught:
"We here no lightening-bugs require
"To set your cousins brains on fire.
"Bringing your toad spawn precepts over,
"I think will gain you credit no where;
"Our Eagle, sir, disdains to gather
"His notes from birds of such a feather.
"St. Patrick thought it meritorious
"Over rascal frogs to be victorious;
"But you would joyfully advance
"To welcome shoals of them from France.
"Then since you hold it little sin,
"To barter Cross for Guillotin,
"I hope your faith to kingdom come
"Will lead by the way of Martyrdom.
This said, it caused a cloud to rise
Of Passion over his faculties;
Which soon was decompos'd again,
In lightning, thunder, and in rain;
In lightning from his eyes; and both
In froth and thunder from his mouth.
Quoth he, "do you know what brought me here?
A ship and lack of provender.
"Why friends are left, and home forsaken? --
To get your bread, and save your bacon.
"No set! it wa'nt to stand your butt,
"I rode so many miles afoot;
"But just to take de flowing rein
"In hand myself, and live and reign
"With 'e sovereign people, who, 'twas said,
"Had, every man, a crown on's head.
"I tought dat here each chimney devil
"Wid British lords was on a level;
"And dat b'a living here, was meant
"The same as seat in Parliament.
"But by my soul de case is plain;
"You Are all aristocrats in grain;
"Who will not join we Cit'zen Bones
"To beat de monarchs off dear trones.
"Therefore I dub you great and small,
"And part my curse among ye all.
"Quoth he, "That is conceding more
"By half than we were stickling for;
"A circumstance, that could not miss you,
"And brings the contest to an issue.
"Don't be alarmed, pray no demur,
"You must excuse my freedom sir,
"My fingers must your throttle greet:
"Nay, by my shoul, there is no retreat.
"What, mangy cur, is it me you snarl at?
"You spunging, function-lacking varlet,
"This, only, saves your forfeit ears,
"That fools are licensed slanderers;
"But, since on foot you crossed the main,
"Good Paddy foot it back again."
He said; and in the ebbing tide
The wight he plunged, who sinking cried
"Oh! Jesus -- oh! -- thy help I crave --
"A sinner res -- cue from the wave,"
He would have said; -- but half the prayer
In bubbles floated here and there.
DEAR Spirit of our happy Clime,
With star decked Tiar', and port sublime,
Who hear'st the savage yell of war,
And giv'st to pity many a tear;
Can thou, believe, oh! Goddess blessed!
Such styg'an fiends thy realm infest.
Yes, such against thy ray serene
Do darkling howl with wolfish spleen;
And wish to see thee crucified,
Thy seamless garments to divide.
CAN he who against his parent raised
His impious arm, by us be praised?
No; rather, each Columbian breast
The vagrant caitiff will detest.
Can he who made the law his foe
At's home, with us, be faithful? No:
The dog that bit his Master there
Walks in a longer tether here.
Then, mid a thousand, is there one
That would not act like honest John.
"WHAT! Paddy, almost gone no doubt!
"Poor flound'ring wretch, I Will help thee out;
"Bad as thou art from crotch to crown,
"God knows, I would not let thee drown."
NOW, dripping through the shouting throng,
He washed and scoured the streets along;
And, like Olympia in a gale,
Ran with a rainbow at his tail.
THE storm he 'scap'd, but not to his mind,
For hope her anchor left behind;
And Paddy 'scap'd the watery grave
To prove himself the viler knave.
For lo! beyond the stretch of thought,
No change in him the plunging wrought;
For now, behold, in every vein,
His temper breaking out again*
Burning t'encounter, line to line,
The keen, bright, Quills of Porcupine.
So wretche'd wight, to quench his skin,
With bathing drives the pimples in,
But finds, at length, the Proverb clear,
That evil humors will appear.
IN ambush couched he held the odds,
And plied his foe with missile clods,
Which daubed, they so at random flew,
But every one, the Lord knows who.
At length he fancied Peter's eye
Marked his retreat, and strove to fly;
When policy, or what you please
Brought Paddy Whack upon his knees.
With lifted hands, and down-cast eyes,
Have mercy! on poor Pat, he cries.
There let him tremble abject cur!
The scorn of every passenger;
While we the form of peace survey,
And tune to her our parting lay.
IN Vernons' Groves whose shade unites
The active joys, and calm delights,
The victor's wreath, and civic crown,
Content, Love, Friendship, and Renown;
Where endless smiles Potomac wears,
The halcyon PEACE her nest prepares.
The Patriot Chief who there resides,
As down the stream of life he glides,
She hovers round, and sooths his ears
With music of the heavenly spheres.
When late she heard the distant cry
Of War, and spread her wings to fly,
'Twas he who charmed her seats to rest,
And soothed her on his parent breast.
Yes, Peace, 'twas he who kindly strove
To wed thee to our Eagle's love.
Then still with all thy bashful train,
Of golden blessings, haunt the plain:
Bid Beauty loose her musky hair,
Bid Pleasure wreathed in smiles be there;
The muses sport thy beams among,
And jocund plenty laugh along,
While safely, in thy olive shade,
At ease her careless limbs are laid.
BLESSED Saint at thy enlivening word
The voice of gladness shall be heard;
And all our joyous vales along,
How charming sweet, thy Turtles' Song:
Till War, amidst his wild career,
Suspends his whirlwind rage to hear,
And every weary realm rejoice
To echo back thy angel voice.
AND thou, "immortal Freedom's sire"!
Whom all revere, esteem, admire;
With all that Gratitude can give,
Forever in our breasts shall live.
If, like the Theban chief condemned
For standing forth thy country's friend,
Reflect it is by the breath of those
Who rank among thy country's foes:
Whose dark cabals and factious cry,
Would raise the civil tempest high,
That they, amid the ensanguin'd broil,
Secure might fatten on the spoil:
Like famished Vultures on the shore,
With joy survey the laboring oar,
The perished wretch on land that is cast,
And scream, and feed amid the blast.
LIVES there a man who, of thy toil,
Enjoys the corn, the wine, the oil;
Whose serpent tongue would streak with blame
The virgin whiteness of thy name;
May Heaven's command the tiger far
To some bleak, blasted island bear,
Whose leafless spray no shade provides
For houseless heads and unfed sides.
There may he press the dreary mould,
Within all comfortless and cold;
In horror fix his haggard eye
On the pale Moon, and winter sky;
And, hated by the Good and Just,
In moody madness sink to dust.
THE Flatterers' labors I contemn,
I leave the venal song to them;
But honestly commend I will,
And love the smile of virtue still;
I Will say thy name, wherever it goes,
Exalted sage! no rival knows;
And that thy services command
The praises of a grateful land.
If, worn with toil, with care oppressed,
Thou seek'st for solitude and rest, --
The deep'ning shade, sequestered cell,
The hill, the plain, the musing doll,
And osey blush of flowerets sweet,
Shall bless thy last, thy loved retreat.
Thy gentle ear at least shall there
No rude and thankless scoffings hear:
No, nor the rill that ripling flows,
Shall murmur at thy calm repose;
But still, at ease, may thou recline
Beneath thy own o'er-mantling vine;
And, as thy years and fame increase,
Be shadowed with the wing of Peace.

