THE FEDERALIST: CONTAINING SOME STRICTURES UPON A PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, The
Pretensions of THOMAS JEFFERSON to the Presidency, examined, and the Charges
against JOHN ADAMS, refuted.

WHICH PAMPHLET WAS FIRST PUBLISHED IN THE GAZETTE OF THE UNITED STATES, IN A
SERIES OF ESSAYS, UNDER THE SIGNATURE OF "PHOCION."

PART THE SECOND.

PHILADELPHIA: RE-PUBLISHED FROM THE GAZETTE OF (...) AND THE NEW (...) BY
MATTHEW CAREY, (...)

THE FEDERALIST, etc.
No. IX. TO THE ELECTORS OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
Respectable Fellow Citizens,
ANOTHER collateral circumstance worthy of serious reflection, is drawn from
some ideas, which are understood to have been published in Boston, in certain
essays under the signature of Publicola, and which have been ascribed to Mr.
John Adams, jun. They were written as a partial reply to "Paine's Rights of
Man," in 1791; and have been since republished in London, with the following
title and motto, in 1793. They were evidently considered in England, as
calculated to defend the British constitution, as it then stood, from any
material changes or alterations. The title runs thus: Answer to Paine's Rights
of Man, by John Adams, esquire, originally printed in America. The motto -- It
is not a mechanical horror (...) of a king or of aristocracy, nor (...) to the
sound of an extrava^^^ (...) of an innocent riban (...) ^^^ple to lay violent
(...) ^his book was (...) Mr. Paine's trial. (...) 126, Dublin editor.
If the essays of Publicola had been first published in England, they would not
so much have concerned the people of America, because the clearly implied
defense of the English constitution, would not have been placed under their
consideration, either as a matter interesting to them, or as a treatise tending
to impair their attachment to the provisions of their own national
constitution, in several passages, and particularly by holding up the opinion,
that any existing political evils in England could not be correctly attributed
to their form of government, though totally opposite, in its cardinal
principle, to ours. The principal and most dangerous abuses in the English
government (says our author, distinguishing it from their constitution, p. 18)
arise, less from the defects inherent in the constitution, than from the state
of society; the universal venality and corruption, which pervades all classes
of men in that kingdom, and which a change of government could not reform. It
is not admitted by the writer, that there are any defects inherent in the
constitution, though hereditary; nor is it at all objected to, though all the
powers and virtues of the English constitution, with a christian hierarchy to
aid them, have not been efficacious to keep universal venality and corruption
from pervading all classes of men in that kingdom. Though the interior affairs
of Great Britain are represented by our author, as thus universally fordid and
vitia^ed, yet we find he enters a caveat against ascribing these evils to the
constitution. The hope, then, that "chance" or "providential" governors or
rulers would save us from corruption and fraud, (...) abandoned. It would have
been (...) we had been informed how (...) well balanced and stupendous a
government. We cannot but expect, that our American divisions and balances of
powers will work much better. Let us guard against fluctuations toward
hereditary power and all its experienced evils -- Let us extend the sphere of
national legislation -- Let us not exhibit the political solicism of giving
powerful seconds to our chief magistrate, who derive an independent authority
from other sources than the national will, and who are not amenable to a
national tribunal -- Let us borrow, at least, this one useful hint from our
French allies, who do not so order things, that the executive power of fifteen
or eighteen departments be held from the inhabitants of such a grand division,
with little or no amenability to the nation or to the national tribunals. In
short, let us rather study to eradicate the seeds of imbecility, of
fluctuation, and of evil, from our inestimable federal representative
government, and let us labor to invigorate this truly republican constitution,
rather than to devote ourselves to a love for a foreign constitution, which is
not, what it professes to be, or for a theory of orders and ^anks, which has
never yet been realized. Modern Britain, as we have seen, is governed in fact
by little more than a two-hundredth part of her adult males. Of course, no real
or even virtual representation of the people is combined with the king and
nobles.

In the ancient limited monarchies, the whole mass of the unnobled people, were
gathered, as upon an American ^lection-day, to cooperate in legislation wi^h
the hereditary orders. The convenience and necessity of an equal representation
was not adverted to -- Hence arose many disorders. The demarcations of power
among the three branches were loose, imperfect, and incorrect. The awful (...)
judiciary powers were not (...) ^^inciples are much bett^^ (...) far superior,
and the effects correspondingly happy and favorable. The judiciary power, under
the general government, is more completely separated and independent, than in
any former instance, much more so than in England -- an incalculable blessing.
For truly and most emphatically may it be said, that the judiciary power, under
a free, written constitution, is the sheet anchor of the political vessel. The
hereditary court of appeals, blended with the legislative power, and including
the impediments to justice, toward those who are not rich, from the immense
expense, and to all suitors, from delay, as established in the house of lords,
is far indeed from satisfactory -- and the tenure of the very important station
of the lord high chancellor, at the pleasure of the crown, is a much more
dangerous departure from the division and balance of political powers than is
to be found in the American constitution.

But are the sober and reflected objections to the hereditary powers of kings
and nobles resolvable into a "mechanical" horror against names, having no
reasonable foundation? Are they a mere extravagant, passionate feeling, into
which mankind have worked themselves up? Are the objections to orders or ranks,
exalting a few to the depression of the rest of a nation no better grounded,
than a natural antipathy to an unpleasant sound? Or are those objections as
extravagant and ridiculous as the fanciful emotions of a man would be, who
should conceive himself to have been born with a natural or physical antipathy
to a pretty innocent riband of red, blue, or green? What shall be thought of
the republicanism of the implication, that the disfranchised inhabitants of any
kingdom, have little (...) of complaint against the constitution, (...)
^^chanical, extravagant feeling or (...) ^^^nds, words, and ribands?

Observations, addressed to the people of America upon the subject of a
government opposite in its principles and construction to ours, are an ill
proof of federalism. They cannot be so well tested, as by showing a contrasted
case. If any one were to propose to change our single quadrennial executive,
chosen by the boards of electors, into an executive council of seven, chosen
yearly by the joint votes of the members of the federal senate and house of
representatives -- If the same person were to propose annual senators, instead
of a senate for the present term -- If the same person were to urge the vesting
of the powers of a court of chancery in a sole judge, to be annually appointed
by the executive council, he would be justly considered as unfriendly to the
efficiency and stability of our government, or, in other words, as an enemy to
the federal constitution. On the other hand, if, instead of an executive
council, chosen by the legislature, the deviation from the present happy mode
of electing our single magistrate be in the opposite extreme, and an hereditary
king be indicated, foretold, represented as inevitable, and insinuated; and,
if, instead of annual senators, the deviation from our present mode of
appointing senators, be also in the opposite extreme, and a corpse of hereditary
nobles, with high judicial powers over life, liberty, and property, are
recommended, as of unexampled excellency, do not such persons insensibly betray
themselves into the like situation of hostility to the constitution of the
United States, and to our present tranquillity?

If this matter be carried a step further, and it be impliedly recommended by
an example of a very alarming nature, and by the approbation of that example,
in terms of the most plain and decided force, to vary our constitution as to
the great and all important alterative power, the matter is (...) more serious.
This observati^^ (...) to the following extract from the 34th page of the
pamphlet in reply to Mr. Pain, which is now under consideration. -- "The very
act," says the writer, by which septennial parliaments were established in
England, affords sufficient proof, that the power of altering the constitution
itself, ought to be delegated, and even exercised by the government, upon
certain critical occasions. Is not this observation to the Americans, taken
with the former quotation, an evidence of a desire to assimilate our federal
constitution to that of England? And if a president be prepared for any other
change, might not a bare majority of a future senate and house of
representatives, in some moment of real danger, but exaggerated and factitious
alarm, give us also, a septennial house of commons, and hereditary rulers? Not
only a president and senate, but all their families, would have a clear and
strong interest to induce them to the measure. The house of representatives
would have some personal interest to prolong their existence; and party
passions, factitious alarms, and secret addresses to their local, personal, or
family interests, might bring us to that, which we are told, that Mankind have
universally discovered and preferred, -- chance to a bad choice, and rulers
given by Providence, rather than such as we might choose ourselves.

A FEDERALIST.

No. X. TO THE ELECTORS OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
Respectable Fellow Citizens,
IT is proposed to examine a little more the pamphlet made up, in England, by
the republication of the essays of Publicola, ascribed to Mr. Adams, jun. and
printed as from America, with the name of John Adams, Esquire, in the title
page.

There is one passage in the pamphlet under consideration, which merits
particular notice. Because, as it was written in 1791, when our present
government was formed, it will appear to be a strong and decided protest
against the manner in which the federal constitution was actually accomplished.
It is in the twenty-fourth page, and runs thus: "If however," says our author,
speaking of a call of a convention by the British parliament, we can suppose,
that the parliament should finally accede to the idea, that they are mere
tyrants without the shadow of a right to the authority, which they have
hitherto exercised; the only act which they could agree to, would be a vote to
dissolve themselves, and leave the vessel of the state without either a pilot
or a rudder. For the very act of calling a convention, would be an usurpation,
and, from the importance of its consequences, an usurpation of the most daring
nature: it would b^^assuming the (...) the ties of society, and at (...) that
this assumed right was without any sort of foundation.

It is not our wish to advise for or against any measure, which regards the
internal affairs of another country. It is only because the papers of Publicola
were offered to American consideration, with a view, no doubt, to the adoption
of the ideas they contain, that we observe upon them. Where they imply a
condemnation of our measures to obtain this happy constitution, it is very fit
and necessary that they be noticed with all our minds and with all our strength.

It is well known, that there was no authority in the Annapolis convention of
1786, to proceed upon any business, other than commercial. Yet they unanimously
recommended to the states, which had delegated them, to call another convention
for general objects. This was done. The convention met at Philadelphia. The
instrument, under which we enjoy our present happiness, was formed by them, and
the old confederated congress of 1787, communicated the proposed constitution
to the states, though one of its provisions was contrary to the old articles of
confederation -- that, we mean, which set up a new confederation of nine
adopting states. It was, however, communicated to the state legislatures, and
they all called conventions of the people to consider, reject, or adopt it,
though it is certain, that no state constitution contained a power to take such
a measure. The people, however, did choose conventions, and adopted the
constitution at various times, from December 1787, until May 1790. The
operation took almost three years, exclusively of the later case of Vermont,
which was peculiarly circumstanced. We do not perceive in this long (...)
^^arance of "a deserted ship with^^^ (...) ^^nor of "a daring usurpation" (...)
of the right to dissolve the "ties of society" -- nor any admission, that the
old congress or the state legislatures of 1787, were mere tyrants without the
shadow of a right to the authority they had theretofore exercised. They saw too
clearly, that our late national constitution was inadequate to union, justice,
and efficient government. The objects aimed at were conformable with the spirit
of our state constitutions, and were pure, equitable, and wise. Had we departed
from sanctioned principles and aimed at the elevation of the one, and the few,
by sacrificing the equal birthrights of all the rest of the people, we should
not this day have enjoyed a constitution, which has afforded us great
prosperity and comparative tranquillity in the midst of a suffering and
convulsed world.

The symptoms and evidences of the real writer of the pamphlet referred to, we
have already given. It is not at all doubted, that Publicola's essays, of which
it is made up, are the work of Mr. Adams, jun. Nothing in the public or private
character of this gentleman is known, which is a subject of censure. If there
were any thing of that nature, it could have no place here. Some of the
political ideas in the pamphlet appear to correspond with the preference to
hereditary government, evidenced or exemplified by an approbation of, and
solicitude for, the British constitution, which has been stated as the great
objection to the election of Mr. Adams.

The testimony of Mr. Pain on the subject of Mr. Adams's sentiments or
dispositions, so far as it may weigh with the electors, cannot, it is true, be
considered as direct. He speaks only of what he has been informed of from such
sources as to fix his own belief. It is, however, a circumstance of weight,
taken in connection with what has been exhibited from Mr. Adams's books, with
the contents of the "Discourses upon Davila," and with (...) and dispositions
displayed in (...) the work of Mr. Adams, jun. Mr. Paine's assertion is, that
he has the authority of one or two persons, for saying that Mr. Adams has
declared, that the presidency should be made hereditary, in the family of Mr.
Lund Washington. It is true, that the manner in which Mr. Pain has stated this
matter, is such as not to give all possible effect to the assertion. But though
there may be wanting something of that serious simplicity of narrative or
statement of facts, which aids the impression, even of truth itself, yet the
assertion is perfectly express and clear, and it completely commits Mr. Pain.
He may occasionally be eccentric or extravagant, as men of great powers of
language, animation, and genius not seldom are; but there appears no reason to
suppose, that he would give under his hand a wilful misrepresentation of fact,
concerning an important subject, and relative to a public officer of high
standing. It is now four or five weeks since this assertion was published in
the gazettes. The circumstance really was very favorable to Mr. Adams, as it
afforded him an opportunity to show the community, that this and all other
opinions or assertions concerning a predilection for hereditary power were
untrue. When the anxieties of a virtuous community are awakened, it is no less
reasonable than prudent, that they should be removed by the exertions of all
who can contribute to that end. But when they have particular relation to
individuals, the attention to the anxieties of the community is rarely
withheld, when it is in their power. Respect to the public feelings and
solicitudes ought to produce all the satisfaction of that nature, which
circumstances will admit. The general inferences from silence are plain and
irresistible, and nothing occurs, that can diminish their force in the present
case.

(...) the gazette of Easton in Maryland, (...) ^^rts of a similar nature (not
as to selecting the family of Mr. Lund Washington, but) as to what has been
alleged to have been declared to one or more of the members of the ^^nate, by
Mr. Adams. The Easton writer treats the report as having actually issued, upon
investigation, in mistake or mistatement. This very slight and very vague
reply, renders it impolitic in the writer to have brought up the subject. For
surcly, if he is authority, he must be informed. If informed, how can he be
uncertain whether the assertion was found to be untrue -- false -- and
mistated, or misconceived and mistaken? Such an assertion concerning Mr. Adams
has been in circulation for two years. It is known as well to the supporters as
to the opponents of Mr. Adams. The influence of the opinion of its truth has
long been, and now is, very considerable indeed. Being really known to the
supporters of Mr. Adams, and, of course, to that gentleman himself, and there
being no use whatever made of the long interval between its origination and the
present time, to remove the impression and relieve the great anxiety and
dissatisfaction it produced in the public mind, the report remains to this hour
in a state of confirmation from the silence. It is an absolute truth, that
persons, who had supported Mr. Adams's former elections, and who, according to
every appearance, might have been willing to support him again, have become
sincerely and greatly solicitous for some other candidate.

This very serious report of what was said to those senators, has occasioned an
alarm, which can never be allayed or suppressed, without the obvious and
natural satisfaction, which so very important a matter requires. One of the
most powerful impulses to the examinations of the real and generally reputed
writings of Mr. Adams, and of his eldest son, was the assertion upon this
subject. The gra^^^^^ will determine the degree (...) votes, which all these
things ought to have in their minds, as they may affect future confidence in
the chief magistrate, public tranquillity, and the maintenance of the
constitution of the United States.

A FEDERALIST.

No. XI. TO THE ELECTORS OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
Respectable Fellow Citizens,
IT has been a subject of frequent and acrimonious observation, by the
opponents of Mr. Jefferson, that he is so much disposed to justify the French
Revolution, as to overlook all the excesses which that nation has committed.
This, however, by no means, appears to be true. Phocion in the fourth page of
the pamphlet and in his first newspaper essay, not being able to adduce any
testimony on the subject, very logically makes it a sine qua non of Mr.
Jefferson's moral character, that it should be shown that he has disapproved of
the cruelties, which have stained the French Revolution. It might be fairly
observed, that a proof of approbation is incumbent on his opponents. But the
following paper, of the current year, will show that the President of the
United States (...) given official, personal, and national assu^^^ (...)
^^mpathy, earnest wishes, the deepest solicitude, and the highest admiration of
the French Revolution, overlooking as a politician, but secretly, no doubt,
lamenting, as a man, their aberrations from moderation and humanity in the
struggles of a convulsive reform of their late stupendous despotism.

The answer of the President of the United States, to the address of the
minister plenipotentiary of the French republic, on his presenting the colors
of France to the United States.
Born, Sir, in a land of liberty; having early learned its value; having
engaged in a perilous conflict to defend it; having, in a word, devoted the
best years of my life to secure it a premanent establishment in my own country;
my anxious recollections, my sympathetic feelings, and my best wishes, are
irresistibly excited, whenever, in any country, I see an oppressed nation
unfurl the banners of freedom. But above all, the events of the French
Revolution, have produced the deepe^t solicitude, as well as the highest
admiration. To call your nation brave, were to pronounce but common praise.
Wonderful people! Ages to come, will read with astonishment, the history of
your brilliant exploits! I rejoice that the period of your toils and of your
immense sacrifices is approaching. I rejoice that the interesting revolutionary
movements of so many years, have issued in the formation of a constitution
designed to give permanency to the great object for which you have contended. I
rejoice that liberty, which you have so long embraced with enthusiasm --
liberty, of which you have been the invincible defenders, now finds an asylum
in the bosom of a REGULARLY ORGANIZED government: -- a government, which being
intended to secure the happiness of the French people, corresponds with the
ardent wishes of my heart, while it gratifies the pride of every citizen of the
United States, (...) resemblance to their own. On these glorious events,
accept, Sir, my sincere congratulations.

In delivering to you these sentiments, I express, not my own feelings, only,
but those of my fellow-citizens, in relation to the commencement, the progress,
and the issue of the French Revolution: and they will cordially join with me in
purest wishes to the Supreme Being, that the citizens of our sister republic,
our magnanimous allics, may soon enjoy in peace that liberty, which they have
purchased at so great a price, and all the happiness which liberty can bestow.

I receive, Sir, with lively sensibility, the symbol of the triumphs and of the
enfranchisement of your nation, the colors of France, which you have now
presented to the United States. The transaction will be announced to congress,
and the colors will be deposited with those archives of the United States,
which are at once the evidences and the memorials of their freedom and
independence. May these be perpetual, and may the friendship of the two
republics be commensurate with their existence.

Go: WASHINGTON.
United States, January 1, 1796.

It will be remembered that this explicit communication was made in the current
year -- that it was after all the cruclties, alleged or real, which Mr.
Jefferson could have known when in the government, had occurred -- and that
therefore those inconsiderate men, who attempt to criminate him for not having
evidenced reprobation of the French excesses, would also deeply inculpate the
president. Thus it is then, that the views of the head of the executive
government have been counteracted by those who criminate Mr. Jefferson for
according with the chief magistrate.

A FEDERALIST.

No. XII. TO THE ELECTORS OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
Respectable Fellow Citizens,
IT would be a vain attempt to banish party from any government, arbitrary or
free. The object of the prudent and the virtuous will ever be, therefore, to
mitigate the spirit, and to check its excesses and exaggerations. Party has
arisen to a considerable height in the United States. Our well and truly
balanced government, in which our president has applied his qualified negative
oftener than the five last British monarchs, and in which the two houses have
negatived each other with an independent decision, has kept us in order in a
difficult and trying season, and in a time of general agitation and convulsion
under monarchy in Europe. It is an uncomfortable truth, that our various
partisans have much misrepresented each other to their respective constituents,
in a prejudiced and angry manner. These circumstances have very much
contributed to the materials which Phocion has wrought up into his essays and
pamphlet. A cursory notice of some facts and events, which have occurred in
America, may tend to produce harmony and to remove prejudices. Time, however,
admits but little to be done to this useful end. It is certain and manifest,
that the excise system of revenue has been the most trying measure of the
general government. Prejudice against it existed in many places, and from
sever^^ causes. It therefore behoved the true and prudent friends of the
government, not to discountenance a mode of revenue, which a war would have
rendered necessary to us, and which we have been obliged to use in peace. The
inevitable difficulties were of themselves too great. It is a fact, little
known, that all the senators of North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia,
voted for the passing of the bill, while three of the senators of the eastern
states voted against it, including both of those from Massachusetts. It must be
added, that Mr. Jefferson's particular friends in the senate, voted for the
measure. A similar support to the excise law took place in the other house, on
the part of the ablest and most influential friends of Mr. Jefferson.

The act of congress most important to the efficiency of the executive power,
is that which enables the president to remove the officers of the executive
government at his discretion. In proportion to the number of members in the
house of representatives, the votes from the southward of Pennsylvania were
more numerous than from the northward, and the names of Mr. Jefferson's ablest
friends will also be found among the voters for this important act. Of such
magnitude is the law, that it is now greatly to be desired that an amendment to
the constitution, securing the power to the president for ever, might be
adopted. By strengthening our elective chief we diminish the pleas for making
him hereditary.

The subject of boundary was predicted by the malignant enemies of American
union and prosperity, as an abundant source of discord and contention. Virginia
had the oldest charter, and a very broad one indeed. Yet she has settled
amicably with North Carolina, Maryland, and Pennsylvania, the great questions
of boundary, conceding what there states maintain to this day in their favor.

Connecticut alone has kept open one point with Pennsylvania, and another with
New York. It may be affirmed, without the least hazard, that the internal peace
and harmony of this country has, in no instance, been so lightly hazarded as by
the legislature of Connecticut, in selling, for a few thousand pounds, a claim
to a quantity of valuable land, reckoned little short of a million and a half
of acres, in the state of New York. If they had a right to it, deep, very deep
indeed, has been the injury to their constituents. Because the property is
intrinsically worth three or four millions of dollars. If they had not the
right, the act of selling it comes under a denomination, which we forbear to
name. It is important to observe, that the transaction took place in the last
year.

No disposition to good government is admitted to exist in the southern states.
Yet two eastern states out of four, rejected the constitution in the first
instance, and of the four southern states only one rejected. There was no
instance of unanimity in adopting the constitution to the eastward. But Jersey,
Delaware, and Georgia, were unanimous, and the minority in Maryland was less
than that of Connecticut, the most unanimous eastern state, being in Maryland
only eleven.

It is urged against some of the southern states, that they impeded the payment
of debts, which the treaty of peace secured to the subjects of Great Britain.
It is, however, some extenuation, if the plea is insufficient, that they
pleaded the infraction of the treaty of 1783, concerning their negroes. And it
is true, though little known, that Connecticut, without such a plea, was found
to have in full force in 1790, a law which, also interfering then on the scorce
of debts with the treaty, was set aside by the supreme court of the United
States. It is also true, that the insurrection of 1786, in Massachusetts, was,
in a great degree, owing to the operation of the courts of law, which, of
course, decreed the payment of private debts to the creditor citizens from the
debtor citizens of the same state: not to persons lately alien enemies, against
whose government a breach of treaty was alleged. The courts of law were
declared by the insurgents to be grievances, and their suppression was
required. It has been said that the southern states were indisposed to the
funding system; but have they not passed laws to raise imposts and even excises
to discharge the interest and sink the principal? Virginia, particularly, has
paid the excise, on the produce of her soil, in an examplary manner, and to a
large amount. If the tempers of some, and the very low sales of their
certificates by others, have occasioned loud complaints, have the same not
appeared in the shape of insurrection, in the state of Massachusetts? -- It is
well known that the payment of the public debt was among the chief causes of
the insurrection of 1786.

Believe me, respectable fellow citizens, it is not to censure, not to raise a
clamor against the eastern states, that these things are mentioned; but, by
self-examination, to produce convictions of truth, and to renovate that "spirit
of amity and mutual concession" which prevailed, alas, more in 1787, 1788, and
1789, than it has done for the last four years. Let us proceed to other facts.

Much has been represented upon the subject of Mr. Jefferson and the late
printer of the National Gazette. It has been proved, upon the oath of Mr.
Freneau, that there was no foundation for the idea of a connection or influence
with or from Mr. Jefferson. This is absolutely true. It has not been heartily
laid before you. If Mr. Jefferson meant to support Mr. Freneau, it is
extraordinary that he did not allow him the whole sum of five hundred dollars
per annum, when the legislature assigned that sum for a clerkship, and when the
linguist [Mr. Freneau] was obliged to procure translations of Spanish,
Portuguese, German, Low Dutch, Italian, or any other foreign papers, the
department of state might receive. It is doubted whether a man of equal talents
could be obtained, for five hundred dollars, now.

Why is it mentioned, that not only Mr Jefferson, but a clerk, before in the
office, understood French? Are there no other foreign languages but French, and
could Mr. Jefferson apply a secreiary's time to make translations, which, it
was known, the president would want, being unacquainted with the French? Other
gentlemen of the executive government, who did not understand French, were to
be consulted on many affairs. To them also translations were necessary, as they
likewise were for the two houses of congress, and for promulgation to our
citizens. If another clerk understood French, did he understand all other
foreign languages? -- was he critically well acquainted with English and
French? -- Though before in the office, had he not his time and talents fully
employed in his proper business?

The representations concerning the case of Mr. Freneau, were so frequent and
open in the gazettes, that it must have been known to the president. It cannot
be doubted, that the affair was a subject of conversation between him and Mr.
Jefferson. If the president thought there was a propriety in Mr. Freneau's
removal, or a necessity for it, he would certainly have said so to the
secretary of state, and Mr. Jefferson would as certainly have removed him on
the president's wish. This ought to be conclusive with every man, and
particularly with such a writer as Phocion, who studies to carry an appearance
of deference and attachment to the chief magistrate. But, as in regard to
opinions concerning French affaris, so in this case, the president himself has
been inconsiderately implicated in censure, to get at Mr. Jefferson. It would
be frivolous to say, the president could not cause the dismission of a
translating clerk.

It is with the greatest regret; that we touch upon foreign topies, even in
reply, but Phocion has made it necessary. It will be remembered, that Mr.
Jefferson was in France, when the measures of the first national assembly were
taken. He saw the daily evidences of that enmity to the French revolution,
which the despotic part of the combined powers manifested in 1788 and 1789, on
account of the admission of the French people, or tiers clat, into a share of
the government. He saw, that the idea of a reform, in any degree through the
agency of the people, excited the passions and exertions of the hereditary
orders. He saw those orders, headed by the blood relations of the king and
queen of France, preparing to interpose in the internal affairs of France, and
ultimately threatening a partition of the kingdom, to prevent the establishment
of any degree or portion of power in the people of France, as a part of the
popular order in Europe. He must have seen that the destruction of the power of
the people in France, naturally led to similar vies in regard to America. Such
were the natural reflections of Americans, disposed to support popular elective
government, in these states. If the protestant cause from 1755 to 1760,
interested the freest of the civilized nations, in the success of the arbitrary
princes who supported it by their arms, as in the case of the last Prussian
king, how natural was it to feel an interest in the success of the French
struggle, which was maintained by hereditary despotic monarchs, against the
newborn power of the people of Europe in the Gallic instance? It was manifest
that the Americans, their constitution and their government, which are
inseparable, were interested, at least, by prudence and policy, not to say by
feeling.

Such was the state and course of things till 1793. No man can doubt the unity
of opinion between the president and Mr. Jefferson, which prevailed on French
affairs. At that time a French agent, as little the friend of France as of
America in his diplomatic conduct, gave this country the most just and serious
causes of offense and uneasiness. Mr. Jefferson must have been very early
struck with the extravagance and danger of Mr. Genet's conduct, for the first
communication to that minister, from the secretary of state, which was within a
very few days after his arrival at the seat of government, clearly proves that
Mr. Jefferson decidedly and explicitly resisted the irregular and dangerous
pretensions of Mr. Genet. These papers were officially communicated to the
legislature by the president. Mr. Genet's first communication was of the 27th
of May, and Mr. Jefferson's reply was of the 5th of June. It appears from the
latter, that he had before made an oral communication to Mr. Genet. In both
these we see that Mr. Jefferson had, in a conciliating, though a firm,
explicit, and decided manner, maintained the independent rights and neutral
duties of this government and nation. These very decided and early
communications, Phocion has carefully omitted, and only brings into view a
subsequent communication to Mr. Governeur Morris, dated above ten weeks after,
the firm spirit of which he endeavors to undervalue. This material omission of
Phocion justifies the pointed repetition of the remark, that he is a very
prejudiced, and consequently, a very deceiving and dangerous informant.

It merits the particular consideration of the electors, that the duty Mr.
Jefferson had to perform, on this occasion, was infinitely delicate and
important. He knew that the president was as earnest in his wishes for the
success of the French revolution, as a decided whig in a neutral chief
magistracy, could possibly be. He most probably knew, too, that a republican
common interest was perceived between the two countries, by the president --
and the same impression existed, no doubt, in his own mind. He knew that France
was under a highly-excited revolutionary government and feeling, and that
military supplies and officers were engaged in France, and commissions of
congress issued, and prizes sold, in the French dominions, before the war of
1778, with England. These were all contrary to the law of nations -- subjected
France to war, and would subject the United States. Though the French Republic
might feel much therefore, the United States could not consent to such
proceedings in their actual situation. The French agent was very extravagant in
his language, and disorderly, to an extreme, in his conduct. This could not be
endured; yet, a quarrel with France, was studiously to be avoided; because it
would throw us into the arms of the combined monarchs, with whom we had no
common feeling -- no common interest -- no ground, however slight, of common
cause. This government, impressed with real friendship toward France, under
the circumstances stated, had to protest, in a dignified manner, against the
agent of that republic. It behoved us to take ground, which its own perfect
soundness, and our arguments and firmness should render impregnable. Let any
man impressed with these views of the subject, examine Mr. Jefferson's thirteen
official letters, of June and July, 1793, to Mr. Genet, and let him also take
up Mr. Jefferson's letter (following those) of the 16th August to Mr. Governeur
Morris, and he will have reason to be thankful for the unshaken firmness, the
intelligence, and conciliation, which Mr. Jefferson displays, in controuling
the operations of Mr. Genet and in requiring of the French government, and
ultimately effecting, his final recall. So completely was this done, that Mr.
Genet has never since returned to France. No sooner had these very difficult
and painful scenes been well gone through, than the British order, against our
trade, of June 1793, came forth and showed us how little it would have done for
us to have been driven by a quarrel with France into the arms of England. While
the agitations and injuries from those orders were embarrassing the business of
the department of state and the commerce of the country, a new and more
alarming scene was opened before us. The schemes of the combined powers were
extended. An explicit manifesto of Great Britain of the 31st October 1793, was
published, in which monarchical government was dictated to the French republic;
and this only other republic upon earth, by virtue of an accompanying secret
order of the British government, nearly of the same date (November 6th, 1793)
was to be sacrificed, without notice, in its commerce, navigation, seamen,
mercantile capital, supplies, and revenues. Yes, respectable electors, one of
these republics was expressly to be subverted, and the other to be ruinously
crippled and deranged by virtue of two acts, matured at the same time, and no
doubt in due connection, upon the same foreign council board! These things are
not repeated to inflame. But if a secretary of state, who dealt firmly with a
grossly offending foreign minister of that other republic, under such trying
circumstances, is to sustain imputed infamy, instead of imputed merit, from the
pen of a self-deceiving witness, it behooves us carefully to look back to the
serious transaction of the time. It is manifested to you, by our eleventh
number, that the president has retained in his mind, the strongest attachment
to the principles of the French revolution, notwithstanding all the misconduct
of their agents. National interests are not altered by ministerial errors or
crimes. Mr. Jefferson has done no more than the president. The execrations of
Phocion, on this account, are clearly implied execrations of both, for a
judicious policy and moderation, by which the wildness of the sons of Gallic
LIBERTY, was not permitted to impair their wonted attachment to the revered
PARENT.

A FEDERALIST.

CONCLUSION OF THE SECOND PART.
IT is manifest, that these additional pages cannot possibly reach all the
electors. Impediments of various kinds, not within the control of the writer,
have prevented their being more early and much more full. The essays of Phocion
carry evident marks of the preparation of years. Yet they seem to be more open
to a complete refutation than any publication on so important a subject, which
has ever been produced in America, from the palpable mistatements and omissions
of great matters of fact. The minuteness and diffusion with which they are
written, would render a detailed answer to him equally long. What he may
propose to publish in defense of Mr. Adams's opinions in his pamphlet copy, we
do not know; but we perceive that he has left his obser^^^ions upon that part
of his subject in his newsp^^ (...) the very slight arguments which he had
given on that head in the first part of his pamphlet.

Should he add no more in regard to that all-important object of our
investigation, we presume it is because he perceives the difficulty of the
task. If he should add more in the pamphlet than he subjects, in his essays, to
general examination, it will evince a desire to avoid the discussion. This,
however, will manifest little respect for that penetration and judgment, which
the select characters of the presidential electors warrant their fellow
citizens, confidently to expect.


