A REPLY TO THE FALSE REASONING IN THE "AGE OF REASON."

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, SOME THOUGHTS ON IDOLATRY; ON THE DEVIL; AND THE ORIGIN OF
MORAL EVIL; ON EDUCATING YOUNG MEN FOR THE GOSPEL MINISTRY; AND ON WHAT IS "THE
WORD OF GOD."

ALL WHICH REFER, MORE OF LESS, TO OPINIONS ADVANCED IN THOMAS PAINE'S
"INVESTIGATION OF TRUE AND FABULOUS THEOLOGY."

BY A LAYMAN.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR THE AUTHOR, AND SOLD BY THE
PRINCIPAL BOOKSELLERS. 1796.

INTRODUCTION.
IT is with no small degree of diffidence that I sit down to expose and
controvert the false reasoning in a late publication called "The Age of
Reason;" especially as the author of it has risen to a very high degree of
eminence by two very popular productions, deservedly esteemed -- "COMMON
SENSE," and the "RIGHTS OF MAN;" -- and especially considering that the fame of
the two last mentioned works may probably bias the public opinion in favor of
the "Age of Reason." But Mr. Paine's attempt to invalidate the divine authority
of revealed religion, reminds me of what befell one of the greatest geniuses for
caricature, that Europe ever produced -- I mean Hogarth the painter. Hogarth
was eminent in the line of his profession, but he needs must turn poet; and he
doubtless expected to excel in that also. Churchill (who was born a poet)
convinced him of his error, by exposing his bad verses in so ludicrous a
manner, that Hogarth, vexed, disappointed, and mortified to a great degree, did
not long survive the shock he had received. Well would it be, were Messrs.
Hogarth and Pain the only lamentable instances of the eccentric vanity and
folly even of men of genius, when, leaving their own proper sphere, they meddle
with what they are not properly acquainted with, and by no means competent for.

Mr. Paine's "AGE OF REASON" has been in some measure answered, and so far
refuted, by the author of a little pamphlet which lately appeared, called "The
Folly of Reason, being our perfect and unerring guide to the knowledge of true
religion:" but I wish he had descended to some other particulars; or that some
person, of more leisure and greater at (...) than I have, had stepped forth and
supplied the deficiency. I am persuaded this might easily have been done in a
masterly manner by many of our clergy, of every denomination: but as Mr. Pain
and other deists are most unreasonably prejudiced against even the good and
honest part of the clergy -- nay even against the whole of them, of every
nation and every church. That too many bad men (perhaps some of them deists, or
atheists) got into the priesthood -- especially in countries where high
preferments and emoluments were annexed to the profession -- is a lamentable
truth. And that kings and princes should endeavor to gain the interest and
support of these men, is no way surprising. Indeed what is there valuable on
earth, which great men have not endeavored to engross, that it might
contribute to their aggrandizement? But is religion, or are talents, riches, or
any thing which contributes to the comfort and convenience of life, less to be
valued on that account? Certainly not. The same sun, which enlivens and
enlightens nature, directs the pirate, the highwayman, and the murderer to the
commission of crimes; and the house-breaker and adulterer take advantage of the
light of the moon, to guide them in the execution of their fell purpose. Gold
may be employed to corrupt the friend, or the patriot -- hire the assassin --
or betray innocence: But shall we therefore despise gold, or refuse the light
of the sun and moon? By no means. Riches, in the hands of a good man, are a
valuable blessing: they enable him to promote useful institutions: to feed the
hungry, clothe the naked, and relieve the distressed. In the hands of bad men,
what blessing is there which has not been perverted? Law, government, physic,
the gift of speech, the arts of writing and printing; and even liberty, sacred
liberty! they have turned into licentiousness.

That there have been great numbers of the clergy, in some countries, who have
been men of blameless and exemplary lives, and adorned the gospel by their
conduct and the effect of their discourses, no one can deny. In opposition to
this worthy class of men, there always have been, and it is to be feared will
continue to be, men of corrupt hearts and morals in every station of life: but
reason and common sense say, that doubtless we ought to discriminate.


And as Mr. Pain has attacked religion with only scuffs, puerile jests, and
bold assertions without proofs -- they might probably think his publication
almost below contempt, and unworthy their serious animadversions -- at least
from the press.

The following essay being composed by a layman, the fruit of long enquiry and
full conviction -- must obviate one of the strongest objections of the deists.
I will therefore cast in my mite -- as perhaps in duty bound.

I have neither leisure nor inclination to follow Mr. Pain in all his cavils
and windings; some of them are so futile, so full of bare assertion, and
buffoonery, as to be an answer to themselves, satisfactory enough to every
intelligent person. But I shall endeavor to answer every objection worth
answering; and, I hope, in such a manner as to satisfy the serious, the candid,
and unprejudiced reader. As to the would-be-critics, and witlings, all I have
to say to them is, That it was not the hope of their approbation that prompted
me to write this essay; nor will their frowns ever prevent my attempting what I
think is right.

With respect to method and style, I well know that this essay will stand in
need of much indulgence from the true critics: and as candor, and a readiness
to observe the good intentions of any author, and the merits as well as
demerits of any production, is always found with them -- I humbly hope from
that quarter, especially when I declare that this is the first essay I ever
attempted, -- that it was composed at broken intervals of time, after attending
to the business of the day -- that my literary education is very confined --
and that I purposely studied plainness and simplicity of style, that the work
might be rendered more generally useful to that class of readers for whom it is
more immediately intended.

Conscious, therefore, of the rectitude of my intentions, I address myself to
my book: "Go, little infant, and plead the cause of truth and virtue! -- Thy
enemies may be numerous, but be not thou dismayed. A few friends thou will
unquestionably find amongst the lovers of candor and religion, notwithstanding
thy rustic appearance; and it is the friendship of these which thy father is
most solicitous thou should cultivate -- With this hope he sends thee into
the world; and commits thee to the guardianship of an Arm all-powerful."

* This work was written in 1794, in a style and manner somewhat new, but being
the author's first essay, his unaffected diffidence prevented its coming
forward till now, encouraged by a few intelligent friends.

A REPLY, etc.
"The reasoning art, to various ends applied,
"Is often a sure -- but often an erring guide."
-- Pope.
MR. Keatinge, in his "Folly of Reason," has at least proved the insufficiency
of Human Reason, in its present imperfect and depraved state, being "our
perfect and unerring guide to the knowledge of true religion:" and I shall only
beg leave to add, that what we commonly call reason in man, is only a reasoning
faculty, which may be misinformed a thousand ways, and biassed by ten thousand
motives, but especially by love, or the chief desire of the heart. What has
human reason done, in the knowledge of theology, amongst the Hottentots at the
Cape of Good Hope? amongst the Indians, and many other nations of reasoning
mortals, where the light of divine revelation has never appeared? Witness
Athens, so justly celebrated for human science and literature -- what fools, or
worse than fools, they were in true theology! Nay, even (how unlike our modern
philosophers!) they themselves confessed their own ignorance, by dedicating one
of their altars "To the unknown God;" -- though, in fact, this was the most
rational act of devotion they had ever performed.

Whatever Deists may think, mankind stood in absolute need of a revelation, in
addition to what is generally called the light of nature, or the knowledge
arising from that part of true theology which contemplates the glorious fabric
of the universe, its creation, wonderful harmony, and preservation.

It appears to me, that mankind, in their fallen, corrupted state, were either
incapable, or not desirous, of studying natural religion (if I may so express
myself) and fell into a thousand absurdities respecting the object of
adoration, and the manner of worshipping the Great First Cause of all things;
and that the infinitely wise Creator, in compassion to their weakness, gave
them in his own good time (gradually, and in such a measure as they were
capable of receiving it) an express revelation by angels; by men, whom they
could hear at leisure, and converse with as brethren, and who proved the
divinity of their mission by astonishing miracles, performed by a word, and
frequently in the presence, not of a few individuals only, but of whole cities
and nations; and, when these failed of their intended effect, God sent his Son
into the world, who united with his divine nature that perfect moral image of
God which mankind had lost in Adam; and in this sense, he might very properly
be called the second Adam, or representative of the human race -- the first
representative having, through disobedience, "Brought death into the world, and
all our woe;" and those forfeited rights being now to be recovered and restored
by the obedience of the second.

To maintain the honor of the moral government of the Deity -- to display his
stupendous love to man -- and to enjoy the godlike luxury (if I may so call it)
of redeeming millions from darkness, slavery, and death eternal, I see no
impropriety or injustice in Jesus Christ's suffering the penalty due to others.
-- As God, he knew all things, and was well acquainted with the terms of his
errand. -- As man, this great philanthrophist "for the joy that was set before
him," gave himself a voluntary sacrifice, and cheerfully submitted even to
death itself, that by his resurrection and ascension he might exalt the dignity
of human nature, and by his example show mankind the road to virtue, to
happiness and heaven.

I must own, that the manner of the Deity's uniting the human nature to his
own, in the person of Jesus Christ, is far beyond our comprehension, at least
in this infancy or first stage of our existence; but so are many of the ways
and works of God: -- even the manner of our own spirits being united to gross
material bodies composed of jarring elements, shortly to become a mass of
corruption, and return to their original dust. But the name of the
incomprehensible Jehovah is "Wonderful." -- He is wonderful in his eternity; in
his infinite, uncreated beauty, perfections, and glory, and in the display of
those perfections, in his power, wisdom, and goodness, made obvious to every
intelligent creature in creation and preservation; and to the wise (who are
taught of God) in his works of providence and redemption -- Yet creatures of
yesterday, whose reasoning (comparatively speaking) is blindness and folly, and
whose utmost stretch of conception can reach only to the knowledge of "a little
part," -- would fain limit Infinite Wisdom, and call Omnipotence to an account
at the bar of infatuated impotence!!! "His ways are not as our ways, neither
are his thoughts as our thoughts."

Jesus Christ clearly proved himself to be the Son of God; not in the same
sense as human intelligences are said to be, but in an extraordinary and
super-eminent degree -- as "Immanuel, God with us." He proved his almighty
power by commanding and receiving obedience from the united fury of a
boisterous wind and sea; by giving sight to those born blind, hearing to the
deaf, reason to the deranged in mind, health to the leprous, feet to the lame,
strength to the paralytic, and life to the dead.

The deists themselves acknowledge that the doctrines Jesus Christ taught, were
an excellent system of morals, never exceeded by any; and that the whole of his
conduct corresponded with the purity of his doctrine: but they seem willing to
pass by his theology -- particularly the plain and clear declarations of the
great mercy and love of God to the fallen race (which before that time they
could only guess at, and were in much doubt and uncertainty of) and their
salvation by his death and resurrection. Whether Mr. Pain, and some others,
think themselves sinners or not, a sense of guilt, and the necessity of an
atonement to offended justice, seems to have been the feeling sentiment of all
nations. Witness the numerous, costly sacrifices, even of their own children,
with a view to expiation. In addition to this, there is an awful hour
approaching -- an honest trying hour -- when the heart will be detected, and
the man appear as he really is: -- An infidel candidate for eternity on a death
bed is a scene shocking beyond description: "No hope -- no prospect of a kind
reprieve,
"To stop his speedy passage to the tomb:
"But all is melancholy -- all is sad!
"Where then is comfort -- where is consolation to be had?"


Let "Fools make a mock at sin" -- if they please (and they are only fools and
madmen who will be guilty of a folly so refined) numerous instances might be
produced wherein a deathbed has effected a sad change of sentiment, and made
the stoutest sinner tremble. To say nothing of Spira, Wolsey, Rochester,
Shaftsbury, and many others, I could here mention the names of two of my
acquaintance who fell victims at the shrine of infidelity. One of them, who was
generally thought to be a man of excellent understanding and fine intellect,
who (many years ago) from reading the writings of the Deists, imbibed their
opinions, and publicly professed them. He was seized with a lingering disorder,
which terminated his existence: but, several months before his death, he was in
great agony and distress of mind, on account of his deistical principles -- and
would hardly, even to the last, receive any comfort, particularly because " he
had denied the Savior, the Lord of life and glory."

But I shall never forget the other, more recent, instance of the pernicious
effects of infidelity. Not many years ago, a gentleman in the state of
Virginia, with whom I was formerly well acquainted, a man of an affluent
fortune, married to an accomplished lady by whom he had several fine children,
and much respected for his urbanity and other good qualities -- took to reading
and studying the writings of deists, from which he imbibed their opinions. He
committed suicide. I have a letter from a friend and correspondent of undoubted
veracity, informing me that this rash act was one of "the fatal effects of
infidelity."

Of what use will the highest seize in the knowledge of politics, and the
science of government, be, in the article of death. These are nevertheless
highly necessary species of knowledge; but they certainly ought not to
supersede that which alone makes wise to salvation. To prepare for eternity is
the grand business of life; and happy will that man be, who can say, with
triumph, at the last hour, "O death! where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy
victory?

I shall say nothing about inspiration; because Mr. Pain himself admits that
the Deity, doubtless, can communicate from himself to his creatures, in what
manner he pleases; and because the subject has been already treated of, and
proved to demonstration, by abler pens.

With respect to the divinity of Jesus Christ, it was his own repeated
declaration, the truth of which he abundantly proved by his almighty and
benevolent works; and by the wonders which he wrought in open day, in the
presence of multitudes, many of whom were his bitter enemies, whose spiritual
pride, covetousness, and hypocrisy, he exposed: and these multitudes could not,
and did not, deny the facts -- nor that they were supernatural. Indeed, nothing
less than that almighty word, which pronounced, "Let there be light," and light
was, could produce such mighty works. Probably, had they continued to be
performed, and performed by men at this day, we might have thought they were
only the powers of (what we call) nature, brought to view: but as God did not
see fit to continue those miracles longer than he thought they were necessary
to command the attention of mankind to the divinity and message of Jesus
Christ, and to the same message continued by his immediate apostles -- the end
being answered, he withdrew that power: and since that time, notwithstanding
great opposition, the gospel has been attended with remarkable success -- owing
to the excellence and purity of its own nature, and to the powerful effects of
it on the heart, when applied thereto by the Holy Spirit.

I am surprised at Mr. Paine's ignorance of the history of Jesus Christ, when
he supposes, that, even after his appearance in his public character, he was
"not much known, and lived concealed!" -- Let him, or any other man in his
senses, read the history, and they will soon be convinced of the falsity of
this assertion -- as also of one, equally wise, viz. "That he could not write."
He certainly could write with his finger, and why not with a pen? I can find no
excuse for such profound ignorance, unless it is that which Mr. Pain makes for
himself -- "that he keeps no bible," and consequently that he reads no bible.
In this, at least, I give him full credit; because the whole of his "Age of
Reason" bears uncontradictory evidence that here he spoke the truth.

One of Mr. Paine's objections to the sacred scriptures, is, "That Jesus Christ
wrote none of his own history himself." -- But, on serious investigation, will
it not appear to have been much more wisely ordered, that an account of his
mighty works and doctrine, should be recorded by others, who were honest men --
who were eye and ear-witnesses to the facts -- and who could have no interest
in deceiving? -- "Let another praise thee, and not thy own lips," is a lesson
of modesty and humility which he constantly taught by his example, and is
generally allowed to be a sure symptom of merit. As man, He never sought his
own glory, but the glory of the Father, by whose power he performed the many
good works, and by whose commission he delivered the heavenly doctrine.

I must here remark, that, in the few infidels I have had an opportunity of
conversing with, I always found a remarkable ignorance of the scriptures --
except a few passages which they thought exceptionable, and which they had
occasionally gleaned from books, or from the conversation of other people; and
that they had taken refuge in infidelity (speaking evil of the things they
understood not) and were opposed to the scriptures because the scriptures were
opposed to their tempers and practices; and these they were unwilling to
rectify or forsake. I perceived, too, that their infidelity lay more in the
heart than in the head: and we all know that mankind are more readily disposed
to believe what they wish, than what militates against or condemns their
favorite desires and pursuits, even in cases where these are allowed by all
other men to be unlawful, and of pernicious consequence.

Mr. Pain, and others of his way of thinking, allow that Jesus Christ was a
good man -- a philanthropist -- a teacher of moral virtue -- and a lover of
truth; and that he suffered from the very men for whose welfare he had lived.
Now, if he was all this, what are we to understand he meant by saying that "He
and the Father were one" -- that "He was the true bread from heaven" -- that
"He came to give his life a ransom for many" -- that "He was sent by the Father
to seek and to save that which was lost" -- that "He proceeded from the Father,
and was soon to return to Him" -- and when Philip said, "Lord, show us the
Father and it suffices us," he answered, "Have I been so long time with you,
and haft thou not known me, Philip? He that has seen me has seen the Father"
(as far as mortal or material eyes could see him) "Believe me, that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me; or else believe me for the very work's sake" --
and many passages to the same purpose? If Jesus Christ was not the Son of God
in an extraordinary degree, how could he make such declarations? And if Mr.
Pain admits one part of the history to be true, he must admit the whole,
because he cannot prove any part of it to be false.

What temptations had the first publishers of the gospel to record falsehoods,
when what they recorded was directly opposed to the manners and prevailing
vices of Jews and Gentiles -- to their prejudices, prepossessions, and
established religions? If honors, wealth, ease, and worldly comfort were their
object, they pursued the wrong path: for they experienced no inconsiderable
portion of contempt and reproach, poverty and ignominy. Their master had set
them an example, and they cheerfully trod in his steps -- they took up the
cross, despising the shame, and endured persecution even unto death, being
supported and comforted by the spirit of God, enjoying a good hope through
grace, and drawing all their stores of consolation from futurity.

Permit me here to borrow the words of an eminent author on this subject. "How
certain," says he, "is the truth of the Christian religion, and particularly of
the resurrection of Christ, which is a matter of fact on which christianity is
founded! We have almost all the concurrent evidences that can be derived from
human testimony, joining to confirm this glorious truth. The fact is not
impossible; concurrent circumstances cast a favorable aspect on it; it was
foretold by one who wrought miracles, and therefore not unlikely, nor
unexpected. The apostles and first disciples were eye and ear-witnesses, for
they conversed with their risen Lord; they were the most plain, honest men, in
themselves; the temptations of worldly interests did rather discourage their
belief and report of it; they all agree in this matter, though they were men of
different characters, Pharisees and Fishermen, and Publicans -- men of Judea
and Galilee, and perhaps some Heathens who were early converted. The thing
might easily been disproved if it were false; it has been conveyed, by
constant tradition and writing, down to our times. Those who at first doubted,
were afterward convinced by certain proofs; nor have any pretended to give any
proof to the contrary -- but merely denied the fact with impudence, in
opposition to all these evidences." And let me add, it has been carried down
to our times accompanied with certain rights and ceremonies, received in all
ages since their first appointment. And it appears, by what happened not many
days after the ascension of Jesus Christ, viz. at the day of Pentecost, that
most of the three thousand then converted, were the very men who had consented
to, or probably taken a more active part in, his crucifixion and death; which
appears evident from their being pricked to the heart when Peter and the rest
told them (among other things) that "they had crucified the Lord of Life and
Glory;" and they cried out, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?"

Would it not puzzle Mr. Pain to get over the wonderful "gift of tongues,"
which happened at this feast? And is it not astonishing that such a number of
illiterate men should, all at once, be enabled to speak in twelve or fifteen
different languages, with facility, perspicuity, and power, so as to astonish
the vast multitudes that were then and there collected together? But, perhaps,
Mr. Pain may boldly deny the whole history. With equal propriety, and for the
very same reason, he may object to the whole history of England, or of any
other country -- because he never saw the actions done which are therein
recorded, or the persons of whom the history may give an account.

Another subject which falls under the lash of Mr. Paine's ridicule, is that of
miracles. By a miracle, I understand, a display of power far above human, or
any thing known before or since in nature; and above, or contrary to, its known
established laws. The nature and evidence of miracles have been elucidated by
much abler pens than mine -- It is unnecessary, therefore, for me to say any
thing on the subject.

As to the historical part of the old testament, Mr. Paine's main cavil and
objection will appear to be rather a strong proof of its authenticity. What
does all true history exhibit, but a picture of the folly, pride, ambition,
tyranny, and cruelty of kings, and those in power -- the deep-laid schemes and
intrigues of courts and courtiers -- private and public massacres of mankind --
wars, tumults, and a long et cetera of crimes? with, probably, now and then, a
tolerably good character, and some praiseworthy actions. The stubbornness of
the six hundred thousand who came out of Egypt is no ways surprising, when we
consider that they were newly emancipated from a state of abject slavery, in
which they and their predecessors had been held for above four hundred years.
Even the history of Sampson (held in such sovereign contempt by Mr. Pain) is
not altogether so uninteresting as he supposes. It conveys useful, and I may
add necessary, instruction. It shows, 1st, That great bodily strength without
wisdom and the fear of God, instead of being beneficial, may become very
hurtful to the possessor: 2dly, That any connection with a wicked woman is
unsafe, and (like every other connection which has not virtue for its
foundation) seldom or never sincere or permanent; consequently that no
confidence is to be placed in women of bad character; and 3dly, To have nothing
to do with them.

The history of Jonah certainly contains some very serious, important, and
useful information, of various kinds, so obvious that I need not waste my time
or tire the reader's patience with producing proofs. I suppose a laugh, or
smile, was all Mr. Pain intended to raise by his pretty little conceit of
Jonah swallowing the whale: if so (was not the subject of too serious a nature
to admit of it) it would be almost a pity to deny his vanity that trifling
gratification.

Mr. Pain puts the Spanish proverbs on a footing equal, if not superior, to
those of Solomon. I leave this point to better judges: for my part, I do not
hesitate to believe that the Spaniards, as well as the Scots, borrowed their
best proverbs from Solomon, with the alteration only of the idioms and
phraseology peculiar to their several countries. The Psalms of David are
allowed by Hebrew scholars, and other good judges, to be the sublime and
animated aspirations of pious and enlightened minds -- who, as well as Solomon
in his dedication of the temple, and all the prophets, instead of neglecting or
despising what is indeed true theology (as far as it goes) every where
earnestly recommended it; as do the whole scriptures. To produce only one or
two instances: -- Isaiah says, "Lift up thine eyes now, and behold! Who has
created all these? Who brings them forth by their numbers, and calls them
by their names? I, JEHOVAH, etc." The Deity is often introduced as "the Creator
of heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is;" and mankind often
called upon to consider Him in this point of view. Mr. Pain seems to have
entirely forgot, or never attended to all this. He remembers, indeed, part of
what Jesus Christ recommended on this subject; but forgets that it is plainly
and strongly hinted at in the New Testament by others. As a proof, it will be
only necessary to read, amongst many instances which might be given, Paul's
excellent discourse to the Athenians.

I think Mr. Pain will not deny that the moral law (the sum and substance of
which, and of all the prophets, is -- "To love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and thy neighbor as thyself") is truly reasonable, even in the very
nature and relation of beings, and the eternal fitness of things. To love the
Infinite Source of uncreated beauty, the Author and Fountain of happiness and
being, upon whose power and goodness we every moment depend -- to love in our
neighbor whatever we ought to love in ourselves -- and whatsoever we would
that men should do unto us, to do even so unto them -- is certainly just and
reasonable; is consistent with the great purpose of God in sending his Son into
our world to restore lost sinners to that supreme love to Himself, and
beneficence to our fellow creatures, in which only the primitive rectitude of
our nature consisted; and obviously tends greatly to enhance our happiness.

ON PROPHECY. In speaking of the prophets, the greater are those who have wrote
or recorded more; and the lesser are those who have wrote or recorded less:
especially in prophesying of the advent of the promised Messiah.

THIS subject being already discussed by much abler pens ( viz. Newton and
others) I mean only to suggest a few hints.

Were we better acquainted with the idioms and phraseology of the times in
which the prophets lived, their prophecies would not appear so dark to us. Most
of them seem to have been well understood by the tyrants and wicked rulers of
those days -- as appears from the cruel persecution, even to death, against the
prophets, for telling those tyrants painful and disagreeable truths.

The prophets often spoke in hieroglyphics, a mode of writing then much used;
as if we should say, "The lion and unicorn did so and so -- the bald eagle will
do so and so -- and, where the insurgents are, there the eagles will be
gathered."

They prophesied of many events, which they lived to see accomplished; some
have been fulfilled since their deaths; and some are yet in the womb of time.
Cyrus was named, and his remarkable conquests foretold, about two hundred years
before he was born -- All the prophecies respecting the Messiah were literally
fulfilled in the person of Jesus Christ. The prophecy of Jesus (who was the
great prophet of his church) respecting the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
consequent calamities, were fulfilled in a remarkable manner: and Eusebius
informs us, that the Christians at Jerusalem, relying on that prophecy, and
regarding their Lord's advice, left the city, and fled to a place of safety out
of its neighborhood, where they escaped the calamities which ensued.

Mr. Pain has paid our modern poets an extraordinary compliment, at the
expense of the ancient prophets; and greatly depreciates the character and
merits of the latter, to appreciate the dignity of the former. I never heard
before, that any poets ever pretended to foretell future events, especially the
fate of nations and kingdoms. The word prophet, in scripture language, often
signifies a teacher; and of these there might be greater and smaller, as at
this day: but that it oftener signifies a man inspired by the spirit of the
Deity, for the purpose of foretelling future great events, appears, on candid
examination, to be without any reasonable doubt or controversy; and even some
of these might have more or less of that gift, as Infinite Wisdom saw they-were
qualified to receive, or able to bear it.

The prophet Isaiah, in his 53d chapter, speaking of the Messiah, says, "He was
despised and rejected of men: a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. And
we" (the then blind, degraded, and corrupted nation of the Jews, in particular)
"hid, as it were our faces from him. He was despised, and we esteemed him not."
It appears to me, that the deists, who deny the divinity of his mission, and
despise or vilify that theology which he came to instruct mankind in, are
fulfilling the above prophecy as fast as they can.

It may not be improper here to take a short view of the happy tendency and
blessed effects of the truths manifested in and recommended by the whole of the
sacred scriptures, especially of those by Jesus Christ and his apostles.

All who know any thing of this revelation as they ought, find that it is not
only "Glad tidings of great joy," but tends to raise the soul far above its
natural besotted and degraded estate; supplies endless exercise for its noblest
powers; strong support and consolation in the hour of adversity (and seasons
and circumstances will change in this transitory scene of our existence) and at
the hour of death, when even the Balaams (the covetous as well as the
vainglorious and sensual) of the present day, would wish to "die the death of
the righteous."

I know this will be called enthusiasm by those who are utter strangers to God
as their Savior, and to those strong consolations: but every person knows, or
may know, that the soul has its senses and feelings distinct from, and
independent of, those of the body. "The heart," says Solomon, "knows its own
bitterness -- and a stranger intermeddleth not with its joy."

"What nothing earthly gives, or can destroy,
"The soul's calm sunshine and the heartfelt joy,
"Is virtue's prize."
-- Pope. I could name the person who, after experiencing much of the
vicissitudes of health and sickness (amongst the rest the yellow fever) when he
stood on the borders of eternity, declared, "That he would much sooner forgive
the man who made an attempt on his life, than he who would endeavor to deprive
him of those supports and consolations offered in the sacred scriptures, and
obtained by all who sincerely ask of God for them." And, surely, he who from
vanity, or any other motive, attempts to deprive thousands, nay, millions (born
and to be born) of his fellow creatures -- free, active, and moral
intelligences -- of those supports and consolations, when they are most
necessary, cannot be a real philanthropist, or have the shadow of a right to
the title; but, on the contrary (whatever may be his pretentions) is an enemy
to mankind.

The Omnipresent Deity manifests himself to every intelligence, just as their
natures, and moral characters are disposed, or fitted to receive -- to the
froward, he manifests himself froward -- to the humble and penitent, he
manifests himself merciful -- to the obedient and loving, he is loving -- (and
his loving kindness is better than life) -- something like the image reflected
to the person who looks in a mirror (if I may so express it) and not only so,
but perhaps, in ten thousand different degrees of beatitude, in proportion to
the nature, capacity, desire, and aptitude of the intelligent creature; his
essential presence is, where his gracious and where his glorious presence are
not manifested, felt, or known: and his gracious presence (in many and various
degrees) where the creature is not prepared to bear the manifestation of his
glorious presence; and doubtless, he could make the whole universe a heaven, if
all he intelligences therein were properly qualified to receive such a glorious
manifestation: read what the patriarch Jacob said after being favored with
that gracious, and (in some degree) glorious vision in his way to Padan-aram;
Genesis, xxviii. 16 and 17.

But let us go to some of the more visible and happy effects of revealed
religion; by the instrumentality of which, miracles are still performed. --
Indeed the miracles wrought upon the bodies of men by some of the prophets, but
especially by Jesus Christ and his apostles, seem to be types of the wonderful
changes and cures effected by means of the gospel upon the hearts of those who
by a living, transforming faith, willingly embrace it, and rejoice to be under
the power of its blessed influence. The minds that are in worse than Egyptian
darkness, are enlightened; the spiritually dead are raised; the dumb speak, and
sing; the lepers are cleansed; the lame walk, and are strengthened; the
mourners are comforted; and to the poor, and those who may apprehend themselves
the vilest of the vile, the glad tidings of "Peace on earth, and good will
toward men," are proclaimed; and this not to the outward ear only, but to the
heart. The effects of this change become visible in the life and conversation.
The lover of sin becomes a lover of holiness; the cruel and revengeful become
meek, placable, forgiving, and benevolent; the liar, a man of strict probity
and a lover of truth; the covetous and rapacious, beneficent and heavenly
minded; the unjust, just and faithful; the drunkard, sober and industrious,
useful to himself and a credit to society; the proud, humble and affable; and
the profligate voluptuary, who enters the habitation of innocence only to
deface the building, and who probably feels a refined gratification in
debauching the wife or the daughter of his intimate friend -- becomes, by the
operation of religion on his heart, virtuous and chaste -- perhaps the worthy
father of a family, whom, both by precept and example, he leads to happiness
here, and points the road to an eternity of happiness in the world to come. In
short, every faculty of the soul undergoes an entire revolution.

And is this change effected by any latent power in nature? Is this the work of
fallen, depraved, and corrupted man? Then may a bitter fountain issue out sweet
waters. No, says reason: this work is of God, from whom alone proceeds every
good and perfect gift -- who "gives liberally, and upbraideth not."

After all the cavils, calumny, and contempt, with which the scriptures of
revealed religion are treated, I cannot help believing, that "Were it not for
that little book the preacher quotes,
" We, men of spirit, all, would cut our throats."
This has too frequently been the case. The rope -- the reeking blade -- the
fatal bullet -- and the deadly cup -- have, in too many instances, been the
dernier resort of men who lived in the world "without God, and without hope."
But let me rather veil the awful scene, and dwell with rapture on the bright
side of the picture; where remembrance presents to my mind's eye a cloud of
witnesses, to bear testimony to the supports, comforts, and deliverances which
they who love and fear God, have, in numberless instances, been favored with;
by which they have been enabled to triumph over tribulation, enjoying "a good
hope through grace," and having a bright prospect in eternity.

ON MYSTERY.
BY a mystery, I understand something obscure, unknown, or above the
comprehension of human understanding: and nature abounds with them. What we see
with our eyes, and what the curious enquirer handles with his hands, have, in
many instances, no small degree of mystery in them. Man himself is a mystery.
But, "Who, by searching, can find out God? who can find out the Almighty unto
perfection?"

As to the mystery of the incarnation, Mr. Pain himself admits that the Deity
can make a communication of himself to whom and in what manner he pleases. A
great part of the heathen theology, and even their mythology, was ancient oral
tradition, miserably changed and corrupted. And even this error of theirs might
originate from oral tradition of some prophecy concerning the future appearance
of some messenger, or extraordinary person, in the character of the Son of God,
to deliver them from that darkness, uncertainty, and mental depravity, into
which the more intelligent among them saw and lamented they had fallen. And
this seems to be much more probable than that the apostles and evangelists took
any hint from the heathen mythology; the whole of which they utterly renounce,
and severely condemn.

With respect to what Mr. Pain ironically calls the "Christian arithmetic;"
(where he only exposes his ignorance and misrepresentation) the Christians
believe and maintain that the DEITY IS ONE. It is true we read of the Father,
Son, and Holy Sprit; an idea of himself which the Deity has revealed, and was
doubtless proper and necessary to lead guilty fallen man back to himself, to
his favor, moral image, and communion. By the Father, I understand the Deity
immanent; by the Son, the Deity emanent in the person of Jesus Christ; and by
the Holy Spirit, that manifestation and degree of his grace purchased by the
obedience and merits of Jesus Christ, and bestowed on those who are willing to
receive it. My reason is generally satisfied with this. The existence of an
unity in trinity is the declaration of God himself, who alone knows his own
nature and essence; and when once I am satisfied that the scriptures are a true
record of the word of God, who cannot lie nor deceive, my reason tells me I
need no other testimony of its truth; because this is by far the best and
highest testimony I can have.

At some happy moments the exercise of my reason is perfectly satisfied in
contemplating the Unity in Trinity; but I have not words to express properly or
fully my ideas on the subject. Were I to use any term, it would be that of
manifestations -- three wonderful manifestations of himself, distinct, but not
separate. By these three wonderful manifestations the Deity seems to lead
mankind to a much farther knowledge of himself; not only of his wonderful mercy
and grace to creatures in our guilty condition, but of his holiness, justice,
and the inflexible regard he has to the honor of his laws and moral government,
than they could ever arrive at by what is called natural theology. The glorious
Deity is incomprehensible, and will ever remain so to every created
intelligence. None but the uncreated and infinite Deity can comprehend himself.
He may have, and probably has, many attributes and perfections not yet
manifested to us either by that part of his creation which we see and
contemplate, or by revelation: the idea of which, perhaps, our natures are
incapable of bearing; and which, even the highest angel in heaven cannot yet
sustain. Probably the knowledge of the great I AM will be progressive to
eternity. For my part, the more I think of the wonderful manifestations he has
already made of himself to the human race, the more I find I am short of
comprehending; and am lost in wonder, love, and praise.

I have endeavored, and I hope with becoming modesty, to rectify Mr. Paine's
ideas of the Trinity. But surely he did not believe what he himself asserts,
when he says, "The Christians have five Deities!" amongst which are, "The
Goddess Nature, and the God Providence." Mr. Pain cannot be insensible that
the christians believe nature to be only the finger of God; that it is the
continuance of that all-creating word which said, "Let there be light -- and
light was;" "Let the earth bring forth," etc. "Increase and multiply," etc. --
This is nature: the omnipotent power and infinite wisdom of God, manifested in
the creation and continuance of his works. And they believe Providence to be
the same power, wisdom, and goodness, displayed toward nations and
individuals, overruling all designs, actions, and events (even those of free
agents) for his glory, and the good of the whole; and especially for the
benefit of those who love him, and fear to offend him; still bringing good out
of evil; and manifesting this, sooner or later, in his own good time and way;
often inscrutable to us, and even opposite to our and short-sighted
conjectures, and by ways and means we should never have though of. "His way is
in the great deep." As he is incomprehensible in his nature, so is his works.
And although this globe is indeed but as a small speck in the creation; yet to
an Infinite Being, whose center is every where, and circumference no where,
there is no great, no small; and the infant that was born yesterday, is as much
the object of his presence and attention (according to its nature and capacity)
as the highest archangel in heaven; and this infant, and all mankind, live and
breathe in those bodies, only so long as his wisdom seen fit -- and, when he
withdraws his supporting power, they sink into their native element. Small as
this globe we live on, is, the Almighty probably intended it (as the scriptures
encourage us to think) to be a theater on which numbers of intelligences in
heaven, or in many other worlds, are looking, and obtaining, in the
dispensations of his providence, a clearer and fuller knowledge of some of his
attributes and perfections, than they could have obtained without this means:
-- at least, with respect to ourselves it is so.

Mr. Pain has given us a beautiful and entertaining description of astronomy:
for which I confess myself obliged to him. Here, indeed he appears to be master
of his subject. I have long been of his opinion with respect to a plurality of
world; and would not hesitate to follow him farther even were he to suppose the
number of them almost endless. What pity, for the sake of his character as a
writer, he was not in one of them when he wrote his "Age of Reason!" I
reverence the science of astronomy, and wish myself a proficient therein,
because I think it would tend to kindle my too often cold and languid devotion;
and I remember a celebrated author gives it as his opinion, that "An undevout
astronomer is mad!" But having now a very short time allotted me to do the work
of an eternity in, and that time being very uncertain, I must direct my
principal attention and study to the main business of life. And if Mr. Pain
will descend a while from the stars, I would point out to him an object near
home, and a subject not altogether unworthy his contemplations: I mean himself:
in which he may find something deserving his attention, perhaps not entirely
unknown to him, but too much neglected.

Was I better instructed in physics, it might not be improper nor
unentertaining to speak of the very curious workmanship of the body, its
various members and powers, all harmonizing, and readily assisting each other,
for the mutual benefit of the whole; and all entirely and readily subject to
the volition of the noble inhabitant. But that is not my intention. Nor is it
my intention to attempt a display of the progressive powers and faculties of
the human soul; what astonishing degrees it has arrived to in the knowledge of
nature, of useful arts, and curious inventions, and in knowledge human and
divine in so small a space of time; or to what degrees thereof it may arrive,
or to what perfection, in the endless circle of eternity. Here indeed, all
power, not only of calculation, but of thought, is lost! But I intend, in few
words, to speak of what I apprehend to be some of its leading properties, which
properties I take to be intelligence, activity, and love.

LOVE is the mistress of the soul. The two first cater for her: They store the
memory for her. The affections (her younger sisters) are all linked to her; and
where she and they lead, the will is sure to follow, a ready volunteer.

Every man fixes his chief love either on the glorious Creator and Benefactor;
on himself; or on some object below the Supreme Good. But there is a certain
powerful something in the soul, united to it, and placed in it as a vicegerent
or judge, of the nature of which (though I have often felt it approving and
comforting, or disapproving or condemning) I must own I know less than of any
or of all the rest. I know it is the best friend or the worst enemy on earth,
following us night and day, not only to our most retired places, but even to
the most public places of resort, and in the midst of our most favorite
amusements. This power, or principle, we call CONSCIENCE. -- CONSCIENCE is not
always so complaisant to LOVE as the rest of the family are. She is very
short-sighted; and sometimes so very foolish that she will swallow poison, if
it is administered in a gilded cup. He is eagle-eyed, looks to consequences,
and will remonstrate. She uses all the little arts to coax him; and even calls
in the aid of INTELLIGENCE, after having hood-winked him, or interposed between
him and a very bright sun that otherwise would shine upon him. But, often, all
wont do. She then tries opiates -- such as, a hurry of diversion and
dissipation, or a multiplicity of business. Nay, she will sometimes degrade
herself by swallowing strong drink, and keeping, more or less, in a state of
intoxication; or by an ardent (but often short-lived) pursuit of sensual
pleasures. If this wont do, she persuades INTELLIGENCE to take a strong dose of
infidelity, who then gives in a false report; and CONSCIENCE, offended,
retires, and shuts himself up in a small closet of his own, and falls fast
asleep -- at which all the family (but especially LOVE) rejoice greatly. But
should adversity, sickness, or the near prospect of death present itself, and
occasion an uncommon stir in the family, CONSCIENCE awakes, starts up, tells
them terrible truths, and prophecies much greater distress, unless they
speedily consent to "turn over a new leaf." Sometimes they will not hearken to
him; and, for want of seeking help where they might find it, they fall into
despair, and die.

What seems surprising, is, that when CONSCIENCE has been long insulted and
defied, and when he has been apparently asleep, he will sometimes start up
suddenly, even in days of health, ease, and outward prosperity, and become so
very troublesome, that, hoping to get rid of him, LOVE and the rest of the
family (in a frenzy) will pull down the house on their own heads; though, I am
well persuaded, they soon want to take possession again: but, alas! powerful as
they are, they cannot create or reanimate.

Now -- hoping that some person of more leisure, and superior qualifications,
will improve on the hints I have thrown out -- and add to them -- I wish
(perhaps with some of my readers) to come to a conclusion: and in so doing I
shall beg leave to use the words of a worthy friend of mine (gone some years
ago to his reward). After speaking to the unguarded readers of Bolingbroke,
Voltaire, D'Argens, Hume, Chubb, D'Alembert, and others, he says, "If such
readers will deign to turn their attention to a different class of writers; if
they will peruse the writings of a Boil, a Newton, a Lock, a Grotius, a
Clarendon, a West, a Littleton, a Forbes, and an Addison, whose learning,
originality of genius, depth of penetration, amiableness of character, profound
researches into the most abstruse and recondite branches of human and divine
knowledge, and laborious search after useful truth, do honor to human nature,
and will render their memory dear to mankind through every period of time -- I
say, if such persons will deign to turn their attention to writers of this
class, their rising prejudices in favor of deism will be quickly annihilated,
and they will wonder how any person of sound judgment, who had thoroughly
studied the argument, could possibly fall into the snare of infidelity."

He adds -- "I have designedly avoided the mention of any of the clergy in the
above catalogue of names; because they are liable to be suspected as partial
and interested advocates, in pleading the cause of christianity; though I can
really see no good cause why the clergy should not be entitled to some share of
common sense and common honesty as well as other men; and surely if they are
not downright atheists, they have as deep an interest in the truths of
religion, and as great reason to dread falsebood and delusion, in matters of
eternal consequence, as any of their fellow creatures possibly can have. (...)
the above mentioned writers (and many other respectable names might easily be
added to the number) being mere laymen, could have no possible motive or
inducement, but the love of truth, to plead the cause of christianity: nay, it
would have been their honor and glory as philosophers, had they found any
capital flaw defect in the evidence for the truth of christianity, to have
disabused the christian world by exposing the delusion, and to have delivered
mankind from the tyranny and oppression of proud, covetous, and unrighteous
churchmen. But, on the contrary, these great lights of the world, being at one
overpowered by the luminous evidence of the truth of christianity, and
captivated with its charms, thought it the most essential and important service
they could render their fellow creatures, to set this evidence in a true light
before their minds, and to inculcate upon mankind the belief of christian
doctrines, and the practice of christian duties -- So that if this grand
question were to be decided by the characters, talents, and abilities of the
writers on both sides, christianity would assuredly obtain a glorious and
complete triumph over infidelity. And, indeed, christians may comfort
themselves with an assurance, that this ever will and must be the case, seeing
Christ has built his church upon the rock of his own veracity and omnipotence,
and therefore all the havoc of apostasy and immorality, all the cunning and
malice of devils, and all the snares and sophistry of infidel (...), will never
be able to prevail against it, to its utter extirpation and ruin! As vainly do
the tribe of infidels labor to write and laugh, and argue christianity out of
the world, as their great predecessor Julian the emperor, did to rebuild the
temple of Jerusalem, and thereby give the lie to our Savior's prophecy, that
it should never never be rebuilt. Nay, the effects of both these attempts are
perfectly similar: for as Julian's vain and defeated attempt to rebuild the
temple, proved, directly contrary to his intention, one of the noblest and most
striking evidences of the truth of christianity, so the present class of
deistical writers, do in fact advance the cause they mean to destroy, by
occasioning such solid defenses of the christian religion, as infidelity can
never demolish by the weapons of reason and fair argumentation. Indeed how can
any weapon formed against Zion; against God, reason, and truth, prosper? Truth
is great and must finally prevail! Men may suffer themselves to be blinded by
their lusts and prejudices, and led away into error and insidelity, if they
choose it. As they may shut their eyes so that they cannot behold the light of
the sun, so they may shut their eyes against the evidences of christianity. Nor
let them blame the Almighty for suffering them to fall into such a chosen
delusion. God has given them eyes, and he has given them a sun; but he will
not force open their eyes to behold the light. I would be absurd to suppose
this. This would be to destroy their free-agency, and render them incapable of
virtue and reward. It is enough that he furnishes them with the organ and the
object, and commands and persuades them by the most engaging motives to make
use of both. If after this, they will be hood-winked and deceived, they must,
and there is no remedy. But the fault will be found to be wholly in themselves,
and not in the evidences of christianity; seeing it is impossible the Almighty
though give a religion to mankind, without giving sufficient evidences of its
truth to a sincere enquirer. But if men will be infidels, either against the
light of evidences, or for want of taking pains to discover it, they must stand
to the consequences; but God and christianity are blameless of their folly and
misery."

I think I hear some deists say -- "This man (or this fellow) with his Infant
in rustic garb, must certainly be somewhat of a rustic himself: for who but
rustic would presume to reason with us the only infallible oracles of reason?
Nay, he presumes, now and then, to give hints of advice to gentlemen who have
been at school! and, perhaps, a few of us have been at college: and if we have
not been taught of God (as some enthusiasts pretend to be) were are taught of
men to speak Greek and Latin, aye, and to chop logic too! and will undertake to
prove that light is darkness, and sweet bitter; and that being under the
dominion of very pernicious habits and practices, is the very height of moral
freedom; and, in short, will undertake to prove any thing we please." I answer,
true; I am, indeed, a plain man in every respect, and may sometimes appear a
little rustic, though I was taught to be polite and complaisant on proper
occasions: but the deists will not go to church, where they may hear a great
deal more of the same truths, and much better delivered. And though truth is
plain and honest, she is also meek and loving; and is willing to wait on these
gentlemen at the press, without a surplice, or any thing that may frighten
young men.

I think I could point out one benefit, at least, which even the deists might
receive by going to church, on Sundays especially. Surely a quiet composing
seat in any place of public worship, must have a happy tendency to refresh
their animal spirits, jaded and worn out with the hurry and fatigue of
dissipation the preceding day or week; not to mention the pleasures their
philanthropy might receive on seeing so many of their neighbors and friends
seriously, but cheerfully, employed in the adoration and worship of the "First
Great Cause." They may even venture safely to join in some parts of the
service: for the christians adore only the "one living and true God," who is
God of nature, as well as of grace and salvation.

I never heard that a deist received harm at church: but I understand many of
them have had occasion to repent their more modish visits -- at the card-table,
the brothel, and the tavern. I beg leave to add, That they had better not be in
too great haste to turn their backs on their "Father's House;" lest the time
come sooner than they expect, when they may want to "fill their belly with
husks." If any have been led astray, the sooner the return to the favor of
their offended God, the better. If any baptized infidels will spare a little
time to read the sacred scriptures (which they surely never heartily and
thoroughly examined) let me recommend the 2d and 3d chapters of the first
epistle of John, to their serious consideration: for it were much better to
consider now, than when consideration will be too late.

I desire, with reverence, to contemplate the Deity in his providence. It
appears, that at different ages, and in different manners, he suffers his
church to be sifted, or winnowed; sometimes by the sword and fire, at other
times by the tongue and pen. The present age may be a winnowing season. And
although the chaff of superstition, human inventions and human establishments,
may be in a great measure blown away; or some of the chaff of mere nominal
professors scattered before the wind: yet let not the true christian be
dejected. He may be sorry for others: but let him not indulge a fear that the
real church of Jesus Christ is in danger. If the outward profession seems to
decline in one place, it will revive with power in another; perhaps in a
wilderness, or with greater success in the very places were at present it seems
to decline. The church of Christ cannot be in danger, so long as the
foundations of it are the God whose word shall endure for ever. On the rock,
Christ has built his church; and the gates of hell shall never prevail against
it.

Nor am I fearful of the effects of an infidel publication, should it
accidentally fall into the hands of a well established christian; for it will
probably set him upon enquiring more fully into the evidences of christianity,
which will ultimately tend to confirm him in the faith -- I am most
apprehensive for youths, whose minds not being fully informed, and whose
principles not being fully established, the publications alluded to may mislead
the imagination, and open a door to licentiousness; especially as they are
generally wrote in a florid style, and are calculated to lead the passions
captive. Would young men be so much their own friends as to read a portion of
the prophets, the proverbs, the psalms, and especially the new testament, every
morning and evening, they would lay in stock of divine knowledge which they
will certainly find of advantage to them in every situation of life, and a
consolation in the article of death. For their fakes this humble essay is
chiefly intended, which I shall conclude with the moral of the well-known fable
of the be and the spider: "The candid reader will reap improvement, where the
froward critic finds only matter of censure."

SOME THOUGHTS ON IDOLATRY.
THE inattention and vicious propensities of corrupt and degraded mankind begot
Idolatry: and, in all ages since its first introduction, idolatry has prevented
mankind from perceiving the beauty, excellence, and beneficial tendency of that
true theology which the works of creation and providence, and the gradual
revelation added thereto, manifested from time to time, to call erring mortals
to the knowledge of the true God: and, even in countries favored with all
these manifestations, idolatry still prevents men from acquiring that great and
important knowledge, not that gross species of idolatry which requires falling
down before images of silver, gold, wood, and stone, the workmanship of men's
hands; but the idolatry of the heart, by placing the chief love of the soul
upon gold, silver, etc.

The idol of sensual gratification has many valuable offerings made to it;
ambition, many more. But there is a lean, thin idol, composed of and frequently
blown away by, the breath of the multitude, which some men worship and pray to;
yes, pray to: -- for if the only true prayer be, the lifting up of the heart,
these idolaters "pray without ceasing."

In sacred scripture, the true God, complaining by the mouth of his prophet, of
the gross idolatry of the Jews as a nation, and alarming them by threatenings to
bring them to repentance and reformation, mentions some who had set up their
idols in their heart, and says, "He that sets up his idol in his heart, I
will even judge that man by himself, says the Lord God." It is this
heart-idolatry that chiefly militates against a pure revelation from an holy
and just God, and prevents thousands of professing christians from reaping that
saving benefit which the gospel of Jesus Christ offers to all: and if its
effects be so dreadful to these, what must they be to those who are so far gone
in depravity as to sit in the seat of the scorner?

The worst and most dangerous kind of idolatry, is self-adoration: admiring in
ourselves that reasoning faculty, which may be impaired or deranged by a
thousand accidents; a faculty which is often blinded or led astray by the
ruling passions; and, though very useful in matters of a theological, as well
as a temporal nature, is very impotent in bringing us to the true knowledge of
God -- of divine objects -- and of what may properly be called true religion.
This the Almighty has reserved in his own hands, and bestows it in what manner
and to whom he sees fit, in such way as he does health, strength, wealth,
power, temperature of climate, etc. and we ought to be truly thankful for every
means of acquiring this greatest, best, and most durable of all knowledge,
which he favors us with; and not make an idol of our reasoning faculty, or
think to scan or limit the ways of a Being of infinite wisdom, goodness, and
power, who cannot err nor do injustice.

SOME THOUGHTS ON THE DEVIL, AND THE ORIGIN OF MORAL EVIL.
A COMMON error in speaking of the Devil, is in many people's supposing that
name to signify only one evil spirit: whereas it properly means a legion, or
the whole host of apostate spirits (probably consisting of innumerable
millions) who are said to be "the third part of heaven," with Satan, the
adversary or accuser, at their head. When a number of men, a few years ago, led
on by one SHAYS, raised an insurrection against the government, it was a common
saying, that "SHAYS" did so and so. So, likewise, the king of Prussia, or the
duke of York are said to do so, or so; -- though the very actions alluded to
are performed by the men under their command. Just so we speak of the devil. It
has become the phraseology of custom, for time immemorial has given sanction to
it.

These spirits being created pure intelligences, highly favored and happy,
delighting in the knowledge and superior love of the eternal and infinitely
glorious Creator. -- They were created free agents, and might of course fall
into error. Overpowered with the radiance of the glory of Jehovah, they might
make excursions amongst the immensity of his works, as a kind of relief; and,
turning their attention upon themselves, and considering the vastly superior
powers and faculties they possessed above the other objects of creation, they
might transfer gradually that supreme love which was due only to the Most High,
unto themselves: so that, forgetting their dependence, they fell from the
purity in which they were created, by transgressing the divine law, and acting
contrary to the light at first imparted to them. Being thus disqualified for
the heavenly abodes, they were driven from thence to the place prepared for
them, for which they had previously prepared themselves.

I offer these thoughts as rational conjecture only, from the few hints given
us in the scriptures: for of the history of these apostate spirits we have only
a few hints given us -- probably lest it should call our attention from a
mournful tragedy of a nature somewhat similar, in which we are all deeply
concerned.

It was not merely the eating of an apple, but the loss of the divine image by
transgression, which constituted the crime of our first parents. But as they
were not self-tempted, like the fallen angels, the Deity showed mercy toward
them, and gave them the hope of a reinstatement in his favor, by a way pointed
out by himself, whereby the communication was again opened between God and man,
and man made capable of a much greater degree of glory and happiness than that
from which he had fallen. But from the fall of Adam from a state of innocence,
but more especially from that of the apostate spirits, we may plainly see, that
any gift, however eminent, or useful in other respects, may become worse than
nothing, when separated from the love of God, the eternal and infinite fountain
of light, life, and happiness, by a perversion of the reasoning intellect.

The apostate spirits fell into darkness, and are "held in chains of darkness."
They are so corrupted that they neither love, nor desire to know real good: but
love and know evil only. And instances have not been wanting among mankind, of
some who by perverting their reason, have lost the true light, and "the light
in them became darkness:" and when this is the case, "How great is that
darkness!"

To conclude. -- If this account of the origin of moral evil be rational, it
will appear, that as God is the first cause of all good, the abuse of moral
liberty was the cause of all moral evil; and that natural, or physical evil,
was sent as a means to cure or restrain it.

Mr. Pain says, that the scriptures represent the Devil as triumphing over
Jesus Christ. Quite the reverse is the truth: for though he is represented as
prompting wicked men to put Jesus to death, yet the resurrection and ascension
are a full refutation of this mistake of Mr. Paine's.

Permit me here to observe, that I cannot help thinking the spiritual world is
nearer to the material than is generally imagined, and is in some measure hid
in it, and in all men united to it. Probably every man is attended by a good
and a bad angel. The bad angel comes with a cup of poison covered with honey:
the good angel comes with a healing and comforting draught; but sometimes with
a rod also in his hand with which he chastises bad boys and girls ("children of
a larger growth") for breaking over the hedge planted for their good. He was a
wise man, who informs us, "He that breaks over a hedge, a serpent shall bite
him."

That our bodies are recipients, we all know; that our souls are recipients
also (with a freedom of choice) we may know; upon this principle all education
is built; whatever object our love, or chief desire, goes out after, our
spirits may be said to feed upon, to be in some measure filled with, and to
this object they will acquire a similarity; when the heart is brooding, or
feeding on moral evil, is it not reasonable to suppose that, as birds who feed
on carrion, by some instinct in their nature, smell it at a great distance, and
move toward it; so evil spirits, by some spiritual instinct, find out and draw
near to the soul that is feeding on evil or mischief; feed with it, and prompt
it to the commission, or perpetration of evil actions? and he that seedeth on
moral evil, shall afterward, have his mouth filled with gravel, and his heart
with gall and wormwood.

"Does he not speak in parable?"

SOME THOUGHTS ON EDUCATING YOUNG MEN FOR THE GOSPEL MINISTRY.
HAD I twenty sons I would not educate any of them purposely for the ministry,
as a profession or office whereby he was to get his bread. But if I perceived
any one of them of a more serious, attentive turn of mind than ordinary, -- who
seemed to delight in contemplating the GREAT FIRST CAUSE, in his glorious and
stupendous works of creation, providence and redemption -- who delighted in
reading in, and meditating on, the sacred records, who was free from an
attachment to vice, and wished to be instrumental in promoting the glory of God
-- I would give him the education necessary for a public speaker, that if he
chose the office of a minister, he might be able to give a discourse on the
sacred scriptures becoming their dignity, and be an ornament to his profession.
I have seen some, yea, many such men in the ministry; and I sincerely wish an
abundant increase to their number.

ON "WHAT IS THE WORD OF GOD?"
THE word of God was from eternity. It was a creating, and still is a saving
word -- a word of life and power in the hearts of all who obey it. It
harmonizes with the written word, and works generally by means of it. Yet God,
as a Savior, has other means whereby he calls sinners to repentance -- such as
sickness, losses, disappointments, remarkable deliverances, etc. The word was
immanent, with God, and is God: and became emanent, partly by his works and
perfectly in and by the person of Jesus Christ; and is sealed in the heart by
his Almighty spirit.

P. S. Some youth of superficial observation, biassed by their propensities,
and pleased with the florid style and licentious tendency of a great part of
"The Age of Reason," thought it unanswerable; -- but upon a closer
investigation, they will find that the greatest part is made up of bold
assertion without proof -- buffoonery and palpable misrepresentation. -- In
this reply there is no fault found with his sentiments on the education of
youth in general, and he is rather complimented for his astronomy -- but a
reply to his false reasoning on matters of much higher and more permanent
concern, was all that was intended.

FINIS.

