Mr. French's Election SERMON. MAY 25, 1796.

COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS. In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, May 25, 1796.
ORDERED, That SAMUEL COOPER, JOSHUA HOLT, THOMAS G. THORNTON, EDMUND RAYMOND,
Esquires, and Col. JOSIAH LITTLE, of Newbury, be a Committee to wait on the
Reverend Mr. FRENCH, and in the Name of the HOUSE, to thank him for the
Discourse, this Day delivered, before His Excellency the GOVERNOR, His Honor
the LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, the Honorable the COUNCIL, and the two Branches of
the LEGISLATURE; and to request of him a Copy for the Press.

Extract from the Journal. Attest. HENRY WARREN, C. H. ^.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY SAMUEL ADAMS, Esquire. GOVERNOR; HIS
HONOR MOSES GILL, Esquire. LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOUR; THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL, SENATE,
AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE Commonwealth of Massachusetts, May 25,
1796. BEING THE DAY OF GENERAL ELECTION.

By JONATHAN FRENCH, A. M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN ANDOVER.

PRINTED IN BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS: AT THE State Press, BY ADAMS and LARKIN,
PRINTERS TO THE HONORABLE THE GENERAL COURT. M, DCC, XCVI.

AN Election SERMON.
ROMANS, 13, VERSE 5. WHEREFORE YE MUST NEEDS BE SUBJECT, NOT ONLY FOR WRATH,
BUT FOR CONSCIENCE SAKE.
THE Apostle PAUL appears to have been an adept in philosophy, ethics and
politics. In his acquaintance with human nature he was equalled by few. Knowing
the will of his divine Teacher, and having imbibed his spirit, with
irresistible arguments, enforced by a captivating address, and all the power of
rhetoric, he inculcated the interesting doctrines and sacred maxims of
christianity. Well versed in the principles of civil government, and knowing
the importance of the influence of christianity upon the minds and conduct of
men to the happiness of civil society, as well as to their preparation for
another and more glorious state, with the authority of an Apostle inspired by
the Holy Ghost and commissioned from the King of Kings, he solemnly exhorts,
"let every soul be subject to the higher powers: For there is no power but of
GOD: The powers that be, are ordained of GOD." The meaning undoubtedly is, that
civil government, through the instrumentality of men, was instituted by the
providence of God, for the benefit of mankind, On this principle, civil
magistrates are appointed, not for their own honor, emolument or
aggrandizement, but to promote and private and public peace and happiness, by
discountenancing vice, and encouraging virtue and religion. To such a
government, well administered, christianity requires peaceable and quiet
subjection; and enforces it with this solemn denunciation against those, who
resist such a government; they resist the ordinance of GOD, and shall receive
to themselves damnation. -- Such subjection is required not from a principle of
fear only, but for conscience fake. The Apostle means a conscience enlightened
by the principles of Christianity, and sanctified by the spirit of grace. We
must therefore be subject, not for wrath only, but from a still higher motive,
a sense of obligation to Deity and the indissoluble bonds of conscience.

THE words of the text may therefore properly stand as the head of the
following discourse; in which a few thoughts may be suggested upon the
necessity and importance of virtue and religion to the support and success of
civil government.

THE Apostle does not prescribe any particular form of government: This is left
to the wisdom and discretion of men; with which christianity never
intermeddles. It is evident from the Apostle however; that government ought to
be founded upon the just rights of mankind, and to be administered for the best
interests of society. They greatly mistake the Apostle therefore, who suppose
him to favor the horrid doctrine of passive obedience and non-resistance. Such
language is fit only for a despot to an untaught, barbarous people. If this
were the Apostle's meaning, no opposition ought to be made to the greatest
tyranny on earth. No revolution might then take place; but men, like brutes,
must submit to still more brutish men; patiently wear the galling yoke, and
drag out the burden of life in miserable servitude without resistance.

THE Apostle teaches no such doctrine. Christianity in by no means adapted to
encourage oppression and tyranny. No form of government yet constructed, ever
was so congenial to christianity, as a well regulated Republic. No religion,
ever yet known, is so conformable to the genius of a free government, as
christianity.

WHOEVER critically attends to human nature, the design of civil government,
and the influence of religious principles on the minds and conduct of men, will
easily perceive how essential morality and religion are to the peace and
happiness of civil society. There are in mankind a variety of desires and
passions, whence all their actions proceed. In the present state of human
depravity, unhappily for us, these desires and passions are frequently at
variance with each other. -- This circumstance, in spite of philosophy and
natural religion, will create a clashing of interest, that will produce those
different opinions and opposing actions, whence distressing evils may ensue. To
prevent such mischiefs, the invention of civil government undoubtedly took its
rise. If the desires and passions of men were duly regulated, civil government
and penal laws would be unnecessary. Men would then never err, except through
misapprehension, which information and the benevolent affections would always
rectify. -- But human nature is possessed of the passions of selfishness and
ambition, envy and jealousy, which unrestrained would produce discord, strife,
and every evil work.

CIVIL government is a kind of machine, which the necessities of mankind have
compelled them to erect for the restraint of such desires and passions as, if
let alone, would be ruinous to the public peace and happiness of society. These
machines ought to be so constructed and managed, as in their operations to
effect that public peace and happiness, which may be sensibly felt, and
realized by the people. But these machines require something more, than the
power and influence of penal laws, to preserve them in order, and promote their
great and important uses. The great art of managing government well consists in
laying the desires, the passions and lusts of men under proper restraint. --
But how can this be done? The experience of ages decides that penal laws alone
are inadequate to the purpose. Though in many instances they may be
efficacious, yet in general they do not reform the depraved minds of the
lawless, nor correct the vicious habits of the licentious. Fear of punishment
may prevent many crimes; but, as it does not destroy the desires and passions
which originate them, whenever this fear, through the hope or prospect of
impunity, subsides, the same passions will again urge on to licentiousness and
criminalty. Human reason and philosophy are not of themselves sufficient to
secure the permanent peace and happiness of society from the depradations of
licentious desires and passions. Further aid beyond any thing civil government
abstractedly considered embraces, is necessary to support it, and to secure the
liberties and happiness of the people. Religion proffers this aid. The very
design of christianity is to reform mankind, to meliorate their tempers, to
bring them to discharge their duty to GOD, and one another, and through the
merits of the Redeemer to fit them for happiness in the world to come. The
spirit of the religion of JESUS, thoroughly imbibed, would check all dangerous
aspiring ambition, and those restless jealousies, which so often disturb the
peace of mankind. Christianity embraces the true principles of free
governments, as founded, not in usurpation, tyranny, or oppression, but in the
true freedom and happiness of mankind. Divine revelation describes the
character of good rulers, as men of wisdom and understanding; and requires that
they be able men, such as fear GOD, and hate covetousness. Thus said David, the
spirit of the Lord spoke by me, the GOD of Israel said, HE, that rules over
men, must be just, ruling in the fear of GOD. Such rulers are not a terror to
good works, but to the evil. They are Ministers of GOD for the good of the
people. The sacred Oracles teach us, that, though they live, as GOD upon earth,
they must die like men, and be accountable to him, by whom King's reign and
Princes decree justice; who takes not bribes, and is no respecter of persons.

IF a government usurp an authority, and claim the exercise of a power, with
which they never were invested; or if one branch of government should leap its
own prescribed limits, and invade the prerogative of another; or if the people
should claim the exercise of that authority, which they have delegated to their
rulers; in all such cases the order and harmony of government will be
necessarily interrupted, the public felicity suffer, and the liberties of the
people be endangered. Hence such contests may arise between peace and faction,
government and anarchy, as will shake, if not destroy, the very foundation of
public happiness. To prevent these fatal evils, christianity requires that
nothing be done through strife and vain glory. But that each in lowliness of
mind esteem others better, than himself. That every one study to be quiet, and
to do his own business; not going beyond, nor defrauding others in any matter.
Christianity teaches to render to all their dues; tribute, to whom tribute;
custom to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; honor, to whom honor. We are not to
speak evil of dignities; nor use our liberty for a cloak of maliciousnests, but
as the servants of GOD. We are to lead quiet and peaceable lives in all
godliness and honesty; and in all things, whatsover we would that men should do
unto us, even so to do unto them. All this is to be done from love to GOD and
our neighbor; and from a religious regard to duty.

No substitute was ever yet found equal to virtue and religion for the support
of order and good government. They, who reject these, may boast of their
constitutions, their laws and administration; but neither the wisest
constitutions, most rigid laws, nor strong nerved officers, dreary prisons, nor
severest punishments, without the aid of virtue and religion can secure the
permanent felicity of civil society. The boasted powers of philosophy, of
natural reason, and national honor are all too feeble or capricious to be
depended on to effect that manly, that regular, and uniform mode of conduct,
which is the natural offspring of virtue and religion. Natural religion is of
high importance, and its inducements to righteousness and truth peace and good
order are numerous and weighty; but they fall far short of the motives of
christianity and give less security to the liberty and happiness of civil
society. The influence of the former terminates with this life; but the latter
embraces motives drawn from the consideration of a future state; that the
actions of men as moral agents will be rewarded or punished in the world to
come. These are motives the strongest and most influential, that can apply to
the consciences of men. Without these the public, in many cases, can have no
security. The conscientious man, in full belief of the existence of GOD, and
the truth of christianity, as an honest man and sincere christian, acts as
under the eye of the allseeing and heart searching Deity, who will bring every
secret thing into judgment, punish the guilty, and beautify the meek with
salvation.

BUT what has the infidel to do with conscience, whose mind is contaminated
with unbelief? Whose principles are destructive both of religion and morality;
and whose conscience is feared as with an hot iron by deeply rooted vicious
habits? What dependence can society place on such characters? A foe to GOD is
not a friend of man. Restraining laws, necessary as they are for the prevention
of crimes, can never reach the evil of abandoned principles and vicious habits,
so as to effect a remedy. Such characters may sometimes act for the public
good; but this is only, when such a line of conduct coincides with some
favorite passion -- They always change with the current of their passions and
interests. Such men are unstable in all their ways.

IN connection with the power of conscience, we may instance the importance of
the influence of religion, in the use of lawful oaths. An oath is a solemn
appeal to GOD, for the truth of what is affirmed or promised: It implies an
imprecation of the just and righteous judgment of GOD, if what the person
declares, be not true; or if, in what he promises, he should not be faithful.
An oath is therefore a solemn religious act, implying the imprecation of the
wrath of GOD upon a person, if he be guilty of perjury. Dreadful is the
punishment threatened in such cases. A curse shall enter into the house of him
that swears falsely by the name of the LORD!

THE utility and necessity of oaths in cases of evidence and in laying a person
under solemn obligation to fidelity, in the discharge of the duties of his
office, have been known and acknowledged among most nations. An oath of
confirmation, says the Apostle, is an end of strife. As a kind of sanction to
the lawfulness and utility of oaths in important cases, the Deity himself,
graciously condescended to confirm his promise to Abraham by an oath. Oaths of
evidence and of office are of so much importance, that civil government would
be unsafe without them. It would be difficult, if not impossible to invent a
substitute, that would answer the purpose. "Because, as one observes, the
obligation of an oath reaches to the most secret and hidden practices of men,
and takes hold of them in many cases, where the penalty of human laws can have
no awe or force upon them." But what is the oath of an infidel, or of a man
void of religion? What security can the public have from the oath of a person,
who does not believe there will be a future state of rewards and punishments?
What obligations of conscience can such a person feel? His taking the form of
an oath while he is regardless of that being, by whom he swears, is no better,
than solemn mockery. The public, it may be repeated, have no security from such
oaths. The utility and necessity of oaths therefore, to the public safety and
happiness evince the necessity of religious principles and virtuous habits. In
the days of Polybius such, we are told, was the corruption of the principles
and morals of the people of Athens, that, "no Greek could be trusted on the
security of his oath." But in the republic of Rome, antecedently to their
abounding licentiousness, such was the impression of their religious principles
and virtuous habits on young minds, "that no Roman was ever known to violate
his oath."

THE passions of men, unawed by religion and conscience, are dangerous, and
ruinous to the freedom and happiness of civil society.

WHEN loose principles, ungovernable passions, and vicious habits take place of
morality and religion; ambition and avarice, revenge and thirst for dominion in
the disappointed, or envy against those, who rise above them in wealth and
honor, united with dishonesty and intrigue, sow the seeds of discord among the
people, excite jealousies, raise factions, and disturb the public tranquillity;
and, if unrestrained, would throw government, yea even the world itself into
confusion.

THE evil effects of irreligion and immorality may be exemplified from the
universal history of mankind. A few instances may be sufficient to confirm the
subject.

WHOEVER attends to the history of that ancient nation, the Jews, will find
these observations verified. When Balaam found that every other expedient to
bring destruction upon Israel failed, he laid a diabolical scheme to corrupt
and debauch the morals of the people, and by this mean effected their ruin. To
the same cause, the corruption of principles and morals, may be traced the
final destruction of the Jewish policy, church, and state.

THE ancient republic of Sparta through the extraordinary policy and rigid laws
of Lycurgus, aided by principles and habits impressed upon the young mind by a
singular mode of education, existed for almost seven hundred years. While it
remained cemented by the force of principles and manners, it bore down all
opposition, and bid defiance to the world. But it finally fell a sacrifice to
dissolute manners and lawless faction.

To similar causes may be asscribed the ruin of the famous, though short lived
republic of Athens. Solon lived to see the fabric of freedom, which he had
erected, fall to destruction. He gave them laws, which he acknowledged were not
the best that might have been given, but the best they could bear. On his
departure from Athens political storms arose; aided by an unprincipled
licentious populace, demagogues took the lead, deluded the people, feized the
strong hold, and established a system of tyranny. The freedom of Athens was
never recovered. That once famed republic, overrun with ignorance and
barbarism, now groans under Turkish tyranny, and Mohammedan imposture.

THE feuds and factions, which eventually proved the overthrow of the freedom,
and the republic of Rome, may be traced up to the same destructive fountain of
bad principles and dissolute morals of the people. "They adopted the luxury,
the immoralities, and irreligion of other nations." These in coincidence with
their own passions effected their complete ruin. Thus that renowned republic,
which nothing else could conquer, was conquered by its own vices. "A corruption
of manners and numerous crimes, says a distinguished writer, made greater havoc
in the city, than the mightiest armies could have done; and in that manner
avenged the conquered globe."

As human nature in all ages of the world is the same, like causes, under
similar circumstances, in whatever period or part of the globe, will produce
like effects. Happy will it be for America, if we avoid the rocks, against
which so many others have been dashed in pieces.

MANY important inferences and reflections, apposite to the present occasion
suggest themselves from the subject.

IF the influence of virtue and religion are so essential in preserving the
freedom and securing the permanent felicity of civil society; the cultivation
of good principles and virtuous morals among the people may be considered, as
an object highly meriting the regard of our Legislative, Judicial, and
Executive branches of government. What encouragement then should be given by
our civil Rulers, by all influential men, and every class of citizens, to
morality, religion and piety; and to all christian institutions, as calculated
to promote such happy effects.

IF civil government thus needs the aid of good principles and virtuous habits,
to render its operations happy and permanent, it must be a hazardous experiment
for any nation under Heaven to reject that aid, on supposition that
constitutions and human laws are sufficient without it, to secure peace and
good order, and the rights and privileges of the people. Men may form
constitutions, enact laws, display their philosophy, and exert all their
eloquence in conjunction with coercion, but all will be insufficient for the
permanent security of freedom and good government, without the aid of religion.

REASONING from human nature and past events, we might venture to predict, if
any nation should have the temerity to cast off morality and religion, as
unnecessary to the happiness of civil society, it would in the event pay dearly
for the experiment; and find, perhaps too late, that their own folly was their
ruin.

FROM the foregoing observations we may infer the high importance of a virtuous
education.

IN countries, where religion is only the tool of states and of tyrants, the
more ignorant the people are, the more easily they may be imposed upon and
enslaved. It is the interest of such governments therefore, to keep the great
mass of the people in ignorance. But, as mankind were not made for slavery, an
enlightened virtuous people will never suffer themselves to be long enslaved.
If, through supiness and inattention, tyranny, should slip on the galling yoke,
and fasten upon them the chain of slavery, they would soon feel their misery,
and with a manly virtuous resentment raise the all conquering arm of liberty,
and break the yoke, as a with of straw, and snap the chain, as a spiders web.

A virtuous education is essential to the permanent felicity of all free
governments. "The infant mind, says a writer of note, left to its own untutored
dictates, inevitably wanders into such follies and vices, as tend to the
destruction of itself and others." "The early and continued culture of the
heart can alone produce such upright manners and principles, as are necessary
to check and subdue the passions of the soul; and liberty can only arise from a
general subordination of these to the public welfare."

EDUCATION in general forms the characters of men. Principles instilled into
the mind, and habits formed in early life, lay a foundation, for the happiness
or misery of the world. They verify the sacred maxim, train up a child in the
way, he should go; and, when he is old, he will not depart from it.

IMPRSSEED with these ideas, our pious ancestors made the earliest exertion for
the diffusion of knowledge, and the promotion of morality and religion among
the people. Their design has been happily aided by many christian Patriots,
whose numerous charitable donations for the promotion of knowledge and
religion, while they have so greatly served to advance private and public
happiness, have at the same time laid up for the pious and charitable donors a
rich inheritance in heaven!

WE are happy in living under a government, where the great object of promoting
learning and religion has arrested the attention of our wise and patriotic
Legislators, who from time to time have enacted such laws, as, if carried into
execution, would prove the grand palladium of our republic. Our Legislatros
have declared that "a general dissemination of knowledge and virtue is
necessary to the prosperity of every state, and to the very existence of a
Commonwealth."

To promote the great design of a virtuous education, a present existing law of
this Commonwealth, makes it the "duty of the President, Professors, and Tutors
of the University in Cambridge, Preceptors of Academies, and all other
Instructors of youth, to take diligent care, and to exert their best
endeavors, to impress on the minds of children and youth committed to their
care an instruction, the principles of piety, justice, and a sacred regard to
truth, love to their country, humanity and universal benevolence, sobriety,
industry, and frugality, chastity, moderation, and temperance, and those other
virtues, which are the ornament of human society, and the basis, upon which the
republican constitution is structured; and it shall be the duty of such
Instructors, to endeavor to lead those under their care (as their ages and
capacities will admit) into a particular understanding of the tendency of the
before mentioned virtues, to preserve, and perfect a republican constitution,
and to secure the blessings of liberty as well, as to promote their future
happiness; and the tendency of the opposite vices to slavery."

MAY this monument of the wisdom and patriotism of the Legislature, who framed
it, be as lasting, as the world.

THIS leads us to reflect upon the importance of intrusting the instruction of
youth to those only, who are of religion and good morals; who will teach by
example as well, as precept.

HAPPY will it be for these rising States, if our Legislative and Executive
branches of government be impressed with the idea, that without close attention
to the virtuous education of youth, republicanism, freedom, and public
happiness can never be preserved.

FROM a regard to the happiness of the people, private and public, present and
future, our civil fathers, we may hope, will give every encouragement to
literary and religious institutions. Parsimony in the support of education and
religion is a kind of sacrilege, in which we cheat ourselves and the rising
generation, injure the public, and rob GOD of his due.

IF morality and religion be thus essential to public happiness and the support
of free governments, it must then be of high importance, that our rulers be
virtuous and good men.

I BELIEVE it may be considered, as an unfailing maxim, that no man can in
heart be a true republican, who is not a person of piety and good morals. An
infidel, immoral true republican is a solecism in language. Consequently no
man, who is unfriendly to religion in profession or practice, ought to be
entrusted with any important concerns in government. If it be pleaded, that bad
men in many instances have done great good to the public; it may be replied,
this happens only, when the selfish principles and passions chance to coincide
with the public good. Such cannot be confided in. Special caution ought to be
used against all those, who treat christianity with contempt. Whatever such men
may pretend, I appeal to the serious part of the community, whether an enemy to
the cross of CHRIST can be a friend to mankind? The liberties of the people can
never be safe in the hands of unprincipled men. While the following maxim
remains an eternal truth, "That can never be politically right, which is
morally wrong;" an unprincipled man can never be a good politician, and ought
never to be confided in by the people.

THE example of wise and religious rulers, if justly esteemed, will have great
influence upon the people. -- For, in a general way, we may say with the wise
son of Sirach, "As is the judge of the people himself, so are his officers; and
what manner of man the ruler of the city is, such are they, that dwell
therein." From the imitative nature of man, the power of example lays an
indispensible obligation upon rulers, and upon all influential men, to exhibit
an example of virtue and piety in all their words and actions.

HAPPY must it be for that people, whose rulers feel the weight of this
obligation. Bad examples are always contagious. The higher men are called in
life, the greater in general is the influence of their example. If legislators
disregard the laws, they have framed, they practically declare such laws are of
no consequence. -- One of the most effectual methods, to induce men to obey the
laws, is for those, who prescribe them, to set the example. Highly favored is
that people, whose legislators may each, with an honest heart say, as a great
and wise ruler in Israel said to the people, "look on me, as I do, so do ye."

IN every view it must be the highest wisdom in all elections to have an eye to
the religious character of men as well, as to the other qualifications. What
can have greater influence upon the minds and consciences of Rulers, to excite
them to fidelity in discharge of the duties of their office, than an habitual
sense of the all seeing eye of Deity, joined to a firm persuasion, that the
most exalted, who live, as GODS on earth, must die like men, and appear at the
awful tribunal of GOD, who is no respecter of persons, and be adjudged and
rewarded according to their works.

IF the influence of religion be so essential to public happiness; then the
encouraging of virtue and piety, and discountenancing of all profanity,
intemperance, profanation of the Lord's day; all public shows, and plays, and
every thing, which tends to dissipate the minds, and corrupt the morals of
youth, or the people at large, claim the attention of our wise and virtuous
Rulers, the guardians of our laws and liberties. On some of these vices,
particularly on profanity, intemperance, and profanation of the holy Sabbath,
with their baneful influence upon society, I might expatiate, were it not that
I should intrude too much upon your patience. One vice however I cannot forbear
to mention. I mean slander or detraction. This, whether it proceed from the
tongue, the pen, or the press, is an evil of the meanest, blackest die, and of
the most mischievous tendency. Its envenomed shafts often aim a deadly blow at
the fairest and most important characters, to wound and destroy that good name,
which is better, than great riches; yea, that is next to life itself. When long
tried virtue, distinguished merit, and signal services are repaid with
ingratitude and abuse, can it be expected, that men of integrity will be
willing to continue in the service of their country? If men of this character
be driven from office, and others succeed them, who prefer private emolument to
the public welfare, we shall, when too late, rue the folly and wickedness of
the conduct, which produced the change. Slander is an evil of such magnitude,
that no bounds can be set to its mischievous consequence. Well might the wise
preacher call the defamer a madman, who casts firebrarnds, arrows, and death.
With infinite reason did the inspired Apostle represent the defaming tongue, as
a fire, a world of iniquity, that sets on fire the course of nature, and as
set on fire of hell.

THERE is nothing however, to be feared from an open, manly, honest, and decent
investigation of public men and measures. The right of free discussion and
private judgment is the glory of every free American. But, when this
degenerates into falsehood, scurrility, and personal abuse; no indignation nor
contempt can be too great to be expressed against it. -- Happy, thrice happy
will it be for America, when the principles of christianity, and the energy of
good morals shall influence every heart, dictate every tougue, and guide in
every action. Then will harmony of opinion, peace, and truth pervade every part
of the United States. Then will wrath and bitterness cease, faction hide its
monstrous head, iniquity be done away, and, the kingdom of the Redeemer
flourish.

We must past over many other inferences and reflections, which naturally
suggest themselves from this fruitful subject.

THIS day recalls to our grateful remembrance, what we have heard with our
ears, and our Fathers have told us concerning the great things our all gracious
GOD has done for this land. Our pious ancestors, on account of the
dissoluteness of manners and licentiousness of the youth, among whom they
resided, "and fearing their posterity through these temptations and vicious
examples would degenerate, and religion die among them; for the sake of purity
of worship, and liberty of conscience, and from a hope of laying a foundation
for the propagation of the kingdom of CHRIST." left all that was dear in their
native country, and planted themselves in this then barbarous land. -- From
small beginnings, by a series of almost miraculous events, the United States
have arisen into an extensive, flourishing nation.

AND now, with respect to our constitutions, laws, and administration, civil
and religious privileges, and with respect to our commercial and agricultural
interests, may it not be affirmed, without an hyperbole, that we are the
happiest nation, that has existed, since the morning stars sang together, and
the sons of GOD shouted for joy at the creation of the world.

WHAT gratitude is due to Heaven on this occasion, for our State and Federal
governments, and for the precious privileges and blessings, we enjoy under
them? With what grateful sensations should we remember that wise and valiant
band of statesmen, warriors, and other patriots, whose great exertions have
been employed in pulling down the strong holds of tyranny and oppression, and
in rearing up the pillars of liberty, peace, and public happiness? To do full
justice to whose characters, would beggar the power of language. May their
memories remain indelibly engraver on the heart of every American! But who, O
who can render adequate thanks to GOD for WASHINGTON -- whose wisdom, and
integrity, firmness and magnanimity, have excited the astonishment of the
nations of the earth, and added a new wonder to the political world!

WHAT is wanting, to render our national happiness as complete, as the present
state of things will permit, but a just estimate of the numerous public
blessings, whereby we are distinguished from other nations, due gratitude to
Heaven, and an expression of this gratitude by a correspondent behavior. We
ought however, to remember that a state of prosperity is a state of danger. It
excites envy abroad, and lulls to security at home. It presents us a mark for
the wiles of those, who are well versed in intrigue; while our youth and
inexperience render us unsuspicious of their stratagems, and poorly qualify us
to detect and defeat them. While we are just and faithful in the fulfillment of
our engagements to all, as free and independent States, may we be proof against
foreign arts, and foreign influence from every quarter.

ON this auspicious anniversary, while many nations are sitting in darkness,
others are involved in the horrors of war, struggling for the blessings we
enjoy, and are groaning to be delivered from calamity, to behold our civil
fathers, the heads of our tribes, here peaceably assembled to transact the
great affairs of state, what heart does not swell with gratitude to Heaven?
What tongue is not ready to break forth into a song of praise.

HIS Excellency the Governor, his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, the honorable
the Council, and the honorable the Members of Legislature, will please accept
my warmest and most respectful congratulations on this important, joyful
occasion. May Almighty GOD take your Excellency and Honors into his most holy
protection! Influenced by the best of principles, the peaceable religion of the
Prince of Peace, may wisdom and unanimity attend your connsels and decisions;
that the people may rejoice and say, blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who
has set such wise and good men to rule over us. Wherefore let us be subject,
not only for wrath, but for conscience sake.

MAY the various branches of the State and Federal governments, under the
influence of the religion of Jesus, each in its proper sphere, like the various
orbs above, keep their proper places and balances, the one never encroaching
upon, or interfering with the other, move on in harmonious rounds till time
shall be no more!

IF such be the importance of morality and religion to the support of the
freedom and happiness of society; my much respected fathers and brethren in the
ministry will never be wanting in their exertions to promote religious
principles, and the christian virtues among the people. I am happy in believing
the great body of the Clergy, with a very few exceptions, are firm friends to
our State and Federal governments, to our constituted authorities, to virtue
and religion, peace and good order among the people. And, if their united
exertions and patient sufferings in effecting the American revolution are marks
of patriotism, may they not justly lay claim to the title of christian
patriots? When the divine Savior commands us to render to Caesar the things
that are Cesar's, and to God the things that are God's -- When the inspired
Paul solemnly charges Titus to put his hearers in mind to obey magistrates, and
to be ready to every good work -- When the inspired Peter solemnly exhorts his
hearers to submit themselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake --
When we hear the inspired Jude denouncing his anathemas against those, who
despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities; with such divine commands, and
enforcing examples before us, on any great emergency, should the Clergy show
indifference, and not exert their influence to save their country; might not
our divine Lord and Master say, as in another case, I tell you, if these should
hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out. -- In every serious
danger, on every important crisis, for Zion's sake they will not hold their
peace, and for Jerusalem's sake, they will not rest, until the righteousness
thereof go forth, as brightness, and the salvation thereof, as a lamp that
burns. They will plead that God will spare his people, that none among the
nations of the earth may say of America, where is now their God?

IN a word, may the consideration of the great importance of virtue and
religion to our public and private happiness, both present and future, engage
every class of citizens to cultivate the christian temper, and to promote
sobriety, peace, and good order in every sphere of action; that our peace may
be as a river, and our righteousness, as the waves of the sea! May the holy
Spirit of the Lord be poured out upon all the nations of the earth; and that
kingdom, which consists in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost,
universally prevail! That instead of wars and bloodshed, Kings may become
nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers to the people of God. Then will
that ancient prophecy be fulfilled, the kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign forever and ever.

FINIS.

