Abraham R. Ellery's Oration.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED JULY 4 th, A. D. 1796, IN THE BAPTIST MEETING HOUSE, IN
NEWPORT; IN COMMEMORATION OF THE TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY ABRAHAM REDWOOD ELLERY.

"Westward the course of Empire takes its way;
"The four first Acts already past;
"The fifth will close the Drama with the day,
"Time's noblest Offspring is the last."
WARREN (RHODE ISLAND): PRINTEED BY NATHANIEL PHILLIPS, M,DCC,XVI.

NEWPORT, MAY 21, 1796.
THE undersigned Citizens of Newport present the compliments to Abraham Redwood
Ellery, Esquire. and being impressed with a sense of the propriety of an annual
recognition of the irresistible feelings, sentiments and principles, that
animated United America, in the year 1776, to declare herself independent,
request the favor of him to deliver, in the Baptist MeetingHouse in this Town,
on the fourth of July next, an Oration in celebration of that ever-memorable
event.

George Gibbs, Walter Channing, Caleb Gardner, George Champlin, Constant Taber,
John L. Boss, Robert Rogers, Henry Sherburne, Christ. Champlin, Henry Hunter,
Simeon Martin, Samuel Sandford, James Robinson, Archibald Crary, John Handy,
Wing Spooner, Nicholas Tailor, John Gardner, Silas Deane, Nich. P. Tillinghast,
William Tew, Christopher Fowler, Daniel Mason, William Ellery, Ethan Clarke,
George Sears, William Handy, James Caboone, Thomas Arnold, Steph. Caboone, jun.
Moses Seixas, Daniel Sheldon, Asher Robbins, Thomas Dennis, Isaac Senter,
Benjamin Mason, Christ. G. Champlin,


NEWPORT, JULY 5, 1796.
THE underwritten Citizens of Newport, present their thanks to Abraham Redwood
Ellery, Esquire. for the federal, elegant and spirited Oration, yesterday delivered
by him, in commemoration of the eventful era of American Independence, and
request of him, a copy of it for the Press.

Signed by the Persons on the preceding Page.

GENTLEMEN,
THE Oration yesterday pronounced at your request, is now submitted to your
perusal; and solicits the same indulgence which attended its delivery.

I am, Gentlemen, with the greatest deference, your very humble Servant,
Abraham R. Ellery.

AN ORATION.
FELLOW-CITIZENS!
IT has ever been the enlightened policy of civilized Nations, to celebrate the
return of those days, which have afforded any memorable lesson to mankind, or
given birth to any remarkable event. By recalling our attention to these eras;
by reviewing the causes, which originated them; the events, of which they were
productive; and the characters, who bore an illustrious share in them; their
memory is renewed and perpetuated, and the impressions made on our feelings,
enlivened and strengthened. This recurrence, as it were, to first principles,
gives us also a standard, by which our conduct may be measured and appretiated;
a criterion, by which its deviation may be detected, and its rectitude
restored. By reviewing the sentiments and conduct of the Fathers of the
American Revolution, our love of virtue is animated, our feelings of gratitude
enlivened, and our principles of patriotism confirmed. -- The anniversary of
this eventful day, which gave the Laws, a Temple; Liberty, an Altar; and
Independence, Birth; must ever be the subject of instructive review, of
grateful applause, and festive remembrance; -- must ever be celebrated by
gratulatory mirth, and joyous acclamation.

THIS Continent, from an auspicious pre-arrangement and predisposition of
things, seems peculiarly marked out by Heaven, as the destined abode of civil
and religious freedom. The time of its discovery sanctions the opinion. When
the daring hand of LUTHER had rent the veil of the Temple of Superstition,
which for ages, had concealed the deformity and wickedness of the Church of
Rome; half Europe shrunk back from the view, bewailed their folly, and forsook
their delusion; then, lest persecution should destroy those illustrious
Reformers, our vast continent was seen offering itself as an asylum for the
oppressed of all Nations: -- as a sanctuary for Liberty, when driven from the
Eastern Climes, and hunted from every other quarter of the globe. This spirit
of Liberty, brought hither by our Forefathers, has ever found a soil congenial
to its nature; -- has ever flourished in its native luxuriance; -- has ever
grown with our growth, and strengthened with our strength; and though
Great Britain often strove to subdue and crush this spirit, still did Liberty,
Antaeus-like, grow stronger by the struggle; and that proud and haughty Nation
was at last compelled, with hesitating voice, and reluctant hand, to
acknowledge us, free, sovereign, and independent.

THE causes, which originated; -- the events, which accompanied; -- and the
consequences, which flowed from the American Revolution, have been too often
traced, and too minutely recounted, -- have been too ably and diffusively
displayed, to require or justify a very detailed consideration. However
extensive the field, or exuberant may have been its harvests; its paths have
been too often explored, and its treasures too often gathered, to leave much
for present collection; and, like the humble follower in the fertile fields of
Boaz, we must now rest content with the scanty gleanings of former industry.

AMONG the causes, which gave birth to, or prepared the way for, the American
Revolution, may principally be ranked, the relative situation of the two
Countries, and the general disposition, and the particular circumstances of
Great Britain.

HOWEVER severe the oppression, or tyrannical the measures, which drove our
Forefathers from their native land to explore the inhospitable wilds of
America; -- however slender the assistance afforded, or the protection
extended, to their infant settlements; still, had they ever been taught and
accustomed to view, with filial regard, the Mother Country. The ties of
consanguinity endearing and strengthening the bands of interest, had ever
secured to her laws, a kind reception, a willing obedience, and prompt
execution. This relation, by throwing the Continent into her scale, had given
her a preponderating influence in the balance of Europe; -- had raised to an
enviable and stupendous height the arch of her wide-extended Empire. This
disposition, so favorable to her views, and beneficial to her interests, it was
the policy of Britain ever to cultivate and promote; -- ever to suffer her
power to rest only upon the firm basis of ancient prejudice, hereditary
attachment, and national affection. But our rapid population, our increasing
resources, and astonishing growth, instead of fortifying this system, and
enforcing the necessity of this policy, served only to excite her suspicions,
and alarm her jealousy. She already began to regard as rivals. She feared, that
acquainted with our own strength, we should renounce her protection, and
disclaim her superiority: she wished, therefore, and strove to prolong the
period of our infancy and weakness; -- to keep us in a state of perpetual
minority; -- to impress us more deeply with a sense of her supremacy; and to
rivet more firmly upon us the chains of our dependence. Viewed through the
medium of political jealousy, every object appeared disguised and discolored;
and all our actions forced and refracted from their true directions. Even our
swift advances in prosperity, and rapid progress toward maturity, were
considered as proofs of our aspiring criminality, and construed as leading
steps to separation and independence.

To strengthen this feeling, was added the general disposition, Great Britain
had ever manifested to oppress and tyrannize over her connections and
dependencies; -- which stimulated her to watch with a jealous eye, and curb
with a rigid arm, her colonies in every part of the world; -- that Avarice of
Liberty Vid. Curran's defense of Archibald Hamilton Rowan.
, which urged her to accumulate and engross, rather than to spread and diffuse
it. Of which disposition, her possessions, both in the East, and in the West,
afford the most melancholy proofs, which stand recorded in the most bloody
characters; -- which disposition has already made her execrated on both sides
of the globe. Which, however, shows, that she was actuated, rather by a partial
spirit, than the genuine principles of Liberty. Impressed with these
principles, she would have made Liberty commensurate with her possessions; --
she would have given freedom to the universe. True Liberty, like Mercy, is
twice blessed; it blesses him who gives, and him who takes; it is neither to be
circumscribed by lines nor latitudes, nor does it turn critic on the different
shades of the human complexion; but like the Sun, would travel through every
clime, and visit, with propitious rays, every quarter of the globe.

IT must likewise be considered, that the period we contemplate, was peculiarly
unfavorable to any arbitrary exertions of power. The progressive energy of
reason, and extensive diffusion of political light, had, in some measure,
dissipated the shades, which veiled the mysteries of government, from the
profane view, and rude search, of vulgar eyes; and America was already remarked
for that science, which teaches the Rights of Man, and distinguished for that
spirit, which kindles the flame of freedom.

THE particular circumstances, in which Great Britain was involved, at the
period under review, strongly co-operated with the preceding causes. Exhausted
by her efforts in the course of a successful war; which, however, was as
pernicious in reality, as splendid in appearance; -- in which, her conquests,
like those of Pyrrbus, had nearly proved her ruin; -- in which, her strength
was consumed, her resources drained, and finances deranged; -- Great Britain
began to cast her selfish regards toward America, and to survey the prosperity
of her Colonies, with a rapacious as well as jealous eye. Bending under the
oppressive weight of national encumbrances, she sought to lighten their
pressure, by transferring to us, some part of her burden; by devolving upon our
shoulders, some part of the accumulated pressure of her national debt.
Abandoning, in pursuance of this interested, selfish plan, the principles of
her former policy, which limited by a system of external taxation, extended
only to the regulation of commerce; she assumed the new and arbitrary powers of
internal taxation, which embracing objects of revenue, could be bounded, only
by her own moderation. This principle In the 6th of Geo. II. An ACT was passed
for imposing duties on foreign spirits, molasses, and sugars imported into the
Colonies. In this ACT, the duties imposed, were said to be GIVEN and GRANTED by
the Parliament, to the King, and this is the FIRST AMERICAN ACT, in which these
words were used. But notwithstanding this, as the Act had the appearance of
being only a regulation of trade, the Colonies submitted to it, and a small
DIRECT revenue was raised. In the 4th of Geo. III. many alterations were made
in this Act, with the declared purpose, of making provision, for raising a
revenue in America. Vid.Dr. Price's Observations, etc. etc. Vid. also Burke's
conciliation Speech.
, so far back as the beginning of the reign of George II, she attempted first
insidiously to introduce, and afterward, in 1765, more completely to
establish, by the Stamp Act; trusting, that the lightness of the imposition,
and smallness of the duties, would tend to conceal the nature of the principle,
and the extent of its consequences; -- that the precedent would, in fact, be
established, before the principle was contested. But she was ignorant of the
disposition and character of the people she intended to beguile and enslave. A
people virtuous, intelligent, and enlightened; who had penetration to foresee,
as well as spirit to resist, the first approaches of tyranny; who could discern
in embryo the full grown consequences of arbitrary principles, and anticipate
the meditated encroachments of oppression; -- a people, whose spirit recoiled
at the idea of their liberties being made the subject of experiment, or sport
of speculation.

OUR flourishing growth, our increased wealth, and extended commerce,
stimulated the rapacity, as well as alarmed the fears of Great Britain. From
these sources, she expected to draw a revenue, sufficient to relieve her
encumbrances, to swell the fund of her corruption, and supply the means of her
extravagance. From us, she expected to reap the emoluments of war, without its
dangers, and the fruits of victories, without their blood shed; to be enriched
by statutable spoils, and legal plunder. To this end, she eagerly sought and
created opportunities, invented and employed means, to render our prosperity
entirely subservient to her interest; to reduce us to the situation of mere
Factors of her commerce, -- mere pensioners upon her bounty. To this end was
it, that after our firm, vigorous, and determined opposition had compelled the
repeal of the Stamp Act, that the Declaratory Law was passed, armed with, and
announcing' powers, to bind us in all cases whatever. Not content with
engrossing us entirely to herself; not content with restraining and
monopolizing our commerce, the source of her wealth, and arm of her power, she
strove, by this Law, to reduce us to a state of unconditional submission, or
rather of humble vassallage, of abject slavery: -- to reduce us to mere hewers
of wood, and drawers of water, under British Taskmasters. To this end every
nerve was strained, and every sinew tortured. Every plan that could disunite,
every proposition that could ensnare, every menace that could intimidate, and
every force that could awe, was employed. Prohibitory Bills, Restraining Acts,
and Penal Laws, assailed us, like so many tempests, from every point of the
compass; -- and, as if invention were exhausted, even musty records were
examined, and moldy parchments disturbed, to hunt for obsolete statutes,
fabricated in the most tyrannical reigns Henry VIII.
, to revive, arm, and point them, against our liberties. All our privileges and
immunities; all our chartered rights, fortified by solemn compacts of the
Crown, and guaranteed by the plighted faith of Parliament, were laid prostrate.
Commissioners were appointed over us, without appeal, control, or
responsibility. Soldiers were quartered upon us, Courts of Common Law
superseded, trials by jury suspended, commerce interdicted, and intercourse cut
off. In a word, every constitutional guard, every civil security, every natural
advantage, and every commercial benefit, was sacrificed to gratify royal and
ministerial vengeance and rapacity. The fleets and armies of Britain were sent
to ravage our coasts, destroy our towns, and desolate our country. Savage
tribes were excited to scalp, and German mercenaries hired to massacre us; and
bands of Cossacks were to have been associated with her, in the trade of
rapine, blood and death. Every step was taken, and every measure adopted to
carry into effect, this system of slavery and oppression; -- measures the most
tyrannical and arbitrary; -- measures, to which reason afforded no countenance,
law no sanction, and experience no precedent. Look through the long succession
of ages, survey the whole extent of human affairs, and where will you find such
instances of encroaching violence, of lawless power, of accumulated outrage?
Where will you find such aggravation of injury; contempt so mixed with
injustice, and insult so added to violence! Where unresisting obedience was
provoked into opposition, and unoffending humility tortured into rage. Even the
most humble petition was rejected with contempt, or answered with insult; the
most pathetic complaint was stigmatized as the voice of sedition, and the most
respectful remonstrance pronounced the herald of rebellion.

NOR were the Americans wanting to themselves in this alarming and hazardous
situation; in this severe trial, and arduous struggle. Every plan of division
and scheme of disaffection, but strengthened and cemented their union; every
menacing appearance, and tyrannical measure but increased and invigorated their
resolution. Their conduct was firm and collected; their resistance temperate
and dignified. Though they had often submitted to transitory imposition and
encroachment; though, as freemen, they had often voluntarily taxed themselves,
to raise money for Great Britain, yet, when she demanded it, with the bayonet
at their breasts, " they would give her nothing but their blood."

THUS were the ties of consanguinity which endeared us to, and the bands of
interest which connected us with, Great Britain, violently torn asunder, and in
1776, America, by declaring herself, free, sovereign, and independent, assumed
a separate and equal station among the nations of the earth. -- This, my FELLOW
CITIZENS, was a crisis teeming with dangers! A day big with fate! America had
governments to form and organize; armies to raise and support; unconnected also
with, and a stranger to the disposition of European powers; while Great Britain
had the range of every Court, and the key of every Cabinet in Europe. Thus,
surrounded with every danger that could intimidate her spirit, and encumbered
with every difficulty that could oppress her efforts, still, did that glow of
thought, that energy of mind, that elasticity of soul, which independence
inspires, give vigor to her resolutions, and success to her exertions.

MANY, who are now present, bore parts, in this important drama, and were
actors in those scenes which tried men's souls; and now enjoy, with refined
sensations, and enhanced pleasure, the rewards of Independence, and the
triumphs of Liberty. How must your bosoms glow, and your hearts burn within
you, at the recollection of these scenes! You best can tell the difficulties,
distresses, and dangers, with which you were environned, and with which you so
successfully struggled. You best can describe the principles, feelings, and
energies, which urged you to combat, and animated you in so glorious a contest;
when without arms to attack, or forts to shelter, you offered your bodies, as
bulwarks for your Country. In contemplating these animating, inspiring, and
heart-enkindling scenes, we feel almost tempted, in the ardor and transport of
youthful enthusiasm, to wish that the period of our nativity had been
anticipated, -- that we had been brought forward earlier into existence, -- to
have accompanied you in the paths of glory, and now to share with you the mead
of valor, and the reward of virtue. Should any event, however, in the
revolution of human affairs, overcast the presentscene, should the danger of
our Country ever summon us to the field, we swear, by the blood of those
heroes, who fought and fell in the battles of Liberty, that we will not shame
your example, or disgrace the ancestors from whom we sprang; -- we swear, ever
to defend that Independence, to keep inviolate that Liberty, you acquired.

IT is unnecessary to dwell upon the operations of a war, which gave so severe
a check to British arms, and so just a lesson to British presumption; -- in the
progress of which, she suffered almost a continued series of mortifying
defeats, and humiliating losses; -- in which, her armies were destroyed, her
resources exhausted, and her credit sunk; -- in which, while Lord North, the
British Palinurus, was sleeping at the helm, indulging in dreams of conquest
and subjugation, our Continent broke from his grasp, -- from the grasp of that
hand, which had threatened to humble it into the dust: -- in the close of
which, the energetic efforts of freemen, supported by the timely aid of France,
compelled GreatBritain to a sullen and reluctant acknowledgement of our
freedom, sovereignty, and independence.

DURING this glorious struggle, the eyes of Europe had been fixed upon us, the
attention of the World drawn to us, as to a common center. Our concerns had
absorbed every other matter of political speculation. The American Revolution,
was regarded, as opening a new prospect in human affairs, -- as commencing a
new epoch in the history of mankind. America was, in fact, considered as the
forlorn hope of the Universe; -- as making the last experiment of those great
political truths, which, eventually, are to enlighten and govern the world; --
as reducing to practice those important principles of the social body, which
have since emancipated France; -- "as having touched that nerve, whose
sensation has vibrated to the heart of Europe;" -- as having kindled that torch
of political knowledge, whose united radiance, and accumulated light, have
already begun to warm and illuminate the world, -- have already dispelled the
clouds which inveloped the Rights of Man, and made tyranny tremble in the
remotest regions of the globe.

IT must, however, be acknowledged, with painful emotion, and severe regret,
that, at the close of the war, our glory, in some measure, was tarnished and
obscured. The ties of common interest, which had connected, and the pressure of
common danger, which, during the war, had united us, imparted an energy to
government, which it did not intrinsically possess; and when its conclusion, in
1783, had deprived Congress of this adventitious support, its recommendatory
system was found totally inadequate to the exigencies, or even common purposes
of government, -- hardly competent, indeed, to preserve the mere forms of
administration. Those habits of ready obedience, that rigid discipline, as it
were, of society, which the emergency of our situation had exacted and
preserved, was no longer maintained. The wishes of Congress were no longer
anticipated, and its recommendations had ceased to carry the force of laws. Its
measures, which, from the principles of its constitution, were calculated to
operate primarily upon the State Legislatures, instead of individuals, were no
longer assisted or executed by them, but more frequently retarded or opposed.
-- The relaxed tone, and deliberated energies of the Body Politic, gave a
menacing aspect to our national affairs, and began to threaten the most serious
evils. Already had Disaffection reared her head, and Jealousy diffused her
spirit throughout the Union. -- Already were witnessed the disturbances of
North Carolina and Pennsylvania, and the insurrections of Massachusetts; nor
was our own State free from subjects of embarrassment and confusion. -- Already
was seen our national credit sinking to the extreme point of depression, and
our national character verging to the lowest stage of humiliation; -- the veins
of commerce were drained, and the wheels of government arrested. -- Already had
our enemies begun to triumph in the completion of their inauspicious
predictions; and to contemplate in idea, our unbalanced systems of government,
loosened from the bands of ATTRACTION, rushing to conflict and ruin. Strongly
affected by a sense of these evils, by the disorganization of Congress, and
apprehended dissolution of our Union, a firm, efficient, and energetic
government was loudly demanded, and in 1787, a Convention appointed, to carry
into effect the united wishes of the Continent.

AT this period, did America present to the world, the new and august
spectacle, of a people, uncompelled by foreign invasion, and unconvulsed by
civil war, "convening voluntarily, deliberating fully, and deciding calmly,"
upon a form of constitution, which was to bind themselves and their posterity.
The difficulties of the task were increased by the vast extent of territory,
"by the enlarged ORBIT, within which, the different internal, legislative
systems were to revolve;" -- by the diversity of genius, the contrariety of
habits, and the rapid and increasing population of the Country, for which it
was intended. -- They were increased, by the novelty of situation and attempt,
which left them without guide or precedent; to which History could bring no
fund of applicable remark, or practical information. To bind together thirteen
different States, to assimilate their widespread interests, to conciliate their
local prejudices, to harmonize their clashing claims, required the highest
exertions of legislative intellect, the highest efforts of the human faculties.
Nor were we disappointed in the execution of this arduous task entrusted to our
tried patriots, their deliberations ended in the production of a constitution,
which is the pride of science, and boast of the human understanding.

IT would be superfluous to detail its perfections, or analyze its beauties; --
to follow the conciliating spirit, the principle of mutual accommodation upon
which it was founded: -- to point out the regular distribution of power into
distinct departments, or the judicious introduction of legislative checks and
balances, of counteracting and cooperating forces and powers. It would be
equally superfluous to repeat the encomiums so justly, and almost universally
accorded to the administration of government formed under it. Its salutary,
renovating, and invigorating effects speak its warmest eulogium, and give "an
experimental answer to the sophistry and declamation of its enemies and
detractors." Its operations already prove, that in principle it was as found,
as in theory beautiful; as happy in its execution, as original in its plan.
Already has it had the effect to restore tranquillity at home, and
respectability abroad. Under its auspices, Enterprise has explored new sources
of commerce, and the Ocean is whitened by her sails. Dormant capitals have been
quickened into life and activity, and Credit has called into circulation;
money, that never would have emerged from the coffer. Our manufacturers, are
increasing and flourishing, and every branch of Industry is revived.
Agriculture has been astonishingly invigorated; our produce is transported to
every clime, and America has almost become the granary of Europe. Our natural
sources of population are continually augmented and augmenting by the influx of
foreigners, who wish to share with us those blessing of Civil Liberty denied
them in their own soil. -- Our interior Country is connected by bridges, that
vie with those of the Old World, in point of utility, and style of
magnificence; and by means of canals, the advantages of maritime communication
are already enjoyed through a large extent of Continent; on every side, are
removing the obstacles, and clearing the paths to unbounded opulence and
grandeur. Vast tracts of territory whose prolific powers, for ages, have wasted
in silence and obscurity, now acknowledge the hand of improvement, and resound
with the voice of industry. Lakes, whose extended shores, but served to reflect
the surrounding woods, and whose expanded bosoms, the impending Heavens, are
now ploughed by adventurous keels, and agitated by the busy train of
navigation. -- On whatever side we turn our eyes, we behold the marks of
happiness, and the face of prosperity: a prosperity, whose "rapid growth, and
astonishing increase, has mocked the calculations of politicians, and
out-stripped the speculations of philosophers."

MANY, whose military, political, and deplomatic powers, were exerted during
the Revolution, in the service of their Country, and were the chief actors in
that important drama, now enjoy the rewards of their Fellow-Citizens, and
continue by their conduct and abilities, to enlarge their claims upon the
gratitude of their Country. At the head of our government presides the CHIEF,
the STATESMAN; whose name excites the warmest emotions of gratitude, affection,
and veneration. To the name of WASHINGTON, -- a name so great and good, -- I
had intended to annex my feeble encomium; -- but the space he fills in my mind,
is hallowed; -- nor dare I even praise him; -- that he ever has been censured,
can be accounted for, only upon that principle, which leads men, through the
obliquity of their understandings, the ingratitude of their feelings, and the
perverseness of their hearts, to arraign, even the wisdom and goodness of
Providence.

AMERICANS! When a character like this, is attempted to be traduced, it is a
direct attack upon all; -- it is wounding Virtue and Patriotism in the person
of their most distinguished votary, and illustrious supporter. -- When a
character like this, is suffered to be reviled, -- is suffered to be treated
with wanton indignity, where will you find the man, who has talents to exert,
who has a character to be injured, or feelings to be wounded, who will venture
to serve his Country? What integrity of life, what exertion of patriotism, what
accumulation of services, will shield him! Who can expect to escape obloquy,
when shafts of calumny have been aimed at a bosom, which never knew dishonor,
or felt reproach!

FELLOW-CITIZENS! The wide-spreading tokens of prosperity throughout the land,
call upon us all, to combine, unite, and exert our efforts, to ensure its
continuance, and to prolong the reign of peace and tranquillity. The
sentiments, to which your benevolence has induced you to attend, sufficiently
acquit the Speaker, of any suspicion of partiality toward GreatBritain; but
whatever, as individuals we feel, as a nation, we are to be swayed, neither by
prejudice nor partiality; nor ought we to suffer our feelings to put to hazard
a situation, which leaves us scarcely any thing to wish for? Shall we suffer
them to be excited and played upon, by the artifices of interested and
designing men? Shall we submit to be duped by the professions, to be led by the
influence, to be arranged under the banners of a foreigner? A foreigner too,
who owes his impunity to the mildness of the government, he is laboring to
overthrow, and his very head, to the mercy of the man, he is suffered to
revile. -- Why should WE espouse European interests or make ourselves a party
in European quarrels? The pure federalism we profess, will be equally
adulterated, -- equally tainted by the infusion of French, as well as British
politics. WE are AMERICANS. The commotions of Europe, so far as they have a
tendency to engage our connected concern, or active interest -- to disturb or
endanger our own tranquillity; ought to pass by us, like the idle winds, which
we respect not. To preserve this wise neutrality, which is equally our dignity,
and our interest, policy requires, our situation demands, and we must expect to
make, some sacrifices. Already has the political horizon been overcast, and its
complexion louring; thunders were heard to roll at a distance; but thank God!
we have escaped the storm.

AMERICANS! The eyes of the world are fixed upon us, and the fate of distant
times interested in our example. We are building a fabric for future ages.
Liberty, which showed, and but just showed herself, in the four celebrated
Empires of the world Four great Empires of the World. I. Babylonians, Chaldeans
and Assyriane. II. Medes and Persians. III. Greeks. IV. Romans.
, where she appeared a fleeting, evanescent form; even in Europe, where she was
long worshipped as the UNKNOWN GODDESS, has chosen her residence in this
congenial clime, and here erects the Temple of the Laws. This fifth Empire, if
I may so call it, from a happy coincidence of events, seems prepared for her
reception; and it seems destined by Heaven, that in us, all the Nations of the
Earth will be finally blessed. Already has the voice of Liberty, uttered from
the Western shores of the Atlantic, reached the Eastern Continent. -- Already
has the New World begun to regenerate the Old; -- and America, by recognizing,
illustrating, and establishing the Rights of Man, laid the primordial basis,
the legitimate origin, and generating principle, of all power and government.
-- Already may we hail the approach of the POLITICAL MILLENNIUM. -- Already may
we anticipate that perfection of the social body, when all the Nations of the
earth will form but one society, one vast family; when there will exist no
authority, but that of Reason; no Throne, but that of Justice; no Temple, but
that of the Laws; no Altar, but that of Liberty Vid. Volney's Ruins.
.


