A SERMON PREACHED AT THE DUDLEIAN LECTURE IN THE CHAPEL OF HARVARD COLLEGE,
SEPTEMBER 7, 1796.

By NATHAN FISKE, D. D. MINISTER OF THE THIRD CHURCH IN BROOKFIELD.

BOSTON: Printed by MANNING and LORING. 1796.

JOHN x. 32. JESUS ANSWERED THEM, MANY GOOD WORKS HAVE I SHOWED YOU FROM MY
FATHER; FOR WHICH OF THOSE WORKS DO YE STONE ME?


THE benevolence, as well as the power and wisdom of the Deity, is conspicuous
in all his works; but especially in his proceedings with his intelligent,
though degenerate offspring in this part of his dominions. Here it shines with
such luster, as to be viewed with admiration by the angels in heaven. God has
not left himself without witness in any age or country, in that he did the
inhabitants good, not only giving them rain from heaven and fruitful seasons,
filling their hearts with food and gladness; but affording them advantages, in
a greater or less degree, to seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him
and find him. In many periods indeed, and in many parts of the world, the
people sat in darkness, and in the region of the shadow of death; while to a
few others a light sprung up sussicient to guide their feet into the way of
peace. The christianized world, most certainly, can say, that God has given
them all things pertaining both to life and godliness: for God, who, at sundry
times and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the fathers by the
prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, concerning the
great salvation; and that which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord,
was confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God also bearing them witness,
both with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy
Ghost, according to his own will.

But I am not to assume the question that is to be discussed, nor take for
granted the point to be proved. The general subject which claims my attention
on this occasion according to the direction of the pious Founder of this
Lecture, being REVEALED RELIGION, it is justly expected that I endeavor to
adduce some arguments in support of Divine Revelation; at least, that I collect
and prepare some materials, which may contribute to the strength of the great
fabric of Christianity; or rather, point out to view the solid firmness of
those everlasting pillars upon which this noble edifice is established.

That a system of doctrines and precepts, under the denomination of the
Christian Religion, has been introduced, and now exists in the world, is
without controversy: for it is equally the butt of sneering unbelievers, and
the boast of its professors; a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense to the
former; but a cornerstone of hope and joy to the latter. It is almost
universally acknowledged too, that this religion derived its name and its
origin from Jesus Christ, whom his followers believed to be the true Messiah;
but whom the Jews insulted as a deceiver, and crucified as a malefactor; whose
memory and whose oracles are still sacred in the esteem of Christians; but
treated with the greatest indignity by modern unbelievers.

Now the great question respecting Christianity, is this, Is it from Heaven, or
of men? and concerning its Founder and propagators, Were they actuated by a
lying spirit, or did they speak as if they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and
act, as if endued with power from on high?

In order to the full discussion of this question, it may be thought necessary
to examine minutely the intrinsic excellency of this religion, in its
doctrines, duties, and professed design; its external supports, in the
fulfillment of prophecies and the exhibition of miracles; the character of its
author, and of his commissioned apostles; its progress and establishment in the
world; and the credibility of the histories and books, which contain this
religion, and transmit an account of its author and first propagators. But this
opens an extensive field. On these heads many volumes have already been
written. It is impossible, therefore, that the limits of one sermon should
contain the principal part of those arguments, arranged in their connected and
corroborating order, by which the belief of Christians is supported, and the
cavils of infidels refuted. A discourse of an hour, under my management, may
tire the patience of the audience, but not do justice to the subject. Something
however must be attempted.

If we take a view of Christianity as forming a complete system of religion,
adapted to the nature, and adequate to the exigencies of mankind, it appears to
be a work of such magnitude, and a good of such importance, as no abilities of
man could ever excogitate or effect.

Justly to apprehend the worth of a benefit, we must consider the necessities
of those upon whom it is conferred, and its suitableness to answer those
necessities. Examining the system of Christianity by these marks, we shall find
it fully to answer the demand.

It needs not the labor of argument to prove, that all flesh had early
corrupted their ways, and become guilty before God. The malady, which was
caught by our first parents in Eden, spread from father to son; and from one
generation to another grew more inveterate and alarming. In matters of
religion, the whole head was sick, and the whole heart faint. The heathen
nations became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools; and changed the
glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible man, and
to birds, and four footed beasts, and creeping things. The disease was
universally felt, and in some instances lamented: but who could investigate a
remedy? The wisest and best of the ancient philosophers, from a mournful sense
of the prevailing debility, could only wish and hope for an able restorer. Wise
as some of them confessedly were, the world by their wisdom knew not God, nor
the way to approach him with confidence, nor to serve him with propriety. They
were not fully persuaded of the immortality of the foul; much less that all
would hereafter be judged and recompensed according to their works. They felt
not therefore the powers of the world to come; 'nor did they perceive in those
rules of virtue, which they were able to discover, the authority of a divine
legislator, or of an impartial judge.' They knew not of an advocate to
intercede in their behalf with their offended sovereign. They knew not of a
divine illuminator and sanctifier to help their infirmities, to aid their
endeavors, and to complete their restoration. To men in such circumstances,
how welcome, how every way suitable, would the plan of recovery by Christ be,
as it is delineated and propounded in the Bible? a plan, which provides for all
their moral wants through time, and for their complete happiness through
eternity. The wisdom of its construction must excite their admiration; its
suitableness and most benevolent tendency must recommend it to their joyful
acceptance; as well as the attestations by which it is supported, claim their
cordial belief.

To decide the question whether the powers of the human mind are adequate to
the task of informing the understanding, regulating the passions, and directing
the conduct, in all the exercises of religious worship, and in all the
practices of moral duty, let us inquire what these boasted powers have
accomplished, without the aid of revelation. Much indeed have they
accomplished, and to great heights have they attained, in scientifick
researches, and in the improvement of the useful, and of the refined arts. But
what have they effected in the science of theology; in the necessary art of
getting rid of the guilt and dominion of sin; and of assuring men's hearts
before God, with respect to their future well-being? In what book but the
Bible, or those which derive their origin from the Bible, can we find a scheme
of divinity, worthy of the great First Cause; or a rational system of moral
duties, fuited to all ranks, capacities and fituations, enforced by proper
sanctions, and encouraged by adequate assistances, and eternal rewards? In this
view, can it appear credible, can it appear possible, to any unprejudiced mind,
that the gospel plan, so comprehensive, and yet so consistent, and which
unfolds such astonishing mysteries, and such sublime and interesting doctrines,
can owe its origin, its establishment, its most happy influence, to the
uninspired genius, or the unassisted powers of man; much more, of an impostor
speaking in the name of the Lord, when the Lord spoke not by him? In this case
he could not be a good man: but certainly, none but a good being can be the
author of a scheme, which not only proclaims, but promotes, both in a direct
and consequential manner, glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, and good
will toward men. Such is the profundity of the plan, so complicated and yet so
regular, that we might on this account give credit to the apostle Peter's
assertion, that even the angels desired to pry into it; and to the apostle
Paul's, I certify you, brethren, that the gospel, which was preached of me, is
not after man. For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but
by the revelation of Jesus Christ. In the same spirit of devout astonishment,
which St. Paul expressed on another occasion, must we exclaim, O the depth of
the riches both of the wisdom and the knowledge of God! how unsearchable are
his judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who has known the mind of
the Lord, or who has been his counselor? Or who has first given unto him,
and it shall be recompensed unto him again? For of him, and through him, and to
him are all things: to whom be glory forever. Amen. The author of such a scheme
must have been possessed of infinite wisdom, infinite comprehension, and
infinite benevolence. This great and astonishing work, this complication of
benefits, bath the Son of God showed us from his Father.

The gospel is evidently a remedial institution. The declared, the apparent,
and the experienced design of it, is to recover the race of men from depravity
and guilt, in a way, which reflects the greatest honor on the character and
authority of a righteous and universal Sovereign, and which is most admirably
suited to the rational and immortal, though corrupted and debilitated nature of
the creatures to be recovered. However deficient every other plan of
restoration, and every effort of human ingenuity is, we are complete in him,
who is the head of all principalities and powers, and in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

"If we contemplate the gospel by itself," says a masterly writer on this
subject, * WHITE.
"and view it in its own light, we shall have abundant reason to admire it,
both for the purity of its nature, and the tendency which it has to promote the
interests and the happiness of mankind. It bears on it the stamp of a divine
original; and there is a spirit which animates and beautifies it, that must
strongly prepossess the pious mind in its favor. The purity of the gospel is
indeed a decisive evidence whence it proceeded; an evidence ever present, ever
legible; and which no distance, whether of time or of place, can efface. That
purity is such as we should naturally expect from the sentiments which
uncorrupted nature leads us to form of the Divine Being. If he had not already
vouchsafed to grant us a revelation of his will, with respect to our duty both
to him and to one another; yet if we had reason to expect that he would grant
it, the clearest dictates of our judgment, and the noblest sentiments of our
heart, would lead us to anticipate the same display of benevolence on the part
of God, and the same encouragements to virtue among men, which we find in the
gospel of Jesus Christ.

"As it is pure, so it is perfect. Whatever is necessary for us to know, is
discovered by it; and discovered in such a manner as to answer all the purposes
of a revelation designed for general information. In the gospel we have nothing
superfluous, nothing perplexing. Every declaration of sin and duty; every
promise to engage us to pursue the one, and every threatening to deter from the
other, are brought forward with a precision and simplicity, which leave no room
either for the perverse to cavil, or the impartial to mistake. There is no vice
which it does not detect, even within the darkest retreats of the mind. There
is no duty connected with the glory of God, the welfare of our neighbor, or
the true happiness of ourselves, but what it unfolds and illustrates. Its
precepts are not only clear in their mode of delivery, and beneficial in their
tendency; but they are enforced by every motive that is calculated to affect
the heart, and to exalt and purify its affections. The promise of divine
forgiveness and compassion through Jesus; of help and succor through the
Divine Spirit, are of the most soothing and engaging nature, to beings
encompassed with difficulties of various kinds, and exposed to moral weaknesses
and transgressions, which are degrading to our nature, and destructive of our
happiness. But to inspire us with the full soul of virtue and religion, it
carries our aspiring minds beyond the contracted views of this mortal scene, to
that exalted world of spirits, where we shall ever be advancing in knowledge
and perfection, where every offense sincerely repented of shall be pardoned,
and every virtuous endeavor accepted and rewarded by him, who is our most
compastionate father, as well as our most righteous judge."

To strengthen our belief that this religion is divine, let us view the
character of its Founder. A succession of illustrious prophecies, from Adam to
Malachi, respecting the Messiah, who was to be a light to the Gentiles, and the
glory of his people Israel, were fulfilled in Jesus Christ; -- fulfilled in the
time, place, and other circumstances of his birth; in the sufferings as well as
purity of his life; in many circumstances relative to his death, burial, and
resurrection; and in the salutary design, and wonderful efficacy of his
doctrines. As he was the holy child Jesus, so it appears from his history that
in after life he knew no sin, and fulfilled all righteousness. He had no faulty
defects to sully his character, but every virtue and grace to adorn it. Into
whatever cities or villages, concourses or retirements, we trace the footsteps
of Christ, we shall discover in him the most consummate prudence and piety; the
most exalted and steady regard to the honor and laws of God; and the most warm
and disinterested benevolence to mankind. In short, as Dr. Doddridge observes,
"We see in him every thing amiable, every thing venerable. We see a perfection
of goodness no where else in the world to be seen or heard; and numberless
arguments plead at once to persuade the heart, that it is absolutely impossible
such a PERSON should be engaged in a design founded in known falsehood, and
tending only to mislead and ruin his followers."

Jesus Christ also, in the course of his active and useful life, performed many
miraculous works, as attestations of his divine mission. His miracles, being
performed with a benevolent design, might well be called good works which he
showed from his Father. Whoever acknowledges a God, must at least admit the
possibility of a miracle. The Framer of the great machine of nature, and of the
laws by which it is directed, may, consistently with his wisdom and goodness,
suspend those laws in any given instance, or increase their energy. He who has
all power, and all hearts in his hands, may perform miracles immediately by
himself, or mediately by other agents; in either case, the great ends of
religion are equally secured, and the proofs of his interposition equally
apparent.

It is manifest from many passages in the New Testament, that Jesus Christ
considered the evidence arising from the mighty works which he wrought, as
abundantly sufficient to support his claims to the Messiahship. If I do not the
works of my Father, believe me not: but if I do, though ye believe not me,
believe the works. As there must always be a perfect consistency between the
attributes, the nature and the proceedings, of an all-perfect being, it is
certain that such a being would not have affixed the sanction of miracles to
the cause in which our Savior was engaged, had that cause been an imposture.
The same spirit of power which was given to our Lord without measure, was
communicated to his apostles in a degree sufficient to enable them also to work
miracles, as an evidence of the truth of their mission and doctrines. These
miracles, too, both of our Savior and of his apostles, were so numerous, so
beneficial, and performed so openly, in the view of such multitudes, as to be
sufficiently screened from the imputation of fraud and collusion, or of a
fortunate and accidental concurrence of second causes. "They were too public to
be the artifices of imposture; too substantial, and too numerous, to afford the
slightest suspicion of undesigned and fortuitous coincidence." In a word, as
the aforesaid author * WHITE.
observes, "should the Divine Being in any instance so far counteract the
common laws of nature as to produce a miracle; and should design that miracle
as a monument to future times of the truth of any particular doctrine, we
cannot conceive any mode of communicating it more effectual than that which he
has chosen. Stronger proofs could not be afforded consistently with the design
of the gospel, which is not to overpower our understandings, by an irresistible
and compulsory light, but to afford us such rational evidence as is sufficient
to satisfy moral inquirers, who are endowed with faculties to perceive the
truth; but at the same time who have power totally to resist it, and finally to
forfeit its blessings."

On the whole then, when we contemplate the character of Christ as delineated
with admirable simplicity by his sacred biographers; when we view him in the
whole course of his public ministry going about doing good, healing all manner
of diseases, casting out devils, instructing the ignorant, and comforting the
sorrowful; especially when we consider the benevolent design of his mission,
and that he actually devoted his life as a ransom for sinners; it gives a
penetrating edge to the inquiry in my text, Many good works have I showed you
from my Father; for which of those works do ye stone me? The same interrogation
and appeal may his friends and followers make in behalf of his cause, and of
the records of his life and doctrines; "Many good works are therein displayed
from the Father; many advantages communicated to the world in general; many
unspeakable blessings, temporal and eternal, to individuals; for which of those
works, those immense advantages, those invaluable blessings, is the cause
rejected and vilified? For which of the doctrines, of the prophecies, of the
promises, is the Bible ridiculed, and spurned through all the filth of the
streets?"

But as the Jews answered the Savior, so modern unbelievers reply now; " For a
good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy, and because that thou, being a
man, make thyself God. And as the Founder of the Christian scheme was an
impostor, so the scheme itself is a forgery. The sacred books, as they are
called, are not authentic. They were not written by those whose names they
bear; and the story they tell is fabulous, and deserves no credit."

In vindication of himself from the charge of blasphemy, and in proof of his
commission from the Father, our Lord, as we have seen, appealed to the miracles
which he wrought, as sufficient to carry conviction to every unprejudiced mind.
To prophecies also, as well as to miracles, both Christ and his apostles
frequently appealed, as proofs of their divine mission. We may add too, that as
'our Savior referred to his mighty works as evidences of his power, so he
referred to the intrinsic excellency and purity of the doctrines they were
intended to bear witness to, as an evidence that the power was of God.' In this
manner, and to this day, do the external and internal proofs of Christianity
mutually illuminate and corroborate each other. The contemporaries of Christ
had the evidence of their senses that he performed miracles. We, though so
distant in time and place, have the evidence of credible testimony, that not
only he, but his apostles in his name, performed them too; and that his
religion spread and got footing in the world, in so speedy and wonderful a
manner, as demonstrated that the cause was of God.

That we have not followed cunningly devised fables; but that we have the most
solid foundation for our faith and hope in Christ Jesus, we argue in this
manner; "The facts recorded of our Savior were recorded by those who must know
whether they were true or false. The persons who recorded them, were under no
possible temptations to deceive the world. We can only account for their
conduct on the supposition of their most perfect conviction and disinterested
zeal. That they should assert what they knew to be false; that they should
publish it with so much ardor; that they should risk every thing dear to
humanity, in order to maintain it; and at last submit to death in order to
attest their persuasion of its truth, in those moments when imposture usually
drops its mask, and enthusiasm loses its confidence; that they should act thus
in opposition to every dictate of common sense and every principle of common
honesty, every restraint of shame, and every impulse of selfishness; is a
phenomenon not less irreconcilable to the moral state of things, than miracles
are to the natural constitution of the world."

We may add too, that the writings, in which the aforementioned facts are
recorded and conveyed to us, have all the marks of genuine simplicity, and an
impartial regard to truth that can be reasonably desired; and they can be
clearly traced from the age in which they were written, and the facts were said
to be done, through the succeeding ages down to our own times. This is not mere
assertion without proof. A succession of writers, both Jewish and Pagan, from
the times of the apostles, to the times of the reformation, incidentally
mention the same facts which are recorded in the New Testament, viz. that "the
Christian religion originated from one Jesus; that the founder was put to death
as a malefactor at Jerusalem, by the authority of the Roman governor, Pontius
Pilate; that the religion nevertheless spread in that city and throughout
Judea; and that it was propagated from thence to distant countries; that the
converts were numerous; that they suffered great hardships and injuries for
their profession; and that all this took place in the age of the world which
our books have assigned. They go on farther to describe the manners of
Christians in terms perfectly conformable to the accounts extant in our books."
See for instance the writings of Tacitus, Suetonius, Pliny, and Josephus; or if
the direct testimony of Josephus be disputed, it must be granted that he gives
no counter evidence; the silence therefore of such a writer in such an age, is
rather in favor of the truth of Christianity.

But further, it is observable, that 'the whole series of Christian writers,
from the first age of its institution down to the present, in their
discussions, apologies, arguments, and controversies, proceed upon the general
story which our scriptures contain, and upon no other. The main facts, the
principal agents are alike in all. Clement, who heard St. Paul preach; Polycarp
the disciple of St. John; Ignatius a contemporary with Polycarp; Quadratus of
the same age with Ignatius; Justin Martyr, who flourished little more than
thirty years after Quadratus, have more or less reference to the life, the
transactions, the crucifixion, the resurrection, and the ascension of Jesus
Christ; and give accounts of these things corresponding with the accounts which
we have in the four gospels, and in the Acts of the apostles.' In succeeding
ages Christian writers have still more frequent references to the leading facts
recorded in the gospel history.

It is to be remarked too, that we have the testimony of enemies as well as of
friends, to the authenticity of the historical books of the New Testament. "The
notice taken of the contents of these books by the early writers against
Christianity, shows that the accounts which Christians had then, were the
accounts which we have now; that we have the same scriptures which they had. It
shows moreover that neither Celsus in the second, Porphyry in the third, nor
Julian in the fourth century, suspected the authenticity of these books, or
ever insinuated that Christians were mistaken in the authors to whom they
ascribed them. Not one of them expressed an opinion upon this subject different
from that which was held by Christians. And when we consider how much it would
have availed them to have cast a doubt upon this point, if they could; and how
ready they showed themselves to be to take every advantage in their power; and
that they were all men of learning and inquiry; their concession, or rather
their suffrage, upon the subject, is extremely valuable." * PALEY.


A late popular and zealous defender of "the rights of man," has with equal
zeal stepped forth the champion of infidelity; opposed the claims of the
Redeemer, and disturbed the peace of his subjects. This daring insurgent has
mustered and set in array a host of popular objections against the Bible, the
citadel of revealed religion. But upon examination it appears, that this
formidable phalanx consists principally of the apparitions of those armed
forces which Celsus, Spinoza, and other succeeding leaders in the infidel
Rebellion, brought into the field for the same purpose; but which were slain by
the sword of the Spirit wielded by the hands of Origin and innumerable other
successful espousers of the Christian cause. Had this doughty hero possessed as
much modesty as boldness, and as much candor as wit; had he, like a just
critic and philosopher, exercised as great judgment and impartiality in
searching out truth, as he did acuteness and prejudice in spying out and
magnifying faults; he would not have considered "a few chronological,
geographical, or genealogical errors -- apparent mistakes, or real
inconsistencies as to historical facts, -- needless repetitions and trifling
interpolations," sufficient to invalidate the genuineness or authenticity of
the sacred writings; but giving the same credit to the authors of the
respective books of the Old and New Testament which he gives to other
historians, he would be so far from rejecting the Bible with contempt, that he
would surrender himself a captive to its superior strength and authority. Yea,
if the aforementioned qualities of the mind would permit him to demand stronger
evidence for the authenticity of the scriptures than for that of any other
books, in the exercise of those qualities he would find stronger. But as these
qualities were not possessed by him, or were not in exercise, he manifests
great prejudice and spite against the gospel and those who are set for its
defense, and great unfairness in his representations and arguments. He rejects
almost all the books of the Bible, from Genesis to the Revelation, because he
thinks he can prove from certain small passages, or circumstances, in those
books, that they were not written by those to whom they have generally been
attributed. Whereas, if this were really the case, their authenticity might
remain; they might still contain a true account of real transactions, though
the names of the writers of them should be found to be different from what they
are generally esteemed to be. -- But my limits will not permit me to examine
and refute his several objections. This is ably done by a worthy prelate, whose
"Apology for the Bible" does honor both to his head and his heart.

Should the Students of this University be prompted by curiosity (I hope they
will not by an evil heart of unbelief) to read the bold attacks of Thomas Pain
upon the authenticity of that book which Christians esteem sacred; I take the
liberty to recommend as ready a perusal of an answer by the Bishop of Landaff.
Here you will see the Bible defended, and the Christian Religion supported, by
a decided superiority both of argument and temper. I had almost said, that the
striking contrast between the disposition of one, who, from early conviction of
the truth of Christianity, had spent his life under the refining and ennobling
influence of its divine maxims, -- and of one, who had long been a contemner
and blasphemer, is a sufficient refutation of Paine's principles, and
vindication of the New Testament; it certainly demonstrates the divine
excellency of the doctrines, morals, and motives pointed out by Jesus Christ.

Among the most essential rights of man, is a freedom of inquiry. This right I
would by no means infringe. But suffer me to say, that if you wish for
specimens and examples of the most indefatigable and extensive research, of the
most profound erudition and of the greatest strength and fairness of
argumentation, you will not study deistical, in preference to Christian
writers. In Hume, or in Gibbon, you may be caught by subtilty, or captivated by
the fascination of language. But these writers have by no means an exclusive
claim to elegance and refinement; certainly not to clearness and strength of
reasoning, and fairness of representation. In a White, a Paley, and a Warson,
besides innumerable others, you will find conclusive argument, and solid
instruction. In the perusal of these you will perceive your understanding
enlightened and enlarged, without being misled; your heart comforted and
established, without being corrupted; and your nature exalted almost to
angelick, without enthusiasm. If you would be unhinged in your principles; set
loose from all religious restraints, and from the controlling influence of a
future state of rewards and punishments; if you would check the energies of the
soul after perfection, and abandon all hope upon a plan of grace, let the
scoffers at Christianity be the men of your counsel. But if you wish to become
proficients in misrepresentation, in buffoonery, in scurrilous abuse of the
best characters among men, in profaneness against the scriptures, and in
blasphemy against God, read "The Age of Reason." But, blessed is the man that
walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners,
nor sits in the seat of the scornful. But who delights in the law of the
Lord, and meditateth therein day and night.

If, in the various ramifications of society, the youth are the vigorous and
most important branches, upon which the expansion, the strength, and the beauty
of the mighty tree, in a great measure depend, young men of abilities and
education may be considered as the principal tubes and vessels, which are to
convey the vital sap through the whole. How important is it that these vessels
should attain their proper maturity and enlargement, and preserve their proper
tone, that the nutrimental juices may be transmitted unobstructed,
undiminished, and uncontaminated. The rectitude of the mind, and the purity of
the heart, are of much greater consequence, than strength of understanding, or
acuteness of wit; and much learning without virtue, may make a man mad or
mischievous. While, therefore, in this Seat of the Muses, in this separation
from the world, you seek and intermeddle with all human wisdom, you will not
neglect that wisdom which is from above; which is first pure; then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated; full of mercy and good fruits; without
partiality, and without hypocrisy. If an acquaintance with the arts and
sciences is essential to your reputation as scholars; must not an acquaintance
with yourselves, and with your Maker, be necessary to your present tranquillity
and usefulness, and to your future exaltation and felicity? Know thyself, is a
maxim of one of the seven wise men. Acquaint thyself with God, is advice of
still greater antiquity and importance. In forming this acquaintance, you will
not only study your own mechanism, the mechanism of the world, and the history
of Providence; but search the scriptures as the most interesting writings,
being adapted to furnish you thoroughly to every good work, and to make you
wise unto salvation. My concluding, my highest wish is, that neither you, nor
your friends, nor your country, may ever have occasion to regret, in any one
instance among you, time misspent, or talents misemployed.

Among the many pernicious importations from abroad, we may reckon, as none of
the least, infidel and atheistical books, and libertine characters. Those, who
have long disturbed the peace of believers, and endeavored to turn the
christianized and the enlightened world upside down, are come hither also. To
counteract the deadly poison of their influence, we ought not to depend wholly
upon the specific antidotes which are ready prepared, and brought to our hand;
but while we gratefully accept and make use of these, we should endeavor to
acquire the skill of preparing other remedies of equal efficacy, though
composed of the same essential ingredients. For it is to be remembered, that
truth, like its great Author, is the same, yesterday, today, and forever; and
the substantial arguments in support of Christianity, like the Father of
Lights, are without variableness or shadow of change. Important in this view is
the Dudleian Institution; which may serve as a laboratory, or armoury, where
those weapons may be formed and burnished, by which to defend the religion of
Jesus, and the rights of Christians. These weapons have hitherto been proof
against every assailant in every attack, in whatever new mode the opponents
might use their own armor, or bring on the assault. The adversaries of
Christianity, like the servants of the king of Syria, seem to say upon every
defeat, Their gods are gods of the hills, therefore they were stronger than we;
let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall overcome them. They
have accordingly shifted their ground, and renewed the encounter, in a somewhat
different manner. But still without success. For, "great is the truth, and it
will prevail." Greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the world. Their
heaviest artillery of argument has been overpowered, and the thickest flights
of their envenomed arrows have been broken, or retorted on themselves. The
Christian cause ever has been, and ever will be, under the patronage of the
Almighty. The weapons of its defenders are mighty through God. No weapon,
therefore, formed against it shall prosper.

How astonishing is the ingratitude of mankind! Some of the greatest
benefactors to the world, have met with the cruellest requitals. Many, of whom
the world was not worthy, have been stoned, have been sawn asunder, have been
slain with the sword. The Son of God himself, who brought grace and truth from
heaven, and who lived and died for the redemption of men, was insulted, spit
upon, buffeted, crowned with thorns, and crucified between two thieves: and
even to this day there are those who join with his betrayers and murderers, and
cry, Crucify him, crucify him; and who tread under foot the gospel, and the
blood of the Son of God. While we stand astonished at the daring blasphemy of
some of the enemies of Christ and of his religion, let us, his professed
friends, revere and serve him with the greater assiduity; and cultivate the
spirit of our Master, who prayed for his murderers when nailing him to the
cross, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

How much reason have we to venerate the scriptures, and to glory in our
religion, notwithstanding the contempt that is cast upon them by men of corrupt
minds, whose words eat as does a canker! The doctrines of revelation have stood
the test of the severest scrutiny, and of the foulest reproach. When they have
been tried they have come forth as gold. The superior and forcible evidences of
the truth of Christianity, have carried conviction to the minds of some of the
greatest geniusses, and most learned scholars; and the luster and divine
excellence of its doctrines and morals, have captivated the hearts of
multitudes, among whose names it would be an honor to have ours enrolled. The
apostle Paul, with all his erudition and eloquence, even in the polite and
learned cities of Athens and Rome, was so far from being ashamed of the gospel,
that he accounted every thing else as loss, for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus his Lord. That which rather gains strength by the manly trial
of reason, can never be weakened by the insolence of ridicule. Instead
therefore of being abashed at the scoffs of abandoned infidels, let us glory in
the undiminished strength of our cause, in the success of its espousers, and in
the honors and triumphs of its Founder. While sneering unbelievers are lifting
the restored hand to smite their healer; are employing their recovered sight to
extinguish the light by which they see; and are requiting with death the
purchaser of immortal life, let us adhere with the greater ardor to our
Redeemer, and hold fast the confidence of our hope firm unto the end. " Lord,
to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. And we believe and
are sure that Thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God."


