MEMOIRS OF THE REVEREND, LEARNED, AND PIOUS: MR. THOMAS HALYBURTON, Professor
of Divinity in the University of St. Andrews. IN FOUR PARTS: WHEREOF THREE WERE
DRAWN UP BY HIMSELF, AND THE FOURTH COLLECTED BY HIS FRIENDS. WITH A LARGE
RECOMMENDATORY EPISTLE BY DR. WATTS.

Psalm lxvi. 16. Come and hear, all ye that fear God, (...) I will declare what
he has done for my soul.

Psalm xxxvii. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of
that man is peace.

Psalm cxii. 6. -- The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.

First American Edition, copied from the Ninth British.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY DAVID HOGAN, And sold by J. M'CULLOCH, No. 1, North
Third-street, and J. ORMROD, No. 41, Chesnut-street.

M.DCC.XCVI.

RECOMMENDATION.
THOUGH the gospel of (...) was (...) confirmed in the first ages of (...), by
(...) of every (...), yet I love to see dally and living witnesses arise, and
(...) their seal to (...) ^^^th and divinity of this gospel. Every transcript
of is in the heart of a Chistian is a new (...) to confirm (...). (...) is
(...) believes, for he (...) is himself, (...) of God. And (...) is he that
has wisdom and (...), in this unbelieving age, to (...) this inward (...)
appear and shine to the world. This is one reason why I value the (...) of ^oly
men; and among those which I have seen, I am not ashamed to reco^^^^^ this as
one of the (...) valuable, and that on these accounts, (...).

1. (...) here the (...) and (...) work of Christimity described at large, by a
wise a learned, and an (...) who seems to have been a strict observer of his
own spirit, and of all the secret motions of it and the more secret springs.
Here you may see the crooked and perverse workings of a carnal heart in a (...)
of (...); the subtle twindings of the old serpent, to keep the (...) from God
and his Christ; and all the counter workings of ^^^^reign grace, which in the
end (...). You see here the (...) flattery and (...) deceits whereby (...) a
good esteem (...) themselves, and build up their (...) opposition to the
holiness of the law, and the grace of the gospel: and here Christians may learn
much of the holy (...) that is needful to (...) a (...) and glorious war with
(...) by the strength that is in Christ, and they may read the triumph of a
dying (...).

Now though every Christian has some inward sense of divine things yet every
one has not so rich a variety of experiences: and among those that have, few
are (...) as to take a due account of them: few so wise as to judge aright
concerning them; and few so faithful and bold as to consign these things to
writing for the use of others. Men that are sit to publish their observations
of this kind, generally imagine, that humility requires to b^ry them in silence
and darkness, (...) the author and subject of this (...) a man of great piety,
of bright natural (...) and uncommon penetration and judgment, as sufficiently
appears in his other writings; yet there is such a vein of humility and
ironesly that some through every page, that you may see the secret workings of
his thoughts through his I (...). His sins as well as his graces lie open to
sight, the labors of his soul appear to the eye, and the (...) reader will
find himself at once delighted and improved. So the (...) operations of (...)
are seen through a h^ve of glass, and the specimen is at once (...) and
pleasing wood^^.

II. Another think that gave me an esteem of this work, was the account than is
given of an (...) conversion, after the author had been long struggling with
(...) convictions of conscience, and laboring long under sharp ago^^^ and
terrors: He had been fighting with guilt and corrupt (...) to attain holiness,
pardon and peace, by all the methods (...) the reason of man would naturally
suggest, and by the doctrines and duties of the gospel itself, ^sed in a more
legal way and (...); and found his labors repeated and (...), and his weak
till to (...) ^ (...) insufficiency of all convictions and awakening words and
(...), all tears and repentances, all religious duties of worship, public and
private, all vows and promises, covenants and (...), with which he bound his
soul to God; and how sin prevailed and triumphed over them all, when they were
practiced only in a legal manner, as a mere task of conscience, and without the
delightful taste of the grace of the gospel. All these left him still under
guilt, under the power of sin, and in the utmost confusion near to despair,
till is pleased God to open his eyes to behold the mercy and comfort of the
gospel as the way to holiness and peace; till divine grace brought him, as a
dying sinner, empty of all good, and helpless, to the full salvation that is in
Christ, and sweetly constrained him to receive peace and holiness together;
till be learned the way of fanc^^cation by faith and hope in a pardoning God, a
God reconciling sinners to himself through Jesus the ^edsomer. This overwhelmed
his soul at once with deep humility and repentance, with wonder and holy joy,
with hope and love, and confurgined him to pleasant obedience. This renewed his
^^^^re, this wrought in him all the powers and principles of Christian
holiness, and raised and supported them in a glorious degree.

Now, though I dare not confine the workings of the blessed Spirit, who is
infinitely free and various in his operations, and he has carried some
thousands so salvation in a more legal way, and ^oth daily conform his divine
workings in many souls to their lower degrees of light and eva^gelical
knowledge, as well as to their natural tempers and their temptations; yet it is
my judgment, that such a conversion of sinners, as this author experienced, is
always more frequent where the gospel ^^rains in its purest light and its
divinest glory, and seems to be more akin to the spirit of Christianity.

III. The last thing that I shall mention, that I remark is this work, is the
full confirmation that is given to our holy religion, and to this noble method
of di^^^^ grace, not only in the most watchful and holy life, but also in the
most joyful and glorious death of this go^^t man. Death takes off every
possible disguise, and makes us think and speak sincerely; and yet you see him
still the same. Have we find reason and learning giving their testimony to the
gospel and to the power of godliness, with a living pen and with dying lips.

Though this book may be of great use to all that will read it with (...)
humble and ^etious tempe^, yet the persons to whom I would chiefly recommend
it, are these, (...).

First, To my younger brethren in the ministry: Perhaps they may learn from
these papers, the way of suiting their (...) in public and in private, with a
more happy turn for the relief and salvation of souls. I am persuaded, if we
all consulted the workings of the Spirit of God on the hearts of Christians and
the various devices of con^pt nature, and the wiles of Sasan, as they appear in
such me^^i^s as these, we should learn better how to deal with the conferences
of men in order to their sa^cti c^^ion and comfort, and put the d^etrin^s of
the gospel to their proper use. We should all preach the abounding grace of
Christ, in order to (...) to delight in the law of God, and more ef^ectually
direct and draw them to the praction of that faith that works by love.

Next, I would recommend it also to those persons that are awakened to a sense
of their sin and danger, and seeking the wa^ of salvation, that they may not
run into (...) methods, nor follow the false and flattering dictates of a mere
natural conscience, left with their bibles in their hands, and the gospel on
their lips, they seek righteousness and peace as it were by the works of she
(...). (...) they will find that hope is the ^^^eit and kindest spring of
holiness, and that there is no solid and la^^ing peace but what is built on the
clear discoveries of forgiving grace, and that faith only can purify the heart.

I would recommend it in the third place, to poor melancholy souls who walk
watchfully and ^^^^^fully before God in every duty, and labor in religion and
travel on in (...) all their days: They dare (...) indulge their hopes, nor
scarce (...) any degree of comfort, (...) their (...) in so imperfect. Let them
learn from this example (...) whether they would (...) ^^grees of (...) by
going (...) seach their (...) and by (...) live on the (...) and richest (...)
the coven^^^ of grace (...) and holiness are (...), as well as (...) and
happiness. Let them try whether an (...) as their righteousness and their
strength together would you ^ill them (...) powerful (...) of love, and lead
(...) sweet delight in every duty: and (...) that (...) would be (...) unto
them, the joy of (...) shall be your strength Keh, viii. 10.

I would commend is also to these Christians that have begun to walk with God
(...) in the ways of his gospel grace. Here they may be (...) all the glorious
grace of the gospel will by (...) them from daily labor, and care and (...)
from constant and (...), and (...) by all the duties of godliness: For if these
(...) gain (...) advantages to bring them back (...) again. (...) prevailing
will (...) ^ver all the (...) are fallen into (...) and decay, they (...) here,
that the only way of their recovery is by faith and hope (...) gospel, by
(...), as (...) and that their only security all along the road to heaven is,
by joining, (...) together.

I will not recommend this book to the nice and critical part of the world that
have no cast of inward religion, and relish nothing but what is polite and
modish: yet I would attempt an apology set a few things in it that may perhaps
disgust some better readers, and prevent their ow^ advantage.

Some will say, The author seems to indulge (...), and talks mystically in some
pages of his narrative. But let it be remembered, that men of great piety,
whose souls are molded into a temper of religion, ^choic the truths of the
gospel in a glorious and transcendent degree of divine light; they live under
warm impressions of these truths, and feel the sweet influence of them on (...)
the powers of nature: This m^^^s them speak even of the most rations things of
religion, sometimes in the language of an inward sensation, of which divine
relish and favor persons of lower degrees of pretty feel (...) little, and the
irreligious man knows nothing at all.

This some language of divine experience may be observed in the writings of
several great and holy men of Scotland, who have been fa^^^red with rate and
peculiar visits from heaven, and have maintained a humble intimacy with God,
and upon this acc^^^^ their (...) the (...) and (...) of their country.

In most other parts of this book the author maintain the reasonableness of the
way of salvation by the gospel, and of the conduct of the Holy Spirit in the
conversion of men; see particularly page 60.; though now and then, in his way
of speaking, he indulges a little to this inward and divine sensation. But that
he was a man of (...) turns of thought, clear judgment, and ^^ong reasoning, is
abundantly evident to any one that will read his discourse against (...) where
he proves by some (...), the utter insus^^^^^ of the Deist's religion for the
salvation of men, and beats them fairly at their own weapons. I wish that
treatise was published single by itself.

Another will object, That he multiplies particulars beyond all necessity.
(...) the English reader to forgive this fault, for I believe it is partly the
custom of the country, and fashion even of the learned in his (...) land. Let
it be noted (...), that the greatest part of the (...) here only (...) the
number of the paragraphs: And if some of the longer paragraphs are divided by
figures as well as by colons and periods, it ought to be (...) as much as the
idioms of his language, which can give no manner of just offense to a wise and
judicious re^^^^. G^^it the figures in reading, and the sense is good, and the
objection vanishes.

I have this to add further in his behalf, that the fashion of our age in South
Britain, to write essays and discourses of all kinds without distinguishing any
heads or particulars, is every whit as faulty, and as much to be censored. This
concealment of all method, even in some excellent treatises renders the sense
more obscure to the apprehension of (...) readers, and much more difficult to
the memory both of the vulgar and the learned. We have got such an extreme
(...) to the way of writing used by our (...), that because they (...) their
heads up to (...), and six and twentiethly, we are ashamed in our day to (...)
secondly or thirdly. Against this (...) of our age I would bear my (...), even
in a preface, and say,

In the third place, it will be objected, That he is a great deal (...) in some
parts of the narrative, and is ready to repeat the same things. But when an
observing Christian has endured (...) conflicts, and obtained laborious (...),
and passed many years in such various exercises of soul, he finds it impossible
in a few pages to tell you a tenth part of what he has passed through: This he
himself excuses, page 67, and you may learn hence, that (...) Christian in this
life is entirely (...) even from those temptations that have been once
powerfully overcome.

I shall be (...) by some persons (...) are many scriptures brought into this
(...) not much to the purpose. But forgive a Christian this practice, who loves
to (...) in the language of his God, where he can but imagine the words may be
(...) to his sense: and if he (...) without apparent necessity, yet in several
of ideas is (...) the allusions are very beautiful.

In the last (...), it will be said. There are some things too private and
personal, and some things that seem too mean and (...) too little (...) the
world wish. (...) of (...) what he (...) him (...) but our friends after our
decease, are ready, from an excess of affection, to show many of our le^^er
affairs to the public, fondly imagining they will be acceptable to the world,
because their own delightful memory of their friend makes it relish so well to
themselves. After all, I cannot say but a judicious abstract of this bock would
(...) it more useful to the reader, and more secure from every exception.

May the blessed Spirit, who formed the soul of this author to the divine model
of the gospel, form the heart of every reader by the same perfect rule, an
raise them to equal or to higher degrees of faith and holiness; that they may
be living witnesses and honors to the same of Christ; and let them join wit^
me to adore my God and my Savior, who though he has secluded me from service
in his house, by long sickness yet he honors me to fiend as a figure on his
big ^way, to direct travelers in the road; and while he restrains my tongue
from its del^ghtful work, he is pleased to use me as a silent singer to point
to the footsteps of ^^faithful shepherd, and by them to guide the flock in
their way to heaven.

I. WATTS
^ May ^^, 1718.
PREFACE.
OF all biography, the lives of eminent saints are, beyond all controversy, the
most edifying and useful; being, in some measure, a transcript of the holiness
of God and of his word. Their (...) and (...) example carries in it such a
secret and powerful efficacy to make-impressions on Fellow Christians, yea, on
all generour souls with whom there is any remains of conscience, that it has
often provoked them to love and good works, and by a pions emulation to tread
their ^^^eps, to glorify God, and mend their pace heavenward. See Heb. x. 24.
Mat. v. 16. 1. Pet. ii. 12. iii. 3.

Without the holy and exemplary lives of the votaries of religion, the gospel
of Christ usually is so far from gaining ground, that it daily loses the room
it has in the world, of which the present melancholy state of the reformed
churches is too plain a document. I am persuaded, that next to the great out
pouring of the Spirit grow on high, Isa. xxxii. 15. the rapid and admirable
success of the glorious gospel, was greatly owing to the holy lives of its
professors, especially their shining in the peculiar and distinguishing duties
of Christianity, and their cheerful and undaunted boldness in suffering for
Christ. Therefore, since in our day the-gospel is so visibly destitute of this
(...) it advantage to commend the Christian religion to the consciences of all,
both friends and foes, we hope the printing of the following sheets will not be
found unseasonable, when there is so evident, and universal a decay of the life
and power of religion with the truly godly, and such a prodigious and
formidable growth of hypocrisy, formality, lukewarmness, and security, etc.
with many in the visible church; where the scandalous and pro^^^e lives of many
protested Christians, are giving so deep and deadly a wound to the credit of
religion and the gospel; when not a few, especially of our youth, and that not
of the meanest quality, are poisoned, I fear beyond the power of antidote, with
pro^^^e romances, stage plays, and histories of the (...) and impure amors of
the wilest rakes and most profligate debauchees, and with atheistical and
blasphemous books against all religion; in a time when the world is abused with
lying stories of the lives of men, base apostates, that preached another
gospel, ceased (...) the right ways of the Lord, and that were (...) and
perfocutoms by which they are (...), and very (...) dressed up in the likeness
of great (...) first-rate Christians, and of men of God indeed. Who knows but
this book may be of some use to rouse decayed Christians, awaken such as have a
(...) to live but are (...), give a check to the vicious and loose lives of the
immoral, expose the distinguished lives of ene^cies, and coavict atheists; and
though it should be wholly fruitless that way, yet it should be a ^^^eding
^estimony and witness against the dangerous and growing evils of this perilous
time, they shall know there has been a prophet among them.

The first three periods of his life were all found after his death in a
manuscript, written with his own hand as they are printed; bat all we could
have of the (...) period of his life, is onl^ some gleanings from imperfect
short hints of things in his diary, which he had never digested nor enlarged,
which is certainly a very considerable loss, seeing the experiences of the
fourth period might have been much more useful, being the whole time of his
ministry; but the wife Lord, the master, called him off, and prevented it.
After he was fixed in a charge, he had much work, his parish being both
specious and numerous; be was often abroad preaching at sacraments, also about
business, and always when he preached, if in health, he wrote much, as is told
afterward, and he was scarce three years a minister, when his health broke.
These and other difficulties had hindered his finishing these memoirs we judge,
which we know he designed: be told himself to some friends, if health and
business would have allo^^^d, he would have written as much is the fourth
period, as in all the other three.

Is wading of his exercise, the se^^or he was once under, when, as he words it,
the Lord brought him to (...) it would be ^^^embered, that though a preparatory
low-work with all the adult that are called, be the fame (...) to substance;
all must be enlightened, co^vinced of their si^ and misery, be made truly
sensible of their lost state, be thoroughly ^ombled, made to se^ their state
desperate withous a Savi^ur, and be renowed (...) they will come to Jesus; so
there is a great variety among the Lord's people as to the time of their
awakening, the duration of it, the mea^^ be which, and (...) of (...), and di^
about their exercisty and the like.

No serious fouls less season to be shaken about their (...) in Christ Jesus,
though they have not been so early awakened as some, or had so great adegree of
terros, and be^n so long ea^ler it as others, or though they cannot give
sodisti^^t accoun^ of the time when, the mea^^ or instruments by which the Lord
first awakened them, as some can do, by all which they have no small
advantage^. It in to be regre^^ed, that some worthy m^^ have, by in^ia^tions
di^^p^^ses on this subject, stumbled not a few serions and exercised Christian.

As to what we have of his dying words annexed to the me^oirs of his life, it
is but a little we assure you, of what he spoke the last five days before his
death: some of the sweetest and most savoury discourses he had, are wholly
lost, being so mangled by the writer, that we were forced to drop them, for
great ca^e was taken not to in^^rt any thing but what he spoke. The occas^on of
this (...) the writer was forced to stan^ as a distance, and one of hi^ fight,
because when he observed him writing h^ was displeased, and would not allow it;
likewise the noise that sometimes was in the room, with people's speaking to
him, their coming in, or going out, and ordering things about him, made the
writer o^ lose half a sentence; neither wa^ i^ possible for those the^ ^evised
his dying words to help this.

The want of connection there is often betwixt purposes discoursed by him, was
occasioned partly by the short Humbers he some sometimes fell in, his taking
some refreshment, and other interruptions, and partly by reason of different
discourses persons had to him.

We assure you, there are very few discenses he had that are full and complete,
as he then spoke them.

READER,

There are some things very obvious, that add a peculiar and bright luster to
the testimony this dying saint and faithful minister of Christ has given to the
good ways of God; which should commend this his swan song to all.

1st, They are the last words of one that gives you a rational and distinct
account of the work of God on his own soul some years ago, and who afterward,
by a holy convincing walk, adorned the gospel of Christ, and glorified his Lord
and master, which was his greatest ambition on earth. He tried the reality and
sweetness of religion some time, found it was a true report the gospel made,
and that the half was not told. His last words deserve the more regard, fince
ye may see he was far from being bigoted unto a fond conceit of the principles
and practice of religion, he tried all things, and did hold fost that which was
good: What vast pains was he at to examine the very fundamental principles of
natural and revealed religion; ye may see from his memoirs, his treatise
against deism, the reason of faith, etc. all which demonstrate his faith did
not stand in the wisdom of men, I Cor. ii. 5. but in the power of God. They are
the last words of one that spent about twelve years in lively pre^ching of
Christ and him crucified, whereof not a few of the Lord's people retain a
savoury remembrance; of which his excellent sermons will convince those that
knew him not, if encouragement be got to print them.

2dly, This may enhance the value of this testimony, that he was under so great
a damp, so dark a cloud, for three or four days before that abundant
consolation and joy the Lord silled him with, which you will find narrated by
himself in his dying words. How agreeable is this to the Lord's usual way of
dealing with his saints, he wounds and then heals, smites and then binds up,
they are pressed out of measure, above strength, etc. not only at conversion,
but often in his dealings with them through their life, both as to their outward
and inward condition, and often signally at death? This glorious method is worthy
of God, and nobly advances his blessed designs about his own.

3dly, The constant and unusual composure of spirit he had is remarkable;
though he was under very tormenting pain, the last days of his sickness, yet
not one impatient word dropped from him; though he slept little the last five
days, and spoke much, yet not one raving word was ever heard from him, which as
ye will find him often admiring it, so it was a wonder to all that were present.

4thly, With what life, what a pecular emotion of spirit, what fervor did he
utter his last words? How refreshing, affecting and astonishing this was, all
present well remember: And though we had all his dying words, this is still
wanting, nor can it be described by us: Now should not that endear this saint's
testimony to religion?

5thly, How prudently did he address himself to persons, ministers or private
Christians that visited him, according to their various ranks, principles,
conditions, and circurustances? He spoke with the nicest caution to them, even
then, which was very surprising.

6thly, And especially that all this was spoke by him in view of approaching
death, (for neither he nor others conceived the least probability of his
recovery after he took bed). Death, the king of terrors, the most terrible of
all terribles to an impenitent sinner, and that nothing can make easy and
sweeten, but the precious fruits of our Lord's death and sufferings. Yet even
then what a calm on his soul? What a submission to it did he show? What a
boldness in facing this last enemy? With what concern and pastion was he
panting for death? How welcome was it to him? His own words will testify this.
One of the opposite way, and not the meanest for sense, said, he never saw one
so willing to die. Now whence is all this? How can this be?

Pagan moralists and philosophers talked of their cordials against death; but
when it came to the push, they found them all insipid and useless. ^iardened
despe^a^^ atheists, and besotted stupid epicures have shut their eyes on
danger. The presumptuous and deluded hypocrites may seign submission to death,
pretend a hope to heaven, and hold last their groundless and rotten hope: yet
when they torn their faces to the wall, how sower and chagrined does the fight
of pale and grim death make them? Their hearts fink in them as ftours, or else
are forced to be a ray a restless disquiet and perplexity.

A graveless, bold and furious soldier may court death, resh on it, and pretend
to desy it in the field.

Some prodigies of wickedness, given up of God, from a base cowardice and
impatience, have dared to ^e their own. execationers, against the self-evident
principles of the law of nature, as well as the express precepts of the moral
law: But not a shadow have any of these of the sweet calm and composure, the
invincible patience, the entire, submission, the absolute resignation to the
divine will, the cheerfulness, satisfaction, joy and comfort, the lively and
assured Christian attains at death, which our dying friend in so great a
measure enjoyed, of which his own words will give you the best account.

Now then, is there not here something ^^uly supernatural and divine, that
human nature could never be capabie of if it were not renewed by the exceeding
greatness of that power that raised Christ from the dead, and also a singular
measure of the saving influences of the spirit of adoption given to it? May not
all then see, that will not shut their eyes, that the grea^^^t hero among men
cannot be equalled to, or vie wi^h a soldier of Christ; ye^, that these puny
heroes are but faint shadows of the ^^al Christian, Ransack the wide world,
consider all the distinguishing excellencies of mortals, view all that have
assumed the name of wise, great, or good, or that m^n canonize for such, and ye
will see beyond all debate, that a saint infinitely outvies them all in his
life, ef^ec^ally in his last coastict with death, the close of the dark scene:
Here shines brightly his true greatness of spirit and incomparable bravery
indeed.

Now on the whole, what a clear convincing evidence have ye here of the
immortality of the soul, that when ^is body was lowest, yet his intellectuals
were so sound, and the actings of his spiti^ about the great things of eternity
were so vigorous and lively? He himself showed a peculiar turn of wit in
improving this.

O the great truth and reality there is in religion! Were it a dream, a mere
mel^ncholy, hypochondriac fancy, an impodure, or cheat, as atheists talk; or no
more in it but m^re morality that has no relation to Christ Jesus, a dead
lifeless form, or some external bodily exercise, as the blind sensual world,
not having the spirit, judg^s, could it have produced such real, such sensible,
and surprising sweet effects, that swallowed up all ^^^^ble and pain, and
ravished with joy, as he found? Is it possible any that have the use of their
reason, can imagine a saint can personate this at death, when under no
temptation to dissemble, when interest or worldly considerations can have no
place or influence, and when they are under the most awful impressions of
eternity, judgment, and of God the judge of the quick and dead, which so
effectually tend to prevent it!

May we not hence also see the wonderful virtue of Christ's blood, be efficacy
of his death and cross? through death he has destroyed death, and him that had
the power of it. On the cross of Christ the saints raise their triumph. How
warm was the heart of this saint when he spoke of it! How often did he glory in
the cross of Christ! On this entirely he laid the stress of his salvation.

O how sure then is God's word! How sase a ^^^^^m to venture our souls on, even
at death! Is he not the faithful God that keeps covenant? Did he not ^^^^mber
the words which he promised to his servant, on which he caused him to ^^te? Did
he not find it with ^^^itness, espec^^^ly in his greatest extremity at death,
when he needed it m^st! How much did he himself notice this! May we not appeal
to dying saints in the wo^ds of (...) to Israel, if any one thing has sailed
or all the good things the Lord had promised to them! As for God, his way is
perfect, the word of the Lord is trica: he is a buckler ^o all those that trust
in (...).

And to conclude, may we not say, There is a reward for the righteous; verily
there is a God that judges in the earth? How can we doubt of this, since the
saints see the salvation of God, they feel and taste this in their life, and at
their death have a very heaven antidated in their souls? What clusters of the
fruits of the promised land from Eshc^l, what sweet earnests and pledges, what
infallible forerunners of heaven have they, both as to their exercise and
enjoyment day and night, for some time in their life, and especially in their
last trial, when near to eternity? Of which our dear friend, as you will see
from his dying words, had so sweet experience.

INDEX.
Page.

AN account of the birth, parentage, and character of the reverend Mr.
Halyburtor, 19 A narrative of the state of matters with him from his birth till
ten years of age, 26 Reflections on this first period, 31 His first concern
about religion, 35 The revival of convictions, their effects, progress, etc. 40
The increase of his convictions, and the vain refuges he betook himself to for
relief, 46 A further account of the straits he was reduced to, and the courses
he took for relief, 51 Reflections on the foregoing exercise, 65 A further
account of the progress of his convictions, temptations, and vain reliefs, till
he was reduced to the utmost extremity, 70 His outgate, and the state of
matters thereon, 86 The mistakes he was still under, and the way of their
discovery, 103 His strugglings with indwelling sin, 112 His exercise about the
guilt of sin, 118 His exercise about the being of God, and outgate, 132 How he
came to be satisfied that the scriptutes are the word of God, 139 The iss^e of
some other temptations, 145 His license to preach the gospel, 155 His entry on
the ministry at Ceres, 158 His management in the work of the ministry, 160 His
judgment concerning several cases, viz. Concerning times of trial, 165 Of
eternity and immortality, 166 Of ministers consulting people in difficult
cases, 166 To find duty in difficult cases, 167 Of legal preaching, 168 Atheism
the root of sin, 168 His marriage and conduct in his family, 177 His exercise
with respect to his youngest child's soul's state, and his son's death, 186 His
entry upon the profession of divinity, 189 An account of some of his last
words, etc. 192-252
A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE BIRTH, PARENTAGE, AND CHARACTER OF THE REVEREND Mr.
THOMAS HALYBURTON, With some other circumstances of his life.
MR. THOMAS HALYBURTON, professor of divinity in the new college at St.
Andrews, was born at Duplin, in the parish of Aberdalgy, December 25th, 1674,
of worthy and godly parents, Mr. George Halyburton and Margaret Playfere. His
father was descended of the family of Pitcur, in the county of Angus; and was
minister of the parish of Aberdalgy, in the presbytery of Perth, out of which
he was ejected by the then government in the year 1662, as about three hundred
more ministers were also, summarily without any legal process, simply for
nonconformity to Prelacy.

Mr. George Halyburton, who was then bishop of Dunkeld, and had been an zealous
covenanter, suddenly became so forward for the national defection, and so cruel
a persecutor of his once fellow presbyters, that he would not spare him more
than others, though he was his near kinsman, but turned him out of his charge:
And yet that prelate was scarce well warm in his nest, when the LORD smote
himself with sore sickness, of which he died, and went to his place.

Immediately after he was thus persecuted, that choice and pious gentleman, the
sole heritor of the said parish, who was one among a thousand in ^u^^ an (...)
time, and afterward suffered much for nonconformity, gave him a house to dwell
in at Dupli^, beside himself, was his orcinary hearer, and while he lived,
showed no small kindness to him, which deferves a thankful remembrance from his
relations.

His father never repented his faithfulness in adhering to the covenanted work
of reformation, but rejoiced that he had been honored to suffer on that
account; and when he fell asleep in the Lord, in the year 1682, in the 55th
year of his age, he died in the faith of (...), that God would deliver this
church from the then sore persecution it was under.

His mother was daughter of Mr. Andrew Playfere, the first minister of
Aberdalgy parish, after the reformation from popery, to whom her husband
succeeded a little before the restoration of prelacy. She was allied to some of
the best families of the kingdom by the mother; of which here I shall forbear a
particular account: But which was their far greater glory, both of them from
their youth up were truly religions.

His mother excelled many of her own sex, for knowledge of the principles of
religion, and an uncommon memory of the scriptures; she would have exactly
repeated many of the choicest chapters of the Bible.

They had a numerous family, no less than eleven children, and very sickly; all
of them died young, except their eldest daughter Jame^, and this their son Mr.
Thomas; but to sweeten these trials, they had peculiar comfort in the death of
their children; some even of the youngest of them, gave singular evidences of
their dying in the Lord, which some yet alive well mind.

When his father died, he was happy to be under the care of such a mother: The
episcopal persecution for non conformity daily growing, she, with her son-in
law and daughter, were forced for their safety to withdraw to Holland, and took
him along with them while he was very young: He quickly learned the Dutch, and
went to Erasmus school to learn the Latin. There they sojourned till August
1687, as which time they returned home, narrowly escaping shipwreck.

At their return he went to the school, and afterward to the university, where
he made great proficiency beyond (...) of his ^^^^ls. When he had finished his
course there ^e entered chaplain to a noble family, where one that had been his
school fellow, and had drunk in the principles of the deists, began to attack
him on that side, which obliged him in the beginning of his studies to read
that controversy carefully; and what progress he made in this, will appear from
his book against the deists. He could (...) attend lessons of divinity in any
of our colleges, while in that family; and though he had read divinity only two
years, the presbytery of Kirkaldy importuned him to ^^ter on trials, and he was
licensed by them to pr^^^^, June and, 1699.

He has ^^^^ed ministe^ in Ceres parish, May is it. 1700.

In 1701, ^e was rearried with Janer Watson, a virt^ous and pious gentlewoman,
daughter to Mr. David Watsion, an ^^^itor in the parish of St. Andrews, a
zealous good man, and one that suffered much in the late times for
nonconformity. His relict survives with fix children, one son, and five
daughters, besides two sons and a daughter that di^d.

Some few years after his seltlement at Ceres, his health broke, and his
indisposition d^ily increased, so that he was hardly able to go through his
ministerial work in that large p^rish.

In April 1710, having received a patent from her Majesty, and an invitation
from the preshytery, be was transparted by the synod of Eise, to be prosessor
of divinity in the new^ (...) of St. Andrews.

In September 23, 1712, at seven in the morning, he slept in Jesus, and him
will the Lord bring with him.

He was of low stature, his b^dy bot thin and small, his hair black (...)
pretty clear and fair.

In April (...) seized on him, which obliged (...) times, to take from him
about (...). He recovered and went abroad (...) body never attained the small
strength (...) shortly after his arms and (...) and insensible, as also (...)
death increased greatly.

B^^ (...) spirit, how great a soul dwelt in his (...) and trait body?

He was naturally of a very pleasant and desirable temper. He had an equal and
cheerful temper, which he retained under surprising vi^itudes. This evenness of
temper appeared much in his frequent and dangerous sickness. He had a calm,
peaceable, healing disposition, and yet bold as a lion in his master's cause.
He had a peculiar talent for composing of differences: How af^^i^ting the
prospect of divitions was to him, the following sheets will testify; And had
some others been blessed with more of this spirit, his and our sears had been
utterly disappointed.

He was master of a considerable stock of prudence, he studied to walk in
wisdom toward them that are without, and them that are within, and to become
all things to all men.

He was dextrous in observing tempers, and in addressing and managing persons.
How wisely he carried in church judicatories, whereof he was a member, others
can witness.

He abhorred that unedifying converse, that is spent in frequent and
unseasonable jesting and drollery, so common with many; though he was
abundantly facetious in company, when and where he saw it expedient, and in
this way sometimes he has dropped what tended to edify. Those who conversed most
with him, will own, they seldom enjoyed his company without some profit by it.
He often was uneasy after much converse with others, if he was not edified
himself, or thought he did not edity others; how circumspect and tender was the
strain of his walk in this? He often regretted the difficulty there was to retain
integrity in the most part of company in this degenerate age; he reckoned such
company a great hardship, and loath would he be to have let any thing offensive
in converse go without a check.

The following memoirs will witness his walking with God in his family and
closet: But some things here I cannot pass; it was his ordinary, except he had
been necessarily hindered, to come from his closet to family worship, es
ecially if the Lord had given him enlargement of heart, and if his spirit was
in a due frame; he would then have been very uneasy, if any interruption fell
in betwixt closet and family duties. He also commonly expounded the word of
God, at least once a day in his family. The night before family fasts, which he
kept, or national fasts, he always directed his servants how to manage that
work, and on the fast days themselves discoursed them about their souls
condition and concerns.

He was an effectionate and dutiful husband, a conscientious and kind parent, a
faithful and easy master.

Such as knew him, will own, he had a clear head, a very ready and rare
invention, and uncommon memory; he read little after his health broke, and often
owned his greatest improvement was more by thinking than reading.

He had a very ready way of expressing his thoughts; he was far from a vain,
airy affectation of language in preaching, (a prevailing evil in this time), he
had studied an even, neat and scriptural style, and this became natural, though
some thought in the end, his deep thinking made it a little more abstruse than
formerly to a popular auditory.

He had choice pulpit gifts, he was an accurate and pathetic preacher, a great
textuary, close in handling any truth he discoursed, and in the application, he
was home, warm and searchings and in this he showed usually a skilful casuist.
He often complained, that some worthy men were too general and bare in the
application of their doctrines.

He ordinarily wrote his sermons very exactly, when health and business would
allow; he used to say, "A lazy minister in his younger years would make a poor
old man." It were to be wished, that this example were more followed than it
is. He often adventured to preach under great indisposition, when he was not able
to write so much as the heads of his sermon, yea, even at sacraments; and he
has been singularly assisted, to the conviction of all that heard him. In his
last two years he wrote little, his health then was so low.

His experience of the power of godliness, with his other gifts mentioned, made
him very skilful to deal with wounded spirits, according to the variety of
their cases; and this converse he owned was extremly useful to himself. Few
ministers have taken a more cautions and confirming way of dealing with people,
than he did before be admitted them to the sacrament; and while in health, he
was diligent in the other parts of his ministerial work.

He was no less singularly ^^ted for the schools; he spoke elegant Latin
promptly, though he had been long in the disuse of it, and was scarce at any
paies to recover it, which was much admired: He was very expert in the Greek,
but his sickness broke his design to accomplish himsels in the rest of the
oriental languages.

In centroversies, especially those of the time, he excelled many. It was
strange to sce ^ow quickly he would have taken up the state of a controversy,
the strength of an adversary, seen through their deceitful sophi^^ry and
pretenses, and how close and nervous his reasoning was usually.

Now on the whole, what a loss, especially in this juncture, may we justly
reckon the death of this great-little man to the poor wrestling church of
Scotland, to the place be lived, and to his family? Alas! what shall we say?
What great thoughts of heart may it cause, when such a green olive tree, fair,
and of goodly fruit, is cut down, when such bright stars set, yea, even
constellations of them in our day? May we not justly fear, when such such
wrestlers with God are taken off, as he on his deathbed comments on such
damping providence, That the coxsump^^^^ (...) shall overflow in righteousness
Isa. x. 2.

MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF Mr. THOMAS HALYBURTON.
Written by himself, somes years before his death.
INTRODUCTION.
THE common occurrences of the life of one in all respects so inconsiderable,
are not worth recording; and if recorded, could be of little use either to
myself, or others. Wherefore it is none of my design to waste time or paper
with these. But if I can recount the Lord's gracious conduct toward me, the
state of matters before and under the Lord's special dealings with me, in a way
of conviction, illumination, conversion, consolation, and edification; and
compact them so, as to discover, not only the parts of this work, the several
advances it made, the opposition made to it, its victory over the opposition of
my own heart, Satan and the world, but also to present the work in its order
and issue, it may be of great use to my own establishment: and if ever it
should fall into the hands of any other Christian, it might be not unuseful,
considering, that the work of the Lord in all is, as to the substance, the
same, and uniform; and as face answers to face, (Prove. xxvii. 19.) in glass, so
does one Christian's experience answer another's, and both to the word.

This being the design of this narrative, to give some account of the Lord's
work with me, and my way with hi^^, in so far as I remember it, from my birth
to this day, I shall proceed to it.

PART I. Narrating the state of matters with me from the time of my birth till
I was about ten years of age, or thereby.
I Came into the world, not only under the guilt of that offense, whereby many,
nay all, were made sinners, Romans (...) and ^n the account whereof judgment
passed on all men to condemnation: But moreover, I brought with me a nature
wholly corrupted, Job xiv. 4. Psalm. li. 5. a heart wholly set in me to do evil,
Eccl. ix. 3. This the testimony of God in the word s^^is^^^^ me of. And herein
I am strongly confirmed by undoubted experience, that fully convinces me, that
from the morning of my days, while under the advantage of gospel light, the
inspection of godly parents, and not yet corrupted by custom, the imaginations
of my heart, and the tenor of my life, were evil, only evit, and continually
so, Genesis vi. 5, 8, 21.

2. It cannot be expected, that at so great a distance, I should remember the
particulars of that first three or four years of my life; yet I may on the
justest grounds presume, that they were fi^^ed up with those sins that cleave
to children in their infancy. Many of which are not only evil, as they flow
from a poisoned root, Marth. vii. 17. for an evil tree will bring forth corrupt
fruit; but do also bear the impress of, and an evident congruity to, their
corrupt source, and taste strong of that root of bitternes-whereupon they grow.
While we are yet on the breasts, inbred corruption breaks ^orth, and before we
give any tolerable evidence that we are rational, we give full evidence that we
are corrupted, Psalm, lviii. 3. We show that we are inclined to evil, by
pressing with impatience and eagerness for what is hurtful; and our aversion to
good, by refusing, with the greatest obstinacy, what is sit, proper, and useful
to us. At first we are only employed about sensible things, and about them we
give the first evidences that our natures are corrupt. And with the first
appearances of reason, the corruption of our spirit discovers itself. How early
do our actings discover passion, pride, revenge, dissimulation, and sensuality,
to be inlaid, as it were, in our very constitution? Any ordinary observer may
discern instances innumerable of this sort, very early in children. With these
and the like evils, no doubt, were the first years of my life, whereof I
remember little, filled up -- Folly is bound up in the heart of a child, Prove.
xxii. 15. and we go aside as soon as borns speaking lies, Psalm. lviii. 3.

3. In this first period of my life, I had advantages above most. My parents
were eminently religious. I was trained up under their eyes and inspection, for
most part. I continually heard the sound of divine truths ringing in my ears,
in their instructions; and I had the beauty of the practice of religion
continually represented to mine eyes in their walk. I was, by their care, kept
from ill company that might infect me. By these means I (...) restrained from
those grosser out-breakings that children often run into, and habituated to a
form of religion, and put upon the performing of such outward duties of
religion as my years were capable of. Hence it appears, that the sin I am now
fully convinced that I wallowed in, during this tract of time, is not to be
imputed, either as to inclination or actings, merely to contracted custom, or
occasional temptations; but it really was the genuine fruit and result of that
lamentable biass man since the fall is born with. Sure the spring must be
within, when notwithstanding all the care taken to keep me from them, I
impetuously went on in sinful courses. The holy God hedged up my way by
precepts, example, and discipline; but I broke through all. Sure the spring
must be within. And sure it must be very strong, that was able to bear down
such powerful mounds [fences] as were set in its way, by the providence of God,
and run with so full a stream, notwithstanding all outward occasions of its
increase were cut off, as much as might be. Herein I have full evidence of a
heart naturally estranged from, my opposite to the Lord. A^^ besides, this
deeply aggravates my guilt. And they have turned unto me the back and not the
face, though I taught them rising up early and teaching them, yet they have not
hearkened to receive instruction, Jer. xxii. 33.

4. The care of my father during his life, which ended October 1682, and of my
mother after his death, though very great, did not change, but only hide
nature; which is indeed often hidden, sometimes overcome, seldom extinguished.
Albeit I cannot remember all the particulars from the fourth or fifth years of
my life, yet so far I do remember what the general bent of my heart was from
that time. Upon a review, I must confess that it was wholly set against the
Lord. The carnal mind in enmity against God, it is not subject to the law of
God, nor can it indeed be, Romans viii. 7.

5. To confirm this, when I now survey the decalogue, and review this portion
of my time, notwithstanding of the great distance, I do distinctly remember,
and were it to edification, could condescend upon particular instances of the
opposition of my heart unto each of its precepts. Whatever influence ed^cation
may have in moulding what is seen, yet surely the imaginations of m^n's heart
are evil from his youth up, Genesis viii. 21.

6. True it is, through the influence of the means before mentioned, I did all
this while abominate the more gross breaches of all the commands, and dislike
open sin. But meanwhile my heart was set upon the less discernible violations
of the same holy law. My quarrel was not with sin, but with the consequences of
it; and the main thing I regarded was the world's opinion of it. Fear of
punishment, pride that fears to be ill thought of, or at best, a natural
conscience enlightened by education, were the only springs of any performance
of duty, or abstinence from sin. Prove I was all this while to sin, even of all
sorts, which that age is carried into, in secret, when I could say, that no eye
shall s^^ me, Job xxiv. 15. They who for credit, or other such inducements, may
seem averse to sin, yet will make bold in the dark with the worst sins; -- Son
of man, haft thou seen what the ancients of the ^^^^se of Israel do in the
dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? For they say, the Lord sees us
not, the Lord has forsaken the earth, Ezekiel. viii. 12.

7. Even those things which, in my way, seemed good and promising, such as
detestation of gross sins, performance of duties, etc, were either purely the
effects of a forcible custom, a bribe to a natural conscience to hold its
peace, a sacrifice to self, a slavish performance of what I took no delight in
to avoid the whip, or sometimes a charra to keep me from danger, which I
thought would befai me, and dreaded much, if I neglected prayer. Thus my best
things dreadfully increased my guilt; being like the apples of Sodom, fair to
look at, promising while untried, but within full of ashes and noisome matter.
When ye falled and mourned in the fifth and seventh months, even these seventy
years, did ye at all fall unto me? And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink,
did ye not eat for yourselves? Zech. vii. 5.6. Bring no more vain oblations,
incense is an abomination to me, the n^w moons and sabbaths, the calling of
assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting, Isa. i.
13.

8. Thus the spring of corruption, dammed in on the one side, I mean as to open
profanity, by the mounds of education, breaks out on the other side, in a form
of religion, (2 Timothy iii. 5.) without, nay plainly opposite to the power of it,
which is no less hateful to the holy God: The prayer of the wicked is sin, his
sacrifice is an abomination, Prove. xxi. 4, 27. xv. 8. Sin in the one case has a
little varnish, that hides its deformity somewhat from the eyes of men; in the
other, it is seen in its native hue and colors. In the one case it runs under
ground: In the other it openly follows its course. Some men's sons are open
before hand, going before them to judgment, and others follow after, 1 Timothy v.
26. Whether the one or the other, the odds is not great. The tree is known by
its fruit, Matthew. xii. 33. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit.
Sometimes it may bring forth good-like fruit.

9. But yet after all I must confess, that such was the strength of corruption,
that it drove me to several of the more plain and gross sins, incident to this
age: which though some account pardonable follies in children, yet the Lord
makes another reckoning of them, and sundry of them have been made bitter to
me; such as, lying, to avoid punishment, Sabbath-breaking, reveage, hatred of
my reprovers, and others of a like nature. Some particular sins committed in
childhood, which I had quite forgot as being attended with no notable
circumstances, that could make them stick, rather than other things, and being
of an older date than any thing else I can remember, were brought fresh to my
remembrance, when the Lord began closely to convince of sin; and being
presented in their native colors, in the light of the Lord, and in all the
circumstances of time, place, partners in sin, etc. and were made the matter of
deep humiliation, loathing, and self-abhorrence, as not only full of wickedness
in themselves, but pregnant evidences of the deepest natural depravity. Which
made me see to whom it was owing, that I went not to all the heights in
wickedness, and the grossest abominations, that ever any were carried to, and
which a haeghty heart, if not restrained seasonably, partly by secret power,
and partly by outward means, would inevitably have carried me to. Prove. xxii.
15. Folly is bound up in the heart of a child, deeply rooted and fastened
there. And no thanks to the best, that they are kept from the worst things. And
David said to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this
day to meet me, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept
me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging myself with mine own
hand. 1 Samuel xxv. 32. For in very deed, as the Lord God of Israel lives, which
has kept me back from hurting thee, except thou had hasted and come to meet
me, surely there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning light any that
pisseth against the wall. What a monster had I been, if lest to myself, and not
seasonably restrained by outward means, and inward power! blessed be the
invisible hand, and the outward instruments of this restraint, that kept me
back from finning.

10. These are but a very few of the innumerable evils that cleaved to me in
this sinful period of my life, For who can understand his errors? Psalm. xix.
12. This period was altogether sinful and vain; nay, sin and vanity in the
abstract. Childhood is vanity, Eccl. xi. 10. And all this is deeply aggravated
by my stupid inconcernedness about them all the while. Notwithstanding of them
all, I was clean in mine (...) eyes, though (...) ^^^shet from my pollutions,
Prove. xxx. 12. in the puddle whereof! had long wallowed. I was whole as to my
own sense, though the plague sore run upon me. Rev. ii. 17. While I thought I
stood in need of nothing, I was poor, miserable, wretched blind, and naked. How
can them say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after B^alim? See thy way in
the valley, know what thou have done, etc. I have ^ot found it by secret
search, but upon all these. Yet thou say, because I am innocent, surely his
anger shall (...) from me. Behold, I will p^ead with thee, because thou say,
I have not sinned, Jer. ii. 23, 33, 34, 35.

Reflections on this First Period.

1. WHEN I consider how many sins long since done and forgotten, many of them
of an older date than any thing else I remember, and in their commission
attended with no such remarkable circumstances, as can rationally be supposed
to have made any deep impression on the ^^^^ry, and so have any influence in
their recovery, after so long oblivion, were now by the Lord brought to mind
with unusual distinctness, I cannot but herein observe, 1. What exact notice
the holy God takes, and how deeply he resents those things, which men generally
will scarce allow (...) faults, or at most but mean ours, pardonable follies
rather than sins. God easily observed, that man's imaginations are evil from
his youth, and will have us mind, and be humbled for the sins that have cleaved
to us from our youth. This has been thy manner from thy youth, that thou
obeyedst not my voice, Jer. xxii. 21^ is an aggravation of other sins he
charges on his people, and in itself one heavy article. 2. How much reason is
there for reckoning it up as one great part of the wicked's misery, that they
lie down in their graves with bones full of the sins of youth? Job xx. ii. How
much reason is there for David's prayer, that God may not remember against him
the sins of his youth? Psalm. ^xv. (...) How just reason have we often, with Job,
(Job xiii. 26.) to suspect, that in the strokes that fall on us in riper years,
God is making (...) to possess the iniquities of our youth? How much reason
have we with holy Augustine, (Aug. conf. Lib. 1.) to confess and mourn over the
sins of childhood, and trace original corruption in its first outbreakings,
even up to infancy? 3. I here observe what an exact register conscience, God's
deputy, keeps; how early it begins to mark, how accurate it is, even when it
seems to take no notice, and to what a length it will go in justifying God's
severity against sinners at the last day; how distinctly and clearly it will
read out, and how far up it will fetch its accounts of those evils which we
mind nothing of, when God shall open its eyes to read what is written, and
discern those p^^nts, which, as Jo^ says, God sets upon the heels of our feet,
Job xiii. 27. and give it a commission to tell us of them, when the books shall
be opened, and the dead, small and great, judged out of them, Rev. xx. 11.

2. When I review this first period of my life, what reason do I see to be
ashamed and even confounded, to think that I have spent ten years of a short
life, without ^^ost a rational thought, and undoubtedly any that was ^ot
sinful. -- After that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed,
yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth, Jer. xxxi.
19.

3. The whole of what I have set down before, being matter of undoubted
experience, of which I can no more doubt than of what I now see and feel; I
have ^^^rein a strong confirmation of my faith, as to the guilt of Adam's sin,
its imputation to his posterity, and of my concernment therein in particular.
For, 1. The bent of my soul from a child was set against the Lord. Nor was this
the effect of custom and education; for there was a sweet conspiracy of
precept, discipline, and example of those with whom I conversed, during this
first part of my life, to carry me another way. Nor can I charge the fault of
this on my constitution of body, or any such thing, as might be alleged to
proceed from my parents in a natural way. For those Justs which are of the
mind, Ephesians. i^. 3. and are not in^^^enced by any constitution of body, were as
strong, sensible, active, and prevalent as any other, nay, more than these
which may be pretended to depend on the frame of the body. And as my soul in
its accursed inclinations was thus opposive to the Lord, so the opposition was
of that strength and force, as was not to be suppressed, much less to be
overcome and subdued, by the utmost care of parents, and the best outward
means. This is undoubted fact. 2. I cannot a^ all conceive it consistent with
the wisdom, goodness, or equity of God, to send me thus into the world, without
any fault on my part. To say I was thus originally framed, without respect to
any sin chargeable on me, is a position so full of flat contrariety to all the
notions I can entertain of the Deity, that I cannot think of it without horror,
much less can I believe and give assent to it. 3. Penal then this corruption
must be, as death and diseases are. And whereof can it be a punishment, if not
of Adam's sin? While those things are so plain in fact, and the deduction so
easy from them, whatever subtle arguments any use to overthrow this truth, I
have no reason to be much shaken or moved with them, or call the truth in
question. If once I am sure, that God has done a thing, there is no room left
for disputing its equity. I am sure, I was corrupt from my infancy. I am sure,
God could not have made me so without cause, or sent me into the world in such
a case, if it had not been for some fault wherein I am concerned. If there is
any attempt to charge God on this score, I look upon it as highly injurious.
There is no more l^ft for me in this case, but humbly to endeavor to clear God
of any seeming hardship. If we cannot easily do this, then I will much rather
own (...) ignorance, and stoop under his incomprehensibility, than lay any
charge of injustice against him. This has staid my soul against the most
subtle arguings of men of perverse minds, and even of Satan, who has often
assaulted me in this instance. Be their arguments what they will, (Job xxiii.
12, 13, 17.) Behold in this they are not just: I will answer thee, that God is
greater than man. Why do thou strive against him? For he gives not an
account of his matters. That he may withdraw man from this, among other evil
purposes of measuring God by his short line, and hide pride from his eye.

4. Hence also, I am taught what estimate to make (...) the p^^tendedly good
and virtuour inclinations, where^^^^ some are, by D^i^^^^ and Pe^^gia^s,
alleged to be bo^^ if it be not in these few and rare instances of the each
^fficacy of sanctifying grace, all that, which is looked (...) as good, is
really no more but the fruit of education, (...), occasional restraints,
freedom from temptation, (...) perhaps a ^^tural temper, influenced by some of
th^^^ and by the constitution of the body, to somewhat of oppositics to those
grosser actings of sin, which makes the (...) noise in the world. In a word,
whatever there is of this sa^e in the rate instances beforementioned, is bet
sin (...) disguise. The odds is not great. The one sort of sinners s^^m to
promise good fruit, but deceive: whereas the openly profane give a plain
refusal, and forbid exp^otations. And yet of this last sort more receive the
gospel than the former. -- But what think ye! (Matthew. xxi. (...) 31.) A certain
man had two sons, and he came to the firt, and said, Son, go work to day in my
vineyard He answered and said, I will not: But afterward he ^e^pented and
went. And be came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, I
go sir; and went not. Whether of them twain did the will of his father? The say
unto him, the first. Jes^^ says unto them, Verily I say unto you, that the
publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you.

PART II. Containing an account of the rise, progress, interruptions, revivals,
and issues of the Lord's strivings with me, during the ten or eleven ensuiing
years of my life, from May 1685, to August 1696.
CHAP. I. Containing an account of the first rise of my concern about religion,
its result, revivals, and other occurrences thereto relating, for the first two
years of this time.
IN the month of May 1685, my mother being by the heat of the persecution
obliged to retire to Holland, I went along with her. While we were at sea,
being in some real or apprehended danger, my conscience, which had for all the
by gone ten years, so far as I can now remember, been fast asleep, began to
awaken. I was hallenged for fin, terrified with the apprehensions of hell and
death, and the wrath of God, which I had no thought about before I was brought
to this distress: Jer. ii. 27. They have turned their back unto me, and not
their face: Eat in the time of their trouble they shall say, Arise, and save us.

2. All this concern was nothing more than a sad mixture of natural sear, and a
selfish desire of preservation from the danger that was supposed imminent, at
least by me. Peace, acceptance, communion with God, came not much in my
thoughts. I was afraid and unwilling to die. I would gladly have been out of
danger of hell. This was all my exercise at this time. It was not sin, but
death, its consequence, I was concerned to be rid of: Exodus x. 16. Then Pharaoh
called for Moses and Aaron in ^^as^e, and said, I have sinned against the Lord
your God. -- Now therefore I pray thee, forgive my sin only this once, and
entreat the Lord your God, that he may take away from me this death only.

3. As this exercise was wholly selfish, without any concern for the Lord's
glory, so it led me to selfish courses for relief. I promised, that were I at
land, I would live and be better than formerly. I engaged to keep all God's
commands. My mother told me, I was in a mistake, and would not hold there. But
there was no persuading one so ignorant of his own heart, as I at this time
was, of this. I multiplied engagements, and doubted not myself as to the
performance: Josh. xxiv. 16. And the people answered, God forbid that we should
forsake the Lord to serve other gods. Ver. 9. And Joshua said unto the people,
Ye cannot serve the Lord; for he is an holy God. Ver. 21. And the people said
unto Joshua, Nay, but we will serve the Lord.

4. No sooner was I come to land, and fixed at Rotterdam, but I verified what
had been foretold. I forgot all my promises and resolutions. The unrenewed and
corrupt heart, being free from the force put upon it by the natural conscience
under appearance of hazard, took its old course. I returned to former evils,
and grew worse. Corruption, that had been dammed in for a little, having easily
forced down all these mounds raised to hold it in, run with the greater
violence. It is true, through the mercy of God, I was still res^^^ined from
open scandalous sins. Toward which the awe of my godly and prudent mother, and
principles of education, did contribute not a little. But as to secret evils of
all sorts I had no aversion to them: Nay, to many of them I was strongly
inclined, and in many instances followed my own inclinations. I was a ready and
easy prey to every temptation, notwithstanding all my engagements; Jer. ii. 20.
And then said, I will not transgress, when upon every high hill, and under
every green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot.

5. My sins, in this place, had this grievous aggravation, that they were
against greater light, and more of the means of grace than I had formerly
enjoyed. On the Lord's day we had three sermons and two lectures in the Scots
church; on Thursday, a sermon there likewise. On Tuesday, one of the suffering
ministers by ^^rns preached. There was a meeting for prayer on Wednesday. On
Monday and Friday's night Mr. James Kirkton commonly lectured in his family. On
Saturday he catechized the children of the Scots sufferers who came to him. My
mother took care to have me attend mod of these occasions, was careful to keep
me to duty, was not wanting in advice, correction, prayer with and for me; she
obliged me to read the scriptures and other edifying books. But so far were all
these from obtaining a due effect on me, that I was weary of them, and went on
in sin: Isa. v. 4. What could have been done more, (viz. in point of outward
means), to my vineyard, that I have not d^^^? Wherefore when I looked that it
should have brought forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? Mal i. 13. Ye
said (...), (viz. of the Lord's service), What a weariness is in it? And ye
have senffed at it, says the Lord of bests: And ye brought that which was
torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye have brought an offering: should I
accept this of year band, says the Lord?

6. At this time I wanted not frequen^^ convictions, occasioned sometimes by
the preaching of the word, and at other seasons by the light of my educatica,
which still hung about me, and was a check upon me: But all this was only like
the starts of a sl^^ping man, occasioned by some sudden noise; up he gets, but
presently be is down, and faster asleep than before. I found means to get rid
of these convictions -- 1. I would, when they were u^ua^y, promise them a
hearing afterward: Acts xxiv. 25. And as Paul reasoned of right^^^s^ess,
temperance, and judgment to come, Felix trembled; and answered, Go thy way, and
when I have a c^^^nient sea^^n I will call for thee. 2. At other seasons, I
looked to the tendency of them, that they aimed at engaging me to be holy, and
then I pored upon the difficulties of that course, till I not only got the edge
of my convictions blunted, b^t frighted myself from a compliance: Prove. xxii.
13. The sluggard says, There is a lion in the way, and I shall be ^^ain in the
streets. 3. When convictions were lighter, I got rid of them by withdrawing
from the means: Ja^^es 1. ^3. 24. If a man be a bearer of the word and not a
doer, he is like unto a man bebolding his ^^^u^^l face is a gless: For be
be^^ldeth himself, and g^^th his way, and straightway f^^getteth what manner of
man ^e was. 4. Sometimes I promised thea^ fair, and so put them off at that
time, but minded it not afterward: Matthew. xxi. 30. -- And be said to the
second likewise, and be answered, I go sir, and went not. 5. Sometimes there
issued in fr^itiess, u^active, and slothful wishes. Prove. xiii. 4. The (...) of
the s^^ggard desir^th, and has nothing. xxi. 25. The desire of the slothful
kills him; for his bands refase to lab^^r. 6. At other times when they were
ti^^bleso^^^, I turned ^ine eye to something which I thought good, in my way,
though, the Lord knows, little was there that had so much as any tolerable
appearance of good. Yet so foolish was I, that I rested here, as (...) had been
not only enough to atone for by-gones, (...) good at God's hand: Luke xviii.
10, 11. (...) ^vent up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, the other ^
publican. The Pharise^ stood and prayed with himself, God I thank thee that I
am not as other men, extartioners, ^^just, adulterers, or even as this
publican, etc. 7, Sometimes endeavored to diminish my sin as much as I could:
Hof. xii. 8. In all my labors they shall find (...) iniquity in me, that were
fin. 8. When these shifts sailed, and they were still uneasy, I then betook
myself to diversions, and they choked the word, and convictions from it: Lake
viii. 14. And that which fell among therus are they, which when they have
^^ard, go forth, and are ch^abed with cares and riches, and pleasures of this
life, and bring ^o fruit to perfection.

7. Abont this time, I met with some things that crossed (...). Hereon I turned
thoughtful, what way to ri^ myself of these difficulties. I seemed more than
ordinary concerned, and my spirit was much troubled; yet really this strai^ ^^d
^e not to God. But my thoughts were spent in rese^^^en^ against the real, or
supposed authors of my uneasiness, in proud, selfish, and vain contrivances for
mine own case and relief: Psalm. ^. 4. The wiched (...) the pride of his
countenauce, will not seek after God: God is not in all his, thoughts. Job
xxxv. 9, 10. They cry on^ by reason of the arm of the mighty: But none s^ith,
Where is God my Maker, who gives songs in the night Is^. xxii. 8, 11. And then
di^^^ lock in that day to the armor of the b^^se of the forest, etc. But ye
have n^^ l^^ked unto the Maker thereof, ^^^ther had respect to him that
foshimed it long ago.

8. About the month of December 1686, upon the earnest desire of my father's
sister, married to John Glass, provost of P^rth, I was sent home. While I staid
in his family, I saw nothing of religion, though my aunt was a woman very
moral. Here I was much indulged. I got liberty, and I to^k it. I faw little of
the worship of God, and I easily complied, and turned remiss too. What further
advancer toward an open rejection of the very form of religion, I made in this
place, I do not now, at this distance, distinctly remember: but no doubt they
were great. This I do remember, that I sound my aversion to these sins, which
through the influence of education I ^^^ominated before, sensibly weakened.
Yea, I sound ^^^e secret hankering after some of them, a delight in them who
were guilty, and a sort of approbation of them in my heart. Yet still I was, in
a great measure, restrained from an avowed practical compliance, by the awful
impressions early instruction had left on my mind, which were not as yet wholly
worn off; though far were they decayed, considering the shortness of my stay,
whence I may easily discern what had become of them, if I had stayed longer
here. Further I mind, that at this time I had a great aversion to learning,
which was the only good thing that in this place was urged upon me. I looked on
it as a burden and drudgery, to which the basest employments were to be
preferred, and hence I no way set my heart to it; but trifled my time a^ay. And
many a sinful shift did I betake myself to, that I might get the time shuffled
over: Psalm. l^ 17, 18, 21. Thus I hated instruction, and c^st God's word behind
my back. When thou saw a th^^^ thou consen^edst with him, and have been
partakers with ^dulterers. These things have thou done, and I kept silen^^; and
thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself.

9. Thus I spent the winter. In the spring, 1687, my mother fearing that I
might be ensnared with the company I was now amongst, came home for me, as
minding the wise man's observation, Prove. xxix. 15. The rod and reproof give
wisdom: But a child left to himself bringe^ his mother to shame. Romans i. 30. 2 Timothy iii. 3. But (...) great was my wickedness, that in spite of natural
affection I was grieved at her return, and when first I heard her voice it
damped me; I cared not to see her. Nothing I disliked more, than a godly and
affectionate mother's converse. I seared to be questioned as to by-gones, I
feared she would carry me away back to Holland, whereby I would be put under
uneasy restraints from my sinful liberty. Jer. ii. 25. But thou said, There
is no hope. No. for I have loved strangers, and after them will I go.

10. In the spring, or toward summer, my mother carried me with her, much
against my will; and put me to school there, at Erasmus' school. I stayed but
sho^^ while there. But the advantageous method of teaching tock with me; I
began to delight in learning, and quickly turned proud of my success. But
otherwise lived as I had done before, still worse and worse under all the means
God made use of to bring me near, and keep me close to him. -- Je^. xiii. 11.
As the girdle cleaves to the loins of a man, so ^ave I caused to cleave unto
me the whole house of Israel, and the whole house of Ju^ab; that they might be
unto me for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: But
they would not hear.

CHAP. II. Containirg an account of the revival of convictions, their effects,
progres^, issues, and interruptions, from the close of 1687, to 1690 or 1691,
when I went from Perth to stay at Edinbergh.
1. IN the month of February 1687, king James emitted his proclamations for
indulgence, whereon most of those who had sled ventured home; and my mother
amongst others, toward August or September, that year. It had been for my
advan^^^^ ^^^bably, for my education, to have stayed (...) made me unwilling to
return. In our retu^n we were in imminent danger of shipwreck on the Scars of
England, but by the mercy of God escaped. The danger was sudden, and suddenly
over, and so lest little or no impression on me. When we came home we fixed at
Perth, and abode there till harvest 1690, or 1691, I cannot be positive which.
What was my case as to my soul concerns during this time, so far as I remember,
I shall here narrate.

2. Presently upon our settlement in this place I was entered to school; and
made some better proficiency than before. But as to religion, I continued as
uncon^^rned as ever, as intent upon sin, as averse to duty as f^^^erly. However
I carried under my mother's eye, when I was among my comrades I took my
liberty, and went with them into all the follies and extravagances they went
into; but with this aggravation above most of them, that what I did I knew to
be a fault very often, whereas they, at least many of them, did not. Yea, not
only went I along with them, but was foremost, and enticed others to folly. Yet
still, through the mercy of God, kept from openly scandalous evils, save once,
that I mind, with some other boys I was sei^ed in a garden, taking some fruit;
whereof I was much ashamed, and never attempted the like a gain; not from any
real dislike of the sin, but sears of a discovery. And thus I continued till
toward the close of king James' reign, when fears of a massacre or some sudden
stroke from the papists, whereof then there was a great noise every where,
revived my concern about religion. Psalm. lxxviii. 34, 35. But when he slew them
then they sought him: and (...) returned and enquired carly after God. And they
remembered that God was their ro^k, and the high God their Redeemer.

3. This concern being some deeper, and the effects of it more remarkable and
lasting, I shall endeavor a distinct account of it. About this time, the Lord,
by the means I lived under, the preaching of the word, catechi^ing in public
and private, enlightened my mind further in the notional knowledge of the law
and gospel. My capacity growing with my years, and knowledge of what was sin
and what was duty, and what the fearful consequences of sin were, and the
advantages of duty, increasing; sin was lest open and naked without the excuse
of ignorance, and conscience had a further advantage, being armed with more
knowledge, and better informed hereon its checks, when now by the Lord's
providence it was in some measure awakened, were more frequent and sharp, and
not so easily to be evaded: John xv. 22. If I had not come and spoken to them,
they had not had sin, but n^w they have no cloak for their sin.

4. Some touches of sickness riveted on me the impressions of mortality and
frailty, and the tendency of each of those ^^merous train of diseases, by which
we are daily expo^^^ to death. Hereon I was brought into and kep^ un^^er
continual bondage through fears of death, Heb. ii. 15.

5. Bot that which above all affected me most deeply, and gave ^n edge to
convictions, was the continual fears we were in of being suddenly destroyed by
the papists: This kept death in its most terrible shape ever in mine eyes and
thoughts: And to my great terror, I saw wrath and ^udgment following it. The
s^^^ers in Zion are afraid, fearful^^ss has surprised the hypocrites: Who
(...) ^s shall dwell with devenring fire? Who (...) ^s shall d^ell with
everlasting b^^nings? Isa. xxxiii. 15.

6. Hereon I was east into grievous disquietment, Psalm. xiii. 2. I te^k counsel
in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily. I was in a dreadful strait betwixt
two. On the (...) hand, my convictions of sin were sharp, fears of a present d
ath and judgment quickened them; this made me attend more to the word; the more
I attended to it they increased the more, and I was daily persuaded more and
more, that there was no way to be rid of them, but by turning religious. On the
other hand, if I should engage in carnest with religion, then I saw the hazard
of suffering for it, and wist not but I might be called immediately to die for
it; and this I could not think of doing. Betwixt the two I was dreadfully
tossed in my own mind; some nights sleep went from mine ey^s, and I was full of
trouble. I set imagination a-work, and did sometimes strongly impress myselt
with the fancy of an Irish cutthroat holding a dagger to my breast, and
offering me these ter^^, Quit your religions, turn papist, and you ^ha^^ live:
Hold it, and you are dead. The imagination was sometimes so strong, that I have
fainted almost with it, and still I was dre^dfully unresolved what to do:
Sometimes I would let him give the fatal stroke; but hereon my spirits shrunk,
and my heart failed at the apprehension of death: At other times I resolved to
quit my religion, but with resolution to take it up again when the danger was
over. But here I could get no rest. What, thought I, if the treacherous enemy
destroy me after I have done it, and so I lose both life and religion? And what
if I die before the danger is over, and so ^i^e be not allowed me to repent?
Hos. vii. 11. Ephr^ (...) silly dove without a heart; they call to Egypt and
they go to Assyria.

7. This sort of exercise frequently recurred, and I continued this way at
times, ever till after the bottle of Gillechrankie, which ^as sought July 27th,
1689. It had some interruptions, and then I was remiss as before, but for near
a year, few weeks, and frequently few days or nights, passed over me without
some such exercise: But the fears of the papists being quickly over, my
remaining difficulty was only with my convictions. Now as to these, I
endeavored to relieve myself, 1. By promises of abstaining from those fins
which most directly crossed my light, and for which I was most plainly
challenged, Exodus ix. 28. And Phar^ab called for Moses and Aaron, and said,
Entreat the Lord for me -- and I will let the people go. 2. I took sanctuary
(...) resolutions of enquiring into the Lord's mind, and comp^ying. But when I
consulted any practical book, or the ministry of the word, and found them not
give such directions as agreed with my unrenewed heart. I was grieved, and
stuck there: Marth. xix. 16, 21, 22. And behold, one came to him, and said unto
him, Good Master, what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life. --
Jesus said unto him, if thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have, and
give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven; and come and follow
me. But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful: For he
had great possessions. 3. I thought to find peace in a more careful attendance
upon duties: Romans x. 3, 4. Thus being ignorant of God's righteousness, and
going about to establish ^ine own righteousness, I submitted not myself unto
the righteousness of God; nor showed I any regard to Christ, who is the end of
the law for righteousness, to every one that believes.

8. Though my foolish heart run to those courses, yes really they afforded no
solid repose: For, 1. The first fin against light, and the first omission of
d^ty, which very speedily ensued upon the intermission of the force that
present conviction put upon me, shock all. And I was confounded at the thoughts
of appearing before God in a right (...) so plainly ragged, that where it had
one piece it wanted two, Isa, Iziv. 6. 2. Though these ways gave some case
where trials were at a distance; yet when the thoughts of death came near, I
found not quiet here: This was not gold tried in the ^ire, nor would it a^^^le
so much as a near-hand view of a trial: (...) at the very appearance of a
storm, this sandy foundation shook, Marth. vii. 27. 3. Whenever convictions
were awakened as to new sins, challenges for old ones recurred, which shewe^
that the cure was not perfect Consider Heb. x. 2. 3. Where conscience of sin
(...) after the use of mea^s, i^^argnes their weak^^^^
. Isa. l. 11. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about
with sparks: Walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have
kindled: This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.

9. The effects of this exercise, that abode and increased afterward, were
principally these three: 1. Hereby I was brought into a doub^ about the truths
of ^^^igion, the being of God, and things eternal. This he^^tation was no^ from
any arguments that offered themselves against these truths; o^ from any
suspicion of ministers, parents, or others from whom I had received them: But
merely from this, that whenever, in danger or strains, I would build on them, a
suspicion secretly haunted me, What if these things are not? Whence I was
brought to think, that I had not certainty and evidence about them answerable
to the weight that was to be laid on them. I thought death, and the trouble
attending it, were certain and sensible things: But I could not get my mind
satified, and fully assured upon the truths of religion. S^^l, when under
apprehensions of death, I would have taken rest upon the truths of religion,
the persuasion failed me, and my mind began to waver: though I could give no
reason of this, Prove. iv. 19. The way of the wicked is as darkness: They know
not at what they st^mble. 2. I was hereby persuaded, and this persuasion ever
after increased in strength, that I could never have peace till I came to
another sort of evidence and certainty about the truths of religion, than I was
yet acquainted withal. Death I saw inevitable, it might be very sudden. I was
capable of being impressed with the fore-thoughts of it, and could no^ banish
them. Therefore concluded I, unless I obtain such a conviction of religion, and
such an interest in it, as will make me not only look at death without fear,
but go through it with comfort, better for me I had never been: But how or
where this was to be obtained, I was utterly ^ncertain. Here I lay in great
perplexity, under the melancholy impressions that I had hitherto spent my money
for that which is not bread, and my labor for that which prof^^^th not, Isa.
Iv. 2. 3. This perplexity was somewhat eased, while, one day or other, reading
in the close of the Fulfilling of the Scrip^^ies, how Mr. Robert Bruce was
shaken about the being of a God, and how at length he came to the fullest
satiss^ction; hereby a hope secretly sprung up, that one time or other, in one
way or other, the like might befall me, and that the Lord might satisfy me in
this. Here was the dawning of a light, that though long it did not fully clear
^p, yet was never put wholly out again; though it was far from satisfying, yet
it kept from despair as to the issue: Mark viii. 23. And be took the blind man
by the band and led him ou^ of the town; and when he had spit on his eyes, and
put his hara's on him, be asked him if be saw ought. And be looked up and said,
I see men as trees walking. -- But all this notwithstanding the vail still
remained untaken away, 2 Cor. iii. 14, 15.

10. About this time, one Mr. Donaldson, a reverend old minister, preached at
Perth, and came to visit my mother; called for me, and among other questions,
he asked me, if I sought a blessing on my learning? To which I ingenuously
answered, No. He replied with an austere look, Sirrah, unsanctified learning
has done much mischief to the kirk of God. This saying stuck with me ever
after, and left a deep impression (...) me; so that whenever I was any way
straitened, I applied to God by praver for help in my learning, and pardon for
n^^ seeking his blessing. But this was only when more than ordinarily
difficulted.

But (...) to the main, all this exercise left me where I was before, afar off
from God. and an (...) to him in my mind, which I evidented by wicked works,
Col. i. 21.

CHAP. III. Giving an account of the increase of my convictions, during my stay
at Edinburgh, from harvest 1690, or 1691, till May 1693, and the vain refuges I
betook myself to for relief.
1. MY mother designing to have me well educated, for the advantage of better
schools, in harvest 1690, or 1691, did remove to Edinburgh, and sixed me at Mr.
Gavin Weir's school, where I stayed (save only for the space of some months
that I abode in Carlop's family, and learned with his children and some others,
under one who had been an under teacher to Mr. Weir, and after his re^^^^l
taught a few privately) till November 169^, when I entered to the college,
under Mr. Ale^ander Cuningham. Here it was my mercy that I sell in with sober
comrades, and bookishly inclined. But this is n^^ my design to narrate; and
therefore I proceed to observe the step^ of the Lord's work with me as to my
soul.

2. While I abode here, the Lord gave not over his dealings with me, Acts xii,
18. About the time of forty years, suffered he their manners in the wilderness.
Long also did he bear with my manners. In this place the work went on: For,
1st, As kn^wledge increased, so co^ictions, it not in force, yet in number,
increased: still as knowledge of the law grew, which it daily did under the
means of grace, the knowledge of sin also grew: For my the law is the knowledge
of sin, Romans vii. 7. The Lord daily let me see, that he was wroth^on account of
sins that formerly I had not noticed, Psalm. l. 21. These things thou have
(...), and I kept silence: Thou thoughted I was such an (...) as thyself: But I
^^^l reproce thee, and set thy sins in order before (...). (...), By new
afflictions the impressions of my mortality were riveted, and I was still the
further in berdage through the growing fears of death, Heb. ii. 15. 3dly. The
word being daily preached, and daily meeting with me, forced me, though
unwilling, to make some enquiry into my sincerity in religion, which I now made
some profession of. A close word will, at length, even bring a judas to say,
Master, Is it I? Match. xxvi. 20, 21, 22, 23. 4thly. By the means of grace,
Herod-like, to save some bosom idols, engaged me, Mark vi. ^0. to do many
things, and hear the word gladly.

3. The means whereby these effects were wrought, were, 1st, The preaching of
the word: Rev. i. 16. By the two edged sword that goes out of his mouth, the
Lord did often wound me, and the secrets of my heart were made manifest. I found
the word a discer^er of the thoughts of the heart, and its in^e^ts, I Cor. xiv.
29. Heb. 17. 12. 2dly. ^he Lord made use of the rod. He ^^id his hand on me.
When I was well and in health, the word did not affect so much, nor did I
attend to it so carefully. Jer. xxii. 21. I spoke unto thee in^hy prosperity,
and thou would^st not hear: This has been thy manner from thy youth, that than
obeyedst not the voice of the Lord. -- Hof. v. 15. In their affliction they
will seed me early. Job xxxvi. 8, 9. If they be bound in fetters, and be holden
in cords of ^ffliction: Then be sh^^^th unto them their work, and th^^
transgressions that they have exceeded. 3dly, I rend Shepherd's treatise,
called. The sincere Convert, which galled me, and cut me to the quick: it came
very close home to me, and affected me very much, and put me to question deeply
my sincerity.

4. By these means I was driven sometimes to great extremity, and carried the
length of a form of religion. I prayed not only evening and morni^^, but at
some other times retired, and would weep plentifully in secret, and read, and
pray, and resolve to live otherwise than I had d^o^. But his goodness was at
the morning cloud, and early d^^, Hos. vi. 4. It kept pace with my convictions.
It was force, not nature; and this strictness lasted no longer than the force
that occasioned it did. And Joash did that which was right in the fight of the
Lord, all the days of Jehoi^da the pri^st. -- But Jehoiada waxed old -- and
died, 2 Chronicles. xxiv. 2, 15, 17, 18. Now after the death of Jehoiada, came the
princes of Judah, and made obeisance to the king, and the king hearkened unto
them. And they left the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served
groves and id^ls.

5. While I was under these distresses, many a wicked shist did I betake myself
unto for relief, though without effect, Hos. v. 13. When Ephrain saw his
sickness and Judah his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and seat to
king Jarch, yet could be not heal you, nor care you of your wound. When
searching marks were offered from the word, which tended to discover my
naughtiness, or when I read them in books, 1st, If any thing was spoken or
mentioned, that did in appearance make for me, then I greedily griped to that:
For I was very unwilling to see my own hypocrisy; and therefore, if; I had but
a show to found my claim, I laid hold on what was offered; like the young man,
when Christ spoke of keeping the commandments, he answered, being unacquainted
with the spiritual extent of the law, Matthew. xix. 20. All these things have I
kept from my youth, what lack I yet? So said I. 2dly, When I found somewhat
required, that I neither had nor tesolved to comply with, because perhaps it
was, on some account or other, dear, then I resolved to compound the matter,
and make amends some other way, and beg a license for that, like Naaman, 2
Kings v. 17, 18. Thy servant will henceforth offer neither burntoffering nor
sacrifice unto other gods, but unto the Lord. In this thing the Lord pardon thy
servant, that when my master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there,
and he leans on my hand, and I how myself down in the house of Rimmon. 3dly,
When any mark was offered, that I could not shift, (...) pretend unto, then I
was ready to question, whether he that offered it were not mistaken, and
secretly questioned the truth, following the measure Satan took with Eve, Genesis
iii. 1, 4. -- Yea has God said, ye shall not cat of every tree of the garden.
And again, -- Ye shall not surely die. 4thly, When I could not see, not through
the want of sufficient light, but through my unwillingness to admit it. I was
ready to quarrel that ministers and books did not tell me plainly: John x. 24.
Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him, How long do thou make
as to doubt? If thou be the Christ tell us plainly. Jesus answered them, I told
you, and you believed not. 5thly, Sometimes when I was gravled with a mark, I
promised it a hearing at a more convenient season, and so like Felix shifted
the trouble for the time, Acts xxiv. 25. 6thly, Sometimes I would slip over
these things that made against me: Acts xvii. 32. He that does evil, c^meth not
to the light, because his deads are ^vil, lest they should be repreved, John
ii. 20. 7thly, I carefully sought for the lowest marks, and the least degrees
of grace that might be saving. I designed only as much religion as would take
me to heaven; and therefore I still enquired with the young man, What good
thing shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? Matthew. xix. 16. I desired no
more than would do this, serve this tern; and any thing that would serve this,
provided my beloved lusts were spared, I would, with him, resolve upon. 8thly,
When more of these shifts would avail, in the general I would resolve upon
doing any thing that the Lord required, like him that said, Lake ix. 57, 58.
Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goast. But then, with him, I
still retracted when the Lord, as he often did, did tell me of particulars he
would try me in, which were cross to my inclination. 9thly, When I saw I
behoved to quit these, of which the Lord often convinced me, then I begged a
little respite or delay, and I would comply: Angustine-like, "I was content to
be holy, but not yet." And another also said, Luke ix. 61, 62. Lord I will
follow thee, but let me first go bid them farewell which are at home at my
house. And Jesus soid, No man having put his hand to the plough and looting
back, is sit for the kingdam of God. An excuse, a delay, in God's account, is a
plain refusal: For all commands and invitations require present obedience; a
Cor. vi. 2. Now is the accepted time. New is the day of salvation, Heb. iii.
15. And today if you will hear bis voice, harden not your hearts. 10thly.
after all ways were ^^^d, I found no relief. I blamed my education, I knew
there was some change; my question was, whether is were the right one? Now,
thought I, if I had not been religiously educated, but had turned all at once,
it would have been more easily discernable. Thus I (...) inta^^gled in my own
ways, Isa. lix. 9, 10. We (...) for ^ight, but behold obscurity; for
brightness, but ^^e ^^alk in dar^ness. We grope for the wall like the blind,
(...) we grop^ as we had (...) eyes: We s^^mble at (...) day (...) it the night
(...) are (...) and (...) had been to my (...) Psalm. (...) they (...). Prove,
xiv. 6. The (...) seeks ^isdom, and ^^^deth it not. (...) and shifts my heart
used, which now (...) I cannot remember. But these are the (...) which do occur
upon ^eflection; and in them (...) is it, that the heart is dec^itful above all
th^^^ (...) wicked. When (...) or can know it (...).

6. Though now I seemed sometimes to have go^^ far, yet really I was ^holly
wrong. For, 1st All this while, being convinced of the necessity of a
righteousness, but ^g^orant of Christ, 'I sought it by the works of the law,'
^om. xi. 3. 2dly. The carnal mind tha^ 'is enmity (...) God, and is not subject
to the law of God,' still comm^^d; Romans viii. 7. 3dly. All my exercise was only
a (...) betwixt light, and love to sin: and sin still (...) it; for my bosom
idols I would by no means part with. 4thly, Self was the animating principle of
any form of religion that I had. So much of it as would save from hell, or take
me to heaven, and no more, I desired. 5thly. All this religion came and went
with the occasions mentioned: It was not abiding.

7. Providentially about this time Clark's Martyrology was cast into my hand. I
loved history, and read it greedily. And some impressions it left on me, that
wanted not their own use now and afterward; 1st, The patience, joy, and
courage of the martyrs, persuaded me that there (...) a power, a reality in
religion, beyond the power of mere nature. 2dly, I was convinced that I was a
stran^ get (...) this, be^^^^ I (...) not think of su^^^^^ng. 3dly, I was
brought to some faint desires after acquaintance with this power of religion:
Dan ii. 18, 29. Then Neb^chadnezzer spoke, and said, blessed be the God of
Shadrachi Meshach, and Abednego. -- There is (...) other God that can delives
after this sort. Often was I in reading this book, at Balarm's wi^^, Let (...)
di^ the death of the righteous, and let my laft end be like his, Numb. xxii.
10. But like him, I loved not their life.

8. (...) that at this time, 1st, God restrained (...) many (...), and I was
(...) to, by my bodily in^^^^^y, a trouble in my joints, ^^ich made me unable
to go. Thus he hedged in my way. Hos. ii. 6. that I should not sind my lovers.
2dly. The Lord in mercy provided me comrades, that were tender of me, and took
care of me. He fed me, and led me, though I knew him not, Hos. ii. 8. Isa. xlv.
3. Jer. ii. 17. 3dly. So far was I from being thankful, that my proud beart
fretted that I was kept from these things others followed. I would have been at
rejoicing at my strength; and vexed I was, that I had an occasion of glorying
out off. And I was not thankful either for the Lord's cutting off, by this
means r^a^y occasions of sin; not for his mercy in providing persons to take
case of me. O what reason have I to say, The Lord is good to the unthankful and
evil, Luke vi. 33.

CHAP. IV. Containing an account of the progress of the Lord's work, the
straitr I was reduced to and the courses I took for relief, from May 1693, when
I left Edinburgh, till I went to the family of Wemyss, August 1696.
1. THE air agreeing neither with my mother nor me, the was advised, and at
length resolved to leave Edinburgh, and go to St. Andrews, a place more
wholesome, and more convenient for my education, to which she always had a
special regard. Here I cannot but observe the remarkable kindness of the Lord
in guiding (...) though then I took no notice of it, Isa. xlv. 6. I am the
Lord, and there in none else, there is no God beside me: I girded thee though
thou have not known me. 1st, At a time when my heart inclined me most to folly,
and by my entering to the college, I was exposed to many temptations to it, the
Lord seas^bly ^^id his hand on me, and try^ed me with (...) mean to restrain
(...), and keep me from contracting any intimacy with those, whose converse
might have prover prejudicial to me, and to engage me to choose sober comrades.
Deuteronomy. viii. 5. Thou shall also (...) in (...) heart, that a^ man chasteneth his
son, so (...) thy God chasteneth thee. Again, 2dly, This is (...) during the
first two months of my stay at the (...) ^^^ing only in my joints, did dot
hinder, but fu^^er my studi^s; and the Lord provided one who, though, (...)
stranger, and under no special obligations, yet attended me as close as he had
been my servant, and was as tender of me as if he had been my brother. During
this time, I made (...) greater proficiency in the Latin tongue, than ever I
has formerly done; the regent I was under being very skilful in teaching it,
and attending very carefully. After this time (...) ill, and was not capable to
attend; and I fell ill, and was thereby obliged to remove to St. Andrews, which
was much to my advantage. For I came under the care of Mr. Thomas Tailor, a man
very capable, and very careful of, and kind to me; and the class I (...), the
regent continued indisposed that year, and falling next year into a phrency.
Thus the Lord chased me from place to place for my good, and every where
provided one friends, Deuteronomy. xxii. 10. He found him in a desert lands and in the
waste and howling wilderness: He led him about and instructed him, he kept him
as the apple of his eye. But God's kindness in guiding to places for my good,
and keeping from inconveniences, snares, and dangers, into which others fell,
had no effect on, nor were they noticed by me. Jer. ii. 6, 7. Neither said
they. Where is the Lord that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, that led
us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts, and of pits, through a
land of drought, and of the shadow of death. -- And I brought you into a
plentiful country, to eat the fruit thereof, and the goodness; but when ye
entered ye defiled my land, and made mine heritage an abomination.

2. When I fettled at St. Andrews, the Lord lest not his work, and striving
with me; but the same sovereign grace that begun went on with it. Ezekiel. xx. 6,
8, 9. I lifted up my hand unto them, to bring them out of the land of Egypt. --
But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto me. -- Then said I, I
will pour out my fury upon them. -- But I wrought for my name's sake. Ezekiel.
xxxvi. 32. Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known unto
you: Be ashamed and confounded for your ways, O honse of Israel.

3. Here the Lord cast my lot under choice means of grace; the ministry of
worthy Mr. Thomas Forrester. Under his searching ministry, the Lord began to
give me some small discoveries of the more secret and spiritual evils of my
heart, and carried me (Ezekiel. viii. 12.) into the secret chambers of imagery, to
let me see what my heart did in the dark. 1st, He opened mine eyes to discern
somewhat of that world of pride that is in the heart, and the wickedness of it.
Though I was some way convinced of my own weakness, when I had any difficulty
more than ordinary before me, and would seek help from God, yet when I got
through, I valued myself upon my acquittance. Of the wickedness and unjustness
of this, the Lord in some measure convinced me: I Cor. iv. 7. What haft thou, O
man, that thou haft not received? And if thou haft received, wherefore do
thou boast? 2dly, He convinced me of the wickedness of the straying of my heart
after idols, especially in the time of worship: Ezekiel. xi. 21. But as for them
whose heart walked after the heart of their detestable things, and their
abominations, I will recompense their ways upon their own heads, says the Lord
God. Ezekiel. xiv. 4, 6. For every one of the house of Israel, or of the stranger
-- which fetteth up his idols in his heart, and puts the stumbling block of
his iniquity before his face, and comes to a prophet to enquire of him
concerning me, I the Lord will answer him by myself. I was made to see, in some
measure, the danger of offering such duties to him, who requires us, Deuteronomy.
xxxii. 46. to set our hearts to what he speaks, and to keep our feet when we
come to the house of God, Eccl. v. i. 3dly, I was likewise made to see somewhat
of my trusting to my duties, and resting on the bare performance, inasmuch as I
was not for most part challenged for unsuitable performance, but for the entire
o^^ission of them), and with the Pharisee I thought it enough, if I could say,
that I did the duty. But now the Lord let me see, that more was required;
though with him I could say, I fasted twice a week, Luke xviii. 12. the Lord
convinced me, that he might answer, When ye fasted, did ye at fast unto me,
even to me? Zech. vi. 5.

4. These, when added to former discoveries of guilt, gave frequently much
disturbance, and cast me into racking perplexity and disquietment; but the
darkness and enmity of my mind remaining, I still had recourse to wicked and
vain courses for peace, such as these formerly mentioned; but they afforded me
little quiet. Pharaoh-like, I engaged to amend those things wherein formerly I
had failed; but, with him, I quickly broke, when the force that drove to this
was over. At last finding no peace in any of these courses, I resolved to enter
into solemn covenant with the Lord; and accordingly I wrote and subscribed a
solemn covenant, whereby I bound myself to be for God: like Israel, when under
the awful impressions of Sinai, and the dreadful appearance of God there, I
said, Deuteronomy. v. 23, 28. All that the Lord our God shall say unto us, we will
hear and do it: And like the scribe that came to Christ, Luke ix. 57. Master I
will follow thee whitherfoever thou go.

5. When I had once done this, then I concluded all was right: For, I. I found
a sort of present peace. Amendment I thought sufficient atonement, and such an
engagement I looked on as performance. I now said, Prove. vii. 14. I have
peace offerings with me: this day I have paid my vows. 2. I at this time found
frequently an unusual sweetness in hearing of the word; especially in hearing
Mr. Forrester lecture on Acta xiii. 53. on the Sabbath night. Here as I
received sometime the most piercing convictions, 1 Cor. xiv. 25. so I received
testes of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, Heb. vi.
5. Thus, like the stony ground, I heard the word, and anon with joy received
it, Match. xiii. 20.3. Common gifts increasing as light grew, I took them for
special grace; and thus have taken up, with the foolish virgins, the lamp of a
profession without oil, Match. xxv. 1. I began to set up for a virgin too, and
like such I began to be esteemed, by some of them, for that which I really was
not, but only appeared to be.

6. But the merciful and good God would not suffer me to rest here. Jer. ii.
35, 36, 37. Yet thou say, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn
from me. Behold I will plead with thee, because thou say, I have not finned.
Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? Thou also shall be ashamed of
Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Aflyria. Yea thou shall go forth from him, and
thine hands upon thine head: For the Lord has rejected thy confidences, and
thou shall not prosper in them. The Lord quickly let me see my mistake: For, I.
The imaginary peace that I had by making this covenant, was quickly lost by
breaking it. Corruption retaining still its power, its locks not being yet cut,
whenever a temptation offered; Judges xvi. 21. like Sampson upon a cry of the
Philistines being on him, it broke all those ties, with which I foolishly, like
his deceived mistress, thought it bound: Like the children of Israel at Sinai
Deuteronomy. v. 27. etc. compared with Numb. xxiii. 16. and Numb. (...) 34.
, I engaged fairly, and herein thought all right; but when I came to
Kibrothhataavah, which was the next station in their way through the
wilderness, and a temptation fell in my way, I fell a murmuring, loathing the
manna, and lusting after the flesh, and this broke all. The Lord's wrath hereon
being afresh intimated against me, as it was against them on that occasion. 2.
Not only upon such breaches met I with challenges, but old ones were revived;
and by this I found former accounts still to be standing against me, which
filled me with consusion, and jealousies of these ways, Jer. ii. 22. For though
thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is
marked before me, says the Lord. 3. The Lord insinuated some discovery of the
treachery of my engagements: let me see how my heart was not sound, and how
there were secret reserves in my engagements for some sins from which my heart
was not divorced; though yet I remember, that at the time I made those
engagements, when my heart put in for sparing these, my light forced me, as it
were for the present, though not without reluctance, to give them up, at least
in words; but really I did not do it. Now the Lord gave some intimations of
this heart-treachery, which when further discovered by the event, my covenant
could not quiet me about. Deuteronomy. v. 29. They have well spoken all that they have
said. O that there such a heart in them. 4. The Lord le^ loose some
corruptions, like the Canaanites, to try me; took off the restraints, and then,
like water dammed in, they became more violent and troublesome, and at length
bore down all that I had set in their way: By these means the Lord let me see
the fruitlessness and vanity of this covenant; which however specious like, was
indeed but a covenant with death; and by the discovery I was put into the
utmost confusion, while the evil I thought I had provided against came upon me:
Isa. xxviii. 19, 20. From the time that it goes forth it shall take you: For
morning by morning shall it pass over, by day and by night, and it shall be a
vexation only to understand the report. For the bed is shorter, than that a man
can stretch himself on it: And the covering narrower, than that he can wrap
himself in it. This I found verified to my sad experience.

7. Notwithstanding the felt vanity of these legal, selfish, anti evangelical
courses, I still cleaved to them: For, I. The peace I lost by breaking, I still
endea^^oured to recover by renewing my covenant, (...) myself in the the
greatness of ray way, and laboring in the fire. My heart, when I was defeat,
gave me suel advice as the king of Syria got from his servants, when he was
defeat by Israel -- Number an army like thou have lost, horse for horse, and
chariot for chariot, and we will sight against them in the plain and surely we
shall be stronger than they, 1 Kings xx. 25. I laid the blame still on some
accidental defect in my former management, and I thought were that provided
against all would be well. 2. When still I found something wanting, I cast
about in my own mind, and contrived to make it up with something estraordinary
of my own; the multiplacation of duties, or some such thing or other. Micah vi.
6, 7. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high
God? Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with ca^^es of a year old.
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of
rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul?

5. But still these vain refuges failed me, and my case was truly miserable
while purs^ing them. Isa. xxx. 1, 2, 3. Woe to the rebellious children, says
the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me: And that cover with a covering, but
not of my spirit, that they may add fin to sin: That walk to go down to Egypt,
and have not asked at my mouth, to strengthen themselves in the strength of
Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt. Therefore shall the strength of
Pharaoh be your shame, and the shadow of Egypt your confusion. Now, as I was
really miserable in following these courses, so, if the Lord of insinite mercy
had not prevented it, I had landed in one of four sad issues, wherein often times
such exercises and courses terminate; either, 1. If I had been freed from
convictions, or the L rd had given over his striving with me, and carrying on
the work of conviction; after convictions had carried me the length of a form
of religion, I had surely, notwithstanding all the disappointments, sitten down
satisfied with that, as having found the life of my hand; or having, by the
endeavors of my hand and its labor, obtained that which would give me a sort
of life, Isa. lvii. 10. Thou art wearied in the greatness of my way, yet said
thou not, There is no hope: Thou have found the life of thine hand (that is, a
sort of life by thy labor), therefore thou wast not grieved. Or, 2. If
convictions had been carried on, and the Lord had lest me to follow those
courses I took, I would have. (Hab. ii. 13. labored in the fire all my days,
wearied and vexed myself for very vanity; (Isa lv. 2.) spending my money for
that which is not bread, and my labor for that which does not profit; in a
continual vicissitude of vows, covenants, engagements, and resolutions;
breaches and disquietments, engagements and false peace, breachea and racking
convictions, would alternately having taken place. And thus I had spent my
days, and at the end been a fool, Jer, xvii, 11. Or, 3. After I had weatied
myself for a while in those vain ways, I would utterly have given up with
religion as a vain thing, and said, with those mentioned by the prophet, who
said, It is vain to serve the Lord; and and what profit is it that we have kept
his ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts?
Mal. iii. 14. And so with them I had gone over to plain atheism and prosanity.
Or, 4. Being forced to seek shelter from my convictions; and being so often and
sadly disappointed by all the ways I tried, I had at last ended in despair,
like Judas; and said, 2 Kings vi, 33. 'This evil is of the Lord, why wait I any
longer, like that wicked king? And in very deed I had some experience of all
these issues. Sometimes I sat down with the form, Rev. iii. 17. and judged I
was rich and increased in goods, and stood in need of nothing. Sometimes I
wearied myself in running from one of those vain courses to another. At other
seasons I turned careless, as finding no profit, and was just at throwing up
all care of religion. And very often I was upon the very brink of despair, almost
quite distracted.

9. When I was thus disappointed, especially after the making, and frequent
repeating of vows and engagements, I was cast into the utmost perplexity to
find where the fault lay. I found this way of covenanting with God recommended
by ministers, mentioned in the scripture, and the people of God declared they
had, found the benefit of it. I could not challenge myself, at least at some
times, for known guile in the making of it. What I engaged to do, I was
resolved upon at the time. I did engage with much concern and solemnity; and
for some time after, I would have walked with much strictness: But though I
could not then discern where the blame lay, I have since been made to see it.
I. Being ignorant of the righteousness of God, I still went about to establish
a righteousness of my own, Romans x. 3. And though in words I renounced this, yet
indeed I sought righteousness and peace, not in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is
the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes, (Romans x. 4.)
but in my own covenants and engagements; so that I really put them in Christ's
room. 2. Whatever room I, in words, allowed Christ, as to forgiveness for by
gones, yet my peace and hope of it for the future, and so my trust, was in the
evenness of my own walk. I obtained not righteousness, because I sought it as
it were by the works of the law, Romans ix. 32. This neglect of Christ, and
shuffling my own covenents and obedience in his room, was evident; because
whenever I was challenged for sin, instead of recourse to his blood, I still
sought peace only in renewing my vows. 3. The consent I gave to the law, was
not from the reconcilement of my heart to its holiness, but merely, in
compliance with the constraint put upon me by my convictions. But in very deed
(Romans viii. 7.) the enmity against it still continued. And I would not have
made it my choice, if that had not forced me to it: so that I subjected not
myself to it. 4. I engaged to live a new life with an old heart, not being yet
made to see, that unless the tree is made good the fruit cannot be good, Matthew.
xii. 35.5. The eye was not single, Matthew. xix. 16. vi. 22. All I aimed at was
self, to be eased of convictions, and obtain peace from these racking
disquietments I was under. I had not the least concern for the Lord's glory,
provided I were safe. 6. In a word, I engaged before the Lord had thoroughly
engaged me. We may be wilwing in some sort, before the Lord has made us truly
willing. I. John iv. 10. The first real kindness begins on his side; and we are
never engaged to love till the Lord's kindness do draw us. The force of a
strait, by convictions, may overpower us into some pretensions of kindness;
thus it was with me. Willing I was to be saved from hell, and to have heaven,
under the general notion of a good place; but no not to be saved in God's way,
on his terms, and in order to these ends he proposes in the salvation of
sinner^.

10. This was no my only trouble at this time. Now I was engaged in the study
of metaphysics and natural theology, accustomed to subtle notions, and
tickled with them; whereupon Satan, in conjunction with the natural atheism of
my heart took occasion to cast me into racking disquietment about the great
truths of religion, more especially the being of a God. Thus, in the justics of
God, that wherein I delighted, I mean subtle and abstract notions, provad the
occasion of much perplexing difficulty to me. For, 1. Some seeming success in
my stadies, the first year I engaged in the study of philosophy, fostered the
natural conceit we all have of our own ability to know, and emboldened me to
proceed further than was meet. So true in that of the word, 1 Con vlii. 1.
Knowledge puffs up. Hereon the natural curi^^ity of my vain mind took a
liberty to enquire without fear into things too high, and made me promise
myself satisfaction about them, in and by my own enquiries: Job xi. 12. Voin
man would be wise, though be in like the wild asses's ^^lt. Thus he intrudes
into those things which he has not seen, Col. ii. 18. vainly past up by his
fleshly mind. 3. And hereon suffering a disappointment, and failing of success,
the natural atheism and enmity of my carnal mind, that rather inclines to
reject the things of God than our own darkness, begun, when puzzled, to
enquire, How can these things be! John iii. 9. Thus, Romans i. 2. pr^sessing
myself wise I became a feel. 4. Satan, that waits all advantages, finding me
thus caught in the thicket, plunged me deeper, by throwing in (Ephesians. vi. 6.)
fiery (...) of subtle arguings against the being of a God; whereby all was set
on a flame, and I so^^^^^^ cast into without convulsions.

11. This exercise about the being of God was much more disquieting than that
formerly mentioned. Then, there was only an unsettledness of mind, proceeding
from the selt want of evidence sufficient to quiet the (...) in that assurance
of the truth that was necessary to embo^^^^^ it without fear, in all its (...),
to have (...) to, had take rest in God. Now, there were contrary disquieting
arguments: Then I was only at that of the disciples, John xiv. 8. Lord, show us
the Father, and it suffices us: But now I was disturbed with the working of
the ruler if darkness, Ephesians. vi. 12. and high imaginations exalting themselves
against God, 2 Cor. x. 5.

12. Though the atheism and enmity of my heart against God were still unremoved
and great, yet the Lord suffered me not to yield, but made me dread and recoil
at the terrible conclusion aimed at by those arguings. For, 1. There remained
so much of that natural knowledge of a Deity, which God has made manifest even
in the heathens, that is, in their consciences, Romans i. 9. and there was so
much of strength added to it by the external evidence of this truth, by the
works of creation and providence, as made me recoil at the thoughts of that
horrible conclusion of the atheist, There is no God. 2. Being at the same time,
deeply affected with deep apprehensions of the shortness and uncertainty of a
present life, I dreaded to admit the conclusion, that I saw would shake the
foundations of any hope of relief for the future from the other side of time,
Psalm. xi. 3. If the foundations be destroyed, what has the righteous done?

13. In this strait, betwixt light that would not admit of a flat denial of the
being of a God, and atheism enflamed and strengthened by Satan's fiery darts, I
betook myself still to vain and selfish courses. My disturbance was from
reasonings, and I thought to relieve myself by my own reasonings. Nothing more,
did I foolishly think, can be requisite to establish my mind about this truth,
and for ever to quiet my mind in a firm assent to it, than to obtain
demonstrative arguments for the being of a God: Thus I thought by searching to
find out God, Job xi. 7. And like the Psalmist, when shaken about the
providence of God, Psalm. lxxiii. 16. I thought to know it. That is, by own
reasonings, I expected to obtain establishment in the truth, and an answer to
the objections urged against it.

14. Wherefore I seriously set myself to the search of such arguments; and I
found them; but found not that relief I expected: Psalm. lxxiii. 16. When I
thought to know this, it was too painful for me. For, 1. The most straitening
and forcible of those arguments, proceeding upon the absurdity of the contrary
conclusion with great evidence, would not allow of any thing to be said to the
argument, and so extorted an assent: But not enlightening the mind with any
satissying notions and discoveries of the (...) God, whom they obliged me to
own as existent, my poind was not quieted. For in things of any practical
(...), without some competent measure of light about for nature of things, the
soul requiring satisfaction, not only as to their reality, but their meetness
to answer those practical uses whereabout it is concerned, cannot rest without
some discoveries of this: John xiv. 5. Thomas said (...) him, Lord, we know not
whither thou go; and how can we know the way? 2. These arguments forced
indeed some assent in the time: But not dissolving contrary objections,
whenever the light of them was removed, and contrary objections came in view
again, I was entirely shaken, like him in Cicero, who read Plato's arguments
for the immortality of the soul, and said, When I re^d I assent, but I cannot
tell how: but so soon as I lay down the book, all this assent is gone. It is
faith alone that, as the word is, Heb. xi. I. reproves contrary arguings, and
plants in the soul an abiding light, that keeps the soul firm in its adherence
to truth. Thus, like the philosophers of old, I Cor. i. 21 In the wisdom of
God, by wisdom I knew not God.

15. Though I was thus entangled rather than extricated, by these selfish
shifts, yet my vain mind still followed these courses. For, I. What hitherto I
had sailed of, I expected I might find by some further progress in learning;
and therefore I applied myself vigorously that way. But any little progress I
made, made me still more sensible how far I was disappointed, and made me
experience the truth of this, that he that increases knowledge, increases
sorrow, Eccl. i. 2^. The further I proceeded, I still found the more
diffculties, and the less satisfaction. When this course could not avail, then
I spent my weary hours in vain wishes for some extraordinary discoveries: Luke
xvi. 20. Nay, but if one rise from the dead, they will believe.

16. Though I reached not the satisfaction I aimed at, yet I cannot but say
this exercise had some useful effects. I. It let me see, that I had need of
some further evidence and establishment about the truths of religion, than
hitherto I had either attained or wist how to attain. Thus I had got some view
of it before: Now I was more consirmed of. 2. My mind being sometimes more
quieted as to these truths in hearing of the word, than by all my arguments, I
was inclined to hope, this evidence I wanted might come from the Lord. 3. I was
beat somewhat from that towering opinion of my own knowledge and abilities to
know, that my first seeming success in in philosophy gave me, and brought to an
useful diffidence of my inability to reach satisfaction, even about natural
things, and solve objections that lay against truths, which yet upon clear
argument, I was forced to admit: Which afterward was of confiderable use to me.

17. But during this period of time, under ali these wreitlings and strugglings
betwixt growing light and sin, corruptions, as I grew in years, grew stronger
and stronger, took deeper root, and received an increase of strength by
occasional temptations, and new force from the weak resistance made to them by
these vain courses, Romans vii. 8, 9, 11. As the law came nearer, in its
spiritual meaning and extent, sin revived, and appeared more discernible in its
strength; and sin taking occasion by the commandment wrought in me inclinations
to all evil. Being fretted, not subdued, it grew stronger, till at length it
slew me.

18. Under this perplexity, I betook myself still to one or other of the
forementioned vain courses: Jer. ii. 36. I gadded about to change my way, sent
to Egypt, went to ^ssyria, yet could not they help me. But yet these exereises
and perolexitics had some intermissions, and then I turned remiss and careless:
Hos. vi. 4. My go^^ness, like the morning cloud and early dew, soon passed away.

19. However, by these means I was brought to a specious like form of religion.
For now, 1. I took some care to avoid those sins, whether secret or open, that
thwarted the light of my conscience most plainly. I not only obstained from
these evils, to which most, even of the soberer sort of students, were
srequently drawn over; but with a sort of resolution I kept at a distance from
the occasions of them. Thus I begun, 2 Pet. ii. 20. to escape the pollutions of
the world through the knowledge of the truth. 2. I was more exact and punctual
in attending duties, public, private, and secret, than heretofore, and that not
without some concern, at least at sometimes, as to my inward frame in them.
Thus I thought I kept his ordinances, Mal. ii. 14.3. When I was ensnared,
either into the commission of sin, or omission of duty, I was brought to a deep
sorrow; and for some time walked mournf lly before God, ibid. 4. Whereas I
always had a sort of awful regard for them that seared God, since ever I began
to be in the least awakened, now I begun to have a sort of liking and kindness
to them, and pleasure in their company and converse, even about matters of
religion. Thus light forced an approbation of them on my mind, and so to give
glory to God; their light so shining before me, Matthew. v. 16. that I could not
but take notice of them. 5. I had frequent tastes of the word of God; and the
powers of the world to come, Heb. vi. 5. which made me delight, in approaching
to God. And, 6. I got some things that looked like return of prayer, when,
under a sense of impotency, I betook myself to God by prayer. In any strait, I
found help so remarkable, that I could not but take notice of it. The Lord
hereby drew me gradually in to expect good in his way; and, though I was wrong
in the main, as it were encouraged the faintest beginnings of a look toward a
return. 1 Kings xxi. 19. And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite,
saying, See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me: Because he humbles
himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: But in his son's days
I will bring the evil upon his house.

20. Now, though by these means I got a name to live, yet really I was dead:
For, 1. The natural darkness still remained uncured. Some dawnings of light
were indeed begun, and some discoveries made of what formerly I had not known,
yet the power of darkness still remained, and the vail was not yet taken away,
nor were spiritual things seen in a true light, 2 Cor. iii. 14, 15. Ephesians. iv.
18. 2. The enmity of my mind against the law Compare Romans vil. 8. with Romans
vii. 12, 22.
, especially in some instances, remained in force; there was not a respect to
all God's commands, Psalm. cxix. 6. I had not yet a sight of the beauty of
holiness. Nor did I in my heart approve of the whole yoke of Christ's precepts,
as good and desirable. It was not that I delighted in holiness and conformity
to the law, at least in some instances, but that I was undone without it, that
made me aim at any sort of compliance. 3. I yet sought righteousness as it were
by the works of the law, Romans ix. 32. I was wholly legal in all I did, not
seeing the necessity, the security, the glory of the gospel method of
salvation, by seeking righteousness and strength in the Lord Christ alone, Romans
x. 4. Psalm. lxxi. 16.4. Self was the spring of all: My only aim was to be
saved, without any regard had to the glory of the Lord, or any enquiry made,
how it might be consistent with it to save one who had so deeply offended? In a
word, all my religion was constrained, violent, selfish, legal, and
anti-evangelical. These, not to mention other things, were still wrong.

Reflections upon the foregoing exercise.

IT will not be improper to review the preceding exercise, and offer two or
three observations.

1. The foregoing exercise affords me full confirmation of many of the truths
contested by the Pelagians and others, concerning man's inability to good, and
the corruption of his nature. When I read and hear their high swelling words of
vanity, in commendation of man, and in praise of his free will to good, and his
good inclinations; and when I hear specious like arguments offered for proof of
these notions, I have no reason to be shaken. Will they dispute me out of my
senses? May I not believe the word? Or mast I wrest and distort scriptures to
make places that appear unfavourable to free will, accord with these notions of
it which some advance? Sure I am, if they will not allow scripture to be its
own interpreter, it is safer, at least in these things that concern our own
natural state, which conscience may know, to admit experience to comment,
rather than reason proceeding upon abstract notions: And where scripture and
experience join, there we have the fullest confirmation of the truths that are
established in the mouth of two such witnesses; the last not only confirming,
but illustrating the testimony of the former. If they say that their hearts are
not so perverse and ill inclined, and that they find inclinations to good in
them, I cannot say so of mine: Yet by the way I must observe, that is their
practice they go seldom further, if so far as others, who agree with me in
owning their hearts so wicked, their corruptions so strong, their wills so
depraved, and set upon evil, that they can do nothing well pleasing to God: Now
surely, if matters are as they represent them, they are far to blame. As for
me, I find more solid truth in that one scripture, that tells us, that that the
heart is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, Jer. xvii. 9. than
in many volumes of idle antiscriptural notions, reared up on the subtle
arguings of men, whose eyes have never yet been opened to see the plagues of
their own hearts, and who therefore run out in asserting such an ability and
power, and inclination to good in man, as neither scripture, nor the experience
of such as have their eyes in the least measure opened, admits of. However, if
others will think that there are such good inclinations in them, I must quit my
part in them. Wosul experience convinces me, and obliges me to acknowledge, to
my own shame, that I never looked toward the Lord's way, save when he drew me,
Jer. xxxi. 18. I was as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; I never went longer
in it than the force lasted; I inclined to sit down, and sat indeed down at
every step -- no great sign I had any heart to the way! I never got up again,
but when the Lord's power was anew put forth. I all this while never went one
step but with a grudge, Genesis xix. 26. I frequently looked back to Sodom; I have
been as a backsliding heifer. I was grieved for what I left behind; my heart
clave to what my light had the greatest opposition to: Job xxiv. 13. Thus I was
of them that rebel against the light: I often refused where the command was
plainest; when I was brought into a strait, I betook myself rather to any shift
than to Christ; Prove. xxviii. 16. Sin bit me, and yet I loved it; my heart
deceived me often, and yet I trusted in it rather than God: Jer. xvii. 5, 7. God
dealt with me in a way of kindness, but when he spoke to me in my prosperity, I
would not hear: Isa. lvii. 17. He smote me and I went on frowardly. I never
parted with any sin till God beat and drove me from it, and hedged in my way.
Surely this looks like the heart deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, Jer. xvii. 9.

2. The foregoing exercise clears what a depth of deceitfulness is in the heart
of man. How many shifts has my heart used to elude the design of all those
strivings of the Lord's spirit with me? What strange shifts has the heart of
man, and how many are they! I have told many, but the one half is not told. All
these shifts respect but one point in religion. If one would undertake to give
an account but of those deceits, which are more noted, with respect to the
whole of his walk and way, how many volumes might be written! There is much
true divinity couched in that short scripture, Jer. xvii. 9. The heart is
deceitful above all things, who can know it? Psalm. xix. 12. Who can unaersland
his errors? When I upon a review mind so many, how many more might I have
noticed if I had observed them in the time, or soon after? and if so many may
be seen, how many secret, undiscernible, or at least undiscerned, deceits are
there?

3. How far may we go in religion, and yet come short? Many things I seemed to
have and do: Mark vi. 20. I did many things, and heard gladly; I was almost
persuaded to be a Christian, Acts xxvi. 28. I seemed to escape the pollutions
that are in the world by the knowledge of the truth, 2 Pet. ii. 20. I seemed
enlightened, and partaker of the heavenly gift, and got some tastes of the good
word of God, and the powers of the world to come, Heb. vi. 5. I underwent many
changes. and yet all the while was naught, defective as to the main: Many shall
seek to enter in, and shall not be able, Luke xiii. 24. Not every one that
says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of God, Matthew. vii. 21.

4. I cannot but look back with wonder, to the astonishing patience of God,
that suffered my manners (Acts xiii. 18.) so long, and the steadiness he shows
in pursuing his work, notwithstanding many provocations to defist, still
working for his name's sake, Ezekiel. xx. 14. All the creation could not have
a^forded so much patience. The disciples of Christ would have called for fire
from heaven, Luke ix. 54. Yea Moses, the meekest man on earth, would have found
more to irritate him here, than at Meribah, Number. xx. 13. Glory to God, that we
have to do with him, and not with man. His ways are not our ways. Nor his
thoughts ours. But as the heavens are high above the earth, so are his ways and
thoughts of mercy above ours, Isa. lv. 8.

5. I must bear witness to the rationalness of God's way. For, 1. These things
he put me under concern about, deliverance from wrath, eternal salvation, and
security about them, were such as my own reason, upon the best attention, could
not but own worthy of the utmost and first concern. He did not call me to vex
myself about-vanity, and the things of no importance. 2. The way he dealt with
me in, was not destructive to the nature of my faculties, but improved them. He
enlightened my eyes to see what he would have me to do; and he forced, not my
will, but swayed it in a way suitable to its nature, to a compliance, so far as
I went. This was not to force, but gently to bend the will, to these things
that really were proper for it to incline to. 3. He always observed the true
order of the saculties. He swayed the will, so far as it went in compliance
with his work, by sending forth his light into the mind, that in the true order
of things, should guide the understanding. 4. He carried me on to
consideration. He did not seek, as it were, to entangle the affections, and by
them carry my mind away in a hurry, as sin and Satan are wont to do, who guide
sinners, as the Philistines did Sampson, they first put out theireyes, and then
make them grind in their mill. 5. The Lord never obliged me to part with any
way, any sin, or refuge I betook myself to, till he had let. me see, that it
was not only against my duty, but my true interest. 6. So far as I complied
with his call, I cannot say that his way was fruitless, or that he was a barren
wilderness, or a land of drought, Jer. ii. 31. The meanest and most feckless
piece of comphance wanted not its reward; Mal. i. 10. Who is there among you
that would shut the doors for naught: Neither do ye kindle fire on mine altar
for naught. Thus the Lord's work was power, not force. He drew, but it was with
the cords of love, and bands of a man, Hos. xi. 4. He bid me quit many things,
but they were vain things that were no bread, Isa. lv. 2. Remember this and
show yourselves men: Bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors O house of
Israel, are not my ways equal? Are not your ways unequal? Yet ye say, the way
of the Lord is not equal, Ezekiel xviii. 25.

6. Though it was congruous to reason, yet it was a work far above the power of
nature. I cannot ascribe its rise or progress to myself; for it was what I
sought not, I thought not of, I liked not, yea, I hated it, I seared, I
avoided, I shifted it; and when all this would not do, I opposed it. For I was
of those that rebel against the light, Job xxiv. 13. I cannot ascribe it to any
outward means. There are many parts of it which they did not reach. The most
feasible failed; the weakest wrought the effect. Neither strong nor weak, had
always the like effect. But the work was carried on by a secret indiscernible
power of him who is like the wind blowing where it lists, John iii. 8. The
work bears an impress of God in all its steps: the word that awakened me, was
the voice of him that makes the dead to hear, John v. 25. that calls things
that are not as if they were, Romans iv. 17. The light that shone, was the candle
of the Lord searching, yea, piercing unto the hidden parts of the belly, Frov.
xx. 27. tracing a deceitful and unsearchable heart into all its turnings and
windings, Jer. xvii. 10. The work was that of one who is every where, and who
knows every thing, and is of one mind, Job xxiii. 13. and so not to be turned;
who will not faint, nor be discouraged, till he have brought forth judgment
unto victory. The work is uniform, though variously carried on, through many
interruptions, over many oppositions, for a long tract of time, by means
seemingly weak, improper and contrary, suitable only for him whose ways are in
the sea, and whose paths are in the great waters, and whose footsteps are not
known. In a word, it was a bush burning and not consumed, only by the presence
of God, Exodus iii. 3. It was a spark in the midst of an ocean, maintained,
notwithstanding floods continually poured on it to extinguish it. This flame
was maintained by oil secredy conveyed into it, Psalm. cxviii. 23. This is the
doing of the Lord, and it is wondrous it our eyes.

PART III. Containing an account of the progress of the Lord's work, for the
space of about three years ensuing, from August 1696, to June 1699: The
dreadful state I was at last brought to, with my outgate, and the state of
matters with me for some time after this.
CHAP. I. Giving an account of the progress of my convictions, temptations, and
vain reliofs, from the time I went to the Weymss', till I was at the last
brought to the utmost extremity.
1. WHEN I had studied philosophy three years, being tickled with it, and
somewhat puffed up with what progress I had made, and designed and expected to
make -- (though I must own that still as knowledge incerased, self-conceit
decreased; and I apprehended I knew more the first year than ever I thought I
knew afterward) -- being thus prepared, I designed to go abroad, and improve
myself further; to which also was advised. But two things broke this project;
my mother would not consent, and the former exercise having brought me into
bondage through fear of death, I was afraid to run the hazards I must run of my
life, so long as I was in so unsettled a case as to my soul's state. Wherefore,
upon the motion of some friends, I consented rather to engage chaplain to a
family for some time.

2. Accordingly, August 1696, I went to the Weymss'. When I came here, a
stranger amongst strangers, and persons of considerable quality, by my natural
bashfuln ss, the consoriousoefs of my auditors, the publieness of the
appearances I was obliged to make, to which formerly I had not been accustomed,
my want of breeding, and the like. I was, for a time, in a very great strait,
forced to retiredness, and to petition for help how to carry it: And though it
was my own, not the Lord's honor I designed, and was concerned for, yet he
that hears the cry of the ravens, Job xxxviii. 4^. Psalm. cxlvii. 9. and would
not overlook Ahab's h^^riliation, I Kings xxi. 29. and the Ninevites'
repentance, Jonah iii. 10. did not fail me in my straits; but helped, so far as
was necessary, to maintain the respect due to the station I was in, and to
obtain kindness.

3. During the first half year or so that I was here, I was somewhat diverted
from my main work, being obliged to study what was necessary for my
accomplishment for converse in the world. But still I held on, and the more
difficulty I met with, I kept the closser to the form of religion I had taken
up. Besides, now my station called and obliged me to somewhat more. But leaving
this, which is only introductory, I proceed to that which is mainly and only
designed in this narrative.

4. I had not long been here, when I was often necessarily, and frequently
without sufficient necessity, engaged in debates about the truth of religion,
the divinity of the scriptures, and the most important doctrines delivered in
them, whereby I was drawn to read the writings of deists, and other enemies to
religion, that I might be acquaint with the arguments, whereby those I
sometimes had occasion to dispute with, opposed the truth. As to the issue of
those arguings, with respect to others, I shall here wave it, because others
are concerned in it; only I may say, I found it true, (Tit. iii. 9.) that
fool^sh questions, and genealogies, and content on^, and strivings about the
law, are unpres^^able and vain, 2 Timothy iii. 13. For evil men and seducers was
worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. 2 Timothy ii. 16. And profane and
vain babblings do increase unto more ungodliness. And to my sad experience I
found, 2 Timothy ii. 17. that their words does eat as does a canker, or gangrene.
It is of an infectious and contagious nature; and therefore it is safest to
shun, avoid them, and follow the wise man's advice, Prove. ix. 6. to forsake the
foolish and live; Prove. xiv. 6. and depart from a foolish man when we perceive
not in him the lips of knowledge; Prove. xix. 27. and cease from the instruction
that causes to err from the words of knowledge.

5. This was of very dangerous consequence to me, and could not prove otherwise
to one in my case. For, I. I was not rooted and grounded in the truth, Ephesians.
iii. 17. Col. ii. 7. being neither notionally instructed in the grounds whereon
the scripture is received, nor acquainted practically with its power, and so
was naked of that armor of light, Romans xiii. 11. that is necessary toward a
conflict with such enemies. 2. The power of that enmity and darkness, Col. i.
13. which incline the vain mind of man to reject and carp at the truths of God
as foolishness, I Cor. ii. 14. still remained unsubdued; and so I was, Ephesians. iv.
14. as the children, who are tossed to and fro by every wind of doctrine. 3.
The objections I found started were many, struck at the foundations, I John ii.
9. were new and surprising to one who was so unsettled, and were dressed up by
the slight and cunning craftiness of them who lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. iv.
14. 4. I was not acquaint with that watchful^ess, vigilance, and humble
sobriety, that was necessary to prevent Satan's gaining any advantage. 5.
Hereon Satan finding so fair an occasion, slipped it not; ^or he goes about, I
Pet. v. 8. seeking such seasons; and finding things thus, he improved it to my
great disquietment.

6. The adversary finding all things thus prepared, set on me furiously, and
employed many against me -- 1. He wrought up the natural atheism, darkness, and
enmity of my heart, to vent itsel^ against the truths of religion, in foolish
enquiries, Is it so? Psalm. lxxiii. 11. How can these things be? John iii. 9.
And what authority have thou, since thou requirest such things? 2. He employed
some who had all advantages, Matthew. xi. 28. and were the m^st likely to
prevail; persons smooth, sober, and who opposed the truth with rational
argun^^ts: such sometimes the devil makes use of, who seem themselves not far
from the kingdom of God, Mark xii. 34. like the scribe who answered and
questioned our Lord civilly; whose words are s^^^ther than butter, while war is
in their b^art, Psalm. lv. 21. And these are usually more prevalent: for with
their fair speeches they deceine the bearts of the simple, Romans xvi. 18.3. He
himself acted sometimes the subtle serpent, putting and suggesting sub^ile
queries, Genesis iii. 1. Has God said so? And sometimes he threw in ^^^ry darts
to inflame and disorder me, Ephesians. vi. 11, 12, 16. Thus I found, when I was
alo^e, when I was in prayer, and most serious, hellish oaths, and grievous
blasphemous suggestions cas^ forcibly into my mind, which made me tremble. No
wonder he should deal so with me, when he impudently sugg^^ed to him in whem be
bad nothing, John xiv. 30. such blasphemons proposals, as that of salling down
to warship him, Matthew. iv. 9.

7. By all these ways he assaulted me, and I was grievously tossed about all
the truths of religion -- 1. The being of God was again brought in question:
The enemy said daily, Where is thy God? Psalm. xlii. 3, 10. And the atheism of
my heart said also, There is no God; and w^^ is the Lord? Psalm. xiv. 1. Exodus
v. 2. I was assulted about his providence, and all the disorders of the world
were urged, to my great disturbance. Psalm. lxxiii. 2, 13. As for me, my feet
were almust gone: My steps had well nigh slipped. The ungodly prosper in the
world, they in^rease in riches, and therefore his people return hither. Waters
of a full cup are wrung out to them: And they say, How does God know? And is
there knowledge in the Most High? 3. I was assaulted as to the truth of the
word, and many ways troubled about it: when I read, when I thought about it, I
was plied hard with grievous suggestions. Sometimes the want of sufficient
evidence was complained of; John vi. 30. What sign ^^^west thou then, that we
may see and believes ^hoe? What lost thou work? At other times it was blamed,
one while of obseurity, John x. 24. How l^ng do thou make us doubt? If thou
be the Christ, tell (...) plainly; and anon another suggestion was clapped in a^
gai^^ some passages as hard -- This is an hard saying, w^^ can hear it? John
vi. 60. When this ro^^ not, it wa^ accused in some places of plain blasphemy --
He ha^^ spoken blasphemy -- Ye have heard his blasphemy, Matthew. xx^i. 65. It
was blamed as contradictory to i^sell, John. xii. 34. We ^^ve heard (...) of
the l^w, that Christ abi^^th for ever; and ho^ j^yest thou, The So^ of man m^st
be l^st up? In pro^ises we^^ called in question, 2 Pet. iii. 4. Where is the
promise of his coming? As were also i^^ threats, Faek. xii. 22. Every vision
fails. Jer. xvii. 1^. Behold they say unto me, Where is the word of the Lord?
Let it come (...). Thus was I daily perplexed, in so much that it was a terror
sometimes, for fear of these suggestions, to look into the Bible. 4. Tho
mystery of the po^pel was partioularly set upon, and represented as
soolishness, I Co^. i. 22. as setting up new gods, Acts xvii. 18; and of; was I
put to answer, John iii. 9. H^w can these things be?

8. The subtle enemy who had often solicited me to high thoughts of myself,
now when he found it for his purpose, ^sged upon me me^n thoughts of myself,
and pressed to 2 bastard sort of humility: He often whispered me in the ear,
It Is vain for you to expect to rid yourself of these difficulties, when so many
learned men, who have studied the point with so much ca^e, and who were far
more capable to discern the truth, cannot reach satisfaction, but have rejected
them, John vii. 48, 49. Have any of the rulers or the Pharisees believed on
him? But this people who k^^weth not the law, are cursed.

9. By this I was brought into grievous perplexity, and many sad toffings,
Psalm. xlii. 3. My tears have been my neat day and night, while they continually
say unto m^ Where is thy God? But still I tried wrong courses -- 1. ^ attempted
by own reasoning ^^^relieve myself, Psalm. lxxiii. 6. I thought to know this. 2.
When this failed, I bought, I read books wri^ten about the truth of religion,
Job viii. 8, 9, etc. This indeed, had it been ^ept in its own pla^^, was
allowable and uselu^, ^ccl. xii. 12. But I expede^h more than I had reason to
look for, and as I used it, this was only the s^it of unbelief, and a vain
coerse running to As^^r, sending to Egypt. ^. I wished for vision, voices, or
some extraordinary course, L^ke xvi. 30. Nay, b^t if one rise from the dead
they will believe. 4. When these sailed, with the sluggard I sat down
discouraged, Eccl. iv. 5. The fool foldeth his hands together, and ^ateth his
^wn f^esh. 5. I sometimes betook myself to prayer; but herein I desiderated
success, not seeking in the right way, nor to right ends, James iv. 3.

10. But all these ways failed me, Eccl. vii. 23, 24. I (...) co^^sel in my
sc^l, having sorrew in my heart daily. I said I will be wise, but it was far
from (...). That which is far off and exceeding deep, who can find it (...) 1.
As to my own reasonings, they avail not against him who esteems iron as straw,
and brass as r^ten wood. Psalm. lxxiii. 16. When I thought to know is, it was
too painful: It was labor in mine eyes. 2. As for books, beside they satisfied
not as to these things they mentioned, many of my scruples were overlooked by
them, so they proved physicians of no value, Job vi. 25. How profitable are
right words? But what does your arguings reprove? 3. As to extraordinary
expectations, God justly rejected them, Luke xvi. 31. They have Mos^^ and the
prophets, and if they will not believe them, neither would they believe though
one should rise from the dead. 4. My sloth still increased my trouble; that
foolish poring fretted my spirit, slew me; Prove. xxi. 25. The desire of the
stuggard hilleth him, because his bauds refuse to work.

11. I had quite sunk under the weight of this trouble, and been swallowed up
of sorrow, and ^nded in despair, if its force had not been somewhat ab^^^d by
occasional considerations, that were by the good hand of God, sometimes one
way, sometimes another, brought to my mind: I. When the hellish conclusions at
which all these temptations aimed, the renouncing of religion, rejecting the
scriptures, etc. were urged, it was often seasonably suggested, John vi. 68. To
whom shall we go? Then has? the words of eternal life. The Lord powerfully
convinced, and kept the conviction strong on my mind, that at what time I
parted with revelation, I behoved to give up with all prospect of certainty or
satisfaction about eternal life. What deists told me, of the demonstrations of
a future happiness built only upon nature's light, had no weight with me;
because I had tried those long ago, and found them to my apprehention
inconcludent: and had they been concludent, I was never a whit the nearer
satisfaction. To tell me of such a state, without any account of its nature, or
the terms whereon it is attainable, was all on^ as if nothing had been said
about it: This created still a dread of the conclusion in my mind; and still
when I was solicited to quit the scriptures, I returned, To whom shall I go to
find the words of eternal life? 2. Upon a due observation of those who were
truly religious, I could not but look on them (though their real worth I did
not yet discern) as the better part of mankind; and the Lord created a dread in
my soul of conclusions, that imported the charge of a lie in a matter of the
greatest importance against the better part of mankind, Psalm. lxxiii. 15. If I
should speak thus, I would offend against the generation of thy children. 3.
The Lord opened mine eyes to see the remarkable folly of those who abandoned
rovealed religion: Not to mention the impious lives of the generality, I saw
the soberer sort guilty of unaccountable folly. The scripture tells them
plainly, that if they have a mind to be satisfied as to the truth of these
pretensions, they must walk in the way of its procepts to find it, John vii.
17. If any man will do his will, he shall know this doctrine if it is of God,
or if I speak of myself. But they walk in a direct contradiction to its
precepts, and yet complain of the want of evidence, while they refuse to try
that way wherein only it is to be found. Again, some sober and learned, and
otherwise inquisitive persons own, that if we are either cut off from hopen, or
left to uncertainty about a future state of happiness, we are miserable: -- and
that they themselves are yet uncertain. While after all this has been by them
confessed, and by some to myself, I saw them either at little or no pains to be
satisfied, Prove. xiv. 6. The scorn^r seeks wisdom and finds it not; yea, I
found this sort of persons much more eager in searching after what might
strengthen their doubts, than what might satisfy them: This smelled rank of a
hatred of light. Now I thought it was not safe to sollow those whom I faw so
evidently foolish, and who did so plainly proclaim their folly, Prove. xxviii.
5. Evil ^^^n understand not judgment: But they that seek the Lord understand
all things. This had that weight with me, that I now ceased to wonder that such
were unsatisfied about the truth of religion, and that there was no ground of
doubting its truth because they are unatisfied. 4. The shining evidence of the
power of religion, in the lives, but more especially in the deaths of the
martyrs, of whom I had formerly read of, stayed me as to this, that there in a
reality in religion, when I was beat from all other holds: Heb. xi. 33. They
were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection. Here I behoved to own the finger of God, especially when I
considered their numbers, their quality, and all circumstances. 5. The known
instances of the power of religion in children in their tender years, was of
great use sometimes, and appeared of great weight: it checked the force of
temptations that drove me to doubt of the reality of religion, Psalm. viii. 2.
Thus out of the mouth of babes and sucklings the Lord ordained strength, and in
sone measure stilled the enemy and the avenger. 6. The sensible and violent
opposition I found Satan making to the scriptures in all the forementioned
ways, was often staying, and persuaded me in some measure, that there behoved to
be a reality in religion; und I could not see what could induce him thus to
oppose it, if it were a cheat, Matthew. xii. 26. Is Satan divided? 7. I got
frequent touches in a way of conviction, Heb. iv. 12. and thus sinding the
power and piercing virtue of the word, making manifest the secrets of my heart,
I was forced to fall down and own God to be in it of a truth, 1 Cor. xiv. 25.8.
Satan sometimes departed and left me for a season, Luke iv. 13 and then I had
some intermission of my sore trouble. 9. I found a secret hope begot and
cherished, I could not tell how, at some seasons, even amidst the violence of
temptations, that I should be satisfied, and that I should yet have good ^^^se
to praist God, Psalm. xlii. 5.8, 11, and that what I knew not now, I should know
hereafter, John xiii. 7. which was strengthened by the consideration of what
others had met with, who had been trysted with temptations that were some way
like mine: Albeit, I doubted, if ever, in all respects, any had been so
molested as I, and if there was any sorrow like unto mine, Lam. i. 12. Yea,
sometimes I was made to hope that Satan's raging foreboded that his time was
but short, Rev. xii. 12.

12. As by these and the like means, the force of the temptation was somewhat
broken, so I was encouraged to several things, which I have reason to own God
was kind to me in holding me to them -- 1. Hereby I was engaged to hold on, in
an attendance with more concern in duties of religion, public, private, and
secret; and so to wait at wisdom's door post, Prove. viii. 34. which afterward
I found the advantage of. 2. Hereby I was enabled to conceal all my own straits
from others, who thereby might either have been stumbled or hardened in their
evil way: I was unwilling others should know any thing that might disgust them
at religion, 2 Samuel i. 22. Tell it not in Gath, -- lest the daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph. In converse with such as were shaken, I still
endeavored to stand for the truth, as if I had been under no doubt about it;
and I must own, that while I did so, the Lord often countenanced me, and
satissied me as to what I had formerly been disquieted about: How good a master
is God! A word spoken for him is not lost; not will he suffer the least service
to pass unrewarded: A heathen Cyrus must have his hire; and so must
Nebuchadnezzar, Ezekiel. xxix. 19.

13. Before I leave this, I must observe some things which the Lord taught me
by this exercise. 1. I hereby learned the danger and vanity of reasoning with
Satan: When I began to answer him with my own reasonings, he had still great
advantage, 1 Pet. v. 9.; he easily evaded all my arguments, and easily repelled
my answers, and enforced his suggestions, James iv. 7.3. and when his
suggestions were to be maintained in point of arguments, he injected them with
that impudent violence that I was not able to stand against, Matthew. iv. 10, 11.
Our safest course is to resist, and to hold at a distance, to avoid communing
with him, Jude 9. 2. I must observe likewise the wise providence of God: that
the greatest difficulties that lie against religion are hid from atheists. All
the objections I met with in their writings, were not near so subtle, as those
which were often suggested to me: The reason of it, from the nature of the
thing, is obvious; such persons take not a near-hand view of religion; and
while persons stand at a distance, neither are the difficulties that attend it,
nor the advantages of it, discerned. Again, Satan finding all things quiet with
them, keeps all so; and finding that they are ensnared, he uses not force, Lake
xi. 21. It is where he is in danger of losing a person, that he uses his utmost
efforts: when Christ is ready to cast him out, then he rages and tears poor
souls, Matthew. ix. 29. Besides, the Lord in his infinite wisdom permits not all
these hellish subtilities to be published, in tenderness to the says of the
weak. He that sets bounds to the raging of the sea, and says, Hitherto shall
thou come, and hoar shall thy proud waves be stayed. Job xxxviii. 11. keeps
Satan under chains, and he cannot step beyond his permission, Rev. xx. 1.

14. This exercise had sundry effects upon me -- 1. The fears I was brought
under fixed a deeper sense of my frailty in general on me, and that I was but a
man, Psalm. ix. 20. Put them in fear, that the nations may know themselves to be
but men. Selab. 2. Hereby the Lord withheld me from my vain projects about
learning. Now I was so far from expecting, as some time I had done, that I
feared I should fall short of what was absolutely needful to my own well being,
Eccl. vii. 23. I said I will be wise, but it was far from me. 3. Whereas I was
educate with an eye to the ministry, and aimed that way; now I came to see the
difficulty, and repent my rash intentions; and laid down a resolution to look
no more that way, unless the Lord satisfied me fully about those truths whereof
I now doubted. I could not without horror think of speaking to others what I
believed not myself, 2 Cor. iv. 13. 4. My bondage through fear of death was
increased, and grew stronger, Heb. ii. 15.5. I was urged to somewhat of more
closeness in the performance of duty; though often I was urged to give it over
as vain, yet I still resolved to hold on there. 6. I was still more and more
confirmed in the necessity of further evidence for the truth of religion, than
I either had attained or knew how to attain.

15. All this while I was under sundry inconveniences that increased my
trouble, and gave advantage to my corruptions. 1. Most of the converse I had,
was with such as helped forward my trouble. I was a companion of fools, and so
^igh to destrustion. For he that well w^^ the wise shell be wise, but a
companion of souls shall be destroyed, Prove. xiii. 10. Again, 2. I had no
friend to whom I could with freedom, and any prospect of satisfaction, impart
my mind: Eccl. iv. 10. We to him that is alone when he falls; for be bath not
another to help him up. 3. Endeavors to conceal entirely my concern and
trouble, broke me. When I hept silence, my hones, waxed old. Psalm. xxxii. 3.4.
I was laid aside from my studies, and had no dirersion, nor could follow any. I
had heart to nothing, could not read, unless that sometimes I read the
scriptures, or some other practical book. Unless when there was an intermission
of my trouble, for near a year and a half I read very little; and this slothful
pos tare laid me open to temptation, and made corruptions grow stronger, Prove.
xxiv. 30, 31. I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the
^an void of understanding, and ^o, it was all grown over with thorns, and
nettles had cov^red the face thereof. And the slo^e wall thereof was broken
down.

16. Hereupon my corruption took vent several ways -- 1. In vain and slothful
desires, Prove. xiii. 4. I desired and had not 2. In foolish contrivances and
searches, how to ease my smart, Psalm. lxxvii. 6. I commened w^^h mine own heart
upon my bed, and my spirit made diligent search, but without a due eye to the
Lord. 3. I spent my time in foolish complaints that dispirited mo; I complained
and my spitit was overwhelmed, Psalm. lxxvii. 3.4. I was sometimes at cursing
the day of my birth, wishing that I had never been born, or that I had died
as soon as born: Job iii. 11. Why died I not from the womb? Why died I not when
I came out of the belly? 5. I wished often that I had been in other
circumstances, and that I had been bred to the plough, or some such employment,
and that I might have in the desert a cottage, Jor. iii. 11. a place of way
faring men, where I might give myself to continual grief. 6. My spirit
sometimes rose in quarrellings against God, Psalm. lxxvii. 3. I thought on God
and was troubled. I said, wherefore do I cry, and thou ^^st not hear me? Job
xxx. 20. And frequently I was not far from that, Will thou always be to me as a
liar, and waters that fail? Jer. xv. 18.

17. After I had thus-wearied myself, after the edge and violence of the
temptations above mentioned was, by the formerly narrated considerations,
blunted and somewhat broke rather than removed, and I eased by Satan's
departure for a season, I inclined to rest; and Satan hereon finding matters
prepared for an assanlt, made fresh attempts in another, and no less
disquieting manner: Matthew. vii. 12, 43, 44. When the unclean spirit is gone our
of a he walks through dry places seeking rest and finding none. Then he
says, I will return to my house from whence I came out; and when he comes, he
finds it empty, swept and garnished. Then goes he and takes with him seven
other spirits, more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: And
the last state of that man is worse than the first.

The devil cannot be at rest, where he has no mischief to do to men. The devil
so leaves none but he will be attempting to come unto them again; and he
ordinarily succeeds, where Christ has not prepossessed the soul: All other
reformation proves bot a sweeping and a garnishing, while the soul is empty of
Christ. It may be swept from the filth of flagitious sins, and garnished with
the paint of religion, or some habits of moral virtue: But none of these will
keep out the devil. Thus I found it to my cost: For, 1. Satan finding my soul,
after all my sad tossings, empty of Christ, returned. 2. And my soul being like
the vineyard of the sluggard, Prove. xxiv. 31. by sloth, detenceless, without
its stone wall, he easily found opportunity to sow tares, and while I slept, to
cultivate the thorns and netties, which naturally grow there. 3. It was no hard
matter to persuade one so wearied, Genesis xlix. 15. that rest was good; and that
there was a lion in the way, Prove. xxii. 13. And, 4. Having thus possession and
quiet abode, with his seven other spirits, my own corruptions, he quickly made
my last state worse than my first. My enemies grow strong and lively, Psalm.
xxxviii. 19.; my corruptions began vigorously to exert themselves.

18. Hereon the Lord minding his own work, brought, by the ministry of the
word, the law in it s spiritual meaning hearer. And then, I. Sin revived and I
died, Romans vii. 9. I found more discernibly the stirrings of corruptions, ibid
8. Yea, 2. Sin taking occasion from the commandment, and being fretted by the
light let into my soul from the word, it wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence. Lusts of all sort, self, sloth, formality, etc. strove to
maintain their own place. 3. Hereby I was plunged in. to deeper guilt, Psalm.
xxxviii. 4. mine iniquities went over my head. And, 4. Hereby my challenges
were sharpened, and I found no rest in my bones, ver. 3. for sins that I had
done.

19. Under this distress, I still, as formerly, sought to other physicians,
rather than to the Lord. For, 1. Having now, by the knowledge of the truth,
escaped the pollutions of the world, 2 Pet, ii. 20. my exercise was much about
the more secret actings of sin, and its working in the heart; and as to these,
I sometimes used extenuations and excuses, taken from the strength of the
temptations I lay under, and other considerations of that sort; and sometimes
this was done not without secret reflections on God. This was Adam's way -- The
woman thou gave me to be with me, she gave me and I did eat, Genesis iii. 12.2.
Sometimes after my engagements and vows, and breaches of them, when I found
conscience disturb me, I begun to enquire whether the things were sin, and
endeavored to persuade myself, that some which were most disturbing were not,
Prove. xx. 25. Thus, after vows I made enquiry. 3. I, at last, when all these
courses failed, again said, I will not transgress; and I made new vows and
rosolutions, accompanied with sorrow for my former breaches, and solemnly bound
myself against my sins, those that predomined; Exodus x. 16.17. Then Pharaoh
called for Moses and Aaron in haste, and said, I have sinned against the Lord
your God, and against you. Now therefore forgive I pray thee my sin only this
once, etc. 4. I set apart time for fasting and prayer in secret; and November
23, 1697, on a time set apart for prayer, I drew up a short account of my
treacherous dealing with God from my youth up, and solemnly bound myself to God
to walk in his ways; and when my own heart told me, that I could not serve the
Lord, I said, Nay, but I will serve the Lord, Josh. xxiv. 21.

20. But all these proved physicians of no value. For I sound, 1. That they
were not able to keep me longer, than till a temptation came in my way from
fin. Whenever this appeared, corruption, that had been so far from being really
weakened by all those inventions, that it really grew in strength, broke down
all that I had set in its way, Jer. ii. 20. Of old time I have broken my yoke,
and burst my bands; and thou said, I will not transgress: When upon every
green tree thou wanderest playing the har^ot. 2. I found these vain ways. I
took to smother convictions, were not able to procure me peace, but really
increased my inward disquietment, and wasted my spirit, Psalm. xxxiii. 3. When I
kept silence (that is, when I sinfully endeavored to suppress my guilt and
trouble) my bones waxed old, through my roaring all day long. 3. The Lord in
mercy gave me no rest in any of these inventions, but suffered me to weary
myself in seeking my lovers, that I might at length betake myself to him. For
so long as I followed these ways. Day and night his hand lay heavy upon me: My
moisture was turned into the drought of summer, Psalm. xxxii. 4.

21. Though hitherto I failed of a right issue, yet I was carried a great
length in compliance with convictions. I kept myself from open pollutions, I
was careful in duties of worship, yea further, I was much in secret, I received
the word with joy. I was often challenged for secret pride, unbelief, and other
heart spiritual evils, and as to the knowledge of them was considerably
enlightend. I fasted, prayed, mourned in secret. I resolved and strove against
sin, even my peculiar sins that I loved best. Thus I had with others a name to
live, Rev. iii. I. and tock up a form of religion, 2 Timothy iii. 5.

22. Yet for all this, I was a stranger to its power; which the following
evidences sufficiently manifest: for whatever lengths I went, yet, is it, I was a
stranger to the glorious and blessed relict, through the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ: Not that I had not some notions of this; for I
prosessed to embrace it: But really. I was in the dark, as to its glotious
efficacy, tendency, and design. I was ignorant of the righteousness of God all
the while, Romans x. 3. 2dly, Still in all this the eye was not single, Marth.
vi. 22. It was only the saving of myself, without any eye to the Lord's glory,
I designed. Romans i^. 31. 3dly, It was still by some righteousness of my own, in
whole or part, that I sought relief. No wonder peace was unstable, that stood
on so weak a foundation. 4thly, Though I was, by the force of convictions,
brought to part with my beloved sins, or consent to their destruction; yet it
was neither without reluctance, or without some secret res^ve. It was like
Pharaoh's consent in the like case, when his servants persuaded him of the
danger of his persisting in his sin, Exodus x. 3. Moses and Aaron were brought
back again to Pharaoh: And he said unto them, Go serve the Lord your God. But
who are they that shall go? 5thly, My heart was utterly averse from
spirituality. Sometimes, through the force of convictions, I was indeed brought
for some time to aim at getting my mind fixed upon heavenly things, and kept on
the thoughts of them: But my heart being yet carnal, I wearied of this hent,
and of this forcible religion. And it was intolerable to think of being always
spiritual, Romans xiii. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, is not subject
to the law of God, nor can it indeed be.

23. By these means I was at last brought to an extremity: For, is, My 'sins
were set in order before me,' Psalm. l. 21. Innumerable evils compassed me
about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look
up. They are more than the hairs upon my head, therefore my heart fails me,
Psalm, xl. 12. 2dly, They were set in order in the dreadfulness of their nature
and aggravations, and all shists, extenuations, pleas and defenses, were
rejected, and my mouth stopped before God, Romans iii. 19. 3dly, All the vain
ways I had taken for my relief; baffled my expectation, and increased my pain;
they were the staff of a broken reed, Isa. xxxvi. 6. they pierced my arm, when
I essayed to lean on them, and I was ashamed, and even c^sea^ded, that I had
hoped, Job vi. 20. 4thly, The wrath of God was dropped into my soul, and the
poison of his arrows drunk up my spirits, Job vi. 4. 5thly, I was as yet
unsanctified, as to the truths of religion, and mine enemies often told me, that
even in God there was no succor for me, Psalm. iii. 2. Yea, 6thly, At sometimes
Satan, to entangle me more, assaulted all the traths of religon at once, and
then I was dreadfully confounded, when the Lord commanded that mine enemies
should be round about me. And they compassed me about like bees, Psalm. cxviii
11.12. 7thly, All ways I took to bear down my corruptions, proved of no avail:
For' fin revived and I died,' yea, taking occasion by the commandment, it slew
me, Romans vii. 9, 11.

24. By the extre nity of this anguish I was, for some time, about the close of
1697, and beginning of School, dreadfully cast down. I was weary of my life. Often
did I use Job's words, I loath it, I would not live always, Job vi. 16. And yet
I was afraid to die: I had no rest, my sore run in the night, and and ceased
not in the day, Psalm. lxxvii 2. At night I wished for day; and in the day. I
wished for night, Deuteronomy. xxviii. 66 67. I said, My couch shall confort me, Job
vi. 13. But then darkness was as the shadow of death, Job. x. 21. When I was in
this case, I was ^ft brought (...) the brink of despair. He sn^ed me with
bisterness, he made me drunk with wormwood. Lam. iii. 10, 16, 17, 18, 1^, 20.
He broke all my teeth with gravel stones; he covered me with athes. He removed
my soul far from peace: I forg^t prosperity. And I said, My strength and my
hone is perithed from the Lord; remembering mine as^licton and my misery, the
wormwood and the gall. My soul and them still in remembrance, and was bowed in
(...). N^w I was made to think it a wonder, that I was not consemed; and though
i dreaded destruction from the A^mi^ety, yet I could not hat justi^y him, if he
had destroyed me! -- Righteous is the Lord, for I have rebelled, ^^n. i. 18. I
was made to fear that the Lord would make me a Magor-^^ss^bib, a terior to
myself, and all round about, Jer. xx. 41; (...) that he would make some
dreadful discovery of my wickedness, that would make me a reproach to religion,
and give the enemies advantage, which put me upon the Psalmist's prayer, Psalm.
xxxix. 8 Deliver me from all my transgressions, make me not the reproach of the
foolish. I was made to wonder, that I was not already cut off. And indeed this
was sometimes reviving, Lam. iii. 20, 21. It is of the Lord's mercies that we
are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. This I recall to my mind,
therefore have I hope. But this hope was easily clouded. It amounted to no more
than this, Who can tell but he may be gracious? 2 Samuel xii. 22. And to this my
fearsul heart suggested the greatness of my sins, as what were above the reach
of pardoning mercy. And Satan daily urged me to give over, and take some
desperate course, to say, 'There is no hope,' Isa. lvii. 10. Thus I walked
about, dejected, weary, and heavy laden; weary of my disease, and weary of the
vain courses I had taken for relief, and uncertain what to do, what course to
take, Psalm. xiii. 2. I took counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily.

CHAP. II. Containing an account of the outgate I got about the close of
January 16, 8, and the state of matters thereon.
1. IF this extremity had lasted much longer, my soul had sunk under the weight
of it, and even, that while I was in this case, had ruined me, if the Lord had
not timely supported in the time of the greatest extremity, and as it were held
me by the hand, even while I carried most wickedly, Psalm. lxxiii. 22, 23. So
foolish was I and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee. Nevertheless, -- thou
have holden me by my right hand. And at this extremity, the Lord stepped in,
when I had destroyed myself, he let me see help in him, Hos. xiii. 9. He found
me lying wallowing in my blood, in a helpless and hopeless condition. I had
none that would, or could save me. I was forsaken of all my lovers. I was
caught in the thicket. I was quite overcome; neither was I in case to fight, or
flee. And then the Lord passed by me, cast his skirt over me, and made this
time ^ time of love, Ezekiel. xvi. 8. And Abraham called the name of that place
Jehovah-jireh: As it is said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be
seen, Genesis xxii. 14.

2. I cannot be very positive about the day, or hour, of this deliverance, nor
can I satisfy many other questions about the way and manner of it. But this is
of no consequence, if the work is in substance sound, John iii. 8. For the wind
blows were in lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell
whence it comes, and whither it goes: So is every one that is born of the
spirit. Many things about the way and manner we may be ignorant of, while we
are su^ficiently sure of the effects. As to these things, I must say with the
blind man, I know not: One thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see,
John ix. 25.

3. However, it was toward the close of January, or the beginning of February,
School, that this seasonable relief came; and so far as I can remember, I was at
secret prayer, in very great extremity, not for from despair, when the Lord
seasonably stepped in, and gave this merciful turn to affairs: When I said, My
foot slippeth, thy mercy held me up, Psalm. xciv. 18. And when there was none to
save, then his own arm brought salvation. 2 Cor. iv. 6. God, who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, shined into my mind, to give the light of the
knowledge of his glory in the face of Jesus Christ.

4. That which yielded me this relief, was a discovery of the Lord, as
manifested in the word. He said to me, Thou haft destroyed thyself, but in me
is thy help. Now the Lord discovered, in the manner afterward to be mentioned,
several things, which I shall here take notice of. 1. He let me see, that there
are forgivenesses with him, that with him there is mercy, and plenicous
redemption, Psalm. cxxx. 4, 7. He made all his goodness pass before me, and he
proclaimed his name, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long
suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth; keeping mercy for thousands.
forgiving iniquity, transgr^stion and sin, who will be gracious to whom he will
be gracious, and will show mercy to whom he will show mercy, Exodus xxxiii. 19.
xxxiv. 5. This was a strange sight to one, who before looked on God only as a
consuming fire, Heb. xii. 29. which I could not see and live, Exed. xxiii. 28.
2dly, He brought me from Sinai and its thunderings, to mount Zion, -- and to
the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that
cleans^th from all sin, and speaks better things than the blood of Abel, Heb.
xi. 22, 24. He revealed Christ in his glory. I now with wonder beheld his
glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Fas^ er, full of grace and
truth, John i. 14. And I was hereon made to say, 'Thou art sai^er than the sons
of men,' Psalm. xlx. 2. 3dly, Herc^n he let me see, that he who had before
rejecied all that I could offer, was well pleased in the beloved. Psalm. xl. 6,
7. Sacrifice and offering then did nor desire, mine cars have thou opered.
Burnt offerings and fin offerings have thou not required. Then sald I, Lo, I
come: in the volume of the bock, it is written of me: I delight to do thy will,
O my God, And ^thly, Hereby I was further fully satisfied, that not only there
was forgiveness of sins, and justification by free grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus: Whom God half see forth to be a propitiation,
through suith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the renission of
sins that are past, through the sor-bearance of God, Romans iii. 24, etc. But
moreover, I saw with wonder and delight, in some measure, how God by this means
might he just, in justifying even the ungodly, who believe in Jesus, Romans iv.
5. How was I ravisned with delight, when made to see, that the God in whom a
little before I throught there was no help for me, or any sinner in may case,
if there was any such, notwithstanding his spotless purity, his deep hatted of
sin, his inflexible justice and righteousness, and his untained faithfulness,
pledged in the threatenings of the how, might not only pardon, but without
prejudice to his justice, or other attributes, he just in justifying even the
ungolly! The reconciliation of those seemingly inconsistance attributes with
one another, and sinners salvation, quite surprised and astonished me. And,
5thly, The Lord further opened the gospel call to me, and let me see, that to
me, even to me, was the word of this salvation seat, Acts xiii. 26. All this
was offered to me, and I was invited secretly to come, and take of the water of
life freely, Rev. xxii. 17. and to come in my distress unto this blessed rest,
Matthew. xi. 28. Come to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and ye shall
find rest for your souls. 6thly, He, to my great satisfaction, gave me a
pleasant discovery of his design in the whole, that it was that no flesh might
glory in his fight, I Cor. i. 29, 31. but that he who glories, should have
occasion only to glory in the Lord, that he might manifest the riches of his
grace, and be exalted in showing mercy; and that we in the end might be saved,
to the praise of the glory of his grace, who made u^ accepted in the beloved,
Ephesians. i. 6, 7. Isa. xxx. 18. 7thly, The Lord revealed to my soul, that full and
suitable provision made in this way against the power of sin, that as there is
righteousness in him, so there is strength, even everlasting strength in the
Lord Jehovah, Isa. xlv. 22. to secure against all enemies; and that in him
there is sweet provision made against the guilt of sin, that through the power
of temptation his people may be inveigled in; 1 John ii. 1, 2. These things
write I to you, that ye sin not: But it any man fin, we have an advocat^ with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our
sins: And not for ours only, but also, for the sins of the whole world. 8thly,
When this strange discovery was made of a relief, wherein full provisions were
made for all the concerns of God's glory, and uny salvation in subordination
thereto, my soul was, by a glorious and sweet power, carried out to rest in it,
as worthy of God, and every way suitable and satisfying in my case. They that
know his name will put their trust in him, Psalm. ix. 10.

5. All these discoveries were conveyed to me only by the word. It was not
indeed by one particular testimony, or promise of the word, but by the
concurring light of a great many of the promises and testimonies of the word
seasonably set home, and most plainly expressing the truths above mentioned.
The promises and truths of the word, in great abundance and variety, were
brought to remembrance, John xiv. 26. and the wonders contained in thems, Psalm.
cxix. 18. were set before mine eyes in the light of the word. He sent his word
and healed me, Psalm. cvii. 20. This was the r^d of his strength, that made me
willing, Psalm. cx. 2, 3. And it was the plain word of salvation, that I sound
to be the power of God, Romans i. 16. I cannot positively say, that the panicular
places above mentioned, were the words whereby these discoveries were conveyed
to my soul: But by these or such like passages; and I believe, by mary, even of
those mentioned promises and truths were the discoveries above named made to me.

6. But it was not the word alone that corveyed the discovery: for most of
these passages where by I was relieved, I had formerly in my distress read, and
thought ^^on, without finding any relief in them. But (...) Lord shined into my
mind by them, 2 Cor. iv. 6. Formerly I was only acquaint with the letter, which
p ofits not. But now the Lord's words were spirit and life, John vi. 69. and in
bis light I sow light, Psalm. xxxvi. 9. God opening mine eyes to see wonders out
of his law, Psalm. cxix. 18. There was light in them; a burning light by them
shone into my mind, to give me not merely some notional knowledge, but the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor.
iv. 6. And many differences I found betwixt the discoveries now made, and the
notions I formerly entertained of the same truths. i. It shone from heaven,
Acts ix. 3. It was not a spark kindled by my own endeavors, but it shone
suddenly about me; it came by the word of God, a heavenly mean; it opened
heaven, and discovered heavenly things, the glory of God, and it led me up as
it were to heaven. Its whole tendency was heavenward. 2. It was a true light,
John i. 9. giving true manifestations of God, even the one true God, and the
one Mediator between God and man; and giving a time view of my state with
respect to God, not according to the foolish conceits I had formetly
entertained, but as they are represented in the word. 3. It was a pleasant and
sweet light. Truly light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to
behold the sun, Eccl. xi. 7. It had a heavenly satisfaction in God attending
i^. It led to a pleasure in the fountain whence it came. 4. It was a distinct
and clear light, repre^^nting not only spiritual things, but manifesting them
in their glory, 2 Cor. iv. 6. and in their comely order; it put all things in
their due line of subordination to God, and gave distinct and sweet views of
their genuine tendency, i John ii. 27. ^9. It was a satisfying light, the soul
retled in the discoveries it made, and and was satisfied; it could not doubt if
it saw, or if the things were (...) as it represented them, Psalm. xvii. 16.6.
It was a quickening, refreshing, healing light; when this Sun of righteousness
arose, there was healing under his (...), i^^al. iv. 2. It was like the
summer's sun, warming. Just word, it was the light of life, John viii. 12.7. It
was a great light: It made great and clear discoveries, where^y it casily
distinguished itself from any former knowledge of these things I had attained.
And, 8. It was a powerful light. It dissipated that thick darkness that
over^pre^d my mind, and made all those frightful temptations, that had formerly
disturbed me, fly before it. When the Lord arose, his enemies were scattered,
and fled before his face, Psalm. lxviii. 1.9. It was composing, it did not, like
a flash of lightning Cant. iii. 8. compared with Isa. lvii. 19.
, suddenly appear, and fill the soul only with amazement and fear; but composed
and quieted my soul, and put all my saculties in a due posture as it were, and
gave me the exercise of them. It destroyed not, but improved my former
knowledge. These particulars might be explained and further amplified: But the
nature of this narrative, and the brevity designed in it, will not allow me to
insist and I the more willingly stop here, and forbear to give any more large
account of my small experience of this light, because I know, that no words can
express the notion, that the weakest Christian, who has his eyes opened, really
has of its glory. The true notion of light is not conveyed by the ear. The ear
tries words, the mouth tastes meat, Job xii. ii. but it is the eye that beholds
the jun, Ephesians. v. 13. No words can convey a true notion of light to the blind.
And he that has eyes, at least while he sees it, will need no words to describe
it. It manifests, itself, and other things. It is like the new name, that none
knows save he who has it. And they who really see, but because their light is
weaker, and Satan raises mists to obscure it, will be more capable of jud^ing
of it by its effects, than by any accounts of its nature; therefore, I shall
forbear to speak any more of that, and now proceed to account for the effects,
whereby its reality and difference from former light will more obviously,
evidently, and convincingly appear. However, at least while this shining
brightness lasted, this one thing it convinced me fully of, and made me
certainly know, that whereas I was blind, now I see, John ix. 25.

7. The first discernible effect of this discovery was, an approbation of God's
way of saving sinners by Jesus Christ, to the praise of the glory of his grace,
which I take to be the true scriptural notion of justifying faith; for this not
only answers the scripture descriptions of it, by receiving, coming to him,
leaking to him, trusting and believing in him, etc. John i. 12. Matthew. xi. 25.
Heb. xii. 2. Psalm. ix. 10.; but it really gives him that glory, Romans iv. 20
that be designed by all this contrivance, -- the glory of his wisdom, grace,
mercy, and truth. Now this discovery of the Lord's name brought me to truth in
him, and glory only in the Lord: I found my soul fully satis. fied in these
discoveries, as pointing out a way of relief, altogether, and in all respects,
suitable to the need of a poor, guilty, self condemned, self-destroyed sinner,
beat from all other reliefs, and who has his mouth stepped before God, after he
has spent all his substance to no purpose upon other physicians, Mark v. 26. In
this I rested, as a way full of peace, comfort, security, and satisfaction, as
providing abundantly for all those ends I desired to have secured. And this
approbation was not mercly for a fit, but over after in all temptations it
discovered itself -- 1. By keeping me up in a fixed assent, and adherence of
mind to, and persuasion of this truth, That God has given to us eternal life,
and this life is only in his Son, 1 John v. 11. 2. When afterward I was, under
temptations, solicited to go away and seek relief in other ways, it still kept
me constant in a firm resolute rejection of all other ways of relief, and
renunciation of all proposals that led to them, even when I found not the
present comfort of this way; I ever held at that with Ephraim, What have I any
more to do with idds? Hos. xiv. 8. And with the disciples, I still said, To
whom shall I go? Thou host the words of eternal life, John vi. 68.3. In all my
after-exercises about guilt, my soul counted all things but loss that it might
win Christ, and get a new discovery of him, Phil. iii. 8. When challenges
disturbed, when thoughts of an arpearance to judgment were suggesled, whenever,
I was in a strait, this was the only sanctuary I took relief in: Let me be
found in him ^ot having mine own righteousness but b^, Phil, iii. 9. if this be
obtained, I am sase; and nothing besides this could make me think myself so. 4.
Whenever the Lord did anew discover the glory of this way, by a beam of fr^^h
light, whatever my distress was before, it still compoted all, commanded a
calm, answered chall hges, and give me boldness and access to God with good
hope, as to all other things, through grace, 2 Th^ss. ii. 15. then I reje^ed in
Christ Jesus, Romans v. 2. Phil. iii. 3. and nothing else was able to disturb me
while this view l^sted. 5. Whenever I was I wrong, yet still reited satission,
that a dise^^ry of the Lord in his own light would set all right ag^^^: And
therefore I was ever at that, O that I was where I might find him, Job xxiii.
6. I Know, though he might m ke sin bitter, yet a m^^nfestation of him (...)
put strength in me Job xxiii. 3. as formerly in swe^, ^^^^ence I had found. 6.
I was then only pleased, (...) never approve myself, but when I found my (...)
measure molded into a compliance with the (...) of the gospel, Romans vi. 10.
emptied of self, su^^^^^ to the Lord, and careful to have him alone exal^^^

8. The next remarkable effect of (...) that it set me right as to my chief
(...) and made me look to the glory of (...) had sttill, in all the courses I
had (...) no real concern for. Now mine (...) measure single, Matthew. vi. 22.
(...) ^^nour which in this light was (...) with my own happiness; and my rea^^d
(...) that evangelical self-denial, which the Lord every where cells for,
consilts, discovered itself (...) all the (...) which I afterward found of
that (...) self, for obtainig its former room: 1. It manisefted itself in
frequent desires, that the Lord alone might he exalted and glorified in my lise
or by my death, Phil. 1.20.2. It kept my soul fixed in the persuasion of this,
that it was every way meet that I should take shame and consusion to myself, as
what truly and only belonged to me, and that the glory of my salvation was only
and entirely the the Lord's due, Dan. ix. 8, 9.3. In a watchful observation of
the stirrings, and the most secretactings of self, secking to advance itself
upon the thin of the Lord's horour, and to the prejedice of it; and uban I was
not able to bear it down. I yet still cried against it, Not (...) is, etc.
Psalm. cxv. 1. Yes, I redoubled my cries in opposition to its impodent
endeavors, Not autous, O Lord, not nets as, hat to thy name be the glory. 4. I
was brought to look upon it as the principal eremy, on which I was always to
have an eye, Gal. ii. 10.; and therefore where the seaft occasion offered, I
had, at least when not otherwise cut of case, still a Not I, ready as a caution
against it, I or. xv. 10.2 Cor. x. 5. And, 5. The remaining self power and
activity of this idol, still has been one of my greatest grievances, Romans vii.
24.6. I never was satisfied, nor found comfort, Romans vii. 25. but where this
idol is discernibly at under; and no victory is so refreshing, as what at any
time is, in more or less, obtained over this, Phil. iii. 8, 9.7. As the
apostles, (2 Cor. iv. 5, and 6, compared), by the shining of the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God into their minds, were made to preach not
th^niselves, but Jesus Christ the Lord. So whenever this light shone, according
to the measure of its clearness, and its continuance, the interest of self was
weakened in my soul, and I was made to seck not myself but Christ Jesus the
Lord.

9. The evidence of this change was for some time frequently darkened; by which
I found, whenever I was again, by the prevalency of sin, challenges thence
arising, or the Lord's hiding, brought under any sears of my own salvation,
then my thoughts were nigrossed, and as it were wholly and only taken up about
my own safety, and my concern for the Lord's glory not then appearing, I was
there by cast under fears that I was altogether selfish; but the Lord at length
cleared up this case unto me. Our minds are weak, they have many concerns, some
where of they value more, some less: they cannot, through their weakness and
limited nature, be intent in their thoughts about all, or even many of them, at
once. And therefore when any one, though the least of them, is in hazard, their
care must be taken up mainly, and as it were about that only, Lake xv. 4. I ven
the good shepherd, though really he vajues the ninety and nice more than the
are rest, and employ all his thoughts as it were about that: But when all are
equally safe, and none of our concerns are in any visible hazard, then is the
only proper time to judge what is really uppermost in the soul; that which it
then is most frequently with, delights most in, and can least think of patting
with, that is uppermost. That which has the heart is the treasure, Matthew. vi.
21. And the Lord let me see that my soul was, when all was safe, wholly almost
taken up in viewing with delight the manifestations of his glory in the face of
Jesus Christ.

10. Before I proceed to take notice of any other effects of this discovery, I
shall represent in a sew particuculars, the pleasant way where by the Lord
carried on this change as to the chief end -- I. When the Lord came to work
this change, I was funk under the weighing sense of this, that I had destroyed
myself, Hos. xiii. 6. and deeply concerned to know how I might be saved, ibid.
Isa. xlv. 24.2. The Lord made me first lock up, by a discovery of salvation and
help which answered my concern about my own case. 3. When I looked to this
salvation, I found it in him. 4. When by this means I came to see his glory
shining in the continvance of my salvation, by the luster of it I was affected
so, that I began to value it above all things, and look on it as of that
importance, that, provided it were secured, all other things, the highest
concerns of the creatures not excepted, were of small moment, Phil. i.: 9. And,
5. Herein viewing the glory of his goodness, in ordering it so, that the
creatures in aiming at his glory should fird their own salvation; this endeared
the Lord and his ways exceedingly. Thus the Lord sweetly led me, by a view of
help suited to my case, to a discovery of his glory in my salvation; and helped
me to place things, in some measure, at least in wish and design, in their own
order, and give his glory the pre eininency that was its due. But this only by
the bye. Now I go on.

11. A third discernible effect of this discovery was, with respect unto the
Lord's yoke, his precepts, 2 Cor. iii. 18. beholding his glory, I was changed
into his image, and made to look on his yake as easy, and his burden as light,
Matthew. xi. 30. and to count that his commaniments were not grievous 1 John v.
3. but right concerning all things, Psalm. cxix. 128. This was very far contrary
to my former temper. Now the reality of this change appeated and evidenced
itself, even amidst all temptations, slips, yea, and relapses into the satare
sin, several ways -- 1. I now came to a fixed persuasion, that the law was not
only just such against which I could make no reasonable exception; but holy,
such as became God; and good, Romans vii. 12. such as every way was suhed to my
true interest, and peace, and advantage, which I could never think before. 2.
Though I (...) in me opposing it still, yet I delighted after to in and man in
the low, as boly, just, spiritual, (...) Form. vii. 20, 22.3. I saw the
commandment (...) broad, Psalm. cxix. 96. (...), and (...) delighted with it,
R^n. vii. 14.4. The (...) heart had the greatest aversion to former (...) made
easy, pleasant, and refreshing, om (...) Formerly I could not thick spiritual
mind (...) easy to me or any other: But now when I (...) in some measure, for
some time, as first after (...) I did, I found it life and peace; and on (...)
carnal mindedness was as death. 5. I (...) peculiar beauty in there laws in
partic^^^ (...) those sins which had the firmest rooci (...) and the greatest
advantage from my (...) occasional temptations, Psalm. xviii. 2. (...) all these
advantages still continued, and (...) heart was so strangely altered, that
(...) full, upon the account of n^ne did I (...) no sins was I so glad of
victory over, (...) I so truch for the ruin of, or did I cry so much against,
or complain so frequently of to the Lord, and set myself more 2-against; my mind
was continually engaged in contrivances for their ruin, which formerly I sought
still to have spared. And if the Lord would have given me it in my choice, to
have the laws that crossed them razed, or to let them stand, he knows I would
have thought the law less pleasant, less perfect, if these had been wanting,
Phil. iii. 7. Thus what things were gain, 1 ^w counted dung, and endeavored to
keep myself from mine iniquity, Psalm. xviii. 23. and I could never think myself
happy till these were plucked out, which were before as the right eye, Matthew.
v. 29, 30.6. I took delight in others, or in myself, only in so far as there
appeared any thing of a selfdenied, humble conformity to the law of the Lord,
such I counted as the excellent of the earth, Psalm. xvi. 2, 3. and I was glad
when I got near them in any the meanest instance. 7. My soul frequently spent
itself in such breathings after conformity to the law of God, as the cxixth
Psalm is filled with throughout, Psalm. cxix. 5, 20, 33, 112. O that my ways
were directed to keep thy statutes. My heart breaks, through the longing it
has to thy commands at all times. Incline my heart that I may keep them always
unto the end, -- and the like. 8. This appeared further, in a fixed dislike of
the least inconformity to the law, either in myself or others. Now, albeit I
was not always suitably affected with my own or other's breaches, yet this was
my burden. I wished always that rivers of tears might run down my eyes, because
I or other transgressors kept not God's law, Psalm. cxix. 136.9. Even when sin
prevailed, and I was afraid to be ruined, when that which was ordained for life
oroved death to me, even then my liking to the law, and value for conformity
continued, all this notwithstanding I consented to the law, that it was holy,
just, and good, Romans vii. 10, 16.10. The sins which, through the force of
temptation, I frequently relapsed into, yet were, and I durst appeal to the
searcher of hearts as to the truth of this, what I would not do: That is, what
the constant bent of my will (when not under the immediate force of a
temptation, Romans vii. 12. when I was not myself) was set against. II. Now
nothing appeared more satisfactory in heaven, than a prospect of being there
satisfied with his likeness, Psalm. xvii. 5.12. I looked on the remainder of
sin, as my greatest misery and burden, and that which made me truly a wretched
man, Romans vii. 24. and daily cry for deliverance. In aword, I saw that if I
could reach conformity to God's law, I would have pleasure, and peace, and
liberty, Prove. iii. 17. All wisdom's ways are ways of peace, her paths
pleasantness, her commendments not grievous, I John v. 3. her yoke light, and
nothing uneasy, but that remaining ensebdned corruption, that would not hoop to
put its neck under the yoke, Matthew, xi. 29, 30. This effect was the most
discernible of any, under temptations, and has stood me in the best stead.

12. A fourth discernible effect of this discovery, was the exercise of
evangelical repentance, which was very different in many respects from that
sorrow I before was acquainted with. 1. In its rise: sorrow formerly flowed
from discoveries of sin, as it brings on wrath, now it flowed from a sense of
sin, as containing wretched unkindness to one, who was astonishingly kind to an
unworthy wretch. I looked upon him whom I had pierced, and mourned, Zech. xii
10. O! what an unkind wretch am I, to provoke such a God, who has followed me
with so much mercy, and yet offers kindness? 3. Sorrow formerly wrought death,
2 Cor. vi. 10. alienated my heart from God, and so dispirited for duty, and
made me fear hurt from him: But this sorrow filled my heart with kindness to
God, to his way, sweetened my soul, and endeared God to it. It flowed from a
sensen of his favor, to an unworthy wretch that deserved none, and was thus a
godly sorrow leading to kindness to God, drawing near to him, but with much
humble sense of my own unworthiness, like the returning prodigal, when he saw
his father coming to meet him, Luke xv. 20, 21.2. The more God manifested of
his kindness, the more this still increased; when he was pacified, I was
ashamed and confounded, Ezekiel. xvi. 63. After I was turned I repented, I smote
noon my breast, and was ashamed and confounded for my strayings, Jer. i. 9. The
sorrow I had before I looked on as a burden, it was nothing but seld^sh concern
for my own safety, and a fear of being made to seel the effects of a righteous
resentment of God. But this sorrow was sweet and pleasant, as being the
exercise of filial gratitude, and I took pleasure in the surprising
manifestations of God's favor to one so unworthy, and in acknowledging my own
unworthiness, Psalm. lxxiii. 22, 23. A sense of my ingratitude, when kept
within, covered me with blushes, and I was eased when the Lord allowed me to
vent my sense of it, and pour it as it were in his bosom. 5. This sorrow was a
spring of activity in the way of duty; and I was glad to be employed in the
meanest errand that might give opportunity to evidence how deeply I resented my
former disobedience, Luke xv. 19. Make me as one of thy hired servants. 6. In a
word, it had all the marks, in some measure, which the apostle gives of the
exercise of this grace. It was a godly sorrow, coming from God, it led to God,
as always what comes from him in a way of grace, leads to him in a way of duty.
It wrought repentance unto life not to be repented of, 2 Cor. vi. 10. it issued
in a return to the way of life, and to such a course, as upon a review I did
not repent of, but delighted in, and defired to be carried further on in. And
still in as far as this sorrow obtained, there was a liveliness in following
this way, that leads to salvation or life. It wrought carefulness to avoid sin,
and please God, indignation against sin, fear of offending God again, vehement
desire of having sin removed, the Lord glorified, and obedience promoted: It
wrought zeal for God, and revenge against myself and sin. It was not as former
sorrow, pregnant with pride, stiffness, and unwillingness to undergo any
chastisement; but it humbled, softened the soul, and wrought a willingness to
bear the indignation of the Lord when I had sinned against him. In a word, I
was glad when the Lord allowed me any measure of it, and grieved when I found
it wanting, and cried to the Prince exalted for it, because of the good effects
it had, and the real advantage I found by it, with respect unto the whole of
that obedience the Lord requires.

13. A fifth discernible effect of this discovery was, a humble, but sweet and
comfortable hope, and persuasion of my own salvation, answerable to the
clearness of this discovery; that is, rising in strength, or growing more weak,
and less discernible, as the discoveries of the way of salvation were more or
^^^ clear und strong. New because this is what I take for gospel assurance,
with the worthy Dr. Owen, I shall give some further account of it, as I found
it then and since. -- I. When the Lord gave this discovery of his way of
salvation, he satisfied me, that it was a way full of peace and security, the
only safe way whereon I might safely venture; and hereby, as I told formerly, I
was sully persuaded, That this was the way wherein I should walk, Isa. xxx. 21.
Hereby I was tr^ed from that disquieting sear, that in trusting to it, I was
trusting to that which would fail. I was satisfied, I could not fail otherwise
than by missing this way; I doubted of myself, but not of the way. 2. The Lord,
by the discovery above mentioned, did powerfully draw my soul to close with it;
and in so far as I have to, and closed with this, in so far, considering the
former discovery of the safety of this way, I could not doubt of the issue, but
was sweetly satisfied, that my expectation should not be cut off, Prove. xxiii.
18. nor my labor in ^ain in pursuing this course. While I clave to, and
reposed with satisfaction on what I was convinced was safe, I could not, in so
far as I leaned to this, but be quiet and composed about the issue. Which shows
how nearly allied faith and assurance are, though they are not the same, and
therefore no wonder the one should be taken for the other. 3. Hereby I was
animated to walk on in this way, and follow duty; and finding, as I went on in
duty, that so far as I proceeded, my expectation was not disappointed, still
according to success, this hope insensibly and secretly grew. This God is our
God, we have waited for him, and he will save us, Isa. xxv. 9.4. This discovery
manifesting salvation in a way of self denial, and trust only in the Lord,
nothing so soon marred this hope, as the least appearance of self, and stirring
of pride. Whenever the glory of the Lord was revealed, and he spoke peace, I
was hereon filled with shame, and the decper this humiliation was, still the
humble confidence of my safety increased, Ezekiel. xvi. 63. Now these two last
remarks show, how far this assurance is from any consistency with negligence,
much less does it foster it: For it grows only upon adherence to the Lord's
way, and is strengthened by a successful pursuit of salvation in the Lord's
way. To intermit or neglect duty, razes the foundation, or at least, lays an
unsurmountable stop in the way of its progress and growth. And further, it is
widely differenced from that unassaulted confidence some pretend to, which is a
fruit of pride, and fosters it, as the last remark clears. In a word, the case
is plainly thus: This way the Lord discovers, is safe for a self-condemned
sinner. I am sat in a practical adherence to it. The further I go, and the
closer I in practice cleave to this way, hope of this salvation increases the
more. Here no place for sloth, but a spur to diligence, as what will not be in
vain in the issue, and is attended with the comfort in every step, as carrying
still nearer the desired salvation. And this safery arising from a renunciation
of all confidence in the flesh, and a trust only in the sovereign grace of God
through Christ, there is no place for confidence in ourselves, or pride in any
degree, the least degree of pride being a step out of this way of peace and
safety.

14. A sixth discernible difference, was with respect to the ordinances of the
Lord's appointment, Psalm. xxvi. 4. This discovery, 1. Drew me to follow them as
the Lord's institutions, and appointed means of obtaining discoveries of his
beauty. 2. It made me follow after discoveries of the Lord's glory in them, and
discoveries from him of myself, my case, my sin, my duty. I desired to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple, ibid. 3. It put me to the
Lord to seek these discoveries from him, and to pray with respect both to
myself and those concerned in the dispensation of the gospel; one thing have I
desired of the Lord, ibid. This was now more constant; I desired and sought
after it. 4. I was brought to more of liveliness, when the Lord discovered
himself; my soul then followed hard after him, Psalm. lxiii. 8. cxix. 32, 65.
when his hand upheld me, and when he drew I ran. 5. When the Lord enlarged and
caused me to approach to him, and see his glory, he still humbled me, dicovered
self, and put me in opposition to it: I have seen him, and therefore I loathed
myself, Job xlii. 5, 6.6. I was now acquainted, in some measure, with that
boldness and freedom of access, with humble ^onsidence, to God, as on a throne
of grace manifesting himself in Christ. I^ a word, I was sensible of the Lord's
hiding and manifesting himself in duty, in some measure, and or the necessity
of the exercise of grace, particularly of (...) in all approaches to God, and
thereby pus upon frequent complaints, dejections for the want of it, cries to
C^^^ for it, and the like.

15. Many other effects followed upon this discovery, ^o long to repeat at
large. ^i. Hereon I found a new and formerly unknown love to all that seemed to
have ^^^^ching of the Lord's image, however different in principses as to
lesser things, tempers, etc. and though distant and unknown, otherwise than by
report. And this evidencing itself in prayer for them, sympathy with them in
their afflictions; which, as all the other, still was more or less lively,
according as I was otherwise in worse or better case. I John iii. 14. By this
do we know we are passed from death to life, because we love the brethren.
Again, 2. Hereon I found my care of all the Lord's concerns enlarged, and I
began to be desirous to have the Lord exalted on the earth, Psalm. cxii. 6, 7,
etc. Zion prosper, and all that love her: I was fearful of hazard that
threatened any of his interests, affected with the sufferings of his people, or
any loss his interest sustained. And, 3. Hereon I began to be more concerned
for any affronts offered to the Lord's glory by others. I saw transgressors and
was grieved, because they kept not God's law, Psalm. cxix. 158. and was often made
to weep, and pray for them in secret, Jer. xiii. 17.4. I found it easy and
delightsome to suppress resentments, and oppose them, and even to pray for
those whom I apprehended to have injured the, Luke vi. 27, 28. Yea, with
delight I could seek their real good, and pray earnestly for it, Psalm. xxxv.
13. Other consequences of this discovery will be mentioned hereafter, in their
proper places.

16. To conclude this chapter, I found this discovery sweetly drawing (Psalm.
cxix. 32. Cant. i. 4.) to a willing, cheerful endeavor after holiness in all
manner of conversation. Whereas, all former courses I took only drove forcibly
to a feigned submission: Which made me often admire the folly of Socinians and
Arminians and other Pe^^gian enemies, who pretend, that free justification
leads to security and carelessless. I could not but say, and think often, What!
shall I believe such wild and wicked reproaches against my clear experience? Do
not I find the quite contrary, while the love of Christ constrains to judge
thus, That if one died for all, then were all dead: that they who henceforth
live, should not live to themselves, but to him that di^d for them? 2 Cor. v.
14, 15. They err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God.

Thus (...) things were in some measure made new; and I, who a little before,
with the jailor, Acts xvi. 34, had fallen down trembling, was now raised up and
set down to feast with the disciples of the Lord, rejoicing and believing. But
alas! I was like the disciples on the mount, I dreamed not of what was abiding
me, Matthew. xvii. 4. as the sequel will show. This I desire to recount, however,
with thankfulness, not to my own commendation, but to the praise of the glory
of his grace, Ephesians. i. 3, (...) How far I was from having attained, or being
already perfect, Phil. iii. 12. the following pages will clear.

CHAP. III. Containing an account of the pleasure of my case at this time, the
mistakes I was still under, the sad effects of them, and the way of their
discovery.
1. THIS glorious discovery was very surprising, and filled m^ with wonder; often
was I made to (...) and wonder that this strange sight meant, Exodus iii. 3. and
whereto it would turn. Things that I had not heard were told me, Isa. lii. 15.
Often did I say, What has the Lord wrought! Psalm. cxxvi. 1, 2, 3. When God
turned back the captivity of Zion, we were like men that dreamed. Our mouth was
filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: Then said they among the
heathen, The Lord has done great things for them. The Lord has done great
things for us, whereof we are glad: The greatness of the things God has done
surpassed belief; and yet the great and clear light wherein they were
discovered, and the discernible effects, would not allow me to doubt.

2. Albeit the effects of this discovery above mentioned were most discernible
at first, yet I did not then, nor till after that light was gone, distinctly
observe them. -- (...) 1. The glory of the Lord was so great, that for a time I
only fixed my eyes upon that, and I was less intent, though much pleased with
it, upon the change that was thereby wrought on me. All this while I was still
crying out, Whence is this to me? Luke i. 43. And what am I, and what is my
father's bonse, that the Lord has visited me, and brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel
vii. 18. Again, 2. I was the less sensible, or at least was the less distinct
in observing these things, because of the remaining darkness as to the many and
great things contained in the covenant of grace. This light clearly revealed
the mystery of sice justification through Christ, and peace by his bloo^: But I
was afterward to learn other things be^^^ging to the mystery of redemption:
This was what I at present needed, and this the Lord gave abundantly, in so far
as the present case required it. But yet after this glorious light had staid
some considerable time with me, I was sadly ignorant of many of the most
important things relating even unto the mystery of forgiveness, the daily use
of this atonement, and the use specially of the Lord Christ with respect to
sanctification. ^ Well might Christ say to me many a day after this, as to
Philip, John xiv. 9. Have I been so long time with you, and yet bast thou not
known me, Philip? What therefore the Lord had done at this time, I knew not
now, but here^fter, John xiii. 7. xvi. 13. when the Comforter had further
instructed me in the nature of the gospel discovery, as I was able to hear it,
and as my daily exigencies required it; and when with Peter, being come to
myself, recovered out of the strange surprise, and put to consider the thing,
then I knew, with him, Acts xii. 11, 12. more distinctly what concerned the
Lord's work, and what he had done for me, Acts xviii. 26.

3. This discovery, while it lasted, was full of ravishing sweetness, and many
things contributed very much to make it so -- I. The case wherein it found me:
I was condemned by God, by my own conscience, and was like to sink under the
pressure of the fear of a present execution of the sentence: When the usual
labors of the day required that I should sleep, and my body toiled and wasted
with the disquiet of my mind, made me heavy, and urged it more; yet I was
afraid to close mine eyes, lest I should awaken in hell, and durst not let
myself sleep, till I was by a weary body beguiled into it, lest I should drop
into the pit before I was aware, Eccl. v. 12. Was it any wonder that the news
of pardon and forgiveness were sweet to one in such a case? whereby I was made
to lie down in safety, and take quiet rest, while there was none to make me
afraid, Micah iv. 4. For so gives he his beloved sleep, Psalm. cxxvi. 2. A
little before I was like Jonah in the whale's belly, Jonah ii. 5, 6, 7. The
waters compassed me about even to the soul; the deep closed me round about, the
weeds were wrapped about my head, I went down to the bottom of the mountains, the
earth with her bars was about me for ever. Ver. 4. And I said, I am cast out of
God's sight. Now, was it any wonder that such an one was delighted when brought
into a garden of delights, placed out of all view of trouble, save a reflection
on it as past, which is retreshing, and set down, to sun himself, and dry
himself under the refreshing rays of the Sun of righteousness? 2. The things
that the Lord discovered, were in themselves glorious, the glory of the Lord
shone about me: I saw such things as eye has not seen, besides thee, O God,
Isa. lxiv. 4. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten of the
Father, he has declared him, John i. 18. In a word, what I saw was the mystery
of godliness, 1 Timothy iii. 26. the wonders of God's law, which the angels
stooping earnestly look into, 1 Pet. i. 12. and that with wonder. 3. They were
new things wherewithal I was utterly unacquaint before, and this made them the
more affecting, Isa, lii. 15. He shall sprinkle many nations, the kings shall
shut their mouths at him: For that which had not beem told them shall they see,
and that which they had not heard shall they confider. Prove. xxv. 26. As cold
waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country. Again, 4. The
light wherein these things were discovered, was a clear sparkling light, that
had a warming force, and reviving influence, that I was altogether a stranger
to before: And one that was a stranger to light, at least to this light of the
Lord, could not but with pleasure enjoy it; for truly light is sweet, and a
pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun, Eccl. xi. 7.

4. This discovery and manifestation was of a much longer continuance, and far
more bright than any I ever since got; for it shone in its brightness for about
ten days time, and for long after that, it was not quite off: And while it
lasted, many things made it observable -- 1. New discoveries were daily made,
the Lord carried from one thing to another, and in this short time taught me
more than by all my study I had learned before: Yea, he taught me the things I
had learned before, in another and quite different manner; what naturally and
notionally I knew before, in it I corrupted myself, Jude 10. but now the Lord
instructed me with a strong hand that I should not walk in this way; Isa. viii.
11. and day unto day uttered spe^^h and might unto night taught knowledge,
Psalm. xix. 2.; every day I was surprised with some new and before unthought of
discovery of the Lord, Iron. iv. 8. This was as the shining light, st^ming more
and more unto the po^fect day. 2. All this ^uoe my mind was wholly almost taken
up about spiritual things: my conversation was in heaven, Phil. iii. 20. I saw
those with whom I conversed turn every thing (even what was not only
innocently, but piously said and meant) into obscene senses: Whereas now,
whatever occuned in reading, in meditation, in converse, in daily observation,
was by mind, and to it, spiritualized. I reflected with wonder on this
difference, and often, during this while, was made to look on the mind as a mould
that casts whatever is brought into it into its own shape, Tit. i. 15. To the
pure all things are pure, but to them that are defiled, and unbelieving, is
nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled. 3. Hereon I was
not only joyful, but I found the joy of the Lord my strength, Neh. viii. 10.
for all this while I was carried out to extra^^^inary pleasure and diligence in
duty; it was not now, as for ne^ly, a burden to go to duty: But I rejoiced when
they said to me, Let us go to the house of God, Psalm. cxxi. 1. And my soul
answered, I will go to God my chief joy, to God that performs all things for
me, Psalm. lvii. 2. My heart was enlarged, and I run in the way of God's
commandments with delight, Psalm. cxix. 32. Willingly I engaged in duty; and
when I was engaged in it, my soul often made me like the chariots of Amminadib,
Cant. vi. 2. and I was not easily stopped; and failed sometimes as to the just
bounds, whereby others, that felt not that ravithing sweetness I enjoyed, were
sometimes disgested, though some were not; for so near as I can reckon, it was
about this time that the Lord began to commend himself and his worship to lady
Anne Elcho, which made her at death bless the Lord for family worship. 4. The
Lord daily instructed me all this while out of the scriptures, and my heart
burned within me while be talked and walked with me by the way, and opened the
scriptures, Luke xxiv. 32. which before were as a sealed book, wherein whatever
I read was dark; even that whereof I had some notion, I was ready to say of it,
I cannot read it, for it is sealed, Isa. is. II. The design and intent, and
mystery was hid from me; and the rest of it, I was forced to say, I know
nothing of it, I was not learned. Again, 5. Mine enemies received a sinnning
stroke, and all of a sudden, by the appearance of the sun, these frightful
things that disturbed me in the dark disappeared: He graciously for a time
restrained them, and bore down corruption, chained up Satan, and kept me from
any disturbance by these enemies, ^^th whom I have before had, and since
likewise, many sad wrestlings, Psalm. xviii. 12, 14. At the brightness that was
before h^^, (...) thick clonds passed. When the Lord arose h^^ enemies were
scattered. Yea, he sent out his arrows a^^ sca^^ered them; and be sont out
lightnings and discomf^^red ^h^m. Ver. 17. Thus he deliverra me from my strong
enemy, and from them which hated me: for they were too strong for me. 6. Which
was the lise of all the former, the Lord, by keeping his glory continually in
mine eye, kept me all this while more humble and self-denied than ever: Seeing
him, I loathed and detested seit, Job xlii. 6. Beholding his glory, I was in
mine own eyes as a grasshopper, as nothing, less than nothing and vanity, and
gloried only in the Lora, rejoicing in Christ, esus, and had no confidence in
the siesh, Number. xiii. 33. Isa. xl. 22. I Cor. i. 30.

5. The Lord had many gracious designs in this, which I was ignorant of then,
as what I shall speedily narrate will show; but the Lord has in some measure
since taught me, some of which I shall here narrate -- i. I was sore broken and
wounded before, and the Lord did this in tenderness, Job v. 18. He bound up my
wounds, Psalm. cxlvii. 3. He poured in oil, Luke x. 34. He made a bid in my
sickness, Psalm. xli. 3. He watched me, and keps me free from disturbance, till
I was somewhat strengthened, Isa. xl. ii. 2. I had been plunged into grievous
and hard thoughts of him, as one who had in anger shut up his tender mercies,
and forgotten to be graci^us, Psalm. lxxvii. 8, 9. and I was not easily induced
to believe good tidings, for I had forget prosperity, Lam. iii. 17. and though
it was told me, I could not believe, Job xl. 16. partly for joy, and partly for
sear, till I got a clear sight of the wagons and provisions, and then my
spirit revived, Genesis xlv. 27. and the Lord satisfied me in deep condescension,
that he was seal, and in earnest, and had (...) pleasure in my death, Ezekiel.
xviii. 32. and xxxiii. II. and that the wound was not incurable, Jer. xv. 18.
that it was not the wound of an enemy, or the stroke of a cruel one, Jer. xxx.
14, 17. but the wound of a friend, in order so healing. 3. He was now for to
make me sell all for the pearl, Matthew. xiii. 45, 46. And like a fair m^rchant
that means not to cheat, he let me see both what I was to leave, and what I was
to choose, that I might be satisfied I had made a good bargain: And though many
a day I have seen neither sun, nor m^on, nor stars, since, Acts xxvii. 20. and
have been in the deep day and night, 2 Cor. xi. 25. yet so far did this go,
that I durst never once in with retract my choice. 4. He knew what a wilderness
I was to go through, and therefore led me not into that long and weary journey
till he had made me cat once and again, as he did by Elijah, 1 Kings xix. 6,
7.5. The Lord did not at first plunge me into war, lest I should have repented
my engagement, Exodus xiii. 17. And it come to pass, when Pharash bad let the
people go, that God bad not led them through the way of the land of the
Philistines, although that was near; for God said, lest pevadventure the people
re^evt when they see war, and they return to Egypt. 6. The Lord hereby
undeceived me as to my hard thoughts of his ways, and reproved me for them; often
was 1 put to say, Lord, I was as a beast, Psalm. lxxiii. 22. and how brutish was
I to think that spirituality was a burden, and that it was impo^sible to be one
day so to an end, without weariness! Thus he let me see, that I uttered what I
understood not, Job xlii. 3. and though once I had so spoken, yet now I durst
not proceed, Job xl. 4.5. For I saw what with men is impossible, with God is
possible and easy, Matthew. xix. 26, who can change the heart, and then the
thoughts change, Matthew. xii. 33. Finally, The Lord designed to give me
something that might in all after trials be staying; and often has the
remembrance of this been sweet when present sense failed, Prove. xxi. 1. Dan.
iv. 16. I called to mind the years of the right band of the most High, Psalm.
lxxvii. 10. and was still supported by it.

6. But, alas! I understood not this, and by my ignorance I was cast into sad
mistakes. 1. I fancied this world would last always. I ravingly talked of
tabernacles, with the disciples on the mount, Matthew. xvii. 4. I knew not that I
was to come down again, and that my dearest Lord was to depart from me again.
Psalm. xxx. 6, 7. In my prosperity, I said, My mountain stands strong by thy
favor, and I shall never be moved. 2. I dreamed no more of sighting with
corruptions; but thought that the enemies that appeared not, were dead, and
that the Egyptians were all drowned in the sea, Exodus x v. 13. and that I
should never learn, nor have occasion for learning war, Is^. ii. 4.3. I
projected to tie myself up to such a bent, and stint myself to such a course of
walking, as neither our circumstances, comptations, nor our duty in this world
allows of. Hereon I remember, I could not endure to read these books which were
really proper and necessary to be read, and all time employed in them I
reckoned on as lost: This was the old legal temper beginning to work again, and
secretly inclining to seek nighteousness, not directly as before, but as it
were by the works of the law, Romans ix. 32. and aiming to entangle me in a yoke
of bondage: Yea, I began to grudge and be challenged about the time spent in
necessary refreshment of the body by meat and sleep, and endeavored to abridge
myself. The devil secretly drove from one extreme to another, and be knew full
well that I would not hold here, and that he would easily get me cast late
another extreme, to assume a latitude beyond what was due, Col. ii. 23. Thus I
was well nigh entangled into that yoke of bondage which the Lord has so lately
broke; and deceived into a voluntary humility and mortification, being vainly
passed up to it by my s^^^^ly mind, Col. ii. 18.4. I began to reckon upon
calargement and success in duty, as what was not only my due, but what I should
always have, and that it was more mine own than really it was: I began to speak
of it with delight, like the disciples, I said, Lord, even the d^cils are
subject to ^s, Luke x. 17.20.5. I looked upon this stock of grace I had gotten,
as what would be sufficient to carry me through all my difficulties, Isa. xl.
31. and saw not that the grace that was sufficie^, 2 Cor. xii. 9. was yet in
the Lord's hand.

7. But now the Lord quickly undeceived me: For, 1. After a little he began to
hide himself, Psalm. xxx. 7.2. He gave me a thor^ in the s^^sh to humble me, 2
Cor. xii. 7. My corruptions began to stir again, and like giants refreshed by
wine, to make furions assaults. 3. A messenger of Sat^^ was sent to butset me,
ibid. and I began to seel the fury of his tempeations.

8. Hereon I was cast into great perplexity. I. I ^ell into deep sorrow: Thou
did hide thy face and I was troubled, Psalm. xxx. 7.2. I began to question the
truth of former manifestations, and to say with the disciples, We thought it
bad been be that should have redesmed ^srac^, Luke xxiv. 21. Again, 3. I began
to doubt of my through-bearance, and to say, One day I sha^^ perish by the bound
of Saul, 1 Samuel xxvii. 1. And, 4. I began to quarrel secretly with the Lord as
if he had beguiled me, and to say, Why have thou not delivered me? Exodus v. 12,
13. Why is my bondage increased, since thou began to a^pear for my deliverance?

9. Under this case I tried all means, but run often (...) wrong ways. 1. I
complained, and then my soul was ^erwhelmed, Psalm. lxxvii. 3. Again, 2. I
thought (...) God; but not sinding the discoveries as before, I was troubled,
ibid. 3. I enquired into the causes of this, Psalm. lxxvi. 6, 7, etc. Wherefore
bidess thou thy s^ce^ Why art thou so far from belping? But here often my spirit
began to go too far, and even to say, Jer. xv. 18. Will thou be always as a
liar, and as waters that sail? And then I took myself, and was sunk deeper for
my wickedness in chiding with God. 4. I essayed to shake myself, and to go to
duty as before, Judges xvi. 20. I wist not that the Lord was departed, that my
locks were cut, and that the enemy that lay in my bosom had discevered my
strength, and got between me and it.

10. I was hereon exceedingly melancholy, and so much the more, that now I
remembered all my goodly pleasant things I enjoyed before I sell into-the
c^e^i^s hand, La^. i. 7. But yet when, after the violence of the conslict, I
recovered myself, I could not but see that things were letter at my worst case,
than sormerly in my best. For, 1. The Lord gave frequent blinks of his
countenance: He looked forth at the windows, and showed himself through the
la^ess, Cant. ii. ^. and sometimes put in his singer by the hale of the (...),
and spoke kindly, and my bowels were u^ved for him, v. 4.2. He frequently let
me see somewhat of his power and glory in the sancinary, Psalm. lxiii. 2.3.
opened a scripture and made my heart burn, or unfolded my case, and told me all
that was in my heart, Luke xxi^. 32. or let me see the end of enemies. 3.
Sometimes he allowed me access to him, Romans v. 2. and made me come even to his
seat, Job xxiii. 3. and pour out my sond to him, Psalm. lxii. 8.4. When I was at
my lowest, I stood otherwise affected to Christ than before: Though I could not
run after him, yet I unwillingly strayed away: My soul longed after him, Psalm.
lxxxiv. 2. when will thou come? Psalm. ci. 2. I frequently breathed for
drawings, Draw me, and I will run after thee, Cant. i. 4. sometimes I essayed
to stretch out the withered hand, and wished for the command that would empower
me to lay hold on him: I still stock to this, that salvation only is to be
sound in him; I refused to go any where else, but resolved to wait on, and
though be should stay me, ye^ trust in him I would, Job vi. 68.5. As to the law
of the Lord, though I could not run as when my heart was enlarged, Psalm. cxix.
32. yet my will was still bent that way: I longed to walk, and run, and for
that enlargement that would make me run: I breathed after conformity: I had no
quarrel at it, but myself: I delighted in the law after the inward man, Romans
vii. 22.6. As to sin, there was a great odds; though I could not delight in
duty as before, I abhorred thoughts of delighting in sin: I was sometimes by
the power of temptation driven to consent, to its embraces, but that was just
such a forced consent, as by the power of conviction I before gave to the law;
whenever I was at myself, I retracted it; my repentings were kindled within me,
Hos. xi. 8. Though it prevailed, my heart was not with it as before, Judges
xvi. 15. I found another sort of opposition made to it; it was dead in purpose
and design; and if it gained victory, I was the more enraged against it. In a
word, as to the law of God, I was as a sick man with his friends sitting at his
bed side; he has no aversion to them, though he cannot delight in them as
before, he reflects with such a pleasure, as his present case allows, upon the
satisfaction he has had in their converse, and wishes to be in case again. But
I was quite contrary with respect to sin. Finally, This deadness was now a
preternatural state; I could not rest in it, but cried daily, Psalm. lxxxv. 6.
When will thou revive me? I loathed myself for it: I wearied, I essayed to
break prison, I looked back to former seasons when it had been otherwise, and
often said, O that it were with me as in months past, Job xxix. 2.

CHAP. IV. Containing an account of my strugglings with indwelling sin, its
victories, the causes of them on my part, and God's goodness with respect to
this trial.
1. I Had not been long in this pleasant case before I found my mistake, that
enemies were not foiled, and that I must down into the valley, and wrestle with
principalities, and powers, Ephesians. vi. 12. and fight with no less enemies than
the Anakims. My corruptions, self, passion, etc. and especially those sins
which casily beset me, Heb. xii. 1. which formerly I was so careful to have
spared, and which I refused to deliver up to justice, set upon me. And finding
that I was now no more their's, as formerly, they gave me frequent scils: I
fell before them often, and multiplied relapses, Romans vii. 21, x9. When I would
do good, evil was present with me, and the good I would do, through their
power, I did not, and the evil I would not do, that I did. Thus I learned, that
the difference betwixt the Lord's people and others, is not simply in this,
that the one falls and the other stands, but that there is a difference in the
issue, Prove. xxiv. 16. The just man falls seven times, but the wicked shall
fall into mischief.

2. Now though I was unwilling to fight, I drew to armor upon the appearance
of these enemies, who received great advantage by that security wherein I had
fallen. And before I was aware, they received a great advantage I could not
easily get from them again. But however, since fight I must, I tried what
weapons would be most successful, Judges xi. 35. And, 1. I objected to them,
that now I had no more to do with them: I had engaged with the Lord, Isa, xxvi.
13.2. I essayed to reason against them, as Joseph did, but without his faith,
Shall I do this great evil, and sin against God? Genesis xxxix. 9.3. When they
still persisted, I essayed to flee from them, and avoid the occasions: But the
enemy was in my bosom, Prove. iv. 14, 15.4. I prayed against them, that the Lord
would rebuke them, Zech. iii. 2.5. I complained of them as his enemies, Hab. i.
1.6. I protested aginst them, Romans vii. 20. And many other ways did I try.

3. But after all they persisted, and I was often soiled; and hereon I fell
into grievous discouragement. And, 1. I began to doubt if I was sincere, or if
the Lord was really with me: If the Lord be us, why is all this evil came upon
us? Judges vi. 13.2. I began to doubt of the issue, and conclude, I should one
day perish by their band 1 Samuel xxvii. 1.3. My conscience being defiled, I was
damped, and could not look up to God. And upon the whole, I was in very great
distress, often at giving over, Psalm. xl. 12.

4. Though I often searched at the time, I could not discover whence it was that
I sailed, Psalm. lxxvii. 6. For no mean that I thought of then, almost, I lest
unessayed. But since, several reasons of the prevalency of sin, and the
unsuccessfulness of my attempts against it, has the Lord graciously discovered,
though I am far from thinking to hit them all, or pretending to remember even
all that the Lord has discovered; yet some of them I shall meation, that now
occur: 1. I was in the entry of this warfare too confident in grace already
received, laid too much stress on it, and promised too much on my own hand,
like Peter, Matthew. xxvi. 33. and so wonder I met with his fate, and was lest to
make discoveries of my own weakness. 2. The subtle enemies I had to do with,
took ^^e betwixt the straits, and I was not watchful against, nor aware of the
seasons when they had special advantage. The thief knew his time, when the good
man is from home, and all is quiet, Matthew. xxiv. 43. And I did not watch; and
therefore be came in an hour when I looked not for him. 3. Mine enemies put me
upon vain work, where the sin lay, not in the thing itselt, but in the degree
of it, there my subtle enemies put me on to appear against, and seek to
eradicate what was really in itself lawful. Of this I had many instances with
respect to passions, and worldly employments, and converse with sinful people:
I minded not, that if we were boand altogether up from converse with the
idolaters, fornicators, etc. of this world, we must needs go cat of the world,
1 Cor. v. 10. And as there was an anger to be avoided, so there was an anger
that was allowable, and even duty required that we should be angry, Ephesians. iv.
26. but so as avoid sin, Eccl. vii. 9. Thus Satan tempted me to provoke God, by
aiming at things which were neither given of God, nor had I any reason to
expect them, and thus to tempt God, by seeking stones to be made bread, Matthew.
iv. 3. or things not meet to be done: Like the Stoics, I was not content to
have the passions kept in their own order, but would have them eradicated. Thus
the devil drives to extremes, and when we fail of success, he takes thence
occasion to discourage ^s. Again, 4. I still neglected some means of God's
appointment, under pretense of inconveniences and difficulties, and sometimes
because irksome to the flesh; whereas these were oft-times the only proper
means, that were omitted, or at least the principal in that case. The omission
of one thing ruins much, and our apologies and exceses will not do, 1 Samuel
xiii. 13, 15, 20, 22. Some particular sins require particular remedies: When
God has appointed the use of these, and this is omitted, no wonder all others
fail. When the disciples asked, wherefore they could not cast the devil out?
our Lord told them, there were some kinds that went not out but by fasting and
prayer, Mark ix. 28.29. Whenever any mean is appointed by God, when the case
occurs wherein it is requisite, the remedy of God's appointment must be used,
as we would reach the end. If there are supposed or real difficulties, yet
while these difficulties are not our sin, we have reason to trust him as to
these, and try the means. 5. I was often sinthful, and by dro^^^^ness a man is
clothed with rags, Prove. xxiii. 21. and enemies may easily sow ta^es when men
are asleep, Matthew. xiii. 25.6. Above all, I was little acquaint with the way of
saith's improvement of Christ for sanctification, and a trade with the throne
of grace for supplies to help in time of need, John v. 40.7. I was sometimes
not single in my aims; I designed to have a victory that would ease me of the
trouble of watchfulness. I was weary of a sighting life, and would have been at
case, and had too much of an eye unto this, and such like aims; and, belike, if
I got leave to rest. I would have been too proud of my had success: Thus we ask
and receive not, because are use amiss, to consume is on ear l^sts, James iv.
3.8. When I was not presently heard, I did not persevere in prayer for the
supplies of grace that I sought. Luke xviii. 1. Thus I found often, that so long
as I was with the Lord, he was with me, 2 Chronicles xv. 2. They that want on the
Lord shall renew their strength, Isa. xl. 31. But I was too soon over with it.
And from these, and the like causes, did my want of success proceed.

5. Yet notwithstanding all these dreadful miscarriages on my part, the Lord,
in the heat of this conflict, and even while I was many ways faulty, was very
kind: 1. He kept me from giving quite over, though I fell, yet I was not quite
cast down, Psalm. xxxvii. 24.2. When I had many times gove furthest with
temptations, yet he came in with seasonable help; and passing all my
miscarriages, he helped me up, let me see that he kept me from being quite
overcome, and gave me some assurances for the future, Psalm. lxxiii. 24. Thus
foolish was I and ig^^^ant, I was at a beast before thee. Nevertheless I am
continually with thee: Thou have holden me by my right hand. Thou will guide
are by thy counsel and receive me to glory. 3. I had gracious experiences of
the Lord's helping in the time of need, and hearing cries. The Lord sometimes
stepped in when I was overcome, and sent as it were an Abigail, to keep me from
executing my wicked purposes, 1 Samuel xxv. 32. sometimes be gave me a cleanly
victory, and strengthened me to repel temptations: And many other ways did he
help and deliver, Psalm. cvi. 43.4. He sometimes, and even very frequently, when
I was hard put to it, cleared up my sincerity, and gave me such views of it, as
emboldened me to appeal to him, which freed me from that temptation, and lest
me at liberty under the advantage of this new encouragement, to appose more
vigorously; Psalm. cxxxix. 21, 22. Do not I hate all them that hate thee? I hate
them with a perfect hatred. I count them mine enemies. And hereby I was not
emboldened to sin; I durst not take encouragement to sin, because grace
abounded, though motions were made this way by my naughty heart; but I was made
more afraid of offending. These, and many other ways, was the Lord kind in the
conflict: He frequently said to me, fear not; Surely there is an end, and thine
expectation shall not be cut off, Prove. xxiii. 18. xxiv. 14.

6. The Lord has since let me see what gracious designs he carried on by this
trial, and what need there was of it, in order both to his glory and my good:
-- 1. Hereby he taught me the nature of that state we are here in, that it is a
wilderness, Cant. viii. 5. a warfare, 1 Cor. ix. 7.2. Cor. x. 4. and that we
must all be soldiers, if we mean to be Christians. 2. He taught me hereby, that
the grace that is sufficient for us, 2 Cor. xii. 9. is not in our own hand, but
in the Lord's; and that therefore our security with respect to future
temptations, is not in grace already received, but in this, that there is
enough in the promise, and the way patent to the thro^e of grace for it, Heb.
iv. 16.3. He taught me that God is the sovereign disposer, and gives out as he
sees meet in time of need, ibid. his own grace, Ephesians. i^. 7. and he is the only
judge of the proper season of giving it out. 4. He led me hereby to discern
somewhat more of the covenant of grace, that in it there are no promises made
of absolute freedom from sin while we are here; 1 John i. 8. If any man say, he
has no sin, he is a liar: And that we have no promise of freedom from gross
sins, and those sins wherein we have been formerly entangled, but in the use,
and diligent use, of the means of the Lord's appointment. 2 Pet. i. 8. If these
things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ 5. Hereby he taught me
that great lesson, that when I am w^ck in myself, then I am strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might, 2 Cor, xii. 10. Whenever I was diffident of
myself, i was then always victorious, or at least came off without hazard:
Which is very far different from what men generally think; that when a man is
diffident, and distrests himself, that then he is not meet for managing any
undertaking; and this is indeed true, when he is carnally diffident. But where
there is a distrust of self, with an eye to the Lord, it is very far otherwise.
6. He hereby taught me the use and necessity, and glory of that provision that
is made by the covenant of grace for guilt; it writes all to us to dissuade
from, and enable us against sin; but if any man sin, through the power of
temptation, it lets us see an advocate with the Father, and blood that
cleanses from all sin, I John iii. 3.7. He let me see his holy jealousy, and
how displeased he was with me for my cleaving to sin so long, and sinful
forbearance. Because I would not slay them as the Lord appointed me, and when
he required it; therefore he left them like the nations of Canaan, Judges ii.
3. to tempt and try me. The sins that now molested me, and frequently cast me
down, were those that I sought to spare before; God cried often to me to part
with them, and I would not hear, and now God would not hear when I cried to be
rid of them: Thou wast a God that forgavest their iniq^^ties, but thou ^okest
vengeance of their inventions, Fsal. xcix. 8.8. The Lord by this did humble and
prove, Deuteronomy. viii. 2. and let me see what was in my heart, even a great deal
more wickedness than I suspected. 9. The Lord hereby instructed me that this is
not my rest, Mich ii. 10, etc. and made me value heaven more than otherwise I
would have done. 10. Hereby he discovered the riches and extent of that
forgiveness that is with him, Psalm. cxxx. 4.7. that it reaches to iniquity,
transgr^ssion, and sin, Exodus xxxiv. 7. That is, sins of all sorts, multiplied
relapses not excepted. He that requires us to forgive to seventy times seven in
a day, will not do less, Matthew. xviii. 22. Yea, he tells us, that in this
respect, his thoughts are as far above ours as the heavens are above the earth,
Isa. Iv. 9. And finally. The Lord hereby fitted me to compassionate others who
are tempted, and comfort them, 2 Cor. i. 4. Heb. ii. 18. Thus I was made a
gainer by my losses and falls, to the praise of his grace.

7. After some years strungg^^^g, the Lord made me lay by all prejudices
against proper means, and wait on him in the use of them all, with some eye to
him, and then he gave me, in some measure, a victory: Thanks be to God who
gives us the victory, I Cor. xv. 57.

CHAP. V. Containing an account of my exercise about the guilt of sin, the
means of obtaining pardon, and the intimations thereof.
1. THE power of indwelling sin being still great, and through its own
activity, occasional temptations, more fixed advantages, and my own mistakes
and negligence, frequently prevalent, I was cast into frequent perplexities
about its guilt, Psalm. xxxviii. 3. There was no soundness in my bones, no rest
in my conscience for sins that I had done.

2. Besides sins of infirmity, sometimes my corruptions did, through my sloth,
neglect of proper means, and the advantages they otherwise had from
temptations, and from their being rooted in my nature, bear me down, and carry
me captive, prevail against me, and carry me not only into commission of
grosser evils, at least in heart, and omission of duties, but even into
frequently repeated relapses into these commissions and omissions; these being
sins against light, engagements, obligations, intimations of love, the guilt of
them was heavy upon my conscience, and I was much perplexed about it; my bones
were broken, my conscience desiled exceedingly, and wounded for them.

3. At sometimes when I sell into such sins, when self and pride prevailed, or
the like evils I was more deeply engaged against, obtained any notable
advantage, I was, by the deceitfulness of sin, for a time hardened. Heb. iii.
13. and insensible, like David after his soul fall. But then, 1. While it was
so, grace languished, the things that remained were ready to die, Rev. ii. 1.2.
The Lord hid himself, I had no countenance in duty: while this regard to sin
continued, all was out of order, Psalm. lxvi. 18.

4. At other times, I had no sooner complied but my heart instantly soute me, i
Sam. xxiv. 5. and I was presently, with Pater after his fall, March. xxvi. 75.
called and stirred up to the exercise of repentance, and enquiries after
forgiveness. But sooner or later the Lord awakened me out of this security, and
set my sins in order, sometimes by one mean, and sometimes by another, before
mine eyes. I. Sometimes he trysted me with some outward affliction, and hid
himself, and then I was put under a blessed necessity of seeking after him, and
enquiring into the reason of his withdrawing, and laying his hand on me. When I
was bonned in the cords of affliction, he showed to me my transgressions that I
had exceeded, Job xxxvi. 8, 9. I will go and return to my place, till they
acknowledge their offense, and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek
me early, Hos. v. 15.2. He sometimes remarkably punished me, and wrote my sin
upon my punishment, Romans ii. 21, etc. Because when I knew God, I glorified him
not as God, neither was thankful: but became vain in my imaginations: therefore
God, though he gave me not up (glory to his name) to vile affections, yet he
let them loose to molest me. He as it were gave a commission to the king of
Egypt, Assyria, or Babyl^^, Ezekiel. xxiii. 9. some of my powerful neighboring
enemies, evils to whom I had formerly been in bondage, with whom I had been in
friendship, on whom to say ^ounding I had doated, and therefore now hared above
als (...), to some one or other, or^ie may be more, gave he ^^ commission or
pertrission to invade me; and then I began 19 c^^sider what I had d^te, and
open name eyes when I was in the ^^rait, and clolely a^^a^lted by then. 3.
Sometimes again, and most frequently, by his word and spirit in ordinances, he
roused me, and laying as it were his singer on the sore, he tol^ me all that I
hand do^e: He sent a N^th^^, that told, Thus art the man, a Sam. xii 7. Whoever
gets away with ^^, his own will not get leave to lie still, though they on^y
lie long in it: Im only have I known of all the families of the earth;
thr^ef^^e I will punish you for all your iniquities, A^os iii. a.

5. When the Lord discovered sin to me, then was my soul troubled -- 1. A sense
of the wrath of God was let into my conscience, which at sometimes was very
terrible. I had no rest because his indig^^ti^e went forth against me, Psalm.
cii. 10. Jer. xv. 17. The pois^^ of his arrow dr^nk up my spirits, Job vi. 4.2.
My soul was filled with shame, while a sense of ino^metable evil^, and
especially such as imported ingratitude and wretched unkinde^f^, ^ay heavy on
my conscience, I could not look up for blothing, Psalm. xl. 12. I lay down in my
sh^me, and my cons^s^^ c^vered me, ser. iii. 25.3. I was cast into dreadful
sears, left the Lord in anger shut up his tender mercies, and be gracious no
more, Psalm. lxxvii. 8, 9. and I should not get pardon, or at least a sense of
it, any more.

6. Satan, who waited for my halting, finding me in this case, did frequently
tempt me to give over duty -- 1. He told me over all the marks of God's
displeasure, and put the worst construction on every thing, as he did with
Cain, Genesis iv. 14.2. He hereon tempted me to draw his conclusion, That my sin
was greater than it could be forgiven, and that so there was no sacc^ar in God
for me, ver. 13. And 3. Hereon he told me, there was no more forgiveness, God's
mercy was at an end, he had forgotten to be gracious, and attempted to prove it
by the unsuccessfulness of my endeavors, and thorefore inferred, that it was
to no purpose to wait any longer, a Kings vi. 33.

7. But the Lord graciously broke the force of this temptation -- 1. Sometimes
by saro^^ discoveries of forgiveness Who can tell but he may be gracious? 2 Samuel xii. 22.2. By reminding ^e of sormer kindness, the years of the right hand
of the most High, Psalm. ixxvii. 10. and the discoveries of the sovereignty of
his grace, at first when he manifested himself. 3. By letting me see the
desperate issue of this course, that ruin was inevitable in it; if I sat still,
I saw I was goes; if I went into the (...), and again followed the course of
the world, I saw interitable ruin there, and therefore I resolved to throw
myself upon him, and it be saved me alive, I lived; and if otherwise, I should
bal die, 2 Kings vii. 4. Job xiii. 15.4. When this temptation was urged most
violently, and I was hard put to it, then I thought it not time to dispute,
whether ever the Lord had manifested himself savingly, but yie^^ed the worst as
to my case that the tempter could pretend, and then I laid my case in all
aggravatiors to the extensive promises of the covenant. Be it granted, said I,
that I and but a hypocrite, that I never obtained pardon, that I am the chief
of sinners, that my sins have such aggravations, as those of none other of
mankind's sins are attended withal; yet the blood of Christ cleanses from all
fin, and he came to save the chief of sinners, 1 John i. 7. 1 Tine. i. 15. This
way proved ost relieving.

8. When I had got over these temptations, then I go: up as I could, and
resolved to seek him in the use of all duties of his appointment, meditation,
prayer, reading, hearing. These duties I followed with various success. For, 1.
Some^imes when I essayed to confess my sins, the Lord closed my lips, and I had
not a word to say, Psalm. li. 15.2. Sometimes I got leave to run the round of
duties; but with the spouie her success, I sought him, but I found him not,
Cant, iii. 1. Agaic, 3. At other times I met with new strokes; The watchmen
that went about the city sound me and smote me, and took away my vail, Cant. v.
7. even the faithful servants of Christ made my wound deeper, by setring home
sin more closely.

9. At sometimes being outwearied, and sense wearing off, through the weakness
of our nature, diversions, are the deceitfulness of sin, I attempted to speak
peace to myself, I got a fort of quietness and relief. But this was easily
discernible. For, 1. It left me in my former deadness, and I was not as before
when God spoke peace, Ezekiel. xiii. 10. Jer. viii. 11.2. I was easily induced to
'return again to folly,' Psalm. xxxv. 8.3. When I said, 'Peace, peace, sudden
destruction' followed it, 1 Thessalonians, v. 3. For the Lord was wroth, and one way or
other dis^^vered his displeasure against me; and finally my own peace did not
heal the sore, for the wrath of God, shame, and confusion hovered over my head.

10. When the Lord let me see my mistake, then he set me a-work again to
enquire after him, and to pursue the former course, and when I had gone a
little further, I found him. Cant. iii. 4. and he relieved me, and the way
whereby he relieved me was the same with that whereby he at first did deliver
me, whereof before I have given account, and therefore I shall here represent
it only more briefly -- I. The Lord set my sin in all its aggravations,
especially as it struck against him, before mine eyes. Against thee, thee only
have I sinned, and in thy fight done this ill, Psalm. li, 4.2. The Lord led me
up even to the fountain, and discovered original sin as the source, and all, at
least many, of the other bitter waters that flowed from that bitter fountain,
by the light whereby he discovered this one; he (as it was with the woman of
Samaria) told me all that ever I did in my life, John iv. 29. Behold I was
shapen in iniquity: and in sin did my mother conceive me, Psalm. li. 5.3. Very
often he laid before me, and brought me under an afflicting sense, even of the
iniquities of my fathers, Lev. xxvi. 40. Ezra ix. 7. and predecessors whom I
never knew. 4. He cut off all excuses, and made me self-convicted, and so
stopped my mouth quite, that I could neither deny nor excuse, and so I was
guilty before God, Romans iii. 19. being stripped of all my ornaments, Exodus
xxxiii. 5, 6.5. He discovered to me, what in justice he might do, and that he
might cast me off, and out of his sight, like Cain, and brought me to own, that
he would be righteous, holy, and clear in judging hus, Psalm. li. 8. and that
any punishment on this side hell, would be mercy, Lam. iii. 22.6. In this case
I lay waiting to see what he would do with me, convinced that whatever he
should do, though I could not but dread wrath and separation from him, and cry
against it, yet I owned all would be just. To the Lord belongs righteousness,
and to me shame and confusion of face, Dan. ix. 7.7. Then in mercy he stepped
in, and made a gracious discovery of the fountain opened for sin and
uncleanness, Zech. xiii. 1. and that blood of atonement that cleanses the
conscience from all sin, 1 John i. 7. in the sight of the Lord. 8. Hereby he
drew my soul to close with, and with trembling to lay stress on it: Iniquities
prevail against me I must confess: But as for our transgressions, thou will
purge them away, Psalm. lxv. 3.9. Having by this look drawn my eyes to look at
him again, while I looked at him my soul melted in tears, and my heart that was
formerly bound up was loosed, Zech. xii. 10. and my lips, formerly sometimes
quite closed, were opened, Psalm. li. 15. When I looked on him whom I had
pierced I mourned, and often, like Peter, I wept bitterly, Luke xxii. 62. Whereas
before, when I was lying self-condemned, guilty, and my mouth stepped, I
sometimes could scarce look up, or give a sigh or a groan, now I flowed in
tears. 10. While he thus answered me, Job ix. 16. and I seemed shy of believing
the news that were so good, and so unexpected, he created peace by the fruit of
his lips, Isa. lvii. 19. by the word, and as it were forced it upon my soul,
and shed abroad his love in my heart, Romans v. 5.11. Hereon I remembered all my
former ways, which the Lord had formerly discovered to me, and was ashamed for
them, and even confounded, now when the Lord was pacified, Ezekiel. xvi. 61, 63.
When he told me, he would blot out and forget, then I had the most distinct and
affecting remembrance, Jer. xxxi. 19. Like Ephraim, when I was turned, I
repented, I somte on my breast, I was ashamed, and even confounded, because I
bare the reproach of my youth, and of my former ways. But this shame was not
that dispiriting shame accompanied with distrust, and inclining to hang down
the hands; but an ingenuous concern, and blushing for wretched unkindness, like
that of the prodigal when his father met him. 12. Hereby my spirit was made
tender, and I was put upon a resolution of walking mournfully before him in the
bitterness of my soul, Isa. xxxviii. 15.13. Hereafter, while this discovery of
forgiveness and peace by it continued, I was made in some measure watchful of
returning again to f^lly, Psalm. lxxxv. 8.14. I was quickened to duty, Psalm. li.
13. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be turned unto
thee. 15. While this lasted, and was not ma^^^d by sin again, the sins of
others, and every provocation by whomsoever done, I could mo^^n ^^er it. R^^^rs
of tears were ready to run d^^^^ wins eyes, because ^^^sor^ keps (...) God's
law, Psalm. cxix. 136.16. Hereon the conscience being p^rged, I now recovered
that f^lial boldness of entering into the Lord's presence by the blood of Jesus
Christ, Heb. x. 19.22. Yet with much tenderness and awe upon my soul, Isa.
xxxiii. 15.16.19. Finally, hereby my soul was much weaned from all things ^ise,
and endeared to the Lord. To this case the Lord frequently brought me. And now,
alas! while I (...) rarely attain unto this exercise of repentance and says in
such liveliness, as then I ofs did, I am made many times to wish, as to this
repentance, that it were with me a^^^ ^^^^ths post, Joh xxix. 3. though I dare
not to wish for the occanon of it again. At that time, when I was assaulted
with boisterous lasts, and soiled by them, and my conscience defiled with
guilt, the Lord did frequently lift me up, yea lift me sweetly up.

11. To prevent mistakes, I shall subjoin a sew chservations concerning this
exercise. 1. Though at sometimes the Lord carried on this work gradually, even
as to time; yet at ^ther seasons, all this was done, as it were at once, and in
a moment. The Lord, as he did to David, in one breathing speaking sin and
peace, Sam. xii. 7, 13.2. There was a very great difference as to the degrees
of this work, sometimes convictions and bun itiation was deeper, and
discoveries of forgiveness clearer, and the exercise of faith and repentance
more lively, and sometimes less so, Jude 22. But whenever God did thoroughly
recover from any grievous fall, all these things in substance were found, Isa.
xxviii. 27.3. This was not always of a like continuance; sometimes, through my
own fault, I quickly lo^^ the jewel: And provoked him at the Red Sea, Psalm.
cvi. 7.4. Though God, to punish me for my wickedness, sometimes let me seek
peace long before I got it; yet at some seasons, to show the sovereignty of his
grace, and that I might ^^t pretend, that it was my secking that moved him to
^ew mercy, he surprised me immediately upon the back of my (...), before ever I
had thought in the least what I had done, and gave me such a (...), as made me
weep bitterly, Luke xxii. 62. And when it was thus, it deeply affected my soul,
and filled me with the most deep self-loathing and detestation, and the highest
wonder at the rickes, freedom, and astonishing sovereignty of grace. 5. There
(...) one thing I may observe with grief of heart, that the most terrible
enemies are not the most dangerous. At that time I was attacked with sins that
were easily known to be sins, my conscience was easily convinced of them, and
aiar^^ed with them and thereby was more deeply exercised and sought more after
distinct discoveries of forgiveness, which were attended with all these
pleasant effects; since that the Lord in some measure broke these lusts, I have
been assaulted with less discernible evils, sins under the mask of duties, and
these secretly devour my strength, and rarely and difficultly are they
discovered in their exceeding sinfulness, and so when it is much needed, I am
more a dranger to that state of repentance. But as I see I need it, so the Lord
knows I long to be brought into it, and to be humbled, especially for secret
and hidden sins that wasted the strength. Often have I been made to think of
this, that all the excuses mentioned in the parable of the supper, that kept
them that were invited from closing with the offer, were taken from occasions
in themselves lawful, Matthew. xxii. 5. And no doubt, the excuses whereby the
Lord's own people are kept from that nearness, that it is their duty and
interest to seek after, flow from the same things: I have found them far the
more dangerous and hurtful hindrances.

12. The Lord, by such exercises, instructed me since, and at the time, in
several useful lessons -- 1. The Lord this way taught me how to walk with him.
He dealt with me as we are wont to do with children, he held me by the hand, he
let me well nigh slip, Psalm. xciv. 18. and sometimes fall, and this to let me
know I was not able to go alone; and then he graciously raised me up, and
comforted me, that I should not by this be altogether discouraged from walking
in his way, Hos. xi. 3, 4. I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their
arms, but they knew not that I healed them; I drew them with the cords of a
man, and with bands of love. And I was to them as they that take off the yoke
on their jaws, and I laid meat unto them. 2. As the Lord, by the prevalency of
sin, taught the necessity of an extensive remedy, so by the experience of
forgiveness, in such cases as I have mentioned, he taught the certainty of
this, that this forgiveness is really as extensive, rich and free, as the case
requires, Psalm. xxxii. 5.3. He, by the experience of this, enabled me to
understand better, and speak more feelingly of these truths, than otherwise I
could have done, and to comfort others with comforts, not only real, but
experienced, even such wherewith I myself had been comforted of God, 2 Cor. i.
4. Thus what I have heard and seen, and handled, of the word of life, that
declared I to others, 1 John i. 1.4 The Lord gave some acquaintnance with the
nature, exercise, and effects of the most useful and necessary graces of his
Spirit, faith, repentance, etc. And finally, The Lord beat down self very much
by this exercise. Of this design the Lord, of late, while I read in my family
in the 9th chapter of Denteronomy, gave me a pleasant view, which I shall
represent in the following remarks from that chapter.

1. God's great design upon Israel, is to manifest the glory of his grace,
mercy, patience, and faithfulness, in their salvation, their deliverance from
Egypt, and putting them in possession of Canaan, see ver. 5, 6. 2. Naturally
sinners, as all his people are such, are, and appear very opposite to this
design, being deeply selfish, as the whole of this chapter, and the scriptures
manifest. And this self has two branches, which are like its two eyes, self
strength, and self-righteousness, ver. 1, 2. and ver. 5.6. 3. Self in these two
branches is very strong. We are ready to pretend, that our own strength carried
us through difficulties, when once we have overcome them, which we were so far
from being able of ourselves to grapple with, that the very thoughts of them
frighted us, compare ver. 1, 2. of this chapter, with the 13th and 14th
chapters of Numbers. And we are ready to ascribe to our own righteousness what
we get, when we, meanwhile, are not worthy of the least of all God's mercies,
ver. 5, 6, etc. 4. Yet how strong soever these are, they must be subdued. In
order thereto, the Lord, after he begins to manifest himself to his people,
leads them not presently into Canaan; but carries them through the wilderness,
where a variety of temptations draw out discoveries of their secret
corruptions, their weakness and wickedness, see ver. 6, 7. 5. The discoveries
of God's patience, mercy and grace, and of his people's weakness and
wickedness, especially after remarkable manifestations of ^e Lord, are means
which the Lord makes use of, and remarkably blefies, to cure them of these
distempers, and put out these two eyes of the wicked idol: Consider the whole
chapter. 6. The Lord, for this end, whenever he is about to complete, or carry
on the begun deliverance and mercy, revives the impression of these things.
Read the whole chapter, particularly ver. 7.
Many other gracious designs did the Lord in this way carry on, he let me see
the bitterness of sin, and discovered it to be exceeding sinful; he let me see
much of the hellish ingratitude of my heart, he let me see the necessity of
coming daily to the throne of grace, as for grace to help in time of need, so
for mercy and forgiveness. He made me see with wonder, how one view of
forgiveness and pardoning mercy alienates the soul more from sin, than twenty
sights, nay tastes of hell, (which Pelagians cannot understand): And many other
things.

13. Besides these more gross evils I fell into, through the violence of
temptation, I was exercised about the guilt of sins of daily incursion and
infirmity, deadness, wandering in duty, and innumerable others. When I began to
be first exercised about forgiveness, I was much difficulted about these; and I
shall, in the following particulars, represent my exercise about them: 1. When
the Lord manifested himself, his enemies fled before him, Psalm. lxviii. 1. and
received a stunning stroke, as has been showed. 2. It was sometime before any
of the stronger enemies discovered themselves again, presumptuous sins for a
time, as has been represented, kept quiet. The first discoveries of the
remaining power of indwelling sin which I got, was in the invasions of sin of
daily infirmity: 'For in many things we offend all,' James iii. 2.3. Hereon I
began to be much discouraged, neither understanding well our state here, that
if any man say, He has no sin, he deceives himself, 1 John i. 8. and the
gracious provision made for this case in the covenant of grace, the daily
sacrifice, that is, the daily application to the throne of grace, the blood of
atonement, the fountain opened, Psalm. xxx. 6. And so being under a fond and
groundless expectation of entire freedom from sin. 4. My foolish expectation
being quickly disappointed by the outbreaking of these sins, I wist not what to
do: I thought it hard to trouble him who had been so kind, to seek new favors,
lia. vii. 13. The pride of my heart could not stoop to be continually, daily,
hourly beholden for new favors: I would have been a lord, and come no more to
Christ, Jer. ii. 31. This pride was so masked up, that at that time I did not
discern it; but since the Lord has made it manifest. 5. But necessity has no
law: they grew many; For who can understand his errors? Psalm. xix. 12. and the
light of the Lord daily discovered more and more of them. 6. Hereon I essayed
to humble myself distinctly for every one of them, and to make a distinct
application to the throne of grace about each; but when I began to observe
them, they were so many, that if I had followed this course, my whole time
would not have sufficed: Hereon the Lord led me to that course, which a worthy
friend, to whom I owe much for a distinct understanding of the Lord's work with
me, told me what Franciscus De Sales, a popish casuist, advises to in this case
-- I was fain to take them all in the ump, or rather to go with them all on me
at once, and plunge myself into the fountain that is opened for sin and for
uncleanness, that is, I took a view of myself as defiled by innumerable evils
of this sort, and under a sense of them, cast myself upon the glorious
atonement, and endeavored to lay stress for cleansing as to them all, whether
such as I ciscerned distinctly, or such as I had not yet discovered, on that
blood that cleanses from all sin; which I think was the Psalmist's way under
the like case, Psalm. xix. 12, 13. Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou
me from secret faults. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let
them not have dominion over me. Then shall I be upright, and I shall be
innocent from the great transgression. That Popish casuist before mentioned, as
my worthy friend told me, illustrates this by a very elegant similitude, If a
man see one or two filthy creatures on him he shakes or washes them off: But if
he look and see himself all overspread with such, then he must bethink himself
of some general course, he goes to some bridge, and leaps into a deep pool, and
drowns them all, and leaves them behind him. If any one grosser sin overtake
us, we must endeavor a distinct recovery and intimation of pardon by a
distinct application to the blood of sprinkling: But when we look upon these
sins which cannot be numbered and searched out, and which are still growing,
then we must betake ourselves with the man to the bridge, and leap into the
pool. 7. To clear this matter yet further, I observe, that the light wherein
that plenteous redempton that is with God, was first discovered, though
variously clouded and darkened, yet continued in some measure: A child of light
continues light in the Lord; he may walk in darkness, and to his sense have no
light, Ephesians. v. 8. Isa. l. 10. while yet it is the remainder of light that makes
him discern his darkness, but he really is not darkness as before: He has his
summer's sun, that shines longer, brighter, and warmer; and his winter's sun,
that shines shorter, is more frequently clouded, and has less heat: He has his
fair days and foul and rainy days, and a changeable intercourse of day and
night, wherein he has only the moon and stars; but light more or less there is
still. 8. When no extraordinary indisposition, no extraordinary darkness was on
me, this habitual discovery of forgiveness, and the way to it, had its own use.
The winter's sun was not able to revive when I was cast into any of those
distempers abovementioned; and therefore, as has been above-narrared, in that
case, I waited a blink of the sen in its strength; but for ordinary, I by the
direction of that light did endeavor daily, as to fins of infirmity, to betake
myself in prayer to the blood of atonement, according as the Lord has taught us
by the daily morning and evening sacrifice under the law: As for particular
cases and pollutions, there were other institutions with respect to them. 9.
This application by prayer to the redemption that is in Christ, even the
forgiveness of sin through says in his blood, Romans iii. 25. according to this
discovery of it, in and by prayer, especially when the Lord quickened by any
new blink; (for the winter sun has his warm and refreshing blinks, even in the
coldest season): this application, I say, especially when the Lord, as he
frequently did, gave any new breathing, did relieve me, and help to quiet my
conscience as to the afflicting sense of these sins of daily incursion: When
the helped to pray for cleansing from secret sins, and keep back from
presumptuous sins, Psalm. xix. 12.13. I was satisfied as to my uprightness and
freedom from the great transgression, and acceptance with him in following any
duty of my station, through the beloved. 10. As the case was not so urgent, so
neither was the outgate so discernible: but it was sufficient to answer in some
measure the end abovementioned, freedom from dispiriting discouragement, and
some measure of comfort and quiet as to my acceptance with God through Christ.

I conclude with four observations as to the whole: 1. Though we may sometimes
heal our own wound slightly, yet it is God's prerogative to speak solid peace,
Isa lvii. 19. yea, and the speaking of it is a work of the greatest power,
where the conscience is really exercised; it is a creating peace, and where he
creates it, he can make it take effect, Job xxiv. 29. When he gives quietness,
who then can make trouble? and when he hides his face, who then can behold
him? Whether it be done against a nation or against a man only. 2. The Lord let
me see, that considering the pride and unbelief of our hearts, and the
greatness of our guilt, it is not easy to win to believe that the forgiveness
that is with God is able to answer all we need, and so to engage a sinner to
betake himself unto it at all times, when once he comes to see his case
thoroughly; and when his unbelief is in some measure ^^stered, and the soul
satisfied of the fullness of the fountain, and extensive, nay, infinite reach of
the forgiveness that is with God, and the pride of heart so far broken, that
the soul is willing to be daily beholden to grace and mercy, it is not easy to
keep up either a due detestation of sin, or keep our carnal hearts from a
common use of it, or rather an abuse of it: Here, in my opinion, lies one of
the greatest secrets of practical godliness, and the highest attainment in
close walking with God; to come daily and wash, and yet to keep as great a
value for this discovery of forgiveness, as if it were once only to be got and
no more: Indeed the more we see of it, the more we should value it; but our
carnal hearts, on the contrary, tern formal, and count it a common thing. That
which is out daily allowance we value little, and we are fo^d of novelties and
dainties: Bread is more precious than most, nay, any of the rarities which men
purchase at so dear a rate; but because God has provided i^ in plenty, and we
daily use it, therefore we make a light account of it: Blessed are they with
whom it is otherwise in the case now in hand. 3. I observe, that the joy of the
Lord is then only to be retained when we walk tenderly and circumspectly; it is
inconsistent not only with the entertainment of any gross sin, (...) with a
careless walk: Then had the churches rest throughout all Judea, and G^^^ce, and
Sanaria, and were edified, walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort
of the Holy Ghost, etc. Acts IX. 32.4. I observe, then when I was as the lowest
ebo, as to forgiveness, doubting if the Lord would pardon, after many duties
have been essayed without finding the Lord, or any sense of his love, I have
often found him in the duty of thankfulness: And whereas one will say, What had I
then to be thankful for? I answer, I began thus, What a mercy is it that I am
out of hell? Lam. iii. 21, 22. It is of the Lord's mercies I am not consumed;
blessed be the Lord for this. Again, What a mercy is it, that not only the Lord
has helped me to notice his mercy in keeping me out of hell, but to be thankful
for it? Again, Blessed be the Lord that has kept me out of hell, blessed be the
Lord that has made me observe it with thankfulness, and blessed be the Lord
that has made me observe his mercy in helping me to thankfulness: Thus I have
gone on till the Lord has led me to a sense of his love, and restored comforts
to my soul: They that will praise the Lord for little, shall have more, Psalm.
lxvii. 5, 6. Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee.
Then shall the earth yield her increase, and God, then our own God shall bless
us.

Upon a further observation of this variety of cases wherewith I was exercised,
the Lord's management of them, and what I have felt in myself, I see, besides
the fruits beforementioned, many others. 1. The Lord hereby rebuked me for my
fondness of enlargement, and my thinking to live a life of sense, and trained
me somewhat up to a life of faith, the faith of adherence, that cleaves to God
as revealed in the word, and refuses to quit the word even when it finds not
the Lord in it, in a sensible way that refreshes, which certainly is more
strong than that which cleaves to it when it feels sensible refreshment and
power: to trust in God when hiding and threatening to stay, Job xiii. 15. is to
hope against hope. 2. He taught me not to judge of my state by my frames;
beside many other lessons that now occur not.

CHAP. VI. Recounting my exercise about the being of God, and so^wing the way
of my outgate from this temptation.
1. I Have before mentioned, and given some account of my trials about the
being of God. Being now to give an account of the relief, it will be proper to
recapitulate briefly my whole exercise with respect unto this head, and set the
temptation and the relief together.

2. I have showed above, that I was early, even as soon almost as I began to
have any close concern about religion, exercised with temptations in reference
to this great and fundamental truth. But at first I had no arguments urged
against this truth, or injected into my mind. Only being made to see, that this
was the hinge whereon the whole of religion turns, all hopes depend, and by
which all practices were to be regulate, I found myself at a loss for want of
an evidence, sufficiently clear and strong, and convincing, which I thought
necessary, with respect to a truth whereon so much weight was to be laid. In a
word, I was at Pharaob's pass, Exodus v. 2. Who is the Lord that I should obey
him, and let Israel go? Plainly, very great things are demanded of me, and I am
called to hope for great things, and before I trust so far, I would be
satisfied to know more of that God in whom I am to trust, as to so great things.

3. But afterward Satan attacked me by subtle injections, as I have showed
before, took me at a disadvantage, when I was estranged from God, and my head
intent upon abstract subtilities, and while I followed such vain speculations,
intruding into things I had not seen, he took his opportunity, and said daily,
Where is thy God? Psalm xlii. 3, 10. And when he had got me down, he triumphed,
where is now that mouth, with which thou did all along reproach Atheists?
Such are their arguments, try your strength with them, and fight them, Judge.
ix. 38.

4. Hereon a sharp conflict began to be managed in my breast. On the one hand,
Satan, in conjunction with the natural atheism of my heart, plied me hard with
fiery dares, Ephesians. vi. 16. and subtle sophistry, arguments sometimes
astonishing, so far were they above my reach. On the other hand, I, a poor
apostate creature, sadly darkened, but yet retaining some remainders of light,
which God has made manifest in my conscience, Rom i. 19. as in these of other
men, and somewhat confirmed in those notions of God by education, the outward
dispensation of the word, and it may be, by some common work of the Spirit,
riveting all the former, keeping alive these impressions, or at least
restraining Satan and my corruptions from blotting them out. Against that
formidable confederacy, I, such a one as I have now represented myself, made
head, and ap^ea^ed.

5. In this conflict, I used various ways: 1. I sometimes rejected the
suggestions, and refused them a hearing, Who art th^n soul (...), or disputed
against God? Romans ix. 20. It shocks nature's light to say, Psalm xiv. 1. There
is no God. Even the (...) dare scarce say it out. 2. Sometimes I prevented them
as it were, and not only refused an hearing, but representing in my own soul
how deep resentment such a provocation, such a motion deserved. If any man will
plead against God, or for Baal, none shall entreat for him, but he should early
be pat to death, Judge. vi. 31.3. When the impudent enemy would not thus be put
^f, I essayed to maintain the truth, and answer his argument. But his instances
were so many, and so subtle, that I could not prevail this way; but the longer
I stood arguing the case, I was put in the greater loss, Rev. xii. 9. When he
comes in speaking terms, he is too hard for us; and no wonder he be so for us,
he worsted our sirit parents in innocence. 4 When I found this, then I often
would wish for a discovery of God himself. O that he would appear, and O that I
knew where I might find him, Job xxiii. 2. when my wishes took no effect. 5.
The devil hereon took advantage to tell me, that he did not appear, and that
surely, if there was a God, he would help one that was standing up for him in
such a strait, Psalm xxii. 6. In this case, I sometimes hoped that he would
arise, and then mine enemies would be made to flee before him: Though the truth
is, I could but give little reason for it. 6. Sometimes I prayed. Satan urged
me with the unreasonableness of praying, till I was once sure there was a God.
And I confess I was sometimes hardly put to it, to defend the practice; yet I
always inclined to the affirmative, and thought, that it there was a God, as I
durst not say but I had reason to think there was, he could best satisfy me as
to his own being, 2 Kings xix. 10.7. I was sometimes obliged to flee him, and
seek sanctuary in diversions. 6. Sometimes the Lord mercifully restrained him,
and be lest me for a season.

6. While this trial was lengthened out, the Lord gave frequently some checks
to it, and to Satan. I. By clear discoveries of the horrible tendency of the
temptations, that they tended to (...) the fis^^tires of all human happiness,
Psalm lxxiii. 15. cat reproach upon all the best and wis^^t of the world, and
account, and set up as the only happy and wise men, pr^^d fools, ^^al. iii. 15.
If the s^ndei^^ are (...) the right^^^ h^^e? Psalm xi. 3. Then are the proud
happy, and ^^ey that hate God are ex^^ted. 2. I was relieved by the
consideration of the comfortable (...) c^^ers had got, who had been in like
manner exercited. Psalm xxix. 4.5. Our fathers trusted i^ God, they trusted in
God and were b^^^^d. 3. God sometimes let me see some glimpses of his glory,
even in the works of creation: The (...) declare his glory, Psalm xix. 1.1. The
Lord sometimes, from the word, re^^ered me by some beans of his glory. And I
remember I was oftener not once helped by the Lord's suggesting with ^^^sual
power, the three children's answer to the king of Babylon, with the glorious
issue; O (...) we are (...) careful to answer thee in this matter. If it bes^,
our God when we serve, is able to deliver as from the bur^ing fiery sur^ace and
be will deliver us out of three band. But if not be it ^now^ (...), O king,
that we will not serve say gods, nor worship the ^^lden (...) which then husl
set up, ^^n. iii. 16, 17. There was something indeed here, that I could not
reach: but my heart was affected with the noble resolution, and encouraged to
attempt, weakly as I could, to write after their copy: and the issue was
encouraging. 5. The devil in these temptations acted so visible a part, that I
could not but discern that there was a devil: And when I saw him to deeply
engaged in this quarrel, I was strongly induced to think be was not (...)
against a straw, or to ^u^^ a shadow,: Sam. xxiv. 14.6. When the Lord began to
deal with me closely about sin, the edge of this temptation was much (...)
could not easily (...) in persuading there was no God, while I found his arrows
slick soft in me, and the p^^son of them drinking up my spirits, Ju^ vi. 4.

7. But yet I was not fully relieved. Nothing but a discovery of God could give
a full defeat to Satan, Zech. iii. 2, Wherefore the Lord at length pitied me;
not in the way that I could have desired; for I would have had it then. But
considering I was then an unhumbled enemy, God could not have appeared
otherwise than as an enemy, and I could not have thus seen him and lived, Exodus
xxxiii. 10. Such an appearance would indeed have made me believe and tremble,
James ii. 19. But this would have cast me into new trouble. Wherefore the Lord
led me to right satisfaction another way: He discovered sin in the way above
mentioned, and by this discovery, as I have now hinted, diverted the violence
of this temptation, and broke its force, as has been above hinted: For be stays
his rough wind in the day of his east wind, Isa. xxvii. 8. And having thus
humbled me, he gave me the above mentioned discovery of himself in his glory in
Christ Jesus.

8. That then which brought me to a soul satisfying assent, and repelled all
temptations against the being of a God, was the abovementioned view of him in
his glory, 2 Cor. iv. 6. While God who commanded the light to shine (...) of
darkness, by his word and Spirit shining into my mind, to give me the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. I could not
desiderate any more satisfying evidence of his being. And while that light did
shine, or when at any time it does shine, Satan then dares not oppose. All the
mountains of opposition, the bulky arguments, that appeared like rocks and
hills, shook at the presence of the Lord, and were carried into the midst of
the sea. And now the light being come, I John ii. 8. and the Lord being seen in
his own light, I had manifold and satisfying evidences of this glorious truth.

8. That then which brought me to a soul satisfying assent, and repelled all
temptations against the being of a God, was the abovementioned view of him in
his glory, 2 Cor. iv. 6. While God who commanded the light to shine (...) of
darkness, by his word and Spirit shining inte my mind, to give me the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. I could not
desiderate any more satisfying evidence of his being. And while that light did
shine, or when at any time it does shine, Satan then dares not oppose. All the
mountains of opposition, the bulky arguments, that appeared like rocks and
hills, shook at the presence of the Lord, and were carried into the midst of
the sea. And now the light being come, I John ii. 8. and the Lord being seen in
his own light, I had manifold and satisfying evidences of this glorious truth.

1. I-had the evidence of sight, not by the eye of the body, but by that of
faith; I saw the glory of God as represented in the word, shining with the
clearest luster, that satisfied me it was truth, and no lie, 2 Cor. iii. 18.
The glory was so great, that it not only let me see, and convinced me of its
reality, but really convinced me in some measure, that nothing else is real.
This sight gave me more consistent, God-becoming notions of him, his nature and
attributes, than ever I attained before, which shook the foundation of many of
my former seruples, that proceeded only from my ignorance and darkness about
the nature of God.

2. I had the evidence of the ears, for I heard him speak, not to my bodily
ears, but to my soul; and his voice did sufficiently distinguish ^^self from
the voice of any creatare. For, first, he spoke terror to me from Sinai, Heb.
xii. 19. and then when my soul was as the troubled sea, he said, Peace, be
still; and with authority commanded he the winds and the sea, and they obeyed,
and presently there was a cain, Mark iv. 33. His word enlightened mine eyes,
and converted my soul. It was a powerful voice that came from the Lord most
high, Psalm. xxix. 4. The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. The
testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. The statu^es of the Lord
are right rejoicing the heart. The commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes, Psalm. xix. 7, 8.

3. I had likewise a seeling of his power. I not only heard his voice, but I
sent his power casting me down, and raining me up again, Psalm. cii. 10. and
sawing to one that was weak, Be strong, Ls^. xxxv. 4. Psalm. Ixviii. 28. yea,
and commanding strength. Thus my says flood not in the wisdom of man, but in
the power of God, 1 Cor. ii. 5. I have before told what of his power I felt,
what effects were wrought, and so here I forbear any further account.

4. I was now made to taste and see that the Lord is good, and that tho-Joul
that trusts in him is bl^ss^d, Psalm. xxxvi. 8. I sat down under his (...), and
the s^^^^ abovementioned were sweet to my ^aste. Cant. ii. 3.

5. I was made to seel the savor, and rel^^h a fragrant sweetness in his word,
works, and ways. His name was as o^^tment. scured forth, and therefore I l^^d
him, Cant, i. 3.

6. Hereby all my objections were solved, Hcb. xi. 1. Faith is the evidence of
things not seen; it not only-satisfied the soul about them by the clearest
evidence, but it reproves contrary objections, Psalm. xviii. 12. At the
brightness that was before him, the dark cl^^ds passed away. My objections now
were like those kings mentioned by the Psalmist, who had come in a combination
to ruin the church, but were frighted by God's appearing, Psalm. xlviii. 4.5.6.
Lo the kings were assembled, they passed together. They saw it, and so they
marvelled, they were troubled, and hasted away. Fear took hold upon them there,
and pains as of a woman in travail. Just so was it with my adversaries; faith
(as the word rendered evidence, Heb. xi. 1. signifies) reproved them, and at
this rebuke they fled. For, 1. If they should now say, Where is thy God? I was
ready toreply, Lo this God is our God, we have waited for him, and be will save
us; we have waited for him, and will be glad in his salvation, Isa. xxv. 9.2.
If they shoald now object the sceming inconsistency of his attributes, which
was often made use of to trouble me, I had an answer given, a word put in my
mouth. At the same time God condescended to show me his back parts,
h^^^^tisfied me, that no man could behold his face, Exodusxxxiii. 3. He by the
discovery gave ma a view of his incomprehensibility, sufficient to silence all
these; Job xi. 7. Caust th^^ by searching find out God? Can^t thou find out the
Almighty unto perfection? Our short line cannot measure God. 3. When the
seeming contusion and disorders in his government were urged, I now had
wherewith to answer all these, Job xxxiii. 13. He gives an account of none of
his matters, Psalm. lxxvii. 19. His way is in the sea, and his paths in the
great waters: His footsteps are not known. Yet though clouds und darkness are
round about him, righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne,
Psalm. xcvii. 2.4. The Lord really cleared many particular objections as to all
these heads, and by this discovery of himself in the sanctnary, Psalm. lxxiii.
17. he satisfied me in a way rational, yet above s ason, letting me see
rational answers in the light of his word and Spitit. He laughs at the
prosperity of the wicked, because he sees their day a coming Psalm. xxxvii. 13.
Thus were mine enemies foiled, and so let all thine enemies perish, O Lord,
Judges v. 31.

This light, thus kindled, he daily increased, and confirmed me every day more
and more by new discoveries of himself from the word. And now I could look with
satisfaction upon the heavens and the earth, and see the print of his hand upon
them.

CHAP. VII. Containing an account how I came to be satisfied that the
scriptures are the word of God, and how temptations in reference to them were
repelled.
1. TO give a clear account of the issue of my temptation, it will be necessary
that I shortly recapitulate what formerly has been spoken concerning the trial,
and my carriage under is.

2. This tempation did not attack me so early as the former, but it was managed
much in the same way; sometimes my mind only hung in suspense, and hovered in
uncertainty, for want of evidence proportioned to the importance of the truth
for my faith to fix on: At other times, I was strangely harassed with violent
temptations, multiplied and subtle objections which were thronged daily in on
my mind, by reading books full of them, by converse with enemies to the word,
by Satan's suggestions, which were by much the more subtle and troublesome to
me.

3. This exercise was in some measure more perplexing than the former, because
it was no less ruining to all satisfying religion; the objections were much
more plausible, they were far more in number, and entertained by persons of a
better character, and the evidence of the truth lay farther from the reach of
an unenlightened mind.

4. Before the issue came, the Lord gave, by considerations formerly mentioned,
sometimes a merciful check unto temptations, and kept them from overwhelming me
quite; of which I have formerly given some account.

5. I tried many ways besides prayer and attendance upon ordinances; I bought,
borrowed, and read many books, written in defense of them, which wanted not its
own solid use; for hereby I got a deep rational conviction of the truth, and so
was emboldened to plead for them against enemies, and often times to beat them at
their own weapons: and I got many particular objections fully answered, and was
hereby encouraged to wait for full satisfaction, without despairing. Especially
one book had this use; after I had, without the satisfaction I desired, though
nor without the fruits abovementioned, perused my later writings, the Lord ^^d
me to look into the (...) filling of the Scriptures, which had lien by me
negrected: And I found this more convincing than any I had read, because it
brought me nearer the proper evidence whereon faith should fix, than any of the
rest; it discovered more of the intrinsiek worth of the word than the others,
and pleaded strongly in point of reason.

6. Yet after all this, my mind ^mained unsatisfied, none of these arguments
had acthority to repel ^^^^^atiens, being but the wisdom of man; nor, on the
same account, did they lay a four ^ation for divine faith, nor did they
enlighten a darkened mind to see the evidence of God in the word; nor were they
able to rectity an indisposed palate, and convey a taste and savor of the
word of God to the soul, that was able to satisfy me that it was such bread as
a man might love by, Matthew. iv. 4.

7. Thus it continued with me un^il the Lord came, and let in the
forementioned discovery of his glory into my soul, and hereby I was relieved
and satisfied as to this doubt also, (...) Cor. xiv. 24.25. The Lord had
before, when I was under the convincing work of his Spirit, affected my
conscience with some sense of his authority in the word, evidencing itself by
that convincing and condemning light and power which I di^cerned and ^eit; and
hereby the force of the foregoing temptation was usually broke in some measure,
when the Lord by the word and fasten on my soul a sense of my guilt, but this
discovery of sin by the word being terrible to me, rather extorted an assent,
than induced to a willing consent and cheerful acquiescence in the word as
coming from God. But the Lord, when he gave the before mentioned outgate by the
word, conveying a sense of his authority in it, by a light and power that
relieved my soul, ^^pe^led temptations, re^ved, composed, comforted, and
strongly: bore up^^^ soul before depressed and bowed down: this made (...) not
only give an a^^ent, (...) with much pleasure acquiesce in this word as the
word of life; then I found his words, and did eat them, and I rejoiced as they
that find great treasure, and they were to me the joy and rejoicing of my
heart, Jei. xv. 16. And hereon I was sweetly satisfied as to the scriptures
being his word; for they did many ways evidence that they were from him.

1. All discoveries of guilt were conveyed by them, before and since my
outgate: God by it spoke in mine can sins, which none save God that searches
the heart could know; it made these sins manifest which I knew not, no creature
else knew, 1 Cor. xv. 25. By it the secrets of my heart were made manifest; and
hereon I could not but fall down, and own that God was in it of a truth, and
that indeed it was a beam from the fountain of light: For whatever makes
manifest is light, Ephesians. v. 13. And that it was from him who tries the reins,
and sets our secret sins in the light of his countenance, Jer. xvii. 10. It
discerned the thoughts and intents of my heart in such a quick and powerful
way, Psalm. xc. 8. and with that authority, Matthew. vii. 29. that made me own it
the word of God. And now I was ready to say, Come see a book that has told me
all that ever I did in my life, is not this the book of God^ John iv. 29.

2. All the discoveries that the Lord gave of his wrath were conveyed by the
scriptures; it was by them that his wrath was dropped into my soul, and
revealed from heaven against me, Romans i. 18. The word, as the arrow of the
Almighty, Psalm. xxxviii. 2. thrown by an omnipotent arm, pierced and stuck in
my soul, and the poison of it drunk up my spirit, Psalm. xlv. 5. Job vi. 4. it
was the rod of God's strength, Psalm. xc. 2. whereby he broke and crushed me
while his enemy.

3. It was by the same word that he let in upon my f^ul that glorious discovery
of his being, attributes, purposes, Romans x. 8, 9. and his whole will in
reference to my salvation by Jesus Christ, whereof before, 2 Timothy i. 10. Tit.
iii. 4. hereby he conveyed into my soul sweet and satisfying evidences as to
his being; satisfying, consistent, and some way God-becoming notions of his
nature. Herein it was that he proclaimed his name, the Lord God merciful and
gracious unto sinners in Christ, Exodus, xxxiv. 5, as I have before showed.

4. It was by the word he conveyed all those converting, Psalm six. 7.
transforming, quickening, so^^orting, re^^iving, compoting influences above
mentioned. It was his word converted my soul, whils I lay in sin, Psalm cxix.
50.93. (...) me when I was dead, charged me into h^^ image in some measure, 2
Cor. iii. 18. (...) me and ^atered me, ^sa. lvii. 15. when again I was weary,
supported and ^^aved me when I was ready to sai^, P^^lm xx. 2. Acts xx. 35. and
composed me when I was like the (...), Mark iv. ^9.

5. It was b^^he sau^e word that he let in glorious discoveries of all the
truths of religion, wherewith I was now made acquainted; let me see the wonders
of his la^^, Psalm cxix. 17. excellent things in coursel and knowledge, Prove.
xxii. 20. By it he was pleased to discover the craft, the power, the actings
and designs of my enemies, and by it he satisfied me of my doubts, let one see
his secret designs in my trials, and somewhat of his designs in many of those
his public administrations, whereat I had before taken exception.

6. As all these discoveries and influences were conveyed by the word, so be
now in the conveyance affected my conscience with this authority, and evidenced
that his name was in it, by that light and power pecu^^^^ to God, that went
along with it, Gal. iii. 2. Jer. xxiii. 2^. It spoke not in all these things as
the scribes and ^harisees, the wise^t, the greatest, or the best of men, but
with another sort of authority and weight, it spoke as never man spoke, Math.
vii. 29. John vii. 46. Whatever it said, either with respe to God, or my case,
or others, my conscience was ma^^ to stand to it, when he c^a^enged by his word
for things which I knew not to be saults, men notice not, conscience obeyed,
and took the hint, and armed with this authority, accused, arr^igned,
conden^ed, and, as it were, executed the sentence too. Nor would it stand to,
or reg^rd defense or pleas from any other airth. When God spoke wrath, be
^indled a stame in my foal, by the breath of this word, that money waters could
no^ quer^^ he raised a storm in it, that I could neither quiet, nor row
against, so as to get to land, Job xxxiv. 29. The heart that before was as
unconcerned as a stone at reading the word, or hearing it, now trembled and
quaked. In like manner when he spoke peace he created it, Isa. lvii 19. He made
the d^ad to bear, and the hearer to live. He sent his word and h^^^^d me, Psalm
cvii. 20, 29. And immediately there was a calm. The winds and s^as obeyed him,
at his rebuke they fred, Mark iv. 39. Templations after it spoke not again.
When I was self destroyed. self condemned, and by its power beat from all
pleas, so that I durst neither deny, excuse nor ex^e^uate, nor quarrel the
^a^dest sentence which I dreaded most; and was hereon cast into the great^it
agony of trouble, when I was ready to say with Job. If I had called, and he had
answered me; yet would I not believe that he had heark^^ed to my voice. Job ix.
16. When with him I ref^sed to be comforted, and scarce did think comfort
possible; yet whenever he sent his word, it healed me, and my soul was
commanded to be at peace, a glorious calm always ^nsued. Whereas, on the other
hand, when I or others endeavored to speak peace to myself, mine enemies
boldly repelled all, and flew on me, as the devil did on the exorcises, Acts
xix 16.

7. The Lord now sweetly relieved me as to my doubts about the scriptures. I.
Whereas mine en^mies had ost pushed me with this, that there were many
pretenders to revelation; and hereon, to difficult me, asked, how I would or
could distinguish the word of God from these pretenders? The Lord himself now
gave a qui^ting reply, Jer. xxiii. 28, 29. The prophet that has a dream, let
him tell a dream; and he that has my word, let him speak my word fa^thfully:
What is the chaff to the wheat, says the Lord? Is not my word like as a fire,
says the Lord? And like a hammer that breaks the reck in pieces? 2. He was
pleased particularly to speak these things, whereat I had stumbled, to my soul,
and often to evidence his authority in and by these passages which I took
exception at. And this condescension was of manifold use; it satisfied as to
those passages, it reproved and humbled me for my unbelief and ignorance in
quarrelling at them; it rendered me jealous of the like temptations with
respect to other passages. It put me to plead for clea^ing as to what was da^k
from the Lord, it gave me hope as to the issue. These things understood not his
disciples at the first. -- They said therefore, What is this that be says, A
little while? We cannot tell what be says. -- But when he had ris^^ from the
dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this unto them: And they
believed the scripture, and the word which Jesus had said, John Chapter xii.
36. compared with Chapter xvi. 18. and with the Chapter ii. 22. Then was I made
to say with the diciples, Chapter xvi. 29. Lo, now speak thou plainly, and
speak no proverb. 3. Where I was not presently cleared, the Lord gave me
subsistence, as it were something to live on till light came; he satisfied me
from the word, of the reasons of his expressing himself in the scriptures in
parables to the multitude; and he told me, that what he did and said, I knew
not now, but encouraged me to hope, that I should know hereafter, John xiii. 7.
when my need required it. 4. He was as good as his word; for when I was alone
with him, he opened what before was spoken in parables, and while he opened the
scripture, and discovered my ignorance, he often made my heart burn within me,
Luke xxiv. 32. Again, 5. He satisfied me, as to many things, that I was not yet
able to bear them, Mark iv. 33. John xvi. 12, 13. as to others, that it was nor
for me to know them at present, that the proper season of light as to them,
would come, when he would show me plainly of them, and then should I know them.
6. He let me see his wisdom and goodness in training me up to dependence, for
opening of my eyes to see the wonders of his law, Psalm cxix. 18. Job xxxiv.
32. and leading me to importune him, that what I knew not he might teach, John
xvi. 12, 13. and discovering hereby that I knew but in part, and stood in need
of the Spirit to guide unto all truth, to bring all to remembrance, 1 Cor.
xiii. 12. and that it was my duty to meditate in Gods law day and night, Psalm
i. 2. and search the scriptures, and that with much humility, since the secret
of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he shows them his covenant, and he
guides the meek in judgment, and clearly teaches them his way, Psalm xxv. 9,
10, 12, 14.

8. When after this I now read the scriptures, and found not that powerful
light shining with that warming, quickening and sparkling glory, 1 Cor. ii. 15.
yet I found mine eyes opened, and an habitual light planted in my soul, John x.
4, 5. whereby I was enabled almost every where to discern the glory of the Lord
in some measure, Col. 1.13. and thereby my conscience was secretly overawed, 1
John ii. 27. and brought even then to regard them as his word, Col. 2.13. being
transtated out of darkness into light, and illuminated in some measure in the
knowledges of God, his nature, purposes, and the tendency of his whole dealings
with men: there was hereby a light reflected on the whole scripture, and I was
ordinarily enabled to discern the congruity of all that I read there to those
discoveries of God, and how worthy of him, and like himself every thing was.
And by this abiding light, I was capable of discerning in the word, discoveries
of the actings of sin in grace, a penetration and exactness beyond the reach of
any, save the omniscient and only wise God.

And being thus once in this way quieted as to the truth, in the same and other
ways of a like nature, I was daily confirmed.

CHAP. VIII. Containing a short account of the issue of some other temptations
wherewith I had been exercised, and the relief I got with respect to them, from
the Lord.
1. I Have above showed, that Satan, who had often tempted me to pride, when he
found it for his interest, turned himself another way, and made it his work to
drive to a bastard sort of humility. When I was caught in the thicket of his
temptations about the truth of the scriptures, and other things of an alike
nature, and was using means to get my mind relieved; he often, with much
importunity, urged me with this thought, "To what purpose do ye seek for
satisfaction, or how can ye be so vain, as to expect it about these things,
wherein men of incomparably greater reach, abilities, diligence and
opportunities, have been obliged to remain unsatisfied, and upon that account,
have given up with them?" This temptation was often urged with that hell'sh
violence, that I had no spirit left in me by it: I was ready to let my hands
hang down, my knees turned feeble, and my mouth was often at speaking it out,
that there was no hope, and I went about to make myself despair of any good,
fruit of any labor taken, or that could by me be exercised, and laid out under
the sun.

2. When the Lord made the foregoing discovery of himself to me, the force of
this temptation was quite broke, by seeing the truths of God in his own light.
But I got not a particular discovery of the weakness of this temptation then,
till some time after reading in my ordinary, the three first-chapters of the
First to the Corinthians, the Lord was pleased to open mine eyes, and make me
understand the weakness of this temptation. The light that then shined upon my
soul from, and by this portion of scripture, and the satisfaction of soul it
gave, as to this temptation, no words can express: Nor can I, at this distance
of time, narrate all that then the Lord made convincingly clear to me from his
word. Yet the substance I do remember, and shall represent in the following
remarks.

3. First God here represented to me, that his great design in the method of
salvation made choice of by infinite wisdom, was to stain the pride of all
glory; that no flesh might glory in his sight. But that he that glories should
glory only in the Lord.

4. Secondly, The Lord discovered, that a vain ambition to be wise above what
God allowed, was the spring and principal part of our apostasy from God; and
that ever since Satan first dropped that poison into our natures, it has wrought
strongly: Vain man would be wise. The Jews as^e a sign, and the Greeks seek
after wisdom.

5. Thirdly, That in order to the attainment of the foregoing design, and
indeed for the recovery of man, it was plainly necessary, that man's ambition
in this matter should be effectually checked. This being a principal branch of
our corruption, if it were not cured we were not completely recovered. This
lying in a plain opposition to the design of God, if it were not levelled, this
design could not be reached. Hereon it became necessary, that God should
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the
prudent.

6. Fourthly, God, to vindicate his own wisdom, which was reproached by this
vain ambition of man, to fix an external blot on this wisdom of man, set up in
opposition to it, and effectually discover its vanity in the depth of his
wisdom, and holy severity in punishing this ambition, and other wickednesses of
vain man, suffered for many ages all nations to walk in their own ways, and try
them, whether they were better than God's way, whether they could supply the
defects which they fondly imagined God at first had made them with, or relieve
themselves from the misery their apostasy had brought them under. He said, I
will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be: For they are a
very froward generation, children in whom is no faith: And the event was every
way answerable to the expectation and design of divine wisdom and justice, and
the desert of the wickedness and folly of men, who made the attempt; for after
near four thousand years fruitless endeavors spent through the wise
forbearance of God, The world by wisdom knew not God. They in the wisdom of
God, quite missed the mark; their foolish minds were darkened; seeking to be
wise, they became fools; and instead of getting their eyes opened to see and
know more than God allowed them, they could see nothing but their' own
nakedness; and so imperfect were their discoveries, that their wisdom suggested
to them, that fig leaves would cure that.

7. Fifthly, After in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God,
after they had spent the time allotted them, for trial and discovery of the
vanity of their own wisdom, with a success answerable to the vanity of the
attempt, God, in the depth of his compassion, stepped in for the relief of
mankind; and for a furtherance of the glorious design abovementioned, was
pleased to pitch on a way quite opposite to all that the wisdom of foolish man
aimed at. The means he made use of, were not such as man's wisdom would or
could expect, prescribe, or approre of. He made not choice of the enticing
words of man's wisdom, or eloquence, human eloquence. It was no way suitable to
the majesty, truth and uncerity of God, to make choice of that mean art,
whereby the affections of weak men are inveigled, and their judgments are
biaffed, and led blind fold in a subjection to these passions, which they could
govern. He made no choice of arrificial reasonings, the other eye of human
wisdom. It did not become the majesty of God to dispute men into their duty, or
a compliance with his will. And albeit he wrought signs to awaken the attention
of a world drowned in security, to conciliate respect to his ambassadors, to
strengthen the faith of his own, and cut off all seemingly rational pleas for
unbelief; yet he choosed not them, nor did he principally insist on them as the
means of converting and recovering the world, not being willing to derogate so
far from his word, as to encourage an opinion, that the devil would, and has
frowardly propagated, that God's word is not upon its own evidence, without
miracles worthy of the acceptance of rational creatures. Nor would he gratify
the unbelieving curiosity of men, who would put God to the drudgery of altering
(...) course of nature, and please their humor at every (...).

8. Sixthly, God having rejected all these, made choice of the foolishness of
preaching, that is, a plain declaration of his mind and will in his name, in
the demonstration of the Spirit and power, and not in the enticing words of
man's wisdom, by persons commissioned for that effect by him. After that in the
wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it plensed God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. Now this was every way
worthy of God. Man was injurious to God, by crediting the devil rather than
God. The devil seemed to have gained a considerable advantage, in persuading
man in his integrity to credit him, and to discredit God. God on the other hand
rubbed shame on him, by engaging fallen man to reject the devil, and credit him
on his bare word; and upon this, to give up with Satan, and all that adhered to
him.

9. Seventhly, God yet further to manifest his design, as he made use of the
foolishness of preaching, that means which, though really it is the wisdom and
power of God, yet men look on it as foolish and weak; so he made choice, not of
the scribes, the learned, wise disputers, to be his ambassadors, but of
foolish, weak, illiterate men: that by things which in appearance are no^^^ke
might bring to naught these that are.

10. Eighthly, In a further congruity to this design, God saw meet to
disappoint men's expectation and wisdom, as ^ar, with respect to the Savior
whom he raised up, as the means of discovering him. He made choice of a
crucified Christ, a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs, and passed by
all the great and high potentates of the earth, and the worldly pomp and
grandeur, which men respect and dote upon.

11. Ni^thly, To lay man yet lower, that the Lord alone might be exalted, he
chose not such persons, as the world would have thought stood fairest for
mercy: But he chose the most miserable and contemptible for most part. Not many
wise, not many noble, not many mighty are called: But God has chosen the
f^olish things of this world, to ^^found the wis^, and God ^ath chos a the ^^ak
things of (...) world to confound those that are mighty: and base things of
this world, and things which are despised, has God chosen: yea, and things
which are not, to bring is naught things that are.

12. Tenthly, The Lord hereon let me se^, I. That it was to be expected, and
was indeed inevitable, that a great opposition should be made to the gospel,
and whole revelation of himself in the word. 2. That this opposition was
principally to be by pretenders to wisdom, learned men 3. That these objections
should be against all the concemments of the gospel, matter, m^nner, means, all
being opposite to their expectations. And that there. fore it was no wonder to
see some stumble at the cross, some at preaching, some at preachers. 4. That
their pleas should be very different and various: The Jews seeking signs, and
the Greeks wisdom, according as their different principles and inclications led
them. 5. That it was to expected, that their objections should be specious,
they being suited to the wisdom, the natural apprehensions of all men
unrene^ed, and not brought to a compliance with the grand design of God. 6.
That it was impossible for any man that was not brought to be a fool in his own
eyes, to be wise in the matters of God, or to discern and approve of the wisdom
of God in this whole matter.

13. Upon this discovery, I was fully satisfied, that though those things were
in the wisdom of God hid from the wise and prudent, yet babes might have a
satisfying discovery of them, because it has pleased the F^ther (...) wall these
things to them.

14. I was made to see, that this oppo^^tion of ^^^aned men, and these (...) in
their enquitica, were sofar from being ^^jull prejudice, (...) truth of God,
that on the contrary, it was a strong con^^^ation of the truth of religion.
Thus, Out of the ea^^^ (...), and sweet out of the strong. Wh^le I (...) knew
(...) is was to^ hard for me. Then went i (...) the san^uary, and there I saw
their end. Hence I was made to hope, that thou^^ my heart and my flesh should.
and did fail me, God would be the strength of my bear^, and portion for ever,
that he would guide me by his counsel, and afterward receive me to glory: And
therefore, Surely it is good for me to draw near to God, who has not said to
the seed of Jacob. Seek ye me in vain: He is good to the soul that secks him,
to them that wait for him. In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.

15. I found frequently that common and much noised pretense against the most
important truths of the scriptures especially those which are controverted by
Pelagians, Arminians, and Socinians, that they are contrary to reason, making
considerable impression on my mind: But this being rather by fits and starts,
than for any fixed tract of time, I shall shortly point at the springs of my
relief from temptations of this sort.

16. First, God had long before I got a full relief, fixed me in a deep,
rational conviction of the shortness of human knowledge, and that there is no
truth we receive, whether upon the evidence of metaphysical, mathematical, or
moral principles, or even on the evidence of our senses, against which there
lay not insoluble obje^tions, on which no man yet thought it reasonable to
question those truths; nor though we would never so much, yet could we not for
those objections bring our minds to hesitate about many of them. This I was
fully satisfied about, on the clearest conviction of reason and experience. And
as this was one of the most considerable fruits of my studies in philosophy, so
it was many ways useful to me: For^ (...) It made me see through the vanity of
that pretense against divine truths, that there lie unanswerable at gu^^^^ts
against them. This I thought would not (...) if once I saw su^^cient evidence
for the^^^^ I was (...) conviction hereby, that is was reasonable to (...) more
inext^^^^ dith^^^ties about truths supernaturally ^^^ealed, than about others,
because they lie farther out of our reach. 3. When difficulties ^cevrred, I was
led rather to suspect myself of ignorance, than the truths of God.

17. Secondly, When the Lord gave me the foregoing discovery of him^^^lf, he
fixed me in the faith of his incomprehentibility. While he let me see his back
parts, he convinced me, that I could not see his face. He let me fee, that his
ways are not our ways: And hereon I dare not attempt any more to measure him,
or his ways, by my short line.

18. Thirdly, Hereby likewise I was brought to rest quietly in the
determination of the word. I took all to the law and, to the testimony: And
where the word clearly interposed its testimony, my soul was now in some
meafure taught to acquiesce in, and stand to its determination.

19. Fourthly, When I found the subtle endeavors of adversaries to prevent
any particular testimony, and myself unable at first to disapprove their
evasions; I was much relieved by a view of the multiplied testimonies of the
word, all running the same way, and declaring as it were with one mouth for the
truth.

20. Fifthly, When by consulting interpreters, especially critics, I found
myself rather darkened than cleared about the meaning of particular
testimonies; I had recourse to the scope of the words, the plain meaning as it
offered itself to view, with a humble dependence upon God for light as to his
mind; and hereby found my soul much more satisfied about the meaning of the
word than by the subtle fetches of bold critics, that are of^^^^ jurious to
truth.

21. Sixthy, When for a time, by the subtle perversions of scriptore
testimonies, I could not sind the use of them, the analogy of faith stayed my
mind as to the truth, till I was in case to recover (...) p^^^^^olar
testimonies out of the enemies hand: When the Lord manisested himself from the
lord to me, he gave me a sweet view of himself, and his (...) princinally aimed
at in the whole revelation he made of himse (...) of the sweet and harmonious
consent and concu^renot of the principal doctrines of the gospel, (...)
promoting that (...) and he let me see how the end and the m^^^^ were ^^
closely linked together, thas one of these truths could not be ^wer^ ^^med, hut
almost all the rest must follow its sat: H^^^or whenever any of these truths
were controverted its connection with the other truths, uniformly and plainly
attester by the current of the scriptures, presented itself, and m^^mind was
satisfied it could not fall without they all ^ell. This I take to be the
analogy of faith; and herein I of took sanctuary.

22. Sev^thly, My mind was often stayed by the concurrent suffinge of the pious
in all churches, and nations, and ages, witnessed in their p^rtieular writings
and confessions of frith: I loved to walk in the footsteps of the s^^^ that
(...) of those of whose piety we had the best se^^^.

23. Eighthly. The direct opposition, especially of the Pelagian ^^tions, to my
owe experience, and that of all the fearers of God I conversed with, as well as
the scriptures, was (...) very great relief.

24. Ninthly One thing that made me always read Arminians and Socinians with a
just jealousy, was a clear view of their scardalous disingenuity in
misrepresenting the opinions they opposed.

25. Tenthly, When I seriously viewed the difficulties they urged against the
truth, I often found them caught in the thicket, and as deeply fastened and
entangled in the (...) full as great or greater incunveniences.

26. Elevembly, The fore mentioned view of the design of the gospel, as
represented from the First of the Corinthians, was of great use.

27. Twelfthly, God very often, when I was perplexed about particular scriptures,
gave me a view of their meaning in his own light, opened them to me; and after
him temptations spoke not again.

28. Many other things and considerarsons of an alike nature, have been
relieving; which, because they are roo many and too long, to be here narrated,
I pass: These mentioned may serve for a taste.

29. I now come to give some account of my relief from another tempration,
wherewith I have been continually ^^^ised from my youth, and yet sometimes am;
and it (...) dea^^^ I have above above narrated what a con^ioua (...) ^^vas in
through fears of death, and how (...) sears ^^gan; I shall now give some
account of my ^^sies.

30. First, I ^^ound the Lord's mercy manifested in Christ, fr^^ m^ from the
spirit of bondage, and acquai^^ me in some muasure with that liberty that is
the attendant of the spirit of adoption; and hereby all my fears were much
weakened.

31. Secondly, The Lord by that discovery he made of himself in Christ,
removed, in a great measure, the grounds whereon I had heretofore feared death
most, the want of evidence about the reality of things not seen, and sin the
sting of death; and hereon ray mind was much cased, because I was now in
measure secured against both these fears.

32. Thirdly. The strong power of sin that I sound still remaining, and the
disturbance thence arising, made life not desirable; and a prospect or riddance
by dea h, and a more satisfying discovery of the Lord, made death appear more
desirable.

33. Fourthly, Whereas a natural aversion to death still continued, and I found
still more fear, upon a close prospect of it, arising in my mind; I was much
relieved by the promise of the Lord's helping against temptation, and engaging
for his people, that they should not be tempted above what they are able to
bear, but that when the trial comes, he will provide a way to escape.

34. Fifthly, My faith, as to this promise, was often strengthened by former
experience: particularly, I remember one day, traveling from Edinburgh to
Leith, and meditating upon death, I was oppressed with Fes r^^ 0 when the Lord
mercifully suggested this scriptural thought, though not in the scripture
words, have you not shrinked formerly under the remore prospect of other
trials? And have you not yet been carried honorably and safely through them?
What reason have you to distrust God as to future trials, who has given grace
formerly to help in time of need? This quieted my mind at the time.

35. Sixthly, With respect to this, it has always been very satisfving to
consider, that it is no way meet that God should give us grace before trials
come, but that he should keep us humble and dependent, by reserving that in his
own hand, and teach us to submit to his judgment, as to the measure and time of
performing his own premises, and giving the necessary supplies of grace.

Seventhly, Hereon my soul was quieted under all my fears of this trial, in
some measure of the faith of this, that the Lord is a God of judgment, and that
they are blessed who wait on him in the faith of his promises, not doubting
either of his faithfulness as to the accomplishment, or judgment as to the
right timing and measuring them in proportion to our trials and necessities.

Eighthly, The Lord has often given me, when clouded by this fear, a sweet
discovery of the beauty of this proposal, that we have promises to live upon,
till the trials come, and that when they come, we shall then get
accomplishments to live on: In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.

Finally, The experiences of the Lord's faithfulness re^ c^^a^d in history, and
learned by report, or by my own ^oservation, did often help to strengthen my
faith of this, and here I rest to this day. I dare not say, I am ready to die;
I dare not say, I have says or grace sussicient to carry me through death; I
dare not say, I have no fears of death; but this I say, there is grace enough 0
for helping me laid up in the promise, there is a throne of grace to which in
our straits we may have recourse: He is a God of judgment, who has the
disposal, and who will not withhold it when it is really the time of naede

PART IV. Containing some account of his ordination unto the holy ministry, and
his conduct therein.
CHAP. I. Of his being licensed to preach the gospel.
WHEN I was under the violent strugglings related in the account of the second
part of my life, I had daid by all thoughts of the work of the ministry. It was
like hell once, to entertain a thought of preaching to others what I did not
believe myself: But now things began to alter, and the Lord led me on to that
which I declined before: And I find the steps of his providence about me in
this matter, do deserve to be remembered by me. 1. My mother did devote me from
my childhood to this work, and often expressed her desire to lend me to the Lord
all the days of my life, to serve him in the gospel of his Son: This has often
had its own weight on my spirit. 2. The course of my studies had looked that
way; my education pointed toward that work; which providential determination
of my studies, though I had no greatregard to it at sometimes, yet on other
occasions it had some weight on my spirit, that I dorst not rashly turn my
thoughts another way. 3. The Lord forcibly, by his providence, did break my
design of following the study of philosophy, by the foregoing exercise, of
which I have given an account, brought my mind to acquiesce in this
dispensation, and made philosophy comparatively distasteful, and it was upon
the serious review of the temptations moving me to incline that way, made
extremely unsavory. 4. The Lord having thus loosed my heart from that study,
that for a while did rival it with the study of divinity; he did also, by the
foregoing issue of my dark exercise, remove and take (...) way the principal
stumbling blocks, and make the way straight. 5. He further, by the discovery of
his glory in the face of Christ, engaged my heart to, and endeared to my soul
the knowledge of Christ, and him crucified. 5. He brought me under a lively
sense of that forcible tie that was hereon laid on me, to lay out myself in any
way that he should call me to be serviceable to him, and I was made to think,
that I should be the more happy, the more directly my work should look that
way. 7. While, like Peter, I was musing sometimes on these things, about the
month of April or May, School, two ministers were sent, to my great surprise,
from the presbytery of Kirkaldie, urging me to enter on trials: I did
altogether decline the proposal, because I had no reading, wanted the languages
and had been much diverted from the study, particularly by the foregoing
exercise, which had filled my thoughts for near a year and a half, and it was
not then two years since I came from the college. In a word, I did answer, I am
child, and cannot speak, Jer. i. 6. And here I stuck, surprised and tossed with
thoughts what this might mean, and whence it was, for I had scarce ever looked
near the presbytery. They prescribed John i. 12. for a text, and left me to
consider of it. 8. I found my aversion strong to enter so soon at least on
trials; but still it had some weight on my spirit, and I did think further of
it, and found that the Lord's dealing with me of late, in the great variety of
trials, casting me down, and raising me up again and again, looked as a
preparation for comforting others with the consolations wherewith I had been
comforted, and sympathizing with them, as having had experience of a great
variety of tempations, and I found that by these my little knowledge of the
mystery of the gospel received some improvement. The ministers continued to
solicit me, and and press home their desire; but while I stood out against
their solicitations, though not without some secret struggle and doubting,
whether in so doing I might not be declining duty, I began to observe the Lord
raising a storm against me: I began to see the snares of the station I was in,
the advantages my corruptions had by it against me; and, in a word the Lord
made it out to me, that I behoved to change my station; but I was not hereby
cleared to comply with their desire, yet I durst not flatly decline it. About
this I much tossed, May 20, School. The Lord was taking away some that had been
most helpful and encouraging, my inward perplexities grew, and I was not like
to have peace in my own mind. 10. While I was in this case, Mr. Riddel did, May
30, come to the Wemyss, and after much converse, and many reasonings, charged
me to try, and have my thoughts on my text, and then do, or stand off, as the
Lord should clear duty, which I did consent to. 11. But after this I still did
shift and decline, and could not think of a compliance; and then December 28,
provost Ramsay wrote, carnestly desiring me to take the charge of my lord
Maitland. This put me to a stand a little, and I was inclined to embrace it at
first: But on farther consideration I was fully cleared to reject that motion,
and so I remained in my former strait, crying to the Lord frequently, that he
might discover duty. I was fully satisfied that I behoved not to stay there,
but yet was averse from the ministry, at least so soon. But that which had well
nigh turned me quite off, was an express from my friend and my father's, the
worthy Mr. James Duncan, urging me, in the most pressing terms, to take the
charge of my lord Duplin's children, offering what encouragement I pheased. My
father's deep obligation to that family, and several other things, carried my
inclination toward a compliance: But having at Mr. Forrester's earnest desire,
undertaken a homily in the new college, which I was to deliver next week, I
took time to consider of it; and after that I had, on February 28, 1699,
delivered my discourse on Job xxviii. 28. I went to visit my acquaintance,
worthy Mr. Shields, who did urge me to enter on trials, with that gravity and
concern, that had more weight on my spirit, than all that had been spoken to
me. Upon this, and other things that offered themselves to view, I was fully
satisfied it was duty to lay aside thoughts of Mr. Duncan's proposal. 22. The
presbytery of Kirkaldie, March 16, c^n^ 1699, urged me to try a common head,
and if I was not after that clear to proceed, promised to leave me to my
choice; whereupon I consented, and delivered it April 20, when I accepted of a
text, and they offered me Psalm. cxix. 9. which I delivered May 10, and
afterward the exercise and addition, which I delivered before the synod that
met about Mr. Inglis' affair, May 23, and thereon took a popular sermon, being
not a little encouraged by Mr. Shield's, who spoke again seriously to me after
sermon and exercise, which was on Romans viii. 36. My popular sermon on Psalm.
lxxiii 25. which I delivered on June 22, and was li^ensed then, after I had
gone through the usual trials. 13. As the Lord did, by the formerly mentioned
conduct of providence about me, remove my scruples, and clear my mind; so his
countenancing me in my first appearances, not only by supplying me for the
work, but making me successful toward the awakening of some, and comforting of
others did not a little confirm and encourage me.

CHAP. II. Of his entering on the ministry at Ceres.
BEING thus licensed, June 22, 1699, at Kirkaldie. I continued preaching as
appointed or defired every Lord's day, for most part, blessed be God, not
without some countenance and success. November 25, the call of South Leith came
to me, where I had preached sometime before. Mr. Wi^hart the minister, with
several elders, came with it: And November 29, a call from the Eli, where I
also had preached, was put in my hand; and much about the same time the call of
the parish of Ceres was put in my hand. I took them to consideration, and gave
no manner of hopes to any. I found myself in a great strait between Leith and
Ceres, and it was much the greater, that both posts lay not within one
province: and so there was no judicature equally concerned in both, to whom I
might submit; so that I was necessitated to make a choice myself. After some
endeavors with my own heart, to bring it to a willingness to close with
either, as God should clear up duty, I did set myself to consider and under
reasons on the hand and on the other: And for Leith the following reasons had
weight -- 1. The importance of the post, and considerableness of the charge. 2.
The unanimity of their call, after they had been long otherwise. 3. The
colleague was most desirable, and one from whom I might learn much, both as to
preaching and discipline. 4. There was a considerable number of godly in the
place. 5. In should have the advantage of living in the presbytery of
Edinburgh, where there is unquestionably the fairest occasion for improvemert.
6. The commission's interposition on behalf of Leith, by their letter of the
date. --


On the other hand, for Ceres, it was of weight -- 1. That the parish was
considerable, had been entirely without one of a long time, had been divided,
and were now harmonious; whereas Leith was well supplied of one. 2. That
whereas Leith lying near Edinburgh, they had the choice of young men, and had
men of weight and activity, and interest to obtain whom they had a mind to; it
was otherwise with Ceres. 3. Where colleagues are most desirable, a collegiate
life is not without such difficulties as should incline one not to run into
them without an evident call. 4. I had not enjoyed time for reading, and could
not in a town, and that so near Edinburgh, where the charge was so great, have
any time for improvement which I might hope for in the country, at least in the
winter season. 5. The charge was less than the half of Leith, and my body was
but weak. 6. I found my temper soft and unmeet for managing the humors of
town's people. 7. I found my best friends, whom I had reason to respect, as
designing nothing but my good, firm of the opinion, that Ceres was the most
suitable charge.


Having weighed all, and laid the matter before the Lord as I could, I at
length came to a resolption, to reject the call of Leith, and did, Jaruary 2,
1700, gave it up, and close with that of Ceres, to the great distatisfaction of
the minister and people of Leith, who had been at more pains with me than I
deserved. Peing thus in some measure cleared to accept of Ceres's call, that of
Eli making no courpethion, I did enter on trials, and and delivered my common
head de Communicatione I diematam, February 13. 12 Coupar, and my exercise and
addition on Gal. iii. 9. March 19; and April 16, I de^^^cred, my popular sermon
cu Rev. i. 6. and underwent the other parts of my private trials; and at last,
to May 1, 1700, was ordaiaed at Ceress (...). Alexander Piteairn, minister at
Kilnceny, preached on Heb. xiii. 17. and 0229 0224 Sabbath next I began my
ministry on Acts x. 29. May 5, 1700.

CHAP. III. Of his management in the work of the ministry.
AFTER he was licensed to preach, and before he was ordained to the ministry,
on some solemn occasions, he dedicated himself to the service of the Lord, with
earnest player for the suitable endowments whereby be might be fitted for the
discarge of that high trust, is it should please God to call him to it. This
occurs frequently in his dairy, whereof take an instance on two in his own
words.

April 18, 1700 being the fast in order to Lefly's sacrament, I rose early in
the morning; and after some review of my former ways, and serious
thoughtsulness of the design of the present duty, I did in prayer pour out my
soul to God, confessing fins; and I dare not say, but it was with some tender
sense of the dishonor done to God, and of the wretched unkindness that is in
them to God. Original sin, imputed and inherent, were both heavy and my par
icular evils. I did solemnly revew my engagements to the Lord, accepting of
Christ according to the gospel ofter and terms, and did endeavor particularly
to act faith on him, with respect to the ministerial endowments, and did devote
my self to him in that service.

May 1, 1700, being the day of his ordination. This morning I renewed my
engagements to God, and accepted of Christ upon the gospel terms, catting
myself over open him, not only for what belongs to me as a private Christian,
but as a minister, eyeing his strength for through-boarance in the whole of the
work, particularly pleading forents presence this day; I cannot deny his
presence in sector. Mr. Alexander Pitcairn minister in Kilmeny preached the
ordination sermon, on Hebrews xiii. 17. Where he insisted upon the watchmen's
duty, I cannot deny, but my heart was much weighed with the sense of the
greatness of the work, and after I had answer. ed the questions put to me
concerning my loundness in the faith, and the sincerity of my purposes in
undertaking king the office and work of the holy ministry, I was ordained.
Lord, then know what my beart's desire to thee was in the time. O Lord,
help, and through grace I shall lay out myself for gaining finners to thee.

Being thus entered into the ministry, he studied and prepared his sermens with
much serious secret prayer for divine assistance and direction in his work, and
for a successful blessing upon the word, both to himself and his hearers.

His practice also was to review and remark his behavior, and acquitting
himself in public duties, as to what assistance and enlargement he obtained, as
to the gravity, ferion sness, tenderness in his own frame, as to his concern
for the soul or hearers, as to the warming of his assections with the comfons
and ravithing sweetness of divine truths. And when he was remarkably helped, it
issued in thanksgiving to God, and watching against vain pride and self, that
that might not rob the Lord of the glory of his free grace. When otherwise, it
was matter of humiliation to him.

Knowing that he was called to watch for souls, as one that must give an
account, he had the weight of the mienlerial charge much upon his spirit: He
was there fore at pains to acquaint himself with the spiritual state of the
souls of his stock, that he might be the more capable of dealing with them for
their edification, according to their particular cases. In order thereunto, so
far as health and strength did allow, he was diligent in visiting all the
samilies within his parish, in instructing ^is people by the familiar way of
catechizing, and in marking (...) proficiency in the knowledge of the truths of
the (...) At some seasons also, especially when he was about to administer the
sacrament of the Lord's suppel. he conversed serverally with such who were to
be admitted auto that holy ordinance; not to bring them unto auricu^^^
confessions, but to try what sense they had of serious religion and practical
godliness, what efficacy and insinence the word of God had upon them, and what
fruits of the preached gospel were to he found in them, that accordingly he
might deal with their consciences, and rightly divide unto them the word of
truth. Take one instance of this in his own words, as they are found written,
July 8 1703, when he had labored about three years in the ministry at Ceres.

I have, faith he, spent now about a month in converse with my people, and I
observe the few following things.

1. That of three or four hundred persons, there ware not aboye forty, who had
not at one time or other been more or lest awakened by the wond, though with
far the greater part it came no length; whence notwithstanding it follows, I.
That where there is a faithful ministry, it is not like, but most part are at
one time or other in so far touched, as will be sure to i slew in a dreadful,
aggravation of their gnils in quenching the spirit, and putting out light: For
if so many were touched, so that they could remember of it, how many more may
have been so, who have not noticed this? 2. The Lord, leave not himself without
a witness, even in the bosom of his enemies, whereby he makes them seign
subreission, be gives the word such power as makes them feel that as is, his,
which tends to enhance their guilt. 2. All who were thus convinced, did
declare, that any awakenings ever they had, were either under the preachers in
the field, or fince the revolucion. This whatever may become of the ministers,
is a testimony to their way, and says, that they are called of God. 3. The most
judicious and ingrained (...) did most frank by dech^re to me, that till the
revolution there were never touched with the word; there was never one that said
he was touched by the curates; (...) on the contrary, all declared otherwise,
and the (...) ^^^alous that way, were most frank in making und^fi^cu
confessions by the plain evidence of truth. 4. There has not been one
presbyterian minister in the parish since the revolution, whom the Lord has not
honored to awaken many; besides their being helped to beget some through the
gospel to a new and lively hope. I conversed with some of whom I have reason to
hope good things, even things that accompany salvation, that seem to have been
brought in by all the presby terian ministers, who were there these silty years
by gone. 5. I observe, for which I bless the Lord, that befides not a few, whom
the Lord has awakened under my ministry, some there are who seem to promise
more than flowers, even fruit. And further, a general acknowledgment from most,
that the word comes near them daily. Which. 1. Makes me ashamed of my own
negligence. 2. Adore God's goodness that blesses my weak labors
notwithstanding. 3. Encourages me to think, that whatever may be amiss, yet I
have got run unsent. 6. I observe, that it is very hard to judge of the
competency of knowledge, in order to admission. And, 7. That knowing people,
estranged from the power of religion, are in the most deplorable condition
imaginable; for I found it almost impossible to get such brought to any sense
of their case.
His ministerial concern was not confined to his parish of Ceres, but did
extend itself to the whole church: And the consideration of abounding errors
and profaneness of the time, did fill his heart with heavy and perplexing
thoughts; as may be observed from the foliowing hints.

Quest. What is the duty that is, in a special manner, called for from this
church in this day?

Answ.

I. Mourning; it is a day of abominations. 2. A serious endeavor to be rooted,
and established in the truths of religion; for there is an aim to destroy the
foundations; and remptations to final and total apostasy abound. 3. A shining
gospel walk as a testimony against the horrid profanity of the time.
Herein, O! that I might get my soul continually exercised. Blessed shall he be
at this day, who, when the Lord comes, shall be found so employed. A sad
neglect of those, gives ground to fear terrible things.

One reasons why the gospel is so unsuccessful at this day, is, because the
simplicity of preaching is neglected; a due application of scripture is best
preaching, for confirming which it is remarkable, that though God may make use
of the words of man in letting into the meaning of it, yet it is the very
scripture word, whereby he ordinarily conveys the comfort or advantage of
whatever fort, it is the tool of God's own framing that works the of, sect.

At another time he says, Having considered the growth of error, My beart is
affected and filled with many heavy and perplexing thoughts: I saw, and daily
so more and more the growth of Arminian, Pelagian, and Socinian errors; this,
with the growth of profanity that is visible, gives me a sad prospect of what
may be a coming. This observation that follows was strangely fixed upon my
thoughts.

1. The gospel truth when fir^^ published, was pure without the mixture of
errors. Yet, 2. When it spread a little, errors quickly were verted to
discredit it. 3. Errors in process of time grew; and the further (...) from the
first times of the gospel the further off from the simplicity and purity. 4.
When Christianity obtained external establishment^ in the world, then there was
a remarkable increase of error, 5. Superstition and error at length overspread,
and the Lord must both punish and purge. 6. The way he took to do both, was to
give up, in the firth century, to a general apostasy, under Mahomet in the
cast, and the Pope in the west: Thus all these errors, as it were, run into
one, or run together. That thus the churches were sufficiently punished by
these two dreadful plagues, and that there was a purgation on them, is plain in
that after the reformation, truth broke out with a beaming luster, and much
purity; Since that time, error has had a second growth; whether the Lord may
not take the same method of purging us again, by casting all into the furnace,
we cannot tell; we must leave it to himself.
Some of the followers of Mrs. Bourignion having come into his parish, and
endeavoring to propagate their opinions, under the plausible pretext of
singular piety and devotion, he thought sit to guard his people against that
intection; a short account whereof he gives in the sollowing words: April 10,
1707: This day the Lord directed to strike at the root of prevailing delusions;
^^ opposition to which I taught, 1. That true holiness will not admit of
leaving out of some duties; and that the devotees, while they withdrew from the
world, omitted, 1. A testimony to the usefulness of the Lord's institutions of
worship. 2. Usefulcess among men. 3. Diligence in their particular calling. 2.
That holiness confi^ts not in ^ ^tri^^ observance of ^elf devised rales, such
as many of theirs are. 3. That when men pretend to holiness in their walk, and
neglect the institutions of worship, then no^e can conclude, that in any thing
they are influenced by the authority of the Lord Jesus: for that same authority
binds to the one as well as the other. 4. That the most effectual inducement to
obedience, is a constant improvement of the blood of Christ by faith, and a
sense of forgiveness kept upon the soul -- Lord hear home truth.


CHAP. IV. Containing his judgment concerning several cases, especially with
respect unto his own exercise and practice.
Concerning times of trial.

CONCERNING fears of falling in times of trial, I was much assa^lted, and was
quieted with the following remarks.

1. These fears of this which disquiet, are a part of that thoughtfulness for
futurity which is forbidden. 2. These fears are bottomed on many wild
supposition as that I should have strength proportioned to trials before they
come, u to trials that may never come, that they that live upon the promises
have not a sure bottom, etc. 3. That in 2 Cor. i. 9. We have the sentence of
death in ourselves, that we may not trust in ourselves, was quieting. But, 4.
My great relief was, that which has been my life, that promise, 1 Cor. x. 13.
There has no temptation to her you, but such as is common to man: But God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able; but
will with the temptation also make a way of eseape, that ye may be able to bear
it. It is not what I have that makes me promise or expect through-bearance, but
what is in Christ and in the promises.
Of eternity and immortality.

I had some ^^uggl^^gs about the belief of eternity and immortality; but was
very much quieted, I. By a clear view, that eternity was wrapped up and implied
in every truth of religion. 2. Especially by much light accompanying that
scripturs, Whorefore have thou made all men in vai^? Psalm. lxxxix. 47. If there
be not eternity, man answers no valuable purpose with respect to God, or with
respect to himself; and so indeed made in vain: This did more establish my soul
than ever it had been in this truth, which let me see how soon God can make
unbelief give back, and give peace in believing.

Of ministers consulting people in ministerial duties

While I had occasion to speak and hear of some ministers, their being swayed
much by the advice of good people, in dark steps of their ministerial work, I
was satisfied in the evident clearness of the following rules.

1. That it is very dangerous to lay too much stress up on the advice and
apprehensions of the best of people, as to what may be sin or duty in matters
that belong not to their station; for the promise of the Spirit's teaching
belongs not to them, as to what may be the duty of the minister's station:
therefore, 2. It is safer to desire the help of their prayers, that God may,
according to his promise, clear us, or dis^cver to us what is duty, than to
learn them to step out of their stations, and advise in things that belong not
to them. 3. In consulting with others for-light, regard would be had to the
different talents of men's, and most regard should be had in matters of soul
exercise, to those whom the Lord has sitted with endowments that way: in
matters of government, most regard should be had to those whom the Lord has
sitted that way. 4. In judging if such are likliest to know the Lord's mind,
who walk the most closely, we should consider, when we judge of the closeness
of walk, not only what men's walk is, but what their temptations are; for one's
walk may be much influenced that way, and grace may be more in one in whom it
appears not so much, than in others who appear to have more, when the one's
grace is continually tried with floods of temptations plunging on it, and the
other's is free.
Observe, Ministers for most part are more shaken about the truths of religion,
and the foundations, than about their own state: people more about their state
than about the truths of religion. Ministers are helped to clear people, as to
what they are straightened abouts; and people are, or may be helpful to ministers
in what they are in the dark about. Thus they mutually excel, and are excelled;
to humble botli, and keep both in their stations.

To sind duty in difficult cases.

I was much refreshed with somewhat that occurred, clearing up soubt to me,
when at a stand which way to choose.

1. There it evera bias to one way or other. 2. Seek to get that removed, and
cry that God may bring your heart to an equal willingness to take either, or
neither way. 3. When this is attained to, then use reason, and take the most
feasible way; and, 4. Cry to him ^^sat he may put a stop, if ye be ont of the
road. 5. It the Lord afford light in any other particular way, use it; but mind
to seek light soberly, use it tenderly, and be wary in the application of it.
Of legal preaching.

I saw the evil of legal preaching, which lies in one of two things, or in both
-- 1. In laying to much stress upon the works of the law, our duties and
strength: Or, 2, In pressing evangelical doctrines without an eye to that which
is the spring of the church's edification, the Spirit of the Lord. Some press
to duties, so that they seem to think, that their reasonings are able to
enforce a compliance; or at least, they do not take care to keep up upon
themselves, and hearers both a constant sense of the contrary, in order to
engage in eagerness in dependence upon the Spirit of the Lord: This is legal
preaching. O Lord, thou knows how much of it is in the church. The gospel glory
is, that it is the ministration of the spirit: The great privilege of believers
is, that the Lord manifests himself to them, as he does not to the world. When
he manifests his authority in the command, it is then powerful: When he
manifests his goodness and truth in the promise, it is full of sweetness: When
he manifests his wrath in the threatening, it awes the soul: When he manifests
his glory in the face of Christ, it is ravishing, reforming, attracting.

Atheism the root of sin.

Two thing I shall note, 1. The Lord gave me a sweet discovery this day in
lecture, of the athelsm of the hearts of men, in rejecting the word,
(notwithstanding there are more, and more evident prints of God on it, than on
all his other works of creation), because they cannot get through some
difficultier in it; whereas there are many more difficulties in the works of
God: The light where by this was s^t home and illutrated in: particular
instances, was sweet. 2. Some days ago, reading Enod ix. and x. chapters, and
finding this, that yet may ^^^w that I am God, frequently repeated, and
elsewhere in places innumerable, ^as the end of God's (...) manifesting himself
in his word and works: I observe from it, that atheism is deeply rooted even in
the Lord's people, seeing they need to be taught this so much.

That it is a high attainment in religion, to win to know that God is the Lord,
(Dent. iv. 35.); and to believe that all sin is resolvable in darkness and
unbelief, as to this one point, that God is the Lord, and consequently, that
all sin is reducible to atheism.

That the great difficulty which the whole of the divine revelation grapples
with, is Atheism; and that its struggle is to recovery man to his first
imprestions of a God. This one point comprehends the whole of man's recovery;
as atheism the whole of man's apostasy.

The Lord saw meet to bring him through many sharp trials, and to keep him
under much soul exercise, in the vicissitudes of discouraging damps and
refreshing re^^^ls, upon his own spirit; that in his ministerial station he
might, from his own experience, be the more capable of dealing suitably with
others, according to their various cases and conditions: He also studied much a
close acquaintance with his own state and frame, and was observant of the Lord
gracious dealings with him, as may be gathered from following short hints.

July 2d, 1702: The Lord, about this time, giving somewhat of a revival from a
long deadness, I think ^ayself concerned to notice the means by which I
obtained this benefit; and, 1. It was signally promoted by converse with lively
Christians: At iron sharpeneth iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his
friend, Prove. xxvii. 17. 2. By some heavy strokes laid on me, the Lord did
chasten me, and, in some measure, teach me out of his law. 3. By terrible
providence with respect unto the public, the Lord did awaken me in some
measure: Awake, sleeper, call on the name of thy God, Jonah i. 6. 4. The Lord
providentially brought unto my hands some papers, containing the exercise of
some noted Christians, wherein I saw how sar short I was of others, and also
not a sew of the causes of my sadly withered and decayed case: For this shall
every godly one pray unto thee, in a ti^^ when thou may be found, Psalm.
xxxii. 6. 5. By some discovery of the vanity of my sweetest enjoyments:
Therefore I will go and return unto my first husband; for then it was better
with me than now, Hos. ii. 7. 6. By leading me to some subjects which I chused
for others, wherein my own case was also remarkably touched, the Lord did in
some measure awaken me: Thus while with David, I heard only a parable at first,
I was quickly told in the end, that I was the man.


March 11, 1705: This day I preached on my ordinary; I was far out of order:
Lerd pity and shine on me. At night I was somewhat refreshed in family worship,
in meditation on my cafe, I saw unbelief to be the root of all my misery, and
was broken on account of it; I cried to the Lord for relief against it, and
that be might manifest himself to my soul: Lord hear. I was much grieved (...)
this, that in a time when so many ^^ange evils abound, there should be such a
strange stupidity on my spirit, that I could not mourn for the dishonor done
to God; I cried for a spirit of supplication and repentance.

April 7th, 1705: I was much disordered to body this day, and in little case
for any work through indisposition, till toward seven at night, and then I was
a little relieved, as to bodily disorder, and began to think of preparing for
the Sabbath; and bowing my knees to prayer, I was su^^ of perplexity, the Lord
hid himself, and my spirit was like to sink, I complained, and my spirit was
^^^^whelmed. I got no relief till after I had made some preparation for the
work of the Subbath, and then my spirit was refreshed with that scripture, Heb.
x. 17, 70. Having therefore, brethren, boldu'ss to enter into the holi^^^ by
the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he buth consecrated for us
through the vail, that is to say, his flesh; which I a little explained in my
sermon: Hereby I found my mind composed; but, O that it were with me as in
months past!

His case for some time.

April 17th, 1705: I was much disordered in body till toward night, then I
began to muse on the state of matters betwixt God and my soul, and finding, 1.
A great withdrawing of influences in duty, in secret, in family, in public. 2.
Hereon deadness followings. And: 3. Hereon a languishing of all grace: And
that, 4. Notwithstanding many loud calls to diligence, and to aim at more than
ordinary nearness to God; I hereupon ^^solred in the Lord's strength to enquire
into the causes, and cry for light as so them.

July 5th, 1705: This morning in prayer, the Lord pointed out further the evil
of a neglect of distinct exercise about the, guilt of sin, I shall represent
the sweet discovery in the following hints.

My case was discovered: 1. I felt deadness. 2. Weariness in duty. 3. Aversion
following hereon. 4. Deadness of spirit for ordinary.

Canses of present deadness.

1. As to the guilt of sin, the sease of it impaired. Hereon the discoveries of
the want of spiritual strength, which flows from dae distinct observation of
sins, weakened. 3. The sense of darkress likewise impaired. 4. Hereon the trade
with Christ for light, forgivenness, and strength, decayed. 5. This trade being
the great mean of en^^ring Christ, and the sweetness of these communications
^^ng that which keeps up liveliness in duty; all these evils follow on the want
of it, Bless, bless the Lord, O my soul,

Relief.

July 19th, 1705: This day the Lord shined on me in duty, my heart was much
composed, satissied, and refreshed, and in some measure made to hope for a
revival. Glory, glory, glory to free grace in Christ.

July 29th, 1705: This day I was much refreshed with a view of the glory of the
Lord Jesus in the ordinances: My soul was sweetened with a sense of his love,
warmed and composed in preaching upon Philip. iii. 3.

February 24th, 1706; being the Lord's day, and he being to preach, his case he
relates thus. In the morning I was sore shaken about the truths of God, but
came to peace as to what I was to speak in three things. Lord, thou have sully
satisfied me as to the after vanity and u^fatisfactoriness, of all other
courses to satisfaction, as to our great concerns, besides that revealed in the
gospel.

Lord, thou have fully satisfied me, that supposing the truth of the gospel,
there is a plenary, and full s^^u^^y as to all that I can desire, with respect
to time and eternity in it.

Lord, thou have given me that full and rational evidence for the truth of the
gospel, far beyond what would in other things fully satisfy me; and therefore
it must only be the wretched unbelief of my heart that keeps me hesitating
here. I will look for faith to the author of it. Of these three I am so fixed,
that no power of temptation has been able to shake me.

All my doubtings flow from unbelief's power, that will not be suppressed
without an overpowering sense of divine authority. I preached, and was helped
in public worship, being strengthered in body, and sweetened in spirit.

December 5th, 1706: Mediration on his taking a journey from his own house,
before the dawning of the day --

What a different case am I in now, from what I was a little whise ago! then I
was in a pleasant habitation, furrounded with wife, children, conveniences; in
a habitation well illuminated with pleasant light, whereby I saw my enjoyments,
discerned the pleasantness of them, and their suitableness. I had necessaries,
quiet of mind, and opportunity to retire to my closet to converse with God,
wherewith I was refreshed.

But what a change do I now find! I am engaged in a journey, my is dark, I find
it cold. Now when I turn thoughtful, I fear every where, fear where no fear is!
Now use and custom turn me secure, and I fear not where there is fear; I see no
danger, and begin to conclude there is none.

Have I not here a view of man's state in innocence, and his state when fallen?

But what a change do I find! Light begins to appeat! Had I never seen it, I
should have had no notion of it! What a surprise is this? When did it begin?
How did it grow? Where were my senses? Did not I look on, and yet I cannot see,
and cannot tell how it began, nor whence! So is every one that is born of the
spirit.

But sure it is, one thing I know, whereas I saw nothing, now I see; I see
where I am, what is near about me; I see where there is hazard, and where there
is safety, in the way I am in; but what is at a distance I yet perceive not:
The first dawning of saving light is not perceivable in its rise, in its
progress, but unquestionable in its effects and gives a view of the state I am
at present in.

But a new scene appears, light grows, I see at a distance, but men appear as
trees, pleasant trees, delightful fields, men suitable to me, and friends
appear as monsters seen with an imperfect light, my fears are quickened: And is
it not so with young converts?

Light still increases, it grows, every new degree is inconceivable, and we
have no notion of the discovery it makes. What before was dark, was frightful,
is now pleasant and agreeable. Imperfect views of the best things give but mis
^^apen notions; light increasing satisfies as to them. Eye bath not seen, Isa
lxiv. 4.

Truly light is sweet; even before the sun is seen, light is great, and is
pleasant, makes the way pleasant, and gives pleasant discoveries; but it cannot
be, without sense, told or conceived, what satisfactory discoveries, what
quickening warmth the noon day sun affords.

So^^^^n self examination.

January 11th 1708: In the morning I arose greatly indisposed with a looseness,
but somewhat relieved before I went to church; yet immediately after sermon
seized with a vomiting. Lord, teach and lead me to some suitable improvement.

Queries to be ^^sidered as to my private case.

1. Are daily sins, sins of infirmity, searched, observed, weighed, mourned
for? 2. Is there care taken, to exercise says distinctly in order to the
pardon of them? 3. Is peace taken, when not powerfully by the Lord spoken? 4.
Does the impression of the necessity and excellency of Christ's blood decay? 5.
Are the experiences of its use and efficacy distinct as before? 6. Am I formal
in worship, duties secret, private, eraving blessing to meat, returning thanks,
prayer, meditation, and reading, etc. 7. Is there due cate of educating my
family? 8. Are tods observed, and suitably improver? 9. Is there d^e concern
for the flock; and singleness and diligence in ministerial duties, prayer for
the flock, visiting the fick, etc.? 10. Is there sy^p^thy with afflicted faints
and churches? 11. Are the sins of the day mourned for? 12. Is the voice of the
rod heard, calling 10, 1. Deniedness to relations, the dear^^^. 2. Deniedness
to the would. 3. To life. 4. Preparation for death. 5. ^pit^ality in duty.
January, 1799. In secret I looked up to God, and reviewed the state of my scul
for the last year, since January 12, 1708: I. These queries had not been, alas!
suitably regarded as they should. 2. Another year added, under many new calls
to repentance and reformation, is not suitably improven. 3. Is not this the
design of my present indisposition, to rebuke for this? 4. Ah! the power of
remaining sin and enmity againt duty, appearing in diverting from secret
duties, indispostion for them, and for spirituality of mind, meditation,
self-examination, prayer, reading the word, and liveliness in them. 5. Is it
not a rebuke for failures as to faithfulness in my station, that I am not put
to silence? 9. Is there not a call, if the Lord spare, to give myself wholly to
the duties of my general and particular calling? 7. May not this indisposition
be a check from prosecuting scholastic studies, and invite to apply myself to a
continuation of my experiences.


Mericies I noticed this last year.

1. O tward: 1. Though the Lord has chastised fore, yet he has spared. 2. When
my work did call for it, about my own and other's sacraments, I was strangely
strengthened. 3. The Lord gives some prospect as to an issue of the conlusions
of my worldly affairs. And here, 1. Not all at once; this might tempt me to
decend no more, or turn slack. 2. Not till the Lord had long ex^^cised with
difficulties; this serves to humble and keep saber. 5. Le^t all this should not
do, he holds the rod o^^^ my head. O the goodness, mercy, and wisdom of God? 2.
As to my soal's case, 1. The Lord kept from despoadency, though the di^emper I
labor under fosters that evil, yet I was kept from folicitousocss as to
events. 2. The Lord kept from being altogether secure and unconcerned, and kept
up a desire of divine teaching while I was chas^^ed. 3. I have been ^ept
composed, and in a watching frame, though much under hiding. 4. He has not
altogether cease^ to be a reprover. 5. Sometimes I have had some blinks of his
(...), and hopes as to the issue. 6. Some evidences of more (...) ordinaty
providence about me and any conceres. 3. As to my family, 1. The Lord has
preserved as. a God has increased it. 3. God has directed to servants sober and
concerned; and however flowly we mo^e, which I defire to lament before the
Lord, yet we are desiring to look the same way, as to c^r eternal con^^rus; at
least, there is none venting any thing of a dislike to either truth or
godliness in my family. Ble^^ed be God for these. Lord, forgive unthankfulness.
Above ail, blessed be God for the gosped.
If the Lord spare me to labor among the people, the following truths offered
in meditation, as most suitable to my case and theirs: 1. In the gospel there
is the most sweet, hononrable, profitable, suitable, and in all re^pects
satisfying offer and proposal made, A murr^age with the king's sen, etc. 2. In
the event, the generality of them to whom this is made, even the more saber,
that are not among the remnant that use the servants despitefully, reject it,
will ^^t come, but male ex^^ses. 3. An ondne regard to things, in their own
place lawful, it that which gives rise to this ill entertainment among the
sober sort of people, at least, this is that whereby they countenance
themselves in that infidelity, which otherwise without blushing they could not
continue in. I have married a wife, I have bought a yoke of oxen, a field, etc.
4. In times of prosperity, or wh^^ the church is under no preseat trial, even
the godly may decay and turn secure, fall from first love, and with the
foolislt virgins sleep. 5. The rise of this evil is to be carefully discovere^:
1. Remainders of enmity. 2. Change of condition, with the want of judgment how
to give every duty its own place and time, so that one may neither justle out
another, nor drive to a careless management, doing this, without leaving the
other undone. 3. The cunning of Satan, enforcing one duty to a neglect of
another, as in Christ's temptation.


This night I got such^a view of my guilt, that nothing could have kept from
despondency, but a view of that grace that cannot be measured; but is best
conceived by that astonishing evidence of it, Romans viii. 32. He that spared not
his (...), 8^^, but delivered him up for us ^llbo^a shall be not with him also
freely give an all things. In the view whereof I defire to live and die, and
speed eternity.

At night I was much refreshed in converse about some of these things.

Clouds return after the rain: This in time of a sore fit of sickness impressed
me. Lord keep me from security, mind, pity. Lord, thou know my frame.

His health was much broken for some years before his death, and somewhat of
his exercise in sickness may be learned from the following instance.

October 12, 1709, I was siezed with a violent flux, attended with painsul
gripings, in three days time I was brought to the gates of death; but it
pleased the Lord to bless the means that were used, and it began to abate.

OBSERVES

The canses of the Lord's contending were many, all reducible to this one,
wosul remissnefs in the tenor of my walk, and neglect to stir up my self to
take hold of God, in the lively spiritual attendance on the Lord in all the
ways of his appointment.

2. I found myself on the approach of the trouble at a great loss, the Lord hid
himself, the Spiat breathed (...) an the promises; all was dark.

3. I had a mollifode of pteffures, my worldly bufiness, my wise's condition
with a child in her belly; there was no place as to these things, but to roll
them over on the Lord. That which weighted me most, was, concern aboot my
soul's stare. As to this I observe,

4. That though I found not that comfortable evidence of it, that sometimes I
have done, yet I ^^ist not quit this hold, That the Lord had made with me an
everlesting covenant, etc. (2 Samuel xxiii. 5.) And though many challenges from
all hands surrounded me, I stood resolved to throw myself on free redeeming
love, and to ventore my surviving wise and children on the Lord's tender
mercies.

5. As to my trouble, God kept me, 1. Submissive justifying the Lord without
repiming at my circumstances 2. He brought me off solicitude about events in a
great measure, and to commit the disposul to Lord, crying for a removal of any
aversion to the Lord's will.

6. As to my work, though I wanted not heavy challenges, especially as to the
want of secret wrestling, and that frequency in it, for the success of the word
among my people, and their salvation; yet it was refreshing, (though I durst
not trust in any thing but sovereign grace) that I durst say, in the fight of
God, without heart condemning, 1. That I was concerned to know the truth. 2.
That I durst not vent my own conceits. 3. Nor did I keep back what might be
prositable. 4. I preached what I resolved to venture my own soul on. And that,
5. I desired to preach home to consciences.

CHAP. V. Of his marriage, and conduct in his family.
MR. HALYBURTON had begun this head in the following words: This being also a
considerable change in my lot, and God's providence being to be remarked, as in
other things so in this, whereabout he is particularly concerned, a good wife
being from the Lord, who sets the solitary in families; I shall notice some;
things here.

1. At the same time the Lord did convince me, that it was not meet I should be
alone, he also clearly convinced me, that a prudent wife is from the Lord; and
there fore I looked, and cried to, and waited on the Lord sot direction, with
that eminent freedom, assistance, and preparation of heart, as gave me some
ground to hope, th^^ he would incline his car to hear. 2. My great difficulty
was, as to the way whereby. I might know his mind, as to the person whom I was
^^ choose and fix upon. The command, be not unequally ^^^ed together with
^^believers, in the strictest seuse, was powerfully impressed upon my soul, in
so much, that (...) prospect of outward advantages whatsomever, could have
swayed me to make choice of one whom I thought vold of the se r of God. But
whether in my choice to p^^ceed upon the information and testimony of godly
proceeder, and concurring providence justifying their te^^^^ money, and
clearing the way; or whether personal and particular acquaintance were not
previously necessary, (...) my strait. 3. I inclined to think this last
necesiary, which did whatever pretenses it was supported withal, proceed from
too much of a dependence on my own understanding, and that joined with a
distrust of the providence of God; which was the beginning of my mistake. 5.
The narrowness of my acquaintance, which was consined to a very few of that
sex, increased my strait, and had a considerable influence into that wrong
choice I made. The person I pitched on wanted not several things which I did
dislike; yet she appearing to be more suitable than any of whom. I had
acquaintance particularly; and falling at that time under some unusual concern
about religion, which she did impart to me, it looked like a providential
clearing of the way, and ground to hope the removal of what I disliked in her
walk; upon which I did too hastily proceed in the proposal. 5. I durst ^ever
absolutely pray for success, but had great frecdom and liberty in pleading that
the Lord would direct; and that if it were not for my spiritual advantage, it
might be effectually crushed, and that my way might be hedged in.
Meanwhile, this gentlewoman carried on an intrigue with another, to whom she
was clandeftinely married, and thereby, in the good providence of God, Mr.
Halyburton was fairly disengaged. And being thus happily disappointed in this,
he fought direction of God in reference to a design of marriage with another;
and also set apart same time expressly to this purpose. An account whereof
follows, as it was found written by himself.

December 13, 1700. This forenoon I set apart for prayer; and being to address
God in reference to my proposal of marriage with J. W. I did judge it suitable
that I should begin the work with some inquity into my own state, knowing that
one unacquainted with Christ has no reason to expect an acceptance in prayer.
Therefore, after some serious application to God in prayer for the assistance
of his Spirit, to make a true discovery of the state of my ^ul, I found it as
follows:

With respect to God.

1. Under a full conviction, that life is in his faveur, Psalm. xxx. 5. nay, his
loving kindness is better than life, Psalm. lxiii. 3. 2. The like conviction I
was under, that my interest in his favor, admittance to, or acceptance with
this God, is utterly impossible, without respect had to a mediator. God being
one that will by no means clear the guilty, I being guilty; God being holy, I
unholy; God a comsuming fire and I one, in respect of sin, meet to be deroured:
I cannot see God, without a mediator, and live. 3. That God, out of mere love,
without regard to any thing in sinners, has been pleased to choose, furnish,
and send into the world, the Lord Jesus Christ, as the mediator, through whom
sinners might be accepted of him.
With respect to Christ.

Notwithstanding the frequent and lamentable prevalency of sin against light,
against resolutions, vows, engagements, strivings, and prayers; yet I must say,
that no alteration of my condition has ever been able to shake me from under a
conviction of the following particulars, since the Lord first convincod, 1.
That the Lord Jesus Christ is such a faviour, as became the grace, mercy, love,
wisdom, holiness, righteousness, justice, and power of God to provide; and on
the other hand, su h 2 savior, as became sinner's needs, sheir desires, and
therefore deserves their acceprance, as sit, suitable, sufficient to save all
that come God through him, and that even to the at^ermost, his blood being able
to cleanse from all sin, and the Spirit sufficient to lead ^^ to all truth. God
knows what heart refreshing sweetness I found in a view of the glory of God's
wisdom, holiness, power, etc, in the face of Jesus Christ. 2. That I do need
him in all his offices: at no time, either when things did go ill or better as
to my sense, durst I, for my foal, think of patting his offices; God knows that
my heart was as much reconciled to his kingly as to his priestly office; and
that it would for ever damp and sink me, were it not that he has a power,
whereby he can captivate every thought to the obedience of himself. His reign,
God knows, I desire. 3. I dare appeal to the searcher of hearts, that it is my
desire above all things to be found in him, etc. (Phil. iii. 9.10.) and never
does sin reduce me to that pass, that I dare admit a thought of the
insufficiency of this way of salvation to save me, or of having recourse to any
other, or of abandoing this; but the more that sin prevalls, the more I see the
excellency, sufficiency, suitableness, and indispensible a^^^ssity of this way
of salvation, and of my adherence to it, rejecting all othere. 4. All my hope
as to freedom from that darkness, which is my burden, is from Christ's.
prophetical office: and my hope of freedom from the guilt, pollution, and power
of sin, and acceptance with God, arises from his priestly and kingly offices.
In one word, I have no hopes of any mercy, in time or eternity, but only
through him; it is through him I expect all, from the least drop of water to
the immense riches of glory.


As to the law.

Notwithstanding my frequent breaches of it, I dare take God to witness, that
1. I count all his commandments, concerning all things to be right. 2. That I
desire inward, universal conformity to them all, withou: reserve, and that in
their spiritual meaning and extens; as reaching all thoughts, words and
actions, and even the most mi^ut^ circumstances of these. 3. That I would not
desire any alteration in any of his laws, but on the contrary, do see the
greatest excelleancy in those of them, which cross my inclinations most; which,
4. Occasions at all times, when not ander the immediare violent in^^hence and
hurry of some impetuons temptation, an habitual and strong desire of conformity
to God's law; my heart ever breathing, with. the Psalmitt, O that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes. 5. Since the commencement of this affair,
particularly, I have seen a peculiar beauty in the law, as exemplisied in the
life of pir Lord, who fulsilled all rightewusness, doing always the things that
pleased the Father, and more particularly in his absolute and unlimited
submissions to the divine will, even in those things which did cross the
natural inclination of his innocent nature. And though at sometimes I could
scarce reach this submission, in reference to this affair; yet, 1. I would be
made submissive. 2. I look upon it as exceedingly amiable. 3. I desire it, and
condemn myself, in as far as I come short of it. 6. God knows, I desire 'to
hate every evil way,' and would be free from every sin.


As to my frame and success, I can say, I thought it issued in ca^^ness and
composure; and as to this affair, contrary to my positive resolution, I was
carried out to be more peremptory than usua, as to the success, though under
sears of a refusal; yea, though I had my spirit in a more submissive frame, yet
now I was more peremptory as to the event, than when my heart was most eagerly
set upon the thing.

January 17, 1701. This day was set apart by J. W. and m^, at parting, to be
kept in order to our obtaining a blessing upon our marriage.

In the morning I began this day with prayer, wherein I did endeavor to trace
back sin to my very infancy, and found the Lord countenancing me, by bringing
sin to remembrance. Lord, I have been in all sin; not one of thy commands but I
have broken, and that almost in all instances, save that I have been kept from
the outward acts, and no thanks to me that it is so; for Lord, thou know it
was only thy restraining grace that kept me from any sin. O! how ignorant are
they of their own natures, or else of how sar different natures from mine are
they, that deny original sin; it may be, some of them, had they been acquaint
with my way and manner from my youth, would have been apt to think me of a good
nature, and not given to ill; but O how ignorant are they who think so! though
I had not the ensnating influence of bad company to draw me aside, yet without
temptation I was inclined to sin, and that against nature's light, very early.
Whatever others speak of their good natures, Lord, I must own mine sinful, and
that all the maginations of the thoughts of my heart have been only evil from
my youth up. When I look at my face in the glass of the holy law, Lord, how
black is it! Nothing but sin wherever I set mine eye.

The Lord helped me to confess sin, and did thereby give a fresh sight of the
need of Christ in all his offices, of his excellency, sufficiency, and
suitableness; and drew out my sou! solemnly to accept of him, renouncing all
other ways of salvation, devoting myself in my station, as a minister, to him,
waiting for, and expecting from him (according to his most gracious promise and
office, as the Prince exalted to give gists to men), such supplies of gifts and
grace, as are needful for my faithful acquittance in the discharge of that
office. Likewise I did solemnly devote myself in this new relation I was to
enter in, to him, pleading, that he would not contend with either of us for the
sins of our single life, that he would make us holy, and grant us to walk
before him, and that he would bless us with all the comforts of a married
state, fitting us every way for one another.

In my second address to God by prayer, the Lord gave me much sweetness and
enlargement, in reference to that particular, for which I set apart this day.
Blessed be God for his Spirit's directing what to pray for, and assisting in
prayer; I hope this shall be comfortable: When be prepares the heart to pray,
he inclines the ear to hear.

I looked on it as a part of the duty of the day, to search into my state; and
after serious application to God for his Spirit, that saer^bes the deep things
of God, to assist me, I pitched on the following evidences of the Lord's
gracious work upon me.

1st. The Lord has given me by his Spirit some discovery of my sin; and here
the Spirit has been, 1. Particular; he has fixed upon innumerable particular
sins of different sorts, fixing mine eye upon time, place and circumstances. 2.
He has been very full; letting me see myself guilty of all sin: This day he
took me to all the commands, and did clearly lay before me innumerable breaches
of every one. 3. He has discovered to me the sins of all the different periods
of my life, infancy, childhood, and youth. 4. He has discoverd to me spiritual
evils, selfishness, pr de, unbelief, and aversion from God. 5. He has given me
a broad sight of the sin of my nature, as the root of all these things, an
amaxing discovery of its enmity to God, of its propensity to every sin, of its
impotency and aversion to every good thing, of the utter impossibility that
ever it should lead me to any thing that is really good. 6. The Lord has
diseovered the guilr and hatefulness of those sins, so that I have been made to
loath myself on account of them.


2dly. The Lord has discovered to me the vanity of all those reliess which
nature leads to, and that, first, as to the guilt of sin, he has made me see,
that my duties cannot sa^^^^ and I hope he has taken me off from resting upon
them: For, 1. Under disquietments occasioned by sin, nothing, save Christ,
could quiet me; duties have rather increased than allayed it, when looked to.
2. The Lord, when I have been most assisted in duties, took such care to guard
me against this, that he then always opened mine eyes to see a world of sin in
them. And here, 3. I have been made, with as much concern, to desire to be
saved from my best dutics, as ever I was from my worst sins. And, 4. The Lord,
from the discoveries he made to me of my heart's inclining to lay some stress,
at sometimes, upon duties, when spiritually performed has stirred up in my soul
a jealousy of my heart in this particular. 5. As to the power of sir, by
manifold sad experiences, I found it too hard for my prayers, rows, tears,
resolations, etc. so often has this been selt, that I have been brought to an
otter despair of relief this way. 6. The Lord has been pleased to determine my
heart to choose the way of falvation revealed in the gospel through faith's
^^ceptance of, and resting on Christ Jesus for wi^^om, (...), sanctisication,
and redemption: this the Lord brought me to approve of,
1. As the only way of obtaining those things. 2. As a way full of admirable
wisdom. 3. As a way full of wooderful love. 4. As a way of great peace and
secority to si^^ers. 5. As a way suited to give glory to God. 6. As a way
suited to honor Christ. 7. As a way suited to honor the Spirit of God. 8. As
a way suited to honor the law.


Now, in all these particulars, I thought this way incomparable; and my
approbation of it was evident, in that I sound, 1. Every day my detestation of
all other ways to increase. 2. I found every day the necessity of this way.
And, 3. I found, that the more I locked at it, the more I loved it, and admired
it, as fuil of all things that can make it defirable. 4. I found in myself an
approbation of the law, and holiness of God in it. I am now satissied, t^^ the
law is holy, juft, good, and spiritual. The carnal mind is enmity against God,
it not subject to the law of God, neither can be. But blessed be God, that
enmity I once had at the law of God, is removed.


Evidences of that ^^mity.

1. I found in my mind a stated dislike at spiritual-mind ednefs, and at the
laws enjoining it. 2. I had a complacency in being freed from all atteadance
upon duty. 3. I would fain ^are had some of God's laws altered, etc.
Evidences of its re^^^al.

1. The Lord did remarbably reconcile my heart to these laws, which formerly I
would gladly have had altered, so that I would not have these by any taken
away. And this is the stronger proof, in regerd that, 1. I find these fins
deeply rooted in my nature, which these laws do cross. 2. I have manifold
temptations to them. 3. I have it to regret, that I am too often overcome by
them. 2. When I fear hell and damnasion on account of my ^^^aches of the law,
yet God knows this never occasions such dislike, as fear of offending him; see
Romans vii. 10, 11, 12. 3. I do desire no alteration, no change to be made of the
law; God knows, I would have my heart brought to it, and not it to my heart. 4.
I sind a constant ^^ame and selt loathing for shortco^ing and want of
conformity to it, and that in these instances wherein none, save God and my own
conscience, are witnesses. 5. I sind ext^^ordin^ry satisfaction, when any
degree of conformity to it is attained. 6. The ordinary and serious breathing
of my soul, is such as that of the Psalmift's, in the c^ix. Psalm throughout.
Upon these grounds I do conclude, that the Lord has wrought faith in me, and
therefore will save me; and complete what concerns me; and because he has
determined me to choose him, therefore I dare call him, my God, my sac^^^^ my
sanctifier. The Lord did this day help to plead for strength against sin; and
my God will hear me: I have reason when I have done all, to say, I have
nothing, I cannot serus the Lord.

In the beginning of this affair, in March 1700, I was consident to meet with a
disappointment, I was reiched to quit it, and did so for some time: God by one
means or other broke all my projects to turn away: he kept me intent in
observing providence, he gave me (...) epportunity, directed to means I had
not (...) prevented my sears as to those which I (...) posite.

After I had the greatest prospect of encouragement, I met with
discouragements, and then encouragement when least expected.

I have been kept off means, kept low as to thoughts of myself, and kept in
dependence on God as to the islue.

The thoughts of which things made me with much sweetness promise good at the
hand of God.

In prosecution of his purpose, he was married at Edinburgh, January 23, 1701.

As God blessed him with him children it was his constant practice to devote
them to Lord: He was much in prayer for his family, submitting all his and
their concerns to the divine disposal, as to life, health, etc. But most
earnest was he for their soul's eternal welfare; an instance hereof follows.

March 1705: An account of my exertise, with r^spect to my youngest child's
soul's state, a girl of eleven m^^^hs old, represented in a sew remarks.

1. When two years ago my son died surprifingly in the birth, I was much
concerned in desiring some sati^saction as to his eternal state, but obtained
no particular promise at that time, save only. 1. That I was made to bles^.
God, that I had no ground to sear the worst, as I might have had it he had been
come to age. 2. I was made to look to the extensive promise of the covenant
that in to us and our children. 3. I had peace in this, that I had devoted him
to the Lord as soon as I found him to live in the belly. 2. When this child
sell into a languishing sickness, and death began evidently to be threatened, I
was put to more close exercise about her eternal state. 3. I was sometimes much
enlarged in her behalf, bu^ was unwilling to rest here, but humbly desired,
that the Lord would give me some ground from the word to hope as to her. 4.
That I might not be wanting in the use of the means of the Lord's appointment,
I consulted books, and the experience of such of the Lord's people as I had
access t, to see what I might expect, but found no satisfaction; yet I resolred
to wait on the Lord, and cried (...) him. 5. When I cried to him, I found for a
considerable time no answer, but heavy challenges; 1. For not observing returns
by the word as I should have done. 2. For not seeking more this way, and
resting too easily without this. 3. For not studying the word so much as I
should. Thus the Lord dealt with me as with Israel, Judges vi. 7. -- 10. when
they cried, before be sent deliverance, he sent a repr^of. 6. 'The Lord,
further to humble me, trysted me with several a^^lictions, my wife's frailty
and my own. 7. When I was in this distress, I cried to the Lord, and in prayer
he relieved me, by that passage, Mark x. 13 -- 16. Suffer little children to
come unto me: as to which I remark, I. While I was in prayer, crying for merey
to the child, it was then suggested. And, 2. The Lord let me see in it, that it
was the parents who brought their children to Christ, desirous of his blessing
of them. 3. The disciples were against Christ's taking notice of them, or
putting any particular mark of respect on them. 4. But Christ rebuked them, and
said, Suffer little children to come unto me, and sorbid them not. Though the
diseiples would not have us to expect any evidence of the Lord's special love
to young ones, yet the Lord is of another mind. 5. The Lord approved of the
parents bringing, and blessed the children. 6. Here the Lord calarged me,
helped me to rely on him, that he would put his hand on the child and bless
her, and hereby quieted my soul, and filled me with thanksolness; and I was
relieved as to the child that is gone, and this that is dying: Bless, bless,
bless the Lord, O my soul; be prepares the heart to pray, and he will incline
the ear to bear. Remember the word an which thou c^^se^^t me to hope.
April 11. The child died: Blessed be God I have had a child to give at his
call, and blessed be the Lord that be heiped me to give her willingly.

Another instance at the death of his son George, March 23, 1717. The Lord's
day, a day to be remembered by me, a day wholly spent in prayer and praise, an
introduction to life: O my soul, never forger what this day I felt, I reached.
My soul had smiles that almost wast^d nature. My kind colleague and I prayed
alternately: O such a sweet day! About half an hour after the Sabbath, my
child, after a sharp conslict betwixt nature and the disease, slept pleasantly
in Jesus, to whom pleasantly he was often given.

Mer^ies and grounds of hope.

1. The Lord from the beginning fixed the eye on himself, and kept submissive
and dependent as to the child. 2. In the entry, the Lord brought the disease
pleasantly on; gave him astonishing patience, when for several days and nights
he slept none. 3. The Lord gave warning by this, that though the child, I
doubt, scarce knew his mother's name or mine before, but named us always and
only father and mother; in his sickness, when asked who we were? He answered,
Thomas Halyburton and Janet Watson: Here the relation was disowned, which
struck me at the first, and I thought the relation was loosed. His mother one
day asked him, why he called her so? But he returned no answer. 4. I asked him
some days after he took it, George, would you be well and live, or die and go
to heaven? I expected a child's answer; but he readily, and more readily than
was consistent with his usual way of speaking, said, "I will go to heaven." I
had herein some check for not being serious enough in the question; and his
death I expected. 5. I had all this winter been extraordinary helped in crying
for mercy to the children; and any blinks I had, and loosing of my bonds, was
when I did point prayer this way; often got I freedom to throw them on sovereign
grace, often to speak to them directly from the word at night, and never more
than about a month before this, from Jacob's last word's: I thought now God was
to take a trial in the tenderest point, whether I should stand to it, and hold
by the often repeated resignation. 6. I could not find freedom in seeking the
child's life, but much in crying for mercy to him, and a token for good. 7.
When he first fell ill, the burden was great on my spirit, till that night
after my kind coll^^ue and I had communed with much weight about the present
state of the church, and of religion in this place; concern for the Lord's
interest got far the ascendant in my heart, and my own dearest concerns sunk;
and from that time the Lord scattered clouds, and comforted me, as to my
present weighty concern for the child: and that, 1. In giving me enlargement to
bless him, that I had no positive grounds to call in question his state. Again,
2. The Lord gave me to lay stress on his command of bringing little ones to
him: nay, he caused me to hope or that word, and on the reach of the promise to
children. 3. The nearer to his end, the more loosed I was from him, the more
che^^ful my resignation, sub^ission, and humble considence, resreshing,
purifying, and quickening my spirit. 4. The Lord led both me and others to
express confidence; we could not avoid it. My kind colleague and I spent the
whole day in prayer with and for him; and he in his turn, praying jost when the
child was dying, even could not hold short of this, We ^^sire to believe, we
hope, ^ay, we are confident he is ^nteving into glory. 5. Whereas he had been
free of the fighting and roving for sorty-eight hours before his death, he came
to have some little siruggles at last, though without contortions; I was put to
cry for pity as to this, and that as a token for good, and was heard. 6. That
same grace that prepared the heart to pray, inclined the car to hear, kept the
soul cheerfully to resignation, and not only composed, but sweetened our
spirits; so that before his death, praye^^ were well nigh made up of praises,
and he was set off with thanksgiving.
CHAP. VI. Of his entering upon the profession of divinity.
THE place of professer of divinity in the new college in the university of St.
Andrews being vacant, a proposal was once and again made to Mr. Halyburton, of
procuring him a patent for that post; but he gave no encouragement to it,
resolving to be no way the disposer of his own lot. And in December 1709, being
advertised, that her majesly's patent was granted in his favor, he said, Lord
crush it, if it is not for thy glory. Herein I have peace, that I had no hand
is it.

The queen's patent being expeded, the college there, upon applied unto the
presbytery of Coupar, for getting Mr. Halyburton loofed from his pastoral
relation to the parish of Ceres, in order to his being settled professor in
divinity in St. Audrews: But that reverend judicatory did, in February 1790,
reser the affair to the provinci^l sypod of Fise, which was to meet at St.
Andrews in April thereafter; and the matter being grav^ly debated before the
synod, and the people of Ceres fully heard in what they had to say, the desire
of the college upon her majesty's patent was granted, without a contradictory
vote.

Upon the whole, Mr. Halybarton had the following ^^^^ections: As to this
affair, it sce^^s to be of the Lord: For, 1. The first rise of it was without
any thing, so much as a thought, in me. 2. The Lord crossed all other attempts,
and disappointed other prospects which they had to others. 3. The Lord kept my
spirit, and held me so by the hand, that I durst give no insinuation or
encouragement that way. 4. The desires of many that feared the Lord run this
way. 5. The Lord laid his hand on me, and therein see^ed to say, I was not like
to be able for the work in the prosent large congregation. 6. As the Lord began
it with me, so be did carry it on, over obstructions remarkably enough. 7. I
had no reason to doubt the singleness of any concerned, and who ^cted in it. 8.
When I began to compare the tract of the Lord's dealing with me, and the course
of my studies, I could deny, that there might be something in it. 9. My people,
whenever the matter appeared, began to saint. 10. Their consciences were
affected with the prepon derating evidence of the reasons, as was mine; though
inclination lay cross. 11. The Lord condescended to bring the matter to a
decision of the most competent judicatory. 12. The Lord condescended to clear
me as to submis^^^^. 1. By that which I resolved, after serious eyeing the
Lord, viz. that since there was a present harmony between me and the
congregation, I should go as far (...) they inclined. 2. This being proposed in
a full meeting, (^iz. of the elders), they all unanimously declared they
^^signed to acquiesce in the fentence of the synod. 3. It was my desire to the
Lord, that there might be some (...) of the Lord attending the determination;
and I dare not deny, but that even beyond expectation, to the conviction of all
my own people, there was, 1. Evident^^ a great weight on the spirits of the
members about light. 2. The Lord was remarkably with Mr. Hog, who prayed before
the vote. 3. When I retired, I cried to the Lord, that if the matter was not
for his glory, he might put a remarkable stop to it: If it was, that he might
carry it on in a way, that might give evidence of himself. 4. The synod
inverted the course of the rolls, ^^^ing St. Andrews and Coupar last, that two
presbyteries, that were not interested, might be first. 5. There was not one
contradictory vote; only the presbytery of Coupar forbore to vote, because they
could not vote against the transportation, and would not irritate the pa^ish.
6. When all this was intimated, it was done with a convincing light, by Mr.
Grierson, the moderator pro tempore. The will of the Lord be done. I had peace
and composure in my own mind, the Lord condescending even beyond expectation.
Now, Lord, fit for what thou do evidently call to.


Upon April 26th, 1710, he was, by the principal of the new college, admitted
professor of divinity there; and delivered his inaugural discourse in
confutation of an ^^heistical pamphlet, entitled, Epistola Archimedis ad regem
Gelomern.

Being admitted professor, he enjoyed not much sound health in the exercise of
that office: For in the beginning of April 1711, he was suddenly seized with a
dangerous pleurisy, which obliged his physicians to take from him a vast
quantity of blood. And though he was relieved of that disease, yet he never
fully recovered his former strength, by reason of the indisposition of his
stomach, and frequent vomiting, which prevented the regular supply of blood for
the nourishment of his body. Hereupon ensued, in the following winter, a
coldness, swelling and stiffness in his legs, with frequent and excessively
painful cramps. But besides his bodily indisposition, the grievances of the
church of Scotland did not a little add to his trouble. His spirit was much
weighted with the melancholy news of the toleration, and ic^^oring the power of
presentations unto patrons, and (...) less with the improsing of the eath of
abjuration upon ministers, from the apprehensions he had of the sad effects
that might follow upon their different sentiments about the Jaw fullness of that
oath. He freely declared his own opinion in the meeting of the synod at St.
Andrews, April 1712. And in conferences of the presbytery upon that matter, he
advised, that ministers, after all due means of information, should act
according to their light. But what he especially endeavonred to inculcate, as
he had access, was that the difference among them about the meaning of an
expression in that oath, gave-no just ground for any alienation of affection,
or for division and sepatation, either among ministers or people.

An account of some of the last words of the reverend Mr. THOMAS HALYBURTON,
professor of divinity in St. Andrews, on his death bed, September, -- 1712.

WEDNESDAY, September 17th, when a friend came and asked him in the morning,
how he had rested the by gone night? He answered, not well; and told, he had
this night been sore tossed with the thoughts of eternity; but, said he, I dare
not say they were distractiag. My evidences are much clouded indeed. I have
been thinking on terribilia Dei, [i. c. the terrible things of GOD], and all
that is difficult in death to a saint. All my enemies have been round about me.
I have had a great conflict, and faith like to fail. O! that I may be kept now
in this last trial, that is ensuing, from being an offense to his people.

Afternoon, when some of his brethren came in to visit him, he said to them, I
am but young, and have little experience; but this deathbed now makes me old;
and therefore I use the freedom to exhort you to faithfulness in the Lord's
work. Ye will never repent this. He is a good master; I have always sound him
so; if I had a thousand lives, I would think them all too little to employ in
his service.

All this whole day, and some days preceding, he was under a cloud and
desertion.

September 18, when a friend returned to ask him how he was, in the morning; he
broke silence with these words, O what a terrible conflict had I yesterday! But
now I can say, I have sought the good fight, I have kept the faith. Now he has
filled my mouth with a new song, Jebovah jireb, in the mount of the Lord, etc.
Praise, praise ^^ comely for the upright. Shortly I shall get another sight of
God than ever I had, and be more meet to praise him than ever. O the thoughts
of an incarnate God are sweet and ravishing! and O! how do I wonder at myself,
that I do not love him more, that I do not admire him more. O that I could
honor him! What a wonder that I enjoy such composure under all my bodily
trouble, and in view of approaching death! O what a mercy that I have the use
of my reason till I have declared his goodness to me!

To his wise he said, He came to me in the third watch of the night, walking
upon the waters, and he said to me, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end, I was drad and am alive, and live for evermore, and have the keys of bell
and death; and added, he stilled the tempest, ^ad O there is a sweet calm in my
soul!

Thereafter, when defired to be tender of his health, he said, I Will strive to
last as long as I can, and I Will get my rest ere it be long. I have no more to
do with time, but to trap [i. e. spend it thristily and piece-meal] it out for
the glory of God.

Then he said, I Will see my Redeemer stand on the earth at the last day; but I
hope to sec him before that, the Lamb in the midst of the throne. O it will be
a bonny [beautifulcompany: The spirits of just men made perfect, and Jesus the
mediator of the cover^^^^! O for grace, grace to be patient to the end. Then he
desired a minister to pray.

After prayer, he called for a little water to wash his eyes, and said, I hope
to get them washen, and made like dove's eyes; and then farewell fin, farewell
sorrow.

In a little, when taking some refreshment, he said, ye see I am eating
heartily here. I get sleep from him, and I get food and drink from him, and
I Will get himself. My heart and my (...) sai!: But God in the (...) of my heart,
and my portion for ever etc. but we have need of patience.

When one said, keep the light of the window from him, it may hurt his eyes; he
said, Truly light is (...), and a pleasant thing to behold the sun, the Sun of
righteousness. O brave light, where the Lamb is the light of that temple! We
cannot have a conception of it now; eye has not seen, nor car heard, etc.

Seeing his younger child, he caused bring her to him, and said, Mady, my dear,
the Lord bless you; the God of your father, and of my father, bless you; the
God that sod we all my life, the Angel that redeemed me from all evil, bless
you, and the rest, and be your portion. That is a goodly heritage, better than
if I had crowns and sceptres to leave you. My child I got you from him, and I
give you to him again.

To his wife he said, My dear encourage yourself in the Lord; he will keep you,
though you even come among enemies hands; surely he will cause the enemy to
treat you well. And then declaring his willingness to part with his dearest
relations, he said. This is the practice of religion, sirs; this is a practical
part of religion to make use of it when we come to the pinch: This is a lesson
of practical divinity.

When the physician came in, he said, Is my pulse weak, doctor? Ans. Yes; but I
have seen it as weak. Then he said, Doctor, as to this piece of work, you are
near an end with it. I wish you may lay it to heart; it will come to your door
too: And it is a business of great moment to die like a Christian. And it is a
rarity. Christ himself has told us, that there are but few that shall be saved,
even among them who are called outwardly. I wish the Lord himself may show you
kindness. The greatest kindacss I am now capable to show you, is to commend
serious religion to you. There is a reality in religion, doctor; this is an age
that has lost the sense of it. He has not said to the house of Jacob, seek ye
may sace us vain. Atheisis will see one day, whether it be so ornot.

I bless God I was educated by godly parents, in the: principles of the church
of Scotland: I bless him, that when I came to riper years, I did, on mature
deliberation, make them my choice: I bless the Lord I have been helped ever
since to adhere to them, without wavering: I bless him I have seen, that
holiness yields peace and comfort in prosperity and adversity: What should I
seek more, or desire more, to give evidence of the reality of it? Therefore, I
am not ashamed of the gospol of Christ; because it is the power of God to
salvation to every one that believes. I am so far from altering my thoughts of
religion, by reason of the present contempt thrown on it, and opposition made
to it, that this endears it the more to me.

As to the simplicity of gospel worship, many must have gaudy pomp now a days
in worship; it is an evividence of the decay of religion; for when folk want
the power and spirituality of it, they must have something to please the carnal
heart. This is my sense of it; and it is the words of truth and soberness; and
I speak as being shoaly to appear in judgment; and hope to give an account of
this with joy, as a part of the testimony of Jesus.

Well, doctor, the Lord be with you, and persuade you to be in earnest. I
return you thanks for you diligence. Is my pulse low? Ans. Yes. He replied, I
am very well pleased. I would have been content to have bean away long ere now.
I found my spirits failing. It is but a few strokes more, and victory, victory
for evermore, through the Captain of our salvation.

After a pause, he said, Every one that is in Christ Jesus must be a new
creature; He must have union with Christ, and a new nature: That is the ground
work of religion. The Christian religion is little understood by the most part
of us.

O the gospel of Christ, how purely was it preached in this place, when I was
at the university! though I found not the sweetness in the time, when I heard
others preach on these subjects, I found it since; and it has fallen on me like
showers on the mown grass; vetily, there is a reality in religion: Few have the
lively impressions of it.

Now get acquaintance with God; the little acquaintance I have had with God
within these two days, has been better than ten thousand times the pains I have
all my life been at about religion. It is good to have him to go to, when we
are turning our face to the wall: He is known for a refuge in the palaces of
Zion, a very present help in trouble.

O there is a strange hardness in the heart of man! I believe there are few men
come to age, but, when they see others dying, have a conviction that they must
die, and yet are not duly affected with it. It is like one rising from the
dead, what they meet with. But they have Moses and the prophets; if they will
not hear then, neither would they hear, though one should rise from the dead.
We must have an ear from God before we can hear. Ye hear not my words, says
Christ, because ye are not of God. However, Whether ^olk will hear, or whether
they will forbear, it is our duty, whom the Lord I as employed to preach his
gospel, to speak his word: And when we are dead and rotten, what we speak of
his word to the name of the Lord, it will take bold of them.

We must have patience to wait till he come. Yet a little while, and be that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry; and till he come, the just shall
live by says: But if any man draw back, says the Lord, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. To point once heavenward, and then draw back, is a dangerous
thing.

We are foolish creatures, we would have all the trial at our disposal, and
limit the Lord as to the circumstances of our trial. Why should I complain of a
little trouble in lying on the bed? Blessed be God, there is an everlasting
rest. Y^a, Christ has perfumed a bed of languishing, and a grave; he has
unstinged death.

To some, at another time, he said, enemies in this place will be insulting
over me, but I am not afraid of that; but that which fills me with fears, is a
misimproven gospel in St. Andrews. St. Andrews has finned against as clear
gospel light as ever shone in the isle of Britain. I remember, when I was at
the college, O how much of God was there in the preached gospel! I had my part
in the misimprovement of it.

Afterward, to his children he said, My bairns, I have nothing to say to you,
but be seekers of God, fulfill my joy. Ah! that I was so long of beginning to
seck God; and yet I was touched with convictions that God was seeking me ere I
arrived at the years of some of you.

To his eldest child he said, Ay, Margaret, you seem sometimes to have
convictions, ^eware of them, they are the most dangerous things that ever you
meddled with; for if you seek not God, each of them is God's messenger; and if
you despise God's messenger he will be avenged on you. My bird, seek the Lord,
and be your mother's comfort.

In the forenoon, to a gentlewoman he said, Madam, I wait for the supplies of
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, whereby I may be able to finish my course with
joy. I began a text at Ceres, (being his farewell sermon), and smiling, said, I
sticked it, I went not through with it. When I came to St. Andrews, I began
where I left at Ceres, I go bound to Jerusalem, etc. Acts xx. 22, 23. The point
I past was, Ministers may have a clear c^ll to work in a place even where they
have the certain prospect of difficulties, and winnowing trials; which I
discoursed here. I was very clear of God's calling me hither, come of it what
will, whether I signify any thing or not. What would befall me I did not know, I
had a very dark prospect, especially from this place, that had so much despised
gospel light; and that when he was taking away his servants here, it made me
tremble to think that wrath was coming, and that I could do nothing to hold it
off; I can signify nothing. The Lord help, I wish for Jerusalem's peace and joy.

I have nothing to do with my li^e, but yet to teap it, that I may lay it out
for my God, for it is my duty to do it. What had I been if the grace of God had
not been revealed in the gospel! He has brought life and immortality to light.
One said, Keep your gripes to the last; Satan is busy. He answered, I have had
trial of it already. O! sober, sober religion is necessary. I was often
stealing from the Lord: but blessed be his name, he made me lay it down again
with shame, and to cry, Not I, etc. 1 Cor. xv. 10. I was ay afraid in public on
that account.

He caused read one of Mr. Rutherford's letters, (viz. to Mr. John Mein, (...)
letter), and thereafter faid, That is a book I would ^^^^mmend to you all;
there is more practical religion in that letter, than in a book of large
volumes.

To a minister that came in, he said, I am lying waiting for the salvation of
God; who said, mind what I spoke to you anent Mr. Anderson, how gracicus the
Lord had been to him, taking him away before these heartbreaking providence
that have fallen cut since. He replied, I know there is a better end of it; the
cause that is down will not bide down; I said it, I will venture my soul on it,
Say to Zion, thy God reign^th. Kings and ministers of state, that build their
state on the ruins of Zion, they and their buildings shall be ruined and
perish, and their memorial with them. One said, if the Lord would spare you, it
would be a mercy to the place; the apostle says, Phil. i. 23, 24. To abide in
the flesh, etc. He answered, What can a poor wretch signify? I Will tell you,
brother, what I have thought a year and a day, I am no prophet, I pretend to
know nothing but what the word of God leads to; my thoughts of taking off the
servants of God at this time, are, I fear it is coming to that, that there is
no stop to be put to the overflowing scourge: there is like to be a general
overflowing consumption, running over not only this, but all the reformed
churches. Sovereignty I will not limit.

Afterward one was showing the difficulty we would have, while in the body,
with indwelling corruption. He answered. I often find it; but the Lord has
relieved me: I found this same night, even after the Lord gave relief,
indwelling sin showing a great deal of strength. One said, you know while you
are in the body, that will not be quite taken away; a perfect separation from
it we are not to expect here. He added, this we know, that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him. This has been made a sweet word to me the last
night.

After a little interruption, he said, In the day when I was in my distress,
and brought to the foot of mount Sinai, the mount that might be tonched. (it
was a sensible thing, but by divine appointment it might not be touched). and
when I came to the blackness and darkness, and heard the crashing of thunder,
etc. I was standing trembling, wishing I had never been. While I was waiting
for my sentence, be brought me to mount Zion, and to the bl^^d of sprinkling,
etc that view gave my mind reft.

To the apothecaty he said, The Lord is upholding me. The Lord show you mercy;
study religion in the beginning of your years: mind, if you come to be handied
as I am, without it you can have no comfort. I give you this as a solemn
warning, if you come to be hardened by the frequent fights of persons in my
circumstances, you may come to be hardened for ever, and your conscience never
be sensible more.

To three ministers in the place, he said, My dear brethren, ye are all there
that are in the town, except my dear colleague, and I have sent for him: Dear
brethren, it is not from any considence in myself, but out of a sincere love to
you, and from what I myself have felt, that for your encouragement I presume to
say, when the Lord helped to diligence in studying and meditating, I found him
then remarkably shining upon me, and testifying his approbation of a sincere
mint. There is nothing to be had with a slack hand.

Then to one of them lately entered into the ministry he said, Your entry into
the ministry is like to fall in an evil day; there is one thing for your
encouragement, you have a call: The times will make hard work to you in this
place; but that that makes your work the harder, is, this people being hardened
under a long tract of pure gospel ordinances. However, be fa^^hsul, and God
will strengthen to his own work. I will not say, ye will got things brought to
what you would have; but i will tell you, I have one thought, and I abide by it,
if ministers ply their work, they cannot, it is true, bring persons to the
Lord, but they may make their consciences knell; they will, they speak for the
Lord.

Then continuing his discourse to the ministers, he said, Now, brethren, give
diligence; for the Lord's sake ply your work, hold fast what ye have. I must
have a word to my brethren, it is on my heart; I am young, but I am near the
end of my life, and that makes me old. It becomes me to take advice from you;
however, it is only to exhort to diligence, in the common salvation. I repent I
did not more, but I have peace in it, that what I did, I did it in sincerity;
he accepts of the mite. It was the delight of my heart to preach the gospel,
and it made me sometimes neglect a frail body. I ever thought, if I could
contribute to the saving of a soul, it would be a flar, a crown, and a glorious
crown. I knew this was the thing I aimed at; I defired to decrease, that the
bridegroom might increase, and to be nothing, that he might all; and I rejoice
in his highness. When one said, so great seize might be comfortable to
him now. He replied, I lay no stress thereon; the thing I rejoice in it, that
his grace enabled me to this. Well, brethren, this is encouragement to you to
try and go farther. Alas, I have gone no length; but I would sain have gone
farther: The hand of the diligent makes rich. Much study, much prayer,
temptations also, and distinct cutgates from temptations, are useful helps. I
was fond enough of books; but I must say, in the course of my ministry, what
the Lord let me see of my ill heart, and what was necessary against it, was
more steadable to me than all my books. One said, that was to believe, and
therefore to speak. He replied, the Lord help me to honor him; I desire no
more, but to honor him here and hereafter. O that I had the tongues of men and
angels to praise him! I hope, I hope in a little to get will to answer duty,
and skill and ability to answer will. O to be helped so, and to sear always.
One said, blessed is he that fears always, even under manifestations and
discoveries of God; He that stands, let him take heed lest be fall. He said,
sobriety, sobriety, would fall in a little, if he withdraw; but do not stumble,
sirs, though I should be shaken, the soundation stands sure.

When advised to lie quiet a little, he said, whereon should a man bestow his
last breath, but in commending the Lord Jesus Christ, God clothed in our
nature, dying for our sins? If pleased the Leed to bruise him, Sec. One said,
the Lord has said, I will have mercy and not sacrifice; and pressed him to be
tender of his body. He answered, O but my heart is full! And then desiring a
minister to pray, he said, pray that God may have pity on a weak thing, that is
not able to bear much in the coaflict.

After prayer, when the ministers were retiring, he said, well, my brethren,
mind me. I desire to be thankful for what I have. I do not desire to want you
long.

Thereafter, to a minister's wise he said, I recommend to you the fear of the
Lord; I know you have a husband to direct you; I know you are the seed of the
righteous; but neither of these will arail. Make it your business to grow in
practical acquaintance with him, and encourage yourself in the Lord: I fear the
time is coming that it shall be said, Blessed are the breasts that gave no
such, and the womb that never bare. I fear heavy trials are hastening on.

To two ministers, who came from the country to visit him, he said, Brethren,
I Will only say this, we have need to take care, with the great apostle, lest
when we preach Christ to others, we be cast-a-ways; if it be so, we have need
to fear; happy is the man that fears always. Be diligent in preaching the
gospel. I presume, in this case I am in, to suggest this advice, that it may
not only be your care to be diligent in composing sermons, but above all scan
your own hearts, and make use of what discoveries you get there, to enable you
to dive into consciences, to awaken hyp^^rites, and to separate the precious
from the vile; and do it with that accuracy and caution as not to make sad the
hearts of those God has made glad. That is the great point in religion, and in
the management of your ministry, that you may obtain the testimony of the great
Shepherd, when he shall appear. Now it is like I may not be far from the
conclusion of my work. As to the work of the ministry, it was my deliberate
choice; were my days lengthened out much more, and days as troublesome as they
are like to be, I would rather be a contemned minister of God than the greatest
prince on earth. I preached the gospel of Christ with pleasure, and I loved it;
for my own hu^l's salvation was upon it; and since I lay down, I have act
changed thoughts about it. I commerd it to you all, ' O make it your business
to double your diligence; there may be hard conflicts. You have a prospect of
difficulties between you and the graves we are all good untried; but we have
need to have on the whole armor of God, to watch and be s^^er.

One of them said, I would gladly hear the professor's mind of the oath. He
answered, As to the matter of the oat, Let every one be fully persuaded in his
own mind. As these who are clear, should guard against every thing that may
endanger the peace of this church: So likewise others, who are not clear,
cannot get over difficulties, and cannot in conscience and duty comply; they
are bound in conscience not only to abstain from separating, but laboriously to
convince their people that it strikes at the root of church communion. If
ministers go on in separating courses, the resul of it will be, people will be
taken up with the public, and forget private religion. Whoever they are that do
so, they will have an accession to this. We shall have people running about
seeking to have their ears gratified, that love not the power of godliness:
We'll get a public religion in the room of real godliness. I love their persons
that differ from me, and I value what I see of God in them; but I am to call no
man master but Christ.

With respect to the difference that is like to ensue among ministers, with the
greatest earnestness I say, my dear brethren in the Lord Jesus, if difference
fall in, difference is a hot thing, there must be condescendence, for hearance,
and tenderness: we must not fly at the ball Whatever apprehensions. I have of
the consequence of some ministers not acting conscientiously, and running
preaching in such a strain as may do hurt, yet I would speak tenderly, and act
tenderly toward them; and les there be reach of the forbearance and meekness
that is Jesus; follow peace, peace is worth much; wounding our church among her
enemies is sad. I would not have a hand in wounding the church of Scotland for
a world: Wounding her at this day is a stabbing her order the fifth rib. These
things are weighting to me now upon the view of eternity: For let my right hand
for^^ her cunning, if I prefer not Jerusalem to my chief joy. For my brethren,
for her peace and constitution I Will pray. The grea^^vil, this day, that is like
to be our bane, nay, ruin and undeing, is, that there is a coldness and
indifferency that has crept in, an untenderness in the course of our walk, that
gives a great advantage to our enemies, we do not maintain the testimony of God
in a humble tender way, in such a day as this, when many are running from God.
It seems to be a principle now with many, how far they may go and not be
ruined, that is, to go to the brink of destruction; but the Christian rule is,
to stand at a distance. Now the Lord help you. Pray that I may be helped to
honor God in life and death; there is much reason to bless him. O to bear it
out, and stand the trial thankfully: O what ground of thankfulness have I!

To his successor in the parish he was transported from, he said, I have this
to say, as to my congregation, that people were my choice; with much peace and
pleasure I preached as I could, though not as I should, the gospel of Jesus
Christ; though in all things I own myself to have finned exceedingly before the
Lord, yet I have peace that I aimed with concern at leading them to the Lord
Jesus; and another foundation can no man lay: I hope you will build on that
same foundation, as you will, in that way, save your own soul, so it is the way
to save them that hear you. From experience I can say, that the pursning this
sincerely, is the way to salvation. Signity to them, that, if it please the
Lord to take me away, I die rejoicing in the faith and profession of what I often
preached to them under a low state of body; and without this I could have no
relief. I would have my folk understand, that that gospel which I recommend to
them, if it is not received, it will be a witness against them. His successor
said, I am persuaded you have seals to your ministry in that parish. He
answered, we are like our master, set for the fall and rising again of many.
Though we can reach no more, if we are faithful, they shall know that a prophet
has been among them.

To one that came in to him, he said, learn to die. It is rare to die as a
Christian; the most part think there is no more to do, but to lay down their
heads and die: This is even as if one would cover his face, and leap over a
rock into the sea.

To a gentlewoman he said, I may cry, shame on me, and woes me, that began not
sooner, and run not faster; for the Lord's way is as silver tried. We should
never, in matters of eternal moment, choose a way that we will rue of again. I
will not detain you, you have your uncle, he will be a good friend to you;
follow his advice, and such persons as he; follow their example. In a word,
follow the example of Jesus Christ, and be conversant with the word; be careful
not only in reading the word, you may soon tire of that, but cry for the Spirit
of the Lord, to quicken it, and then you will be with it as the child that
cannot live without the breasts. Be diligent in attending the ordinances. The
Lord bless you. As for me, for any thing I see, I am dying: But I die, I bless
his name, in the way that I have hitherto chosen deliberately, and I have no
ground to complain. Commend me to all friends. Carry this commission along,
what I say to one, I say to all, Seek the Lord. And all I have to seek, is that
I may stand to it.

To a private Christian he said, seek the Lord, and be real in religion,
content not yourself with the form of it; a mere profession will not do the
turn; this will be but the shell without the kernel; but they that are sincere,
shall inherit the crown. Let not the scorn and contempt that is cast on
religion, cause you give up with it. It Is not in vain to seek the Lord, you
have found it. The scriptures of truth are a contemned book by men; but they
are able to make you wise unto salvation; beware of casting out with them, and
throwing them by as a useless book; but converse with them, and ye will find
your account in them: All the books of the world could not have been in that
stead, that since yesterday they have been to me. Choose good company; bewane of
ill company, hold at a distance from it; seek that God may guide you into
religious company, and improve it; folk by whom ye may learn something, and
that without learning any thing that may be hurtful. Ye have a sad set of
gentry round about here; take heed ye be not drawn off your feet. This is a
friends advice; it is meet for me, in my circumstances especially, to give, and
meet for you to receive.

After a little stop, he said, I Will only tell you one difference there is this
day between my case and the case of many in the world; the course I have
followed weakly, has been at least to join with them that are on God's side:
Now, it is come to a push, and I have peace; I always wished to have God for my
God, and the heritage of his chosen. But they that walk contrary to God, and
forsake him, I have seen them frequently, when they were come to a pinch, cry
then, "O shame upon the way I "have been in."

In the night time, to some present he said, Do ye observe this growing
weakness of my eyes? Ans. No. He replied, Yea, but I know it is so; now that is
a progno. tick of a change. If he shut eyes, he will open eyes, eyes no more to
behold vanity: But I shall behold him in righteousness, and when I a wake, I
shall be satisfied with his likeness.

Thereafter he said, If this be the day of the ending of my conflict, I would
desire, even humbly to seek of the Lord, that he would of his great mercy
condescend to be tender to one that loves his appearance; that as he has dealt
wonderfully and condes endingly with me, so he may even deal tenderly to the
end, in loosing the pins of my tabernacle, and that I may be helped to honor
God by a composed resignation into his hand. O religion, and the glory of it,
in this degenerate age, has been much on my heart; and he has said, them that
honor me, I will honor: I was willing through his grace to have borne
reproach; if my adversary had written a book, I would have taken and bound it
as a glory.

Finding some sweat on his face, he said, I fancy that is an indication of a
greater change. I can compose myself, I bless his name. I wot not how it comes
to pass, that a body, that has met with so much of God, should be so unthankful
as in the least to doubt him about the ^elt. O what an evil heart of unbelief,
cursed unbelief, and cursed self have I. O how has God honored me! O that I
should yet have such an enemy in my bosom, as an evil heart.

He cansed read I These. i. iv. and v. chapters. And when one said, Sir, I
think you need to take the night's rest; he answered, I have no need of any
rest, were it not to put me in case to finish my course with joy. Lo, what the
power of Christ's death, and the efficacy of his resurrection are! And now I
find the advantage of one at the right band of God, who is able to save to the
uttermost; and that is the sight I long for; he will but shut the eyes, and
open them in glory! O it is a great matter, sirs, to believe; yet we have
strong grounds to believe, only we have evil hearts of unbelief. This I dare
say, to have my soul entirely submissive to God, and all things, even every
high imagination and thought made subject, is my sincore desire; but I Will get
that done shortly; then never will there be a reluctant thought, neves an
estranged thought more from God: Now it does not appear what we shall be; we
shall be like him when he appears; for we shall see him as hi it.

To one that alleged he was faint, he said, I am not faintish, I am composed,
and I am refreshed, I am not drunk with wine, and yet I am refreshed with wine,
with the spiced wine: O there is a sweet calm on my soul! And my desires are
toward him, and the remembrance of his name. Remember him! why should I not
remember him, that remembered me in my low condition? He passed by, and said,
live, and when he says, he commands, he gives reft.

After reading of the foresaid scripture, he caused read a Cor, i, 1^ -- 22.
and after the 9th and 10th verses were read, he said; now there it is all; God
has delivered, and filled me with peace, when I was under that heavy damp; and
I hope that he will deliver, even from that which I seared in death; and let me
find that I have got the victory, and that the God of peace will bruise Satan
shortly under my feet, and he will get up no more; and I will get a victory
over the cunning world, the deceitful heart. O! many a weary day I have had
with my unbelief. If I had had faith to believe things not seen, if I had had
says answerable to the convictions I had on my soul, that my happiness lay not
in things seen and temporal, but eternal; if I had had faith's abiding
imprressions realizing these things, I would not have known how to abide out of
heaven a moment.

A little thereafter he said, as I preached the gospel in my life, so I desire
to die preaching it; and though I live not till a suffering time, I may get in
among the witnesses. Sirs, I will be a witness against St. Andrews. I will be a
witness against the professors that are come about me, if they follow not the
Lord.

When desired to lie quiet and take sleep, he answered, the folk I am going to,
sleep not day nor night, but cry, holy, holy, holy. They that wait on the Lord
shall mount up as with eagles wings.

Then he said, find ye any alteration as to my coldness? the only reason why I
ask, is, I would not lose my time.

Ah, poor blacked I, that think shame to come in among that fair company. One
said, you will be as fine as the rest. He said, blessings to his name, for
composure. I cannot get my heart in a right tune, as I would have it, but
within a little I will get it so.

After he had lien quiet a little, one said, you have sleeped none. He
answered, no, I had much work, but blessed be God, pleasant work.

Thereafter, when his wife asked how he was, he answered, my dear, I am longing
for the salvation of my God, and hastening to it. Then seeing her very sad, he
said, my dear, encourage yourself; here is a body going to clay, and a soul
going to heaven, where I hope you are to come.

September 19, about five in the morning, when he was desired to lie quiet, and
try if he could rest, he answered, no, no; should I lie here altogether
useless? should not I spend the last bit of my strength, to show forth his
glory? he held up his hands, and said, lame hands, and lame legs, (his hands
and legs were greatly swelled), but see a lame man leaping and rejoicing.

Speaking of his children to his wife, he said, they are all a devoted thing to
the Lord; and I can say, sometimes when they were baptized, that the Lord
helped me to devote them to him, and hade me bring the rest and he would accept
of them.

Thereafter, finding some disorder in his body, he said, this is just one of
the forerunners of the charge, the great change. One said, blessed be the Lord,
that he is provicing you with relief. He replied, his word is a good word; and
O he has been condescending, ^stenishingly condescending! And I am even made to
say, Why are his obariot wheels so long a coming? When shall I ^e admitted to
see the glory of the higher house, and instead of that clouded light of a
created sun, to see that clear and perfect glory, and the Lamb to the must of
the there?

After a while's silence, in the scren^^n, finding himself very low, he took
farewell of his wife and children; saluting them all one by one, and spoke
particularly to each of them: Then he said, A kind and affecticnate wife you
have been to me; the Lord bless you, and he shall bless you.

To a minister that came in, he said, your servant, brother. I am upon a piece
of trying work; I am parting with wife and bairns. Resolve on that, I bless his
name, though I have had one of the best of wives, yet she is no more mine, but
the Lord's.

Then to his children he said, now von are fatherless; your father is to be
taken from you: Eur seek God. And now I got you from the Lord, and I give you
to him. Now I leave you upon him; you are no more mine.

To his son he said, God bless the lad, and let my name he named upon him. But
O! what is my name! Let the name of the Lord be named upon him. I do not say,
keep up my name; but O! that you may be honored to tell the generation
following, how good God is, and hand down the testimony. And O that ye may be
all the Lord's.

After that he spoke to his servants, and said, as for you, my servants, that
have been in my family, my dear friends, make religion your main business, and
mind that above all things. I charge all my servants in my house, beware of
graceless masters, avoid it, as what may turn to your destruction; seek to be
with them that fear the Lord.

Then he said, I will not bring up an ill report on religion; nay, I cannot but
give a testimony to is: Tribulation works patience; and patience, experience;
and experience works hope; and hope makes not ashemed. God has shed abroad his
love in my heart; and I am waiting for his salvation. Here is a demonstration
of the reality of religion, that I, a poor weak timorous man, as much once
afraid of death as any; I that have been many years under the terrors of death,
come now in the mercy of God, and by the power of his grace, composedly, and
with joy, to look death in the face; I have seen it in its paleness, and all
the circumstances of horror attending it; I dare look it in the face in its
most ghastly shape, and hope within a little to have the victory. Then he said,
I hope he will deal tenderly; but pray for me that my faith. fail not. I loved
to live preaching Christ, and love to die preaching Christ.

To some ministers that were come in, he said, my brethren, I have been taking
farewell of wife and bairns, I have been giving them up to God from whom I got
them: I am upon the wing to eternity; but glory to God, I know in whom I have
believed.

Then he said, dear brethren, (...) you begin and speak a word to one that
longs to hea^ (...) him: O I love to hear the gospel, I love to preach is, it
is a joyful sound, a sweet sound; I love to hear of his name; his name is like
cin^ment poured forth; the efficacy lies here, they are his ordinances, his
institutions, and he has promised to bless them; that makes me desire them. The
gospel as dispensed is the ministration of the spirit. -- I have need of grace,
that I may be helped to stand to it to the last, and in the last conflict to
honor him. One said, God has been gracious to you hitherto; and you know, he
is always the same, he is the same to those that belong to him: There is one
good word, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. He answered, blessed be
his name that he will stand by me: O to have him shut my eyes himself, and then
to open them, that I may behold him in his own light!

Thereaster he said, well firs, what shall we say of the Lord Christ? He is
altogether lovely. Religion is a mystery; but I was looking through the
promises this night, and observing how to provide against the last conflict: I
was astonished and at a stand, when I saw the sweet accomplishment of them:
every promise of the word of God is sweet; they are sure promises. O sirs,
study the word, observe the accomplishment of it; it was the thing I loved all
my days, and it is sweet to the last. O the accomplishment of the word is
worthy to be observed, and especially when I was looking this same night to
what he has already fulfilled to me!

To a minister he said, now, sir, though I will not limit the Lord as to time,
I am expecting the onset from the last enemy; and I know not but I may get many
enemies about me are then.

Then exhorting some to think on death, he said, to mind death is a piositable
thing: To mind death is not to go church yards and visit tombs; but it lies in
this, to be habitually under the impressions of death, in its rise and cause,
in its present state and relation to both covenants, the various issues and
consequences of it, and the way of delivery from it, and all the circumstances
attending it.

Then as to his spiritual enemies, he said, But I think. I am now almost out of
their hands. One said, that is a great victory. He answered, I dare not speak
of victory; but he holds me (...) though I cannot hold pace: I am, afraid to
speak, lest ^ursed enemy, viz. self, lie at the door to catch: for when I had
the greatest advantages, I have felt corruption stirring and making no small
difficulty, inclining me to spoil my Lord of his glory. One said, we shall
neither under mercies nor afflictions be free of this trial. He said, O
strange, that when death has been so lo g kept in view, that it should be so!
One said, you have reason to count that a victory, that the Lord has helped you
over your late sears: You know what a damp you was under on Wednesday, and what
a sweet outgate you got. He answered, I desire to bless his name for it; but I
should be yet under as great a damp, if he should withdraw: Holy se..r, caution
and jealousy, is still needful.

After that, to the ministers he said, brethren, you are there: In case I
should be surprised, I take this opportunity to acknowledge your tenderness to
me, that I am most unworthy of it in many respects: I can say, I desired to
live in love with you and I bless God there was harmony amongst us. The Lord
bless you and your labors, the Lord himself multiply spiritual bleffings on
you and your families, support you against discouragements; and the Lord in
mercy look on the rising generation; the Lord hold his hands about the
seminaries in this place, God look with pity on them. Then to one be said, My
dear brother, who has been my comfort in affliction, stand your ground, quit
yourselt like a man, be strong. Now sir, now my dear friend, I shall only say,
as I wish you the blessing of God on your family, so I desire that you will
even show kindness to the dead, in sympaty with all hindness to my dear wife
and children: I recommend her to your care; she has been the friend of my
bosom, the wise of my youth, a faithful friend. And turning to all the
ministers present, O sirs, check my poor babies, if ye see any thing in them
disorderly: I have lent and devoted them to the Lord. Last spring the Lord has
taken trial of it, (by this he meant the death of his son George), and has
taken me at my word. O sirs, it is an evidence of the decay of religion, that
sympathy and love among the saints is decayed: O if the Spirit were poured out
from high I. Then he said, pray firs, pray for grace: I would have the praise
of the victory to him.

Afterward he said, patience must have its perfect work; I will wait for it: My
soul longs more than they that wait for the morning. Sweet Lord Jesus, make
haste, until the day break and the shadows slic away. Then to a minister he
said, pray a word for patience to me to bide this last trial.

Thereafter, at his desire, a large paper was read over to him, which he had
dictated some days before, containing a testimony unto religion, and advice to
his family, which being read, he owned before several witnesses, that he had
dictated the same; and desired that these, as his words, might be attested by
them; the tenor whereof follows:

HAVING, in another paper apart, made such a disposition of my worldly
concerns, as I thought most expedient for my family, I did think myself bound
moreover, by this present testament and latter will, to declare my sentiments
and sense as to religion; being hitherto, thio' the mercy of God, in the full
and composed exercise of any reason and judgment that God has given me, though:
otherwise very trail in body: And this I am the rather inclined to, as a
testimony against the growing apostasy of the day we live in, and in expression
of my earnest concern to have all with whom I have any influence or interest to
adhere to the truth and way of God, in opposition to that general inclination
to apossacy, in principle and practice, that prevails at this day.

In the first place then, I do ingenuously acknowledge, that I came into the
world a defiled, polluted branch of apostate Adam, under the guilt of his sin,
tainted with the pollution of sin derived from him; having a heart full of
alienation from, and enmity against God; in a word, a child of wrath, and heir
of bell. And long did I follow the bent of this corrupt nature, going on,
notwithstanding reclaiming means of all forts, from evil to worse, though
mereifully restrained from those more open scandals, that bring reproach before
the world: In a word, I had ruined myself, and could do nothing for my own
recovery, and must have been everlastingly ruined in this case, if the Lord, in
tender mercy, had not looked upon me.

I must, on the other hand, and the Lord knows I do it with much cheerfulness
of heart, bless the Lord, who calt my lot in a land where the gospel of Christ,
and the way of salvation by him, is clearly, plainly, and purely revealed and
preached, wherein the pure ordinances of God's worship, without the mixture of
men's inventions, have through the mercy of God been kept up, and the beautiful
order of his house maintained, according to the rule of his word. I bless the
Lord that he so ordered it, that I was born in a religious family of godly
parents, and that I had this to say, that God was my father's God, and that I
had been earnestly and seriously by them devoted to him: And whereas I early
subjected myself to other lords in my childhood and youth, I bless and adore
the Lord, that by his word and Spirit, he ceased not to be a reprover,
reclaimer, and to strive with me, until, by a day of power, he made me
cheerfully give up with those abominations, and return to the God of my
fathers. Long did I struggle against the Lord's work, but, praises to free
grace, he proved stronger than I, and overcame me, and I rejoice in his
highness.

I bless the Lord, though by many provocations of all forts, I hare given him
just ground to abandon me quite, yet he has not so done; nay, even when I was
as a beast before him, he held me by the hand, and left me not to run away. O
astonishing, sovereigaty of grace! I bless the Lord, that when I stood
trembling under the tetrors of God's law, he seasonably saved me from despair,
by some discovery of the blessed way of salvation for self destroyed sinners,
through a slain Savior; even such a discovery, as made me resolve to part with
all, that I might have the field, Christ the treasure hid in it, and pearl of
price. There is nothing I dread so much as a mistake in this matter; it is
Christ only that will answer me and my case; and without him I am undone; on
him, the efficacy of his sufferings, the power of his resurrection, and of his
whole mediation as revealed in the gospel, do I build all my hope.

I bless the Lord, that ever he honored such a sinful unworthy worm, to preach
the glorious gospel of his Son: I confess I have but ill managed this glorious
trust; and my manifold corruptions made me a sinner in all I did, exceedingly;
yet so far us I do know my own heart, it was the life of my life to preach
Christ crucified, and deal with consciences about accepting of him; nor durst I
deal coldly or indifferently, in a matter wherein I knew my own and hearer's
salvation to eternity did depend. Herein this day I have peace, and I know that
in this matter I shall never have ground of regret. I must bear my honorable
master that testimony, that he never bid me go any part of my warfare upon my
own charges; if I was straitened it was in my own bowels; as to him I always
found, "spend and have in his service, was the best thrist;" when I was helped
freely to give what freely I had received, I never wanted then seed for sowing,
and bread for the eater, and I hope sometimes a blessing.

I bless God, that he has cast an insignificant worm's lot among those to whom
his weak labors were not: unacceptable; and I look upon it as a high privilege
to have the countenance of the saints, the excellent o^es of the earth; I h ve
desired to live with them here, and desire to have my lot with them eternally
hereafter. I have peace this day, that through his merciful hand, I have been
kept from making any worldly interest the main design; it is to his grace only
I owe this, as every thing else.

I bless the Lord, that I have been happily trysted in the several places
wherein I lived, with kind, affectionate, useful fathers and brethren to me,
with whom I have lived with much delight and satisfaction, and for whom I bless
the Lord heartily.

In a word, I desire to join my insignisicant testimony unto that of the
glorious cloud of witnesses; and particularly I do attest, as my fixed
persuasion, that Christ only has the words of eternal life; that the gospel
only has brought life and immortality to light; that this blessed revelation is
able to make wise to salvation every one that believes. I must bear a
testimony, that the way of holiness is the way of peace, and the way of
pleasantness, and that gospel ordinances, in their native simplicity and
purity, are blested and effectual means of communion and fellowship with the
Father and with the Son.

I see a generation, that has lost long ago any thing of the power of religion
some of them once seemed to have, hastening fast to an utter rejection of the
purity of gospel ordinances, and strongly inclined to substitute in their room
that dead carease of forms, ceremonies, and superstitions, which England at her
reformation, regarding political considerations more than the rule of church
retormation, retained to the unspeakable prejudice of souls, and to the
endangering one day or other, the whole of the Christian religion there; it
being visible, that among those who adhere to them, the power of religion is
still wearing lower and lower: and nothing could induce this generation to the
change, but their utterignorance of the power of religion; and something men
must have. It is obvious, the change is net of God; the lives of the zealots
for it demonstrate this, with the opposition made by them unto serious
godliness, and the encouragement given unto prosane persons, if they will but
join with them in this party-design. In a word, my sense of it is, that it
flows from the want of a sense of the spirituality that God requires in his
worship, and is likly to issue in the loss of all religion. Such as now cast at
the purity and simplicity of religion, and put forms in its room, are likely,
are long, as we have seen instances, to set the form a packing too.

In a word, all in God's way, in his word, is glorious, honorable, and like
himself, he needs none of cur testimonies; but it is the least than we can do,
to signify our good will to have his praises celebrated; and I, being so many
ways obliged, take this solemn occasion to acknowledge, before I leave the
world, these among the innumetable other obligations, and desire to bequeath
this, as my best legacy to my family, even my serious and solemn advice, to
make choice of God for their God; he has been my father's God, the God both of
my wife's predecessors and mine; he has been, we hope, our God; and I recommend
him to my children for their God, solemnly charging thein, as they will be
answerable in the great day, all of them, to make it their first care to seek
after peace with God, and reconciliation through Christ crucisied; and being
reconciled, make it their perpetual study to please him in all things. I
beseech them, with all the bowels of a father, as they love their souls, sit
not down short of saving acquaintance with him, wait diligently upon the means
of grace, and attend the worship of God in all duties, secret especially,
family likewise, and carefully attend public ordinances; beware of contenting
yourselves with the more form of these duties, but cry to the Lord for
communion with him in them, and the our-pouring of his Spirit, whereby you may
be enabled to worship God, who is a spirit, in spirit. It is my charge to you,
and that which I am above all things relating to you concerned in, that ye
follow God; follow him early, follow him fully, without turning aside to the
right or left hand. In this way, I dare promise you blessedness; if ye follow
this way, I bless you all, and pray that be who blesses, and they are blessed,
may bless you all. I have often devoted, as I could, all of you to God; and there
is nothing I have so much at heart, as to have this stand, that ye may indeed
be the Lord's; and if ye turn aside from this way, then I will have this to be
a standing witness against you in the day of the Lord. O that God himself, by
his grace, may in a day of his power, determine your tender hearts to seek him
early, and he will be a good portion, and see well to you; your bread shall be
given you, and your water shall be sure; necessaties you shall have, and a
blessing; though you have not many blood relations, ye shall not want a friend
every where, and that a steadable friend. I leave you, my dear family, upon the
mercies of God in Christ, and recommend him and the word of his grace to you,
and you to him, and to the word of his grace. Be obedient and comsortable to
your mother, as ye would have God's blessing: She deserves this at your hand,
and will need that comfort.

I leave this one advice more to my family, that whereas we have a prospect of
divided times, and different apprehensions and practices among ministers and
people, purticularly about this oath of abjuration, beware of interesting
yourselves in that difference, or entertaining prejudices against ministers
upon the one hand or the other; there will be faithful ministers on both sides,
and on either hand they will act according to their light fincerely; whoever
shall have an accession to the weakening any of their hands, will find no peace
in it, in the close of the day; beware of a religion that is most taken up
about public matters. The sum of the gospel, is Christ crucified. Seek where
this is purely preached; bewa^e of an itch after pulpit debates; walk bumbly
with God, fear always; hold at a distance from appearances of evil; follow
peace, truth, holiness. This instead of legacies I leave unto you, as my last
will, never to be revoked.

As for my body, I commit it to the dust, under the care of the Keeper of
Israel, expecting and hoping, that that quickening Spirit, that is the Spirit
of the Head, and actuates all the members of his mystical body, will in due
time quicken my mortal body; and for my spirit, I commend it unto the Lord
Jesus Christ: with him I have entrusted it long ago; and I will end with
Stephen, crying, Lord Jesus, receive ay spirit.

THOMAS HALYBURTON.


Thereafter, to some present, he said, Professors, I have this to say to day
about religion, we have a double call to give a te^timony to it, atheism and
profaneness are coming in like a flood. We shall all be martyrs. Blessings to
his name to get leave to lie on this bed, to testity against profanenass and
atheis^. But, said he, it is very painsul to be lying here when all is ready, I
mean when there is a habitation, a better house to be dwelling in than this. I
am loosed from my enjoyments, my dearest wise and bairns, I have given up with
them, and my beart in disengaged; but I put them in a good hand, I have put
them in Lord's hand. I do consess, God has been beating me in a mortar this
long time, and I see be has been doing some work; I was made like a weaned
child, I durst not repine. Then he cried, O when will thou come! Come, Lord
Jesur. I wait for the Lord.

Thereaster, when some people came in to see him, he said, These fourteen or
fifteen years I have been studying the promises; but I have seen more of the
book of God this night, than all that time. O^ the wisdom that is laid up in
the book of God, that is to be found only there! Then he said, I know a great
deal from a dying man will go for canting and roving; but I bless God, he has
so kept the little indgment I had, that I have been capable to reflect with
composure on his dealing with me. I am sober and composed, if ever I was sober.
And whether men will hear, or whether they will forbear, this is a testimony.
The operations of the Spirit of God are maligned this day; but if we take away
the operations and influences of the Spirit of God in religion, I know not what
is left. He promised the Spirit to lead us in all trath. O that this generation
would awaken, to seek after quickening influences of the Spirir. O for a day of
the down pouring of the Spirit from on high, in a work of conversion, for such
u day as that, when the Spirit of God effectually reached our fathers, and
brought forth great men, and made others to be conquered by them. The residue
of the spirit is with him.

To a minister he said, I am won now, I say I am won, brother, longing for the
salvation of God, and for the day when. I shall see his appearance; but I must
keep my post; and good reason, if he send me but fresh supplies, as much as
help me till I come home, that I may not dishonor him by begging at another's
door; I am that proud I would take all from him, and act to beg from other
lords. Our master gives his servants-a very honorable al^^wance.

Then to the phyfician he said, Doctor, it is great bravery to face death on a
fick bed. The beathens of old, whenever they turned impatient, they r^n away to
ki^themselves, and make an ead of themiselves, they dought not bide it; [i. e.
they co^ld not bear it]. Is it not more courage, and a nobler spint, that the
Lord allows, even the weak, the timorous, the ^ainteft, a power, whereby they
can lie under sickness and pain, and brave the floutest enemy, by a patience of
spirit?

After a pause, he said, I think we shall lose the very show of religion. Our
gentry and nobility, I think, if the Lord do not reclaim them, they are like
all to turn heathens, drunkards, swearers, etc. Among other things, I rejoice
in it the Lord is rabing me away in my younger years, that I will be free of
the transgression of the wicked; and it has many a year grieved my soul to s^e
it.

After a little, he said, there is a sweet composure on my spirit. The beams of
the hourse are as it were cracking. I am laying down my tabemacle to be built
again. O to get grace to be saithsul to the death: For after we have gone
through many things, yet we have need still to wait on God till the last: For
it is he that ^^^^res to the end that shall be soued. Am not I a man
wonderfully upheld by God under assiction and death? The death of the saints is
made a derision in our day; but if they laugh at me, I can laugh at them, and I
think I have better reason; let thom come to my pass, and they dare not; and I
will rejoice in my God, and joy in the God of my salvation, though the fig tree
sbould not blossom, and there should be to fruit in the vine, and the labor of
the olive should fail. But, said he, blessed be God, I am provided; God is good
portion. I want death to complete my happiness.

After a little stop, he said, I was afraid this day in the morning, that want
of rest might have discomposed me. I would fain h ve rest for fear of my head.
The Lord has been very kind to me, in giring me composure, and exercise of my
judgment, after I had a sore distracting trouble in the beginning of this death
bed sickness. Then be said, ^ut being laid here, I must speak; it is the last
service the Lord Jesus calls for at my hand; and I owe him so match, that I
cannot but commend him. As far as my word will go, I must proclaim it, he is
the best master that ever I saw.

Then to the physician he said, I fancy my s^et are growing cold, doctor: yea,
yea, all the parts of t^is body are going to ruin. You may, said he, believe a
ruan venturing on eternity. I am not acting as a fool, but ^ have weighed
eternity this last night. I have looked on death as stripped of all things
pleasant to natore; I have considered the spade and grave, and every
circumstauce in it that is terrible to nature; and under the view of all these,
I found, That in the way of God that gave satisfaction, not only a rational
satistaction, but a heartengaging power attending it, that makes me rejoice.
The doctor sail, you speak beyond your strength; it is a wonder to see you hold
out so. He answered, I cannot beilow my strength better, doctor; and I ^we him
much more. I have narrow thoughts; I am like to be overwhelmed, and I know not
where I am, when I think on what I am to be, and what I am to ^^e, I have long
de^ired and prayed sor it; blessed be God, I am richly furnished. I had as much
the day after my s^ter died.

To his son he said, O man, if I ^ad as many sons as there are hairs in your
head, I would besrow them all en Cod. David, these are honest solk, (meaning
the ministers), mind their advice; the curse of God will orertake you, if you
follow it not. Beware of ill c^mpany: read the Bible. I pray you may be an
encouragement to your mother.

He was much concerned about his two r^phews abroad, on which he dictated a
letter for them, which is as follows:

DEAR NEPHEW,
THE words of your dying uncle, the last letter from him should have some
weight; and my earnest desire that it may have weight in order to your eternal
saltations is the reason of my employing some of my laft minutes, ^y a horrowed
hand, to ^^^m^nd unto you to make earnest of religion, and not to rest content
with a dead, dry, harren pros^ssion. I can tell you, si^ce I came to this bed
of languishing, I have found a fell proos, that religion is a real, useful,
noble, and profitable thing. I have been helped through the mercy of God,
during my lying here, to rejoice in the goodness of God, and he composedly and
pleasantly; nothing but religion, nothing, nothing but the power of the grace
of God can have that efficacy, to enable me to do to: and having found it so
steadable a friend, I could not but commend it to you. It is a day of power
that only will engage you effectually, and wi^^ prevail with you to engage in
earnest. A providence like this may rouse some present affections, that will go
off in an empty slash again: but it must he a ^enewing work of grace that will
fix an abiding anchor. The Lord in merey engage your heart to him, that you may
find how good he is to the soul that seeks him, as I do this day to my joy, and
hope to do more fully in a little. I could not but commend the Lord to you,
having found so much of his goodness; I never sound so much when I was in
health and prosperity, as I find now in sickness and languishing; I find he
m^kes all things to be his people's for good, sickness or health, or ^is^ases,
or whatever they be, all is good; and I find all for good. I am longing to be
away, and I must break off, If God be pleased to bless this advice from a dying
frierd, we will meet, and meet comfortably in the higher house; I mean, if ye
comply with the design of the advice. I fear the influence of the place you
live in, want of lively ordinances, and the converse of lively Christians, may
endanger you. Converse much with the word of God, be much in secret prayer. God
can give a good appetite, and a strong stomach, that out of a very sapless
piece of nourishment, can fetch something that will give s^^ength, and make
coarser food subsist and nourish too. However, as soon as you can, seek after
lively ordinances; endeavor by all means to draw upacquaintance with the
saints, the excellent ones in the earth, that fear God.

DEAR NEPHEW,

I Remember kindly your wife, and I advise you in that place, where you can
scarce have acre^^ to any ordinances, and c^^^ot but the exposed unto many
disadvantages and dengers in point of religion: I advise you to take the first
opportunity of coming out of Babylon, and settling your business where ye may
be undes lively means of grace. I know you are a child of many prayers, and you
were prayed back from the gates of death; and now I wish that you may give
eridence, that you have been prayed back indeed for mercy to yourseft: I shall
be glad that this advice from a dying man come to be any wise useful to you.
The Lord be with your spirit. You cannot expect from any one in my condition a
digested, polished letter; but I speak the words of soberness, and full
composure of mind, blessed be God. Let your kindness to the dead appear in your
hi^dness to my dear widow, whom I leave behind and my f^r children; ^^ew your
conc^rn with both.

THOMAS HALYBURTON.


To some present he said, O sirs, I dread might^ly, that a rational sort of
religion is coming in among us; I mean by it, a religion that consists in a
bare attendance on c^tward duties and ordinances, without the power (...)
godliness; and thence people shall sall into a way of serving God, which is
more deism, having no relation to Christ Jesus, and the Spirit of God. To his
colleagne he said, Dear brother, let not modesly hinder you from laying out
your talent that way; God has given you abilities. Well, brother, to encourage
you, I must teli you, I must say it, your conversation has been a blessing to
me; our mutual communication about the concerns of the Lord was reviving. It
was after a sweet night's communication of this sort, that God took the burden
of my son George off me, and brought me to sweet so^^nission in the prospect of
his approaching death. O if we could be concerned about God's interest, he
would look well to ours.

Then he said, if I had all our brethren present now, I would tell them how
much it is upon my heart, that they may maintain brotherly love, and beware of
division. One said, I have observed that that has been many times the greatest
trial of the church of Scotland. Alas! the satal lengths that division came in
time of persecution, and not without the influence of some by their preaching,
has brought us to that pass, that we are not like to recover. He said, O what a
care has God of me, that is hiding me from the evil to come? I was willing to
stand my post with you, to stand and fall with the church of Scotland; but my
master is calling me off. O, I pity, I pity them that stay behind. I am no
prophet, I do not pretend to prophecy; but I am persuaded a form is coming on
this church. One said, I hope, brother, the Lord will not quit his room in
Scotland. He answered, indeed. I hope not; but I much doubt if this gener^tion
will be honored to do God great ser^ice, and see good days. I do not much
wonder that he has laid me by: But however, they that keep the faith, and fight
the good fight, shall have abundant peace. Well, well, firs, the day must
break; I hope, I hope, the Lord will arise, and the church will be made a
wonder; he will say, Lo! this people have I formed for myself, he can make a
nation to be born at once.

Often he faid, this day O how composed am I! what a wonder to be so, while I
see the evident symptoms of my dissolution I and cried often, as in the Song,
when shull the day break and the soa^^ws flic away? Turn my beloved and be thou
like a ree or a young heart upon the mountains of Bether. I am longing to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, that is far better.

When a minister's son came in, he said, John, you are going to get another
lesson from a dying man; you got one from a dying father, and now another from
a second father; (this he said, because that young man was recommended to his
care). Then telling how kind the Lord was to that minister when dying, he said,
I have found much of God's goodness too: I did not think to come near to, but I
was desiring and panting after a share of his happiness; and now God has given,
it me. And now, John, I charge you, trace your father's steps, as ye will be
answerable at the great day. O serve the Lord, and for your encouragement I
tell you, man, he is the best of masters; beencouraged to seck God, beware of
the vanities of youth; and take beed to your ways according to the word of God.
The Lord bless you, and bless your sisters, and make them in their younger
years to seck God, and it will be well with you. The reverend old man your
grandfather, your father looked on him as an orphan; be you as a father to him,
be dropping ay the word of life to him, and have a tender care of him; it is
the way to obtain a blessing. Tray for me, for patie we to the end, that I may
win to praise him. I many times had a mistuned voice, but, which is worse, I
had a mistuned heart; but I will get all right tuned above.

To a minister that came from Edinburgh to visit him, he said, Come and see
your friend in the best case that you ever saw him in, longing for a
deliverance, and h^stening to the coming of the day of God, waiting for the
salvation of God, on a bed of roses, though nature and skin say not so, a bed
perfumed. And, man, I sent for you, I longed to see you, that I might give you
encouragement in an ill world to preach the gos^el, and stand by Christ, that
has been so good to me. This is the best pulpit that ever I was in, I am now
laid on this bed for this end, that I may commend my Lord. He answered, it is a
great blessing that he commends himself to you, and I ^esire to bless him on
that account. To which be replied, Yea, he commended himself first.

September 10th, in the morning, when a minister asked how he was, he said, I
am composed, waiting for him. To which he replied, You see how kindly he deals
with you, he is both antidating in your foul heavenly exercise, and heavenly
enjoyments. On which he said, He is preparing and making me mee^ for the
inbe^itance of the saints in light. The minister said, He deals so tenderly
with you, that be gives you little ado but to praise. He answered, I have
reason to desire the help of all to praise him: Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
all that is within me magnify his holy name.

A little after that one said, Have you pain with the purging? He answered,
Yea, yea, indoed have (...) but I have no complaint. And said h^, I will be
present (...) without spo!; and I will get a clean bed, white and fair. O he is
good to me!

To some entering the room he said. Indeed you are all very welcome, sirs; I am
taking a little wine for refreshment, and in a little I will get my wine fresh
and new in his kingdom of glory: I dare scarce allow my thoughts to run
directly upon it, I must lock: aside, least I should be overwhelmed. But I ra
her speak than ^^ are of him who has done wonderful things for me, and has kept
me this day in a perfect calm. One said, You have got, I trust, what your heart
can desire to make you meet for going through the valley of the shadow of
death, since Wednesday that you had your own trial. He answered, Weeping may
endure for a night, but joy ^^mes in the morning. It is but a little, and I
shall get that rest; I am getting the earnest of it. It is but a little and I
will get himself. Light in (...) for the right^^^^, and gladness for the
upright. O! when will it come that I may win there where I will conceive aright
of glory. I co^ret orde^ my speech now, by reason of darkness But I long to
behold it. I have the patience to wait until be come. I have experienced much
of his goodness since I lay down in this bed, I have found that tribulation
works patience, and patience experiencer, and experience hope. And I have found
the love of God st^ed abroad in my soul. Then turning to his wife, he said,
Come away, my dear, and encourage yourself in the expectation, that under the
conduct of the same Captain of salvation ye will come hither, and cast yourself
and your family upon the Lord, encourage yourself, God lives; blessed be my
Redeemer the rock of my strength.

After that, to his son, he said, I am going to die, I am to be a bridegroom
the day, at least, I am to be the bride; I am going home to my God, and I hope
you, God: And be sure that you be with God often, and if ye be often with him, ye
will be where I am. My dear, seek God, seek 0209 0224 V 3 hit, and seek him
early, and he will be found of you, 02 The angel that preserved me, bless the
led. Mind, David, that I have commented God and his way to you. Then he said, O
sirs! if there were a day of the power of God going along, and God gripping the
hearts of youth. Peer thing, read your book, and be a good scholar yourself,
and be sure to seek God, that the may teach you.

Then he said, Who is like him? Oh! what be I as allowed me this night! I know
now the meaning of that word, (...) wh^! ye will in my name, and ye shall
receive it. I say, the Lord has even allowed me to be very homely in every
circumstance, and I have thought, I was even ^^^^ing at it.

Then to his daughter he said, Come Margaret, I must again commend to you my
God, and his ways. Be an encouragement to your mother: Mind the many
^^^citations I have given you and despise them not and save your ou^ fool: And
cry, that by a day of his power, he may bring you to found sincerity. You have
lost a loving father: It will be God only that can make him up: But he can do
more; and indeed we must not compare fathers. Your father and mother have given
you to God; do not you give yourself unto the devil. In all things, aim at
pleasing God; and my bird, ye will never rue it.

After that he caused his son come to him, and said, David, keep not near vain
persons, any body that will swear, or lie, or speak any that is bandy, or that
will break the Sabb^ch day, come not near them; and pray that God may give you
a better memory to mind the sermons, and say your beart.

Then he said, O let us exalt his name together. O glory dwells in Immanuel's
land. I long for the fragrancy of the spiced wine, Stay me with flagons,
comfort me with apples; for I am sick of love. Then he caused a minister to
pray.

Thereafter to a ^^^^^fter that came in, he said, I am core is J^^^ the ^^^^tor
of the (...) covenant; I will be in a^r^ng the bl^ssed company that stand by; I
will be in with that (...) above, where the Lamb in the midst of the throne it
is the precedence: And now I wait for his salvation, glory to him. What shall I
render to God? Let us exalt his name together; he has done wonderful things for
me. I have been many a day afraid, how I (...) get through the valley and
shadow of death. One said, it is a mercy, sir, the Lord has taken away the
fears of death, before death comes. He answered, O there is much in this, he
has wrought us for the self same, thing! Since I was laid down here the Lord
has carried on a work of sanctification far on my soul, that makes me meet for
heaven.

After prayer by some of the ministers, it was a^ed at him, Find you any more
case? He answered, Yea, I found case in the time of prayer. Then he said, I
long to launch out in his praise, it is an ocean. (...) I come not to be life
an angel of God, yet the weak will be like Doz bid, the sweet singer of Israel.
O be encouraged to follow the Lord, every one of you, sirs.

Then to one of the elders of the parish he said, James, ye are an old man; and
I am dying; yet I am dying old; old, and satisfied with days; the child is
going to die an hundred years old. I am like a shock of corn fully ripe. I have
ripened fast; but O! I have been under a bright sun, a day when the Sun of
righteousness shines, and I have brave showers.

After a little silence he said, I have been sleeping, and I have wakened as
refreshed; and now what shall I say? I can say no more to commend the Lord; not
for want of what to say, but for want of words wherewith to express it. Well,
sirs, ye will meet with difficulties and discouragements; but this may
encourage you, ye see God owns his servants, and should not his servants own
him, and rejoice in him, and despise what enemies can do, when the master does
so much for them? God has kept my head to me, and my judgment, for the best
piece of work that ever I had. Blessed be God, my head and my heart are so
sound. Though many a time, a vain heart has run away, and carried me down the
stream, yet I may say, the habitually determinate desires of my soul, from the
day that God first revealed his Son in me, run out after him, and the
remembrance of his name. And now I find he meets them that rejoice, and work
righteousness; glory, glory to him. O what of God I see! I never saw any thing
like it. The beginning and end, sirs, of religion, are wonderfully sweet. Mark
the perfect man, and behold the upright, etc. I am not calling myself perfect;
the Lord knows, I am far from it; I have found corruption stirring since you
came in this morning. One said, His dealing with you has been very uncommon. He
answered. Very uncommon indeed, if ye knew all that I know: yea, but therein is
the glory of the Lord, that he makes the weak strong; the excellency of the
power is the more remarkably s^en. The other replied, There is a borrowed
perfection. He answered, Yea, yea, that is perfection; glory to him for that
perfection. The other adding, And as all our righteousness comes from him, so
does all our strength: He said, Yea, yea, now may ye all ascribe to him the
honor of his name; may ye be all engaged by this unto the Lord himself, and
established in his way; the glory (...) his, his only, and engagement of heart,
as consequent to the discovery, should be to him only: Not unto us, not unto
us, but to thy name, O Lord, be the glory. O the sweetness of a Creator to a
creature!

Having continued his discourse a while to those about him, he said, O this is
the most honorable pulpit that ever I was in! I am preaching the same Chirst,
the same holiness, the same happiness I did before: I have much satisfaction in
that, I am not asha^^d of the gospel I preached; I was never ashamed of it all
my days, and I am not ashamed of it at the last, when I am put to the trial in
the bed of languishing: Blessed be God, we are all agreed in that, that it is
the power of God to salvation.

After that, to a minister that had come from Edinburgh, he said, Now tell my
honest friends at Edinburgh, tell them what God has done for my soul, and
encourage them to hold on their way, they are a blessed seed: Beside those, to
Christian acquaintances I am very willing it should be told how good God has
been to me. Are we ashamed of the gospel? Will these experiences of the reality
of religion be blown out of our minds? Here I am now, a man, a weak man, in
hands with the king of terrors, rejoicing in the hopes of the glory that is to
be revealed, and that by the death and resurrection of a despised Christ. That
minister answered, Sir, I believe you know that your friends at Edinburgh will
be very well s^tisfied, that mercy from the Lord has been shown to you, He
replied, All that fear God may be glad. ^^dced minted, as strength would allow,
when the beginning of this trouble was on me, at that, 'shew me a token for
good;' and indeed I think God has shown me a token for good.

Then to some present he said, it is an ill time this; I well tell you, sir, it
was this ill time that has helped on all this; it has weighted my spirit, the
dark prospect was so uneasy: But may be I took more care than I should have
done: We trust. God too little. I sought my judgment, and he has continued by
judgment. Then he desired a minister to pray, and said, O let us exalt his
name: Trals the lines are f^llen in pleasant places, and I have gotten a good,
heritage. Now play; but be shore, because I find a great alteration on my body;
and praise, O praise him; praise is comely.

After prayer he said, Christ is exalted; death is not terrible, death is
unstinged; the curse of the fiery law is done away.

To a gentlewoman he said, I long for his salvation; I bless his name I have
found him, I am taken up in blessing him, I am dying rojoicing in the Lord.
Well, said but, I long to be in promised land. ^He, apprehending himself very
low, said, Here I die, saying. Lord Jesus receive my spirit. -- Come, sweet
Lord Jesus, receive this spirit fluttering within my breast, like a bird so be
out of a share. -- When will I hear him says, Arist, my love, my fair one, and
come away, the winter is past, the rain is gone over, etc. Come sweet Lord
Jesus, come and take me by the hand, that I stumble not in the dark valley of
death. One said, He has been pleased to set his love upon you, and he will help
through in this last conflict; for his word is still the same, I will never,
never leave, nor forsake you; he is able to save to the n^^ermost. He answered,
I know that.

A little after, the other said, We have, brother, such a view of his love and
glory that shall be revealed, that shall excite to praise and thanksgiving,
that will be the eternal song of the redeemed. You are beginning that song now.
He answered, Ay, ay blessed be his name.

Then he prayed, and said, Pity me, and let me depart in peace; for only eyes
have seen thy salvation.

When a minister said, Do you desire one of us to pray? He answered, Yea, yea,
pray that I may win comfortably over. One said, He has need of some
refreshment. He answered, I have meat to eat. Pray, said he, that, like a good
soldier, I may strike the last stroke.

After that he said, I wait for thy salvation. -- How long? Come, sweet Lord
Jesus. -- O come, sweet Lord Jesus, take me by the hand. Then he caused a
minister pray, and said, Pray, pray and praise.

After that he said, Come Lord Jesus; I have waited for thy sal ation. -- I
wait for thy salvation, as the watchman watches for the morning. -- I am weary
with delays. -- I faint for thy salvation. -- Why are his chariot wheels so
long a coming? -- He is trying, my patience -- he is trying my patience. O what
means he to stay so long? I am like to faint with delays.

Then having revived a little, he said, Draw the curtains about me, and let me
see what he has a mind to do with me. This done, after a while's silence, he
said, Whence is this to me? There is a strange change within this half hour.
Ah, said he, I am like to be ship-wrecked to health again; I am afraid for it,
and tremble at this, sirs. O what sort of providence is this? I was in hopes to
have been at the end of my journey; and now I am detained with a cross wind. I
desire to be patient under his hand; but he must open my heart to glorify him.
Then he said, Pray for me, that none that fear him may be ashamed on my account.

After that he said, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place
where thy honor dwells. Thou that know all things, knows I love thee. Lord,
I may not want thee.

Then to the ministers he said. Brethren, go and pray to the Lord for me. One
said, Brother, I am not disappointed in that reviving you got. The Lord calls
to submission to his will; he does all things well; he has given you wonderful
assistance hitherto. He answered, I find corruption vigorous and strong, so
that I have no reason to quit my post, no not for half an hour.

Thereafter he said, O that I could bless the Lord, such a wonder of mercy as I
have been made. When he was breathing forth a passionate longing after his
dissolution, one said to him, You have reason to account God's kindness to you
very surprising, since now these three days past you have had so much of
sensible comforts without interruption, and some of the greatest men in the
church of Scotland have been sore and long tossed with desertion, and have not
had at death the half of your consolation, have not got the half of these
manifestations that you have had. He answered, His loving kindness is indeed
mavelous to me, What am I, O what am I, that he has brought me hitherto! What
I have is not a flashy and very sensible joy; yet I bless, I bless his name I
am much composed, and having solid clear scripture manifestations of God, and
the things of God.

To the apothecary he said, I thought to have been away, and I am come back
again: I am glad to be gone, not that I am wearied: He has not allowed a
fretting thought to vex me. O I am a monument, a monument of the power of God.
My trouble is great, but I am helped to bear it: And in so far I am a martyr as
well as a witness. My great desire has been these many years, to suffer for the
truth of our religion; and now God has given me the greatest honor, to be a
living witness to it, and a monument of it, that we have not followed cunningly
devised fables. I will be at heaven shortly; I will come there by the word of
my testimony, and the blood of the Lamb: All is of grace: He has chosen me,
called me, justified me, and sanctified me by his grace. He gives grace and
glory, these are brave gifts.

Then he said to the ministers, after many apologies, etc. That he as a dying
man begged them to represent to the ensuing synod, that they would keep up
brotherly love, the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, and with the
utmost care avoid divisive courses, whatever temptations they might be under to
these. I am concerned, said he, as long as I am in time, for the church; I even
pity you: O let all of us bide by him. O that the ministry of Scotland may be
kept from destroying the church of Scotland. O that I could obtain it of them
with tears of blood, to be concerned for the church! Shall we drawn away from
the precious gospel, and from Christ?

To one of the students he said, If I had you lads all about me now, I would
give you a lesson of divinity: However, this will be a standing witness of the
reality, solidity, power and efficacy of these truths I taught you; for by the
power of that grace revealed in these truths, here I lie pained, without pain;
without strength, and yet strong. I think it would not be a lost session this,
though you were all here.

To a citizen he said, Sir, I am a monument of the great goodness of God: There
are but a few names in this place that set their faces heavenward: be
encouraged to go on. The Lord bless you and your family: you have been a kind
neighbor. Then he said, They tha^ are planted in the house of the Lord, shall
flourish in the courts of our God. I am planted in the house of God, here is an
evidence of it, I am but young, and yet the child is going to die an hundred
years old. In winter (...), I thought I was going to be cast as a withered
stick on^^ the dyke; and now the dead stock that was cut, has budded again and
grown a tall cedar in Lebanon.

After a pause, he said, My body complains of pain, but I complain of none. I
was never more myself all my life, than in this sickness, I was never more
indebted to grace. Ah, I mistook myself, O cursed self. I would been over
easily away without all this scouring, (meaning the flux), and yet I am
scouring away to heaven: I thought to win away with this rubbish; but my God
sees meet to purge me of all my dross; he is keeping me, and he will have me as
gold purified seven times ere I go hen^^; and I will be bravely purged, and get
fair c^ean garments, washen and made white in the blood of the Lamb; and the
enemy that accused Joshua the high priest, dare not accuse me for filthy
garments: Yes, not unto us, not unto us: O there is a beauty there! would you
have a mark of a true Christian? here it is, to strike at the beating down of
self, in all its most subtle actings. I am full of sores, said he, but all my
bones shall praise him.

Then he pressed the minister, to dis^ourse to him, and said, I desire to hear
the word read, the word preached. Many times when I thought on the (...) that
lived in the days of old, I said, I was as one (...) time; but new I think I am
born in due time, for I will see Jesus, O sweet Jesus that delivers from the
wrath to come! I will see blijah and Moses, the great Old Testament prophets; I
will see the two great mediators, the type and ^^titype: The three discipies
got a sweet and glorious fight of Christ in his transfiguration; this was
indeed an edifying and confirming fight allowed to the disciples for streng
thening their faith against the objections of the unbelieving Jews, and the
shaking trials they were shortly to meet with. Was he despised as a mean and
more man, and his Godhead disowned? Lo! here he appears in divine majesty and
glory. Did they say that he was against the law? Lo! here Moses, by whom the
law was given, paying respect unto him. Did they say that he was not the
promised Meffias foretold by the prophets? Lo! here Klijah, the greatest zoalot
among the Old Testament prophets, owning and honoring him. Was he reproached
as a deceiver of the people? Lo! the voice from heaven faith, This is my
balaved San in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. Yet this fight was of short
continuance, and terrible while it lasted. But in heaven we shall have a more
glorious and abiding fight, we shall behold his glory, we shall be made like
unts him, for ^^e shall see him as he is: Lo! this it our God, and we have
waited for hi! When his people are in trouble, the wiched say, When is your
God! but wait the (...) till their deliverance come and then they can say, Lo!
this is our God. O (...) I am ^^ll of matter I know not where to begin or ^^d:
The spirit of the Lord has been mighty with me; O the book of God is an unco^
thing! It is written within and without! I never studied it to the half of what
I should; but God has given me much of it together. Never was I more uneasy in
my life, and yet I was never more easy: All my honer are like to break, they
stick through my skin, a ba^^ is a burden to me, my mouth's a burden, etc. and
yet all easy: Not unto (...) -- O there is a beauty there.

Then to his wise be said, O my sweet bind, are you there? I (...) no more
thine? I am the Lord's. I remember on the day I to^k you by the hand, I thought
of varting with you; but I wist not how to get my heart off you again, but now
I gor it do^e. Will not you give me to the Lord, my dear? Then seeing her very
sad, he said, My doar, do you weep? you should rathes rejoice; rejoice with me,
and let us exalt his name together; I will be in the same family with you: You
must even stay a while behind, and take ca^e of God's bairns.

In the night time be said, Ah, St. Andrews, I am afraid it is coming to that
with it, that the power of religion will wear quite out among prosessors in St.
Andrews, and that they will not seek after the influences of the Spirit in
ordinances.

When wak^^ed out of sleep, he said, I am lying pleasantly, and waiting
patiently rill he finish and perfect what concerns me. God is with me still,
and he will be with me: I will be cold within a little, and I long for it, I
long for my dissolution. O who would not lie in this pickle till they be all
washen away! One said, He will be sore lying. He answered, I have no sores, he
has bound up all my wounds. The gods that the blinded nati^s f^ar are but lying
vanities, but the God of Israel, the partic^ of Israel, is not like them. I am
now in the hands of the king of terrors, and within a little I will he out of
them: I am now in hand to grapple with the laft enemy, and I find it is a
conquerable enemy; I am more than a c^nquerer. One said, A strange champion
indeed. He answered, I? Not I, but the gr^^e of God in me; by the grait of God
I am what I am. The God of prace has b^uised Sat^n under my seet. Ye see
affliction is no ma^k of God's displeasure: I often wondered how the marry is
could clap their hands in the sire; ^l do not wonder at it now: I could clap my
hands, though you would hold burning candles about them, and think it no
hardship, though the slames were going round about them: And yet I would cry,
and not be able to bear it, if ye would but touch my toe, if the Lord withdrew.

Their he said to one, after a sh^ck he had, Find you any alteration in my
pulse with this? Ans. No, it is as vigorous as yesterday. Well, well, said he,
I will wait cheerfully. One said, Ye are well bired to it, as ye use to say
yourself. He answered, I am so. I will wait till I be all washen away; but my
tongue is my g^^^y, to render the calves of my lips. God has given me my head
and my tongue to praise his name. I lost my spirits: God has given me my
spirits again.

September 21st, about three in the morming, he said, And is it the Sabbath
then? This is a brave Sabbath, the best that ever I had: My pleasant George on
a Sabbath night went into his rest: I bestowed him on my God: Blessed be his
name, he made me content: I would even have given him all my bairns that way,
and I hope it shall be so; blessed be his name.

After a little pause, he said, Shall I forget Zion? way, let my right band
forget her arr^ing, if I ^^fir not Jerusal m to my chief^ist joy. O to have God
returning to this church, and his work going on in the world: if every drop of
my blood, every bit of my body, every hair of my head, were all men; they
should go to the fire, to have this going on.

And after that, to sour he said, O firs, I could not believe that I could
have ^o^e, and borne cheerfully, this rod so long; this is a miracle, pain
without pain; and this is not a fancy of a man disordered in his brain, but of
one lying in full composure. O blessed be God that ever I was born. I have a
father, a mother, and ten brethren and sisters in heaven, and I shall be the
eleventh. O blessed be the day that ever I was born. O if I were where he is,
and yet for all this, God's will drawing from me would make me as weak as
water. All this I enjoy, though it be miracle upon miracle, would not make me
stand without new supply from God. The thing J rejoice in is, that God is
altogether full, and that in the mediator Christ Jesus, there is all the
fullness of the Godhead, and it will never run out.

After a while's silence, some having heard him greaning, he said, it is not
jor pain I am groaning, but for the poor church of Scotland, and for the cup of
indignation in the Lord's hand that is going about. I have been days, weeks,
and months in terror, thinking what would I do in the days of pestilence; but
now I see in him there is safety, and that an invisible God can keep from a
visible stroke; but O it is a strange thing to corsider how an inbeliering
heart could not trust him; but now I am kept in persect peace, The name of the
Lord is a strong t^wer; here is a strong tower: And he that dwells under the
shadow of the most High shall abide, and not be afraid. O the book of God,
firs, is a rich treasure, a sweet book: make all much use of your Bibies.

Then to his wife he said, O wait upon him, for he is a good God to his own,
and he never takes any thing from them, but (...) gives them as good, and
better back again; ye will get himself. My dear, we have had many a sweet day
together; we must part for a while, but we will meet again, and shall have one
work in the praises of God, in the praises of the I a^b. O how wonderful is it!
and let my soul wonder. O to get a discovery of him, eye so eye; it is so much
enlivening. It is life (...) to know the bring God and Jesus Christ. I will not
say with Job, when it is morning, when will it be evening? no, I dare not say
it: It will be but a little while, and I will get rest.

Then to some present he said, Do ye think that he will come and receive the
p^^^^er of hope the day? Whether he do or no, holy and righteous is be, but I
confess I long for it. This is vastly more that I am bearing than ^^ay deaths,
and yet the Lord bears up sweetly with his power. Were it not the power of
grace, nature would distract under what I have upon me even now, but the Lord
upholds me. I do not weary, but the hireling longs for his wages. He seems in
his adorable wisdom to try me further, and holy and reverend is his name; he is
not wanting to me. One said, Well, that is enough, if he is now giving you a
heavy burden to bear, be gires you such remarkable supply. He said, I desire
only grace to be faithful to the death unto the Lord Jesus, unto my God, until
I come to the land of praises, even to jerusalems gares, to pay thanks to the
name of the God of Jacob. One said, You have his promise for through-bearing,
and he cannot sail in performing it. I hear the defluxion has been uneasy to
you the night. He answered, Yea, yea; but O keep me from impatience, or
charging my God foolishly. One said, It is weak faith that cannot believe, when
it has such a support of sensible comfort as you have. He answered, the
hundredth part of this (...) would have put me into a diffraction, if the Lord
had not sustained me. This is his day, it is his holy rest. I long for the
rest; I long for this desirable rest. One said, We^^, you have reached a will
submissive to his. He answered, It takes a great deal of hammering to polish
us, and make us meet for the inheritance of the saints in light.

To his son he said, My dear David, I am lying here man, finding how good God
is; and I would fain have my David, I would fain have you God's, and acquaint
with his way, that when I am dead, I may live in you, and you may tell to the
generation not born, how good God is. O man, if I had you a seeker of God, I
would think myself happy in it. Then a minister asked, if he should pray. He
answered, Yea, yea, pray for me.

After prayer, he said, This night my skin has burnt, my heart has panted, my
body has been, bruised on the bed with weakness, and there is a sore upon me
that is racking my spirit, and my heart has been sometimes like to fail: and
yet I cannot say, but the Lord, after all this trouble holds me in health in
the midst of all. If the Lord give such support, and continue me years in this,
I have no reason to complain. One said, No hypocrite is able to counterfeit
that language in such a case as you are in. He answered, It is as great a
wonder to me, as to any about me. Brother, I know not whether I may not desire
you to beg of the Lord, with respect to your body, even to pity and to shorten,
if it be his will, my trial; the hireling longs for his wages; but I have
rerson to do it with submission.

Thereafter he said, My body has got such a hurt, that I believe I will scarce
recover it; and that is the thing that keeps all my body in a fire. The panting
for want of breath is over; but O it is the mercy of God that keeps me
composed. This trouble of my bowels draws my stomach and all together as if it
were with cords: And yet I must say, What am I, and what is my father's house,
that God b^^s brought me hitherto. One said, You have resigned yourself to his
will and pleasure; and he will strengthen you with patience; he gives strength
for the burden. He answered, He has done it hitherto, I have a heart warm to
God, and I have a carnal heart too. One said, Corruption will temain while in
the body. He answered, But I long to be away, to get a deliverance. One said,
In do time that will come. Then he said, I am lying here, and the Lord helps
me to wait for that consolation that is in Christ, that will ^^ll me with
admiration to eternity: But I have already the pleasant perceable fruits of
righteousness, and sweet composure. I had what was worse than a thousand
deaths, and he has held me by the hand.

To the minister he said, The Lord has been still with me. I am carnal, but I
long for a deliverance from the remainders of a body of sin. I long for a
deliverance from this trouble; if God lengthen it out, if he give me more
troubles, then why not, righteous is his name. I know not what alteration may
be. I long indeed for a share of that everlasting rest; and I confess I am like
a bird on the wing, and I would fain be at Immanuel's land, where the tree of
life is. Well, all this is encouragement to you to acquaint yourself with God;
you see religion is advantageous; great is the gain of gallizess. All these
soft clothes are like sacking about me; and yet I have perfect case of spirit.
My breast is drawing together, as sore as it were with cords; and still the
Lord keeps composure. What is this! I could have scarce believed, though I had
been told it, that I could have been kept in the right exercise of my judgment
under this racking pain. The drawing of the breast seems to me to be, as if I
were all hung together, all pulled together: So that I would make that improve
ent, whatever comes of it, I am sure I am a demonstration that there is a
reality in religion; and I rejoice in this, that God has honored a sinful
worm, so as to be a demonitration of his grace. I am preaching the gospel. I
have a dispensation committed to me, shame belongs to me; I am a sinner, the
praise of all belongs to him; worthy is the Lamb, to receive glory. I hope I
shall shortly be at that glory I have been long expecting: though I come not
near Mr. Shield's glory, nor Mr. Anderson's, etc. Only, O if I were in, I will
be well enough, I will be well enough when I win in. Dear friends about me,
take the commendation off my hand; while I live I must preach the gospel: He
has given me a while yet here, that should be reckoned precious, and I reckon
it should be my work still to commend him. The word soeaks, providence speaks
in me; and if there be a despising of the gospel under this new discovery, take
heed, it will still make it the worse with you. Glory to him that ever he
revealed himself in me! be is free in his love. I was wallowing in my blood;
but he fast by, and cast his skirt over me; like the kindly mother to the
bairn, at first it behoved to be cleansed and swaddled, and again cleansed
after that it is puddled; so I will be to cleanse to the end.

To two ministers that tarried with him, when the resst went to the church, be
said, I would desire a word read, and prayer, and if my head would endure, I
would fain hear singing. I do not now find any change, but there may be; and I
am the less concerned, because the Lord in some measure has taken away that
inclination to limit him as to the hour; though ye may be sure the hireling
longs for his wages. He caused read Psalm lxxxiv. and sing the latter part of
it, and pray: And after prayer, he having joined in singing, said, I had always
a mistuned voice, a bad ear, bat which is worst of all, a mistuned heart; but
shortly, when I Join the temple service above, there shall not be, world
without end, one string of the affections out of tune. And after that, he
caused one of the ministers read to him, what Doctor Owen had said of this
temple service above, in his book on the person of Christ; often this day did
he bloss God be had been helped to give such a testimony to God's ways.

To some that came from church, he said, You have been in the assembly of God's
people, the desirable assembly wherein communion and fellowship with the Father
and Son may be attained; and all these enjoyments are among the most valuable
to be had here, and they are the way to the reft, which remains for the people
of God: But O! to be joined with the company above. How amiable are thy
tabernacles, even here! but more so above, where there is the eagle's eye, that
can see a glorious light, even the light of the Lord. Now, our faith, even at
its highest elevation here, when it looks to these things, they are so great,
that we pass from our compeara^ce, we are not able to behold them. Now, I hope
in God, and blessed be his name. Though I was one well near the saying, my
hope, my strength is perished from the Lord; yet the Lord rebuked that. My
unbelief was very impudent in urging suggestions. A shadow of a difficulty will
fright, and lay me on my back. I am nothing, less than nothing, a vile sinner;
but mercy does all, I bless him; and he himself has said it, and done it; and
now I am lying his debtor not able to pay a mite of it.

Then to the ministers he said, Now I would fain hear, sirs, hear of the
gospel, hear of Christ. On which the ministers present discoursed a while on
the promises of God, the faith and experiences of the saints in sormer times.
(...) Lord, said he, has indeed de lt wonderfully with (...) he has taken me
out of the miry clay and set my fact upon a rock; he has come in the watches of
the night, and cairned the waves of the raging sea. I expected no smile when I
took this trouble; and many a time I have been this winter at saying, I am like
to be a branch that is withered, and cast over the hedge; I brought all this
strait on myself; and I thought, if I could win away creeping with terrors, to
be plunged into eternity with a peradventure, it was fair; praise is comely; I
am one of the chief of sinners very kindly dealt with; whence is this to me!

At night, he said, There will be a turn. One said, Yea, no doubt of that, your
defluxion is already dried up. He said, I take shivers, that I am hopeful, it
is my deliverance coming, under the conduct of the great Captain of salvation,
I will shake hands with the king of terrors; though one sit of sickness would
but take away my tongue, another my ear, another my throat, I will be content.
One said, That is a mercy. He said, Yea, yes. a troubled sea, a mied fretting,
rising up in rebellion against God. is uneasy. I bless him, I got that mercy in
the violence of my trouble; he kept me from daring to entertain a harsh thought
of him: he held me by the hand: and I see now what corruption is; even while
under the most of God and his goodness, I have been kept under a continual sear
of my ill heart. These are the two worst enemies I have, self with its fair
shows, its secret insinuations, and unbelief, struggling hard against me. It is
a mercy he gives me now and then, when I am able to speak, leave to follow the
old trade, to preach and commend Christ; I think be has given me good cause.
Sometimes I find it safer for my body and head, to ^^^r others speaking.

After he had lien quiet a little, to his wife he said, O! my dear, I was just
praying for you and your bairns, and commending you to your God, and my God, to
our father's God. Being much troubled with the cough, he said, there are no
coughs in heaven.

In the night time be caused read the songs of degrees, and said, They were so
called by some, because they were sung on the steps of the stair, that led up
to the temple: And, said he, what meeter to be read to a poor sinner, that aims
at climbing up the hill of God, where the temple of God is. Under the Old
Testament, it was only the high priest that was to enter within the most holy
place, and that once a year, and not without blood; but now there is a way
opened into the holiest of all, for every believer.

One said, I thought, sir, you was expressing your sears anent the times. He
answered, Yes, indeed; I am no prophet, I am not positive on the head, but I
greatly fear a heavy stroke coming on this land, I fear the plague of God is
coming on Scotland. One said, The pestilence, sir, do you mean! He said, Yes,
indeed, and a bloody sword also. Nay, it is what I seared these several years,
and I bide by it, I am of the same mind still; and I do not see what way it is
evitable without a miracle; and a miracle I do not expect: But seek to be
established in the truth. These are like to be shaking times.

September 22, at half two, he asked what hour it was? and said, early in the
morning my friends should be acquainted, because I do expect this cough will
hasten the deliverance; the Lord can do it speedily, but in the mean time, he
will give me rest. Rest with himself. What needs a poor creature, that has a
prospect of soch a rest, weary of outward trouble? I am lying very composedly,
glory to his name; I hope I am going to the land where there is a calm. One
said, You have no reason to doubt of that calm. He said, No, no.

Then he renewed his dis ourse on the case of the church, and said, Zion has
been much upon my heart; I have had much t^^^;ing about the poor kirk of
Scotland; O what, will come of it, and the town of St. Andrews! Then he
expressed his fears of a stroke coming on all the churches, that God was about
to give them a terrible shake. One said, If so, I would sain hope it may be
Antichrist's last stroke. He answered, Perhaps it may be so. He spoke of Mr.
Hooker's denunciation of wrath against England, which is mentioned in the
history of New England. And, said he, we are going to unite with the sins of
France; what ground of fear may this be? I fear persecution by the popish
party. One said, However it is the more hopeful that the reformed churches are
like to be joined with us in the trial. He answered, But I am very apprehensive
God is about to winnow the reformed churches indeed. Well, well, said he, I
will get out of the dark cloud; within a little, I will be in Abraham's bosom,
yea, in the bosom of him that carries the lambs in his besom; and I am sure of
goodness and ^^r^y in great store, even all that is laid ^p for his people, to
follow me. O he is good to a poor worm, the chief of sinners! O! let us exalt
his name together; it is the consiant employ of all above, they cease not day
nor night, the sea and sing, they have a clear vition. O if I saw his lovely
sace, that is fairer than the sons of men, yea, that is beyond the sun at
noonday! O to be where there is no sin. How sweet has even this bed been!
though sin remains, and my trouble is great, yet I have been composed in the
midst of my trouble. He can give heaven in the worst cases. What shall I say?
How shall I conceal his goodness?

Thinking on the students of divinity, who were then s^parate in time of
vacance, he dictated a letter, to be communicated to them at their next
meeting; the copy whereof follows:

" Dearly ^e^^ved in our Lord my joy and hope, and the hope, shall I says, of
the church of Scotland: "YOU are devoted to the study of the gospel, for
preserving a seed to serve the Lord in the church of Scotland, in order to the
continuance of the gospel with the ^^iting generation. A prospect this is of
the highest concern, the most honcurable piece of service you can ever be
employed in. This study, weakly as I could, I did ^adea^our to assist you in,
according to the measure of the gift of Christ, in public, in private, to the
u^^ost that a sading body would allow, and beyond; yet with much pleasure and
satisfaction, in hopes that the Lord one day might make my weak Libours, and
your vigorous studies, through his blessing, useful in the church of God, a
blessing to posterity, and a high honor to yourselves. Want of health allowed
me not what was in my heart to have done for your assistance and encouragement:
And now I have no more left me, but to give a sincere testimony of my entire
affection for you, and that I have really the yearnings of a parent's bowels
toward you, by signifying in the short line when upon a deathbed and near the
confines of eternity, that you may vigorously ply that study, end rest not
short of saving acquaintance with the power of divine truth, and experimental
knowledge of the mystery of God and of Christ, diligently using all means, that
the word of God may dwell in you richly, and that you may have treasures
furnished richly with things n^w and old, and that ye may prove one day able
min^ders of the new t^siament: But rest not, for the Lord's s^ke, and for your
own soul's sake, in the bate fruits of your own study; but seek to be taught of
God, that you may at once grow in grace and in the knowledge of God: Beware of
curiosities and nove^ties in religion: Adhere, as you will be answereable, unto
the doctrine of the church of Scotland, sincorely taught by your worthy and
judicious, master, whom ye are happy in, if you know your o^^ mercy, and have
grace given you to improve it. This is a time of abounding errors; beware of
drinking them in, beware of an assu^^ning boldness in the matters of God. The
fear of the Lord is the begin^in^ of wisdom. What man fears God, God will teach
him the secret of his (...). I have not time not strength, being by the Lord's
hand cut short, to write my mind dis^^^ctly to you: but since I am now very
near ^^ernity, loaded with the riches of God's goodness, I could not but by
this line signify my sincere desire, that you may be nourithed to in the words
of tr^th, and that you may use wholesome food, and be kept from poison. I
recemmend to you among human writings, for a true view of the mystery of the
gospel, especially those of the great doctor Owen: But the word of God, in
dependence upon the Spirit of God, must be your study and meditation day night.
Words cannot express what I have sound of God since I came to this bed of
languishing, what advantage I have sound of having minted at following that
God, that truth, that gospel, which I recommend to you; and therefore, am bold
to recommend to you this, as the most noble, honorable, advantageous work you
can be employed in; and I am this day sure, from experience, that it is better
to serve the Lord in the gospel of his S^^, than to serve the greatest princes
on earth, in the highest station. If God help you in this service to be
faithful, the reward is too great to be expressed. My thoughts, my words are
swallowed up, and my affection toward you is such that my body would quite
sink to speak what is on my heart of love to you, and de^^re to have you
acquaint with my dearest Lord, to whom I was always deeply obliged, but now I
am so much indebted, that I sear to mention how good he has been to my soul. O
choose him, cleave to him, serve him, study to know more and more of him, live
in communion with him. Never rest till you reach eternal communion with him.
This is all from your dying master. I have desired my brother-in-law to sign
this in my name. A death bed will excuse confusion. I wish nothing more than
that, after you have done much service to the church here, I may have the
happiness to hear you approven by the great She ^^rd of the sheep.

THOMAS HALYBURTON."

To a min^^^^er (...) said, I think, brother, my case is 2 pretty said (...) of
the immortality of the soul. One said, Your (...) may be confounding to
athei^^s. Then he said, Glory, glory, for support, continued support to the
chief of sinners. O that I could sing forth his praise. Indeed I am p^^ient,
yet not I, but the grace of God in me. Not I, should ay be at hand. Coursed
self, carsed self that robs God of ^is glory. Could I have believed (but I am
an unbelieving body) that I could have had this pleasure and patience in this
condition! Once or twice Satan was at the brangling of my faith. I wakened in a
sort of a carnal frame, and thought I had loft my jewel; but row, I hope, he
will sland by me to the end. If ever I was distinct in my judgment and memory
in my life, it was since he laid his hand on me; glory to him; what shall I
render to him? My bones are riving through my skin; and yet all my bo^es are
praifing him. I said, I am cest out of thy fight, but I will l^sk again toward
thy boly temple. The ^nemics of the gos^el in St. Andrews, shall have this
among other things to ans^er for, that God has taken and singled me out for a
monument of his mercy; but the design and upshot of it is, for the
establishment and consolation of his own, and, I hope, for the engaging of
some, may be, poor young things to God. Glory to the Captain of salvation. O
death, where is thy sling? O grave, where is thy victory? There is no curse of
a broken law here, I will get the good of the day.

To a minister that said, How are you, sir, the day? be ansvered, I bless his
name, I am posling to eternity, to heaven.

To a gentlewoman he said, Well, desirable neighbor, I am dying in a way that
may confirm that God is good. Well, well, I am near heaven. Then he sainted,
and said, this is another ^^essenger come for me.

When he was to take a little refreshment, in seeking a blessing he used these
following expressions: " Glory to God in the highest, that there is good will
to men, and seace in earth; glory that life and immortality is brought to
light. Help to put a crown on the mediator's head, grace's head: It will be oar
glory to etercity, to run deeper and de^per in debt. Glory to God, that a vile
worm, the (...) of siuners, is singled out to be a monument of his g^^^, and a
trampeter of his praise. Who is a God like ^^^o thee, etc."

Aster he had taken the refreshment, he said, Trust him to all eternity, credit
his word. I listened to unbelief since I came to this bed, and it had almost
killed me; but God rebuked it. I sought the victory by prayer; and God has give
it; he is the hearer of prayer. I have not much more to do with death.

To one he said, Another messenger comes for me, a cough. O man, I am bindly
dealt with! The Lord has done wonderful things. Only grace to be sober to the
end: for our strength lies in him. Not we, O man, this is an up-making for the
residue of my days. Well, 38 years come December 25th, is my age, Hezekiah
said, I am cut off from the residue of my years; but I will not say so. God is
giving me this to make up the residue of my years. The Lord is even washing
away my body, to let me see, that ray spirit can live without. I will not weary
through his grace now. Brother, mind me, that the Lord may help me to honor
him to the and. Ay, I will be washen, and get white robes, the crown on my
head, and palms in my hands.

I am calling you to see a miracle, God is melting me down into corruption and
dust, and yet he is ^eeping me in a calm. O! who is like unto our ^^d? Not unto
us, not unto us, but to thy name O Lord, be the praise. Our light endure but
for a moment, work on^ for us a far more afflictions that xceeding and eternal
weight of glory. I will get the martyr's crown, with the minister of Christ's
crown; and O but the martyr's crown is a glorious crown. I am now a witness for
Christ, for the reality of religion; and I am suffering. It is given unto me,
not only to believe, but to suffer for his name. I sought an increase of faith
from the Lord Jesus, and our lord has heard me; and now it is but a little, and
I will get the crown. And though there be a little noisomeness about me, yet I
am willing that you be spectators of it; for it was not for my sake that I meet
with this, but for your establishment. Is there not a beauty in this providence?

After a wrestling with defluxion in his throat, he said, The Lord has sent
another messenger for me, to hasten me home. The other day I would have been
away without this glorious evidence of the grace of God; but this is more for
my advantage, that I am thus tried and comforted. I am ha^^^ning, and I will
not complain of the flow paces of time. Why are has chariot wheels so long a
coming? But I will not say so any more: Yet a little while and be that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry. Come here, all ye that fear the Lord, and
I will tell you what he has done for my soul. Then he caused a minister pray,
and said, Pray that he may enable me for the las;t stroke, so that I may be a
conqueror, and more than conqueror.

To his son he said, David, come man, O seek thy father's God. I am like the
slave born in God's house, and I, my wise and h^irns, are the Lord's, therefore
let your ear be bored to his door post, and be his servant for ever: and if ye
serve him, my God will bless you, he will bless you for ever. Come, my dear,
your grandfather and grandmother are in heaven. Is it not hard, man, to die
well, for them that do not know God in Christ? If you knew the sore skin that I
have, you would cry and greet, [i. e. weep]. I am not greeting nor crying. How
glad would I be, if I knew my little stock, David, would be a witness for God,
a sufferer for the name of Christ, striving and resisting even unto blood. I
had rather have you such, than an emperor of the universe, and would rejoice
more in it. Where I called to it, I would spond my blood, and go through fire
and water for it.

Then he said, if I would say, that I would speak no more in the name of the
Lord, it would be like a fire within my breast. I was early ^ausing with
myself, how I would stand the shock, and be a martyr against popery: I lay one
night musing about it, and slept none, etc. (See pages 42, 43.)

When some looked to him as if they had been amazed, he said, Why look ye
steadfastly on me, as if by my might or power, I were so? Not I, but the grace
in me; it is the Spirit of God that supports me. I am here on a death bed,
going to heaven. It Is but a little time, and corruption will be raised in
inconuption.

To his daughter he said, Margate, I charge you to seek early the God of your
father; he is a wonder-working God.

To his wife be said, Be not discouraged, my dear, at the unavoidable
consequences of nature which I was under, it is an evidence that there is but a
very little, and death will be swallowed up in victory; the body will be shaken
into pieces. I am washing away, blessed be God; and yet my head is as composed
as it was before my sickness.

To another of his daughters, he said, Janet, O seek God; he is good, he will
be a better father than I am; you are born in his house. I have not a child, I
have given you all to him; I leave you to the abundant grace of God. I am much
concerned for the young generation; I fear they shall all cast at religion
together.

To a gentlewoman in the parish of Cores, he said, Behold your dying minister;
I am hastening to eternity; and hastening to heaven as fast as I can: I am
dying in the faith of these truths I preached among you; you may remember I
preached on that text, When I heard, my belly trembled: My lips quivered at the
voice: Rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I might
rast in the day of trouble, Hab. iii. 16. Then you may remember, I told you,
that there was a rest to the Lord's people even in trouble; and now I seal this
rest. O! I am well hired to all this; I have perfect composure of spirit,
perfect peace without any roving, or any thing that is the effect of disorder:
O what wonderful power is that! Tell my parishioners, that my God is blessing
me, that the single mints I made at serving him in preaching the gospel of his
Son, the Lord has already rewarded it to a miracle: Now I find the gospel the
power of God to salvation, all surts of salvation. All in our reliligion is
experimental, it will bide the proof. Well, mistress, God bless you, and bless
your bairns, and make them a blessing to you; seek God, make earnest of
religion. O what shall I render to the Lord! Blessed be God that he gives so
honorable an occasion to commend him.

To one of his children he said, if you forsake the God of your father, that
has been so kind to me, this will be a witness against y^^^ here I am a
witness, that our rock is not as their roc^.

Then to some present he said, My moisture is much exhausted this night; but
the d^w lies all night on my branches, the dew that waits not for man, nor
tarries for the sons of men. O what cannot grace do! how have I formerly
fretted and repined at the hundredth part of the trouble I have on my body new.
Here you see a man dying a monument of the glorious power of admirable
astonishing grace: And generations to come shall call me blessed. Follow my
advice, study the power of religion, it is the power of religion and not a name
that will give the comfort I find. Now, firs, here is something to be improven
for a while, it will take telling; there is telling in this providence, it will
cost me telling to eternity. If there be such a glory in his conduct about me
now, O what will be in that, to see the Lamb in the midst of the throne, to see
the Lamb that was slain in the midst of the throne, the Lamb that has the seven
horns, and the seven eyes? I have peace in the midst of pain; and O how much of
that I have had for a time past! My peace has been like a river, not a
discomposed thought. There has been some little suggestions since I got the
great assault of my enemies in one league together; I got one assault, and I
was like to fall: But since the Lord rebuked them, there is not a discomposed
thought, but all calm.

To the ministers he said, Brethren, bless God on my behalf, and pray I may be
helped, I have been grappling with the king of terrors, and I find he is
conquerable; I found the rattling of his drum in my throat, (meaning the
choking defluxion in his throat), and I was not affrighted: I am melting away
bravely.

To two of the students he said, Well, lads, you see your dying master confined
within these four stoops, and by the grace of God he is what he is, he is dying
as one unto whom the Lord is showing himself marvellously good: This is no
roving of a sick man; I bless God I never had my judgment more distinct all my
days, an evidence of the reality of religion. When the de^iu^ion came up, he
called for a little twist, and said, I think all the substance of my body shall
evacuate this way. But with a smiling countenance said, it is welcome: Now, my
body is wasting like a piece of brae [i. e. a bank] by a mighty current; and
yet the power of God keeps me up.

To a gentlewoman he said, You are come to see your old dying friend, a wonder
indeed, but a wonder of mercy: I have preached from the pulpit, but now I am
preaching from a deathbed; and I would be conrent, if sensible presence were
continued, to speak till flesh and bones were washen and wasted to nothing.
Labor to get a clear view of him. The God of glory appeared to me; and the
first sight I got of him, was such, as it wan my heart to him, so as it was
never loosed; though I have had many wanderings, yet I can say, I was never
myself till I wan back to the center again. Follow me, take my word for it, he
is a good matter, ye will never rue the service; and I am well hired to it. He
took a little rattle in his throat, and said, This may be irksome to you; but
every messenger of death is pleasant to me, and I am only detained here, that I
may trumpet forth his praise a little longer.

About noon he said, I was just thinking on the pleasant spot of earth that I
will get to lie in, beside Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Forrester, principal Anderson,
etc. and I will come in as the little one among them, and I will got my
pleasant George in my hand; and O we will be a knot of bonny [i. e. comely]
dust. Then he said, it will not be all my sore bones that will make me weary
yet, as long as God gives me a tongue to speak, and judgment to conceive, to
preach the gospel.

He broke out in frequent admiration with the greatest warmness at what he
selt: Strange, said he, this body is washing away to corruption, and yet my
intellectuals are so lively, that I cannot say there is the least alteration,
the least decay of judgment or memory; such vigorous actings of my spirit
toward God, and things that are not seen! but, said he, Not I, not I, but the
grace of God in me. Not unto us, not unto us; which still I must have on my
heart, since cursed sell is apt to steal glory from God; here I must watch,
left the enemy give me a wound.

Then to some ministers when they came in, he said, What a demonstration has
God given you and me of the immortality of the soul, by the vigor of my
intellectuals, and the lively actings of my spirit after God, and the things of
God, now when my body is so low, and also pained.

At night he fell very weak, and after a sore conflict, prayer being ended, he
said, Ebenezer. One said, The Lord has helped hitherto, and he will help.

Sometime thereafter he said, Good is the will of the Lord, and every one of
the these throws is good, and I must not want one of them; I must not ^lie from
my post, but must stand as a sentinel, for this is my particular work: This
would be hard work without Christ, but it is easy having him the Captain of
salvation.

He complained of his head, but said, in a battle there must be blood and dust;
every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in
blood. It Is meet I should be hard put to it, that I may know to whom I owe my
strength. O that I were at the throne above, that my g^immering sight were
taken away, that this unsteady faith might terminate in perfect vision.

Then looking to a minister, he said, this is Gymnasium. And some who stood by,
asking what that word meant, he said, it was a school for exercise, a place
where they wrestled and fought naked; and I am in agony, and wrestling with the
king of terrors. But, said the minister, you will obtain the victory through
the Captain of salvation, who, you know, is able to keep what you have
committed to him.

When he revived, after a severe shock, he said, I am defeat; and added, I am
shipwrecked into health again. One said, But you have still a pleasant view of
an end of all your pain and trouble in that land, where the inhabitant shall
not say he is sick. At which he gave pleasant looks and smiles, and turned up
his eyes and hands while he was not able to speak.

One said, Blessed are they that die in the Lord; there is much that goes
before, along with, and after it. We groan in this tabernacle, being burdened,
not simply that we would be dissolved, but clothed upon with our house which is
from heaven. Then he said, when I fall so low that I am not able to speak, I
will show you a sign of triumph when I am near glory, if I be able.

Then he was for a while very low, he swooned, and thereafter, as prayer was
ended, he revived a little. One said, Had you no trouble? He answered, No, I
know not where I was; I know nothing about it. Yea, yea, he can do no iniquity.
It is meet there should be a trial. I am wonderfully helped, beyond the power
of nature. If my mouth be not wet every moment, it is as hot as fire.

Then he said, The conflict is pretty long, but blessed be he that gives
patience. I am mightily spent. One said, Shall we pray a short word? He
answered, Yes.

Thereafter (...) said, That (...) will be repaired again in a more glorious
manner. Our vile body, will be (...) I like (...) Then he said, I am very well
pleased of the (...) away now. The Lord has allowed me long ^^^^ise of thoughts
about my condition.

A little after that, he said, Lord pity.

Long after, being like to ^omis, he said, I am effectually choked. Then he
said, I desice to adhere to the Lord; but I am like to be quite choked with
defluxion. He had elevated looks, and cried, Pity, pity, Lord.

To his wise he said, My dear, be not discouraged, though I should go away in a
fainting sit, the Lord's way is the best way; and I am composed.

To some others he said, You need not be discouraged, sirs; what if I should go
away with a fit of vomiting or fainting, it is all one. I did not know whether
I was up or down.

After that he said, though my body be sufficiently teazed, Yet my spirit is
untouched.

One said, You seem to be near the crown that you have been wrestling so long
for. He cried, free grace, free grace, not unto me. Speaking of his body, he
said, Why should it not go to dust?

One said, You have been crying much to God that he would be with you; and I
doubt not but you are finding it now. He said, Yes. One said, Now you are
putting your seal to that truth, that great is the gain of godliness. He
answered, Yes indeed. One said, And I hope your are encouraging yourself in the
Lord. As a sign of it he lifted up his hands and clapped them, when he could
not speak.

Then in a little he went to the land where the weary are at rest.

N. B. He spoke little the last six hours before his death, only some broken
sentences, which with difficulty were understood; but urged the ministers
present with him to discourse to him, and often cried, pray, pray, which pas done
by five or six ministers, till he fell asleep in the Lord, which was about
seven in the morning, September 2^d 17^2.

FINIS
BOOK SELLER AND STATIONER, No. (...), MARKET STREET, PHILADELPHIA, HAS FOR
SALE, Among other Articles, the following books.
Retail price. A (...) Lady's receptor 1 00 A (...), a (...) 75 (...)
collection of Church (...) 1 50 (...) Lectures (...) Phi^^^^phy 4 vo^^. 14 00
Rooth's Rei^^ of G^^^^, 1 00 -- Glad (...), 75 Brack ^^ridge's G^^^^
Publictions, 1 00 Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, ours, 07 1-2 -- Holy War, 75 --
Broken Heart, 30 -- Visions. 30 Bostod's Fourfold S^a^ 1 00 -- Crook in the
Lot. 50 Buck's Miscelianeous Works, 2 vols. 2 00 -- Theological Dictions^^y, 2
vols. 4 00 Burder's Oriental Customs, 2 vols. 4 00 -- Village Sermons, 2 vols.
2 00 Bigland's Letters on the Study and Use of History, 2 00 Brown's Dictionary
of the Bible, 2 vols plate^ 7 00 Cases of Conscience, by Pike and Baywood 1 25
Christ a Christian's Righteousness, 75 Carnato on Health, 25 and ^1
Chesterfield's Principles of Politeness, 31 Cotineau's Geographical
Compilations, 2 vols. 25 Cowper's Task, 75 Cornelil Nepotis Vitae excellentium
Imperatorum, 80 Craighead on the Sacrament, 50 Cole on God's Sovereignty, 1 00
Christian World unmasked, Come and Peep, 75 David's Psalins, old Version, 87
1-2 Dilworth's Spelling Book, improved, 19 Dusief's French and English
Dictionary, 3 vols. 10 00 -- Nature Displayed, 2 vols. 5 00 Easy Musical
Instructor, by Smith and Little, 1 00 Erskine's Select Sermons, 1 00 -- Gospe^
Sonnets, 62 1-2 -- Faith no Fancy, 1 00 Epitome of Workman's Geography, 3d edit
31 Evangelical Biography, by Middleton, (...) Goldsmith's History of England, 1
00 -- ^^eede, 1 00 -- Rome, 1 00 History of the Uhited States from the (...) of
America, to the year 1807, 3d edition, with a correct map of the United States,
1 00 H^lyburton's Memoirs, 62 1-2 History of the (...), with a description of
his dwelling, 87 1-2 Holyoke's Columbian ^^^^^itory of Church Muric, 3 00
Hervey's Complete Works, 6 vols. 7 00 Incidents of the Writers Insurrection, in
1704, by H. H Brackenridge 1 50 Johnson's School Dictionary, 50 Keith's new
treatise on the use of the Globes, 2 25 Life of the late Rev. Wm. Marsh^ll,
minister of the Scots Seceder Church in Philadelphia, 25 Letter Writers,
various editions, 19, 50 and 75 Life of Col. Gardin^, 50 Melodist, 2 collection
of plain church tunes, 25 Musical Instructor, by Dickerson and Chapin, 1 00
Modern Chivalry, by H. H. Brackenridge, 4 vols. in one, first edition, 1 50
M'Culloch's Selected Music, crown folio, 2 50 and 3 50 Marshall on
Sanctification, 75 National Airs and Martial Music, 1 00 M'Laurin's Sermons and
Essays, 1 12 1-2 Newton's Works, complete in 11 vols. 9 50 Old English Baron, a
novel, 62 1-2 Polite Learning, by D. Jaudon, 75 Philadelphia Chorister, or
Choice Anthems, 50 Parental Duty, or Early Piety, 75 Questions adapted to
Workman's Geography, 25 Rippon's Hymns, 62 1-2 Rise and Progress, of Religion
in the Soul, by Doddridge, 1 00 Sacred Harmony, a collection of Church Music, 1
00 Selectae e Profanis, 1 00 Shumway's American Harmony, 2 00 Seceder's
Testimony, 50 and 37 1-2 Simpson's Plea for Religion, 1 00 Sandford and Merton,
1 00 Songs in the Night, by a young woman in affliction, 50 Traill's Sermons on
the Throne of Grace, 75 Toplady on Predestination, 50 Village Dialogues, by the
Rev. Rowland Hill, 2 vols. 2 00 Willison's Sacramental Meditations, 75 --
Afflicted Man's Companion, 75 Watts' Psalms and Hymns, 66 and 75 and 1 12 1-2
Williams' Christian Preacher, 1 12 1-2 Witherspoon's Works, complete, 4 vols. 8
50 Workman's Elements of Geography, 14th edit. 50 Winter in London, 2 vols. 1
50 Zion's Pilgrim, 75 PICTURE TOY BOOKS 25 CENTS. Blue Be^^d, John Gilp^^ C^^'s
Co^^^ert, Jack and the (...), Cinderella, or the (...), Jack the Giant Killer,
(...) Trot and her (...), Joe Dob^on, Flora's Grand Gala, Mermaid at Home,
Gulliver's Travels, Old Mother Hu^^ard, and D^g, History of the Apple Pie, To^
the Piper. 12 CENTS. History of T^^^-H^^^^, Pug's Visit to Mr. Punch, Little
Wanderers, P^^^^'s Visit to Mr. Pug. CHAP BOOKS, -- 19 CENTS. American Jest
Book, Merry Song^^^, Arabian Night's Entertainment, Mocking Bird, Bunyan's
Grace abounding, News from the internal Regions, Burrough's Life, Newton's
Life, Catechism of Nature, Philip Quarll, Complete Letter Writer, Philadelphia
Song^ter, Death of Abel, Paul Jones, Dream Book, Prompter, Devotional
Exercises, Pamela, Esop's Fables, Robin Hood, Father's Legacy, Rosamond and
Jane Shore, Fairy Tales, Russel's Seven Sermons, Female Policy, Robinson
Crusoe, Flavel's Token for Mourners, Roderic Random, Gentle Shepherd, Sinbad
the Sailor, Gulliver's Travels, Tea-Table Dialogues, Life of Joseph, Twelve
Caesar's, Look ere you Leap, Valentine and (...), Laugh and be Fat, Washington's
Life.

PAMPHLETS AND TOYS, -- 8 CENTS.
American Primer, Anthems: Rose of Sharon, Denmark, Judgment, Columbia, Anthem
from Luke, etc. Church in the House, a Sermon by Mr. Matthew Henry, author of
the Commentary, Dickerson's Musical Catechism, George Buchanan, Mother's
Catechism, Murckarsie's Childrens' Catechism, New England Primer, improved,
Pady from Cork History of the Holy Jesus, Little Dick, Philadelphia Primer,
Robin Goodsellow, Shorter Catechism, Village Tattler, Rush's (Dr.) Inquiry into
the Effects of Spirituous Liquors, with Thern^^m^ter,
TOYS (...)
Child's Play Thing, Father's Gift, Hermit of the Forest, History of Miss Patty
Proud, Little Thumb, Little Boy ^der a Hay-C^^k, Master Cat, or Puss in Boots,
Moral Lectures, Political Balance, Principles of the Christian Religion,
Prayers for Children, Popular Song Ballads, in (...), Riquet with the Tuft,
Sleeping Beauty in the Wood, Shorter Catechism, Sister's Gift, Shinny Stick,
Tommy Two Shoes, Watts' Divine Songs, Wisdom in Miniature, Whittington and his
Cat
POCKET and HOUSE ALMANACS, Annually.

-- ALSO --

Quarto, Octavo, School and Pocket Bibles -- Testaments -- Columbian,
Webster's, Pierce's, Barry's and Comly's Spelling Books -- Tutor's and School
Masters' Assistants -- Scott's Lessons -- Greek, Latin, and French School Books
-- Murray's English Reader, Introduction, and Sequel. -- Enfield's Speaker --
Orthographical Expositor. -- Grammara, by Comely, Harrison, and Murray --
Bailey's, Johnson's, Sheridan's, and Walker's Dictionaries. -- Gibson's
Surveying. -- Dilworth's, Jackson's, and Mair's Bookkeeping. -- Ready
Reckoners. -- Bingham's Historical Grammar. -- Simpson's Algebra. -- Song
Books. -- Novels.

STATIONARY.
Blank Books, Bonnet Boards, Bills of Lading Bills of Exchange, Bank Books,
Copperplate-Writing Pieces, Copy Books, Cyphering books, Checks, on all the
Banks of Philadelphia Camels' hair Pencils, Conversation Cards, Dividers, brass
and steel, Day Books, Gum Elastic, Gold Scales, and Weights, Gunter's Scales,
India Ink, Ink. Inkpowder, Inkstands, various kinds, Indentures, Judgment
Bonds, Lead Pencils, Black and Red, Ledgers, Memorandum Books, Mathematical
Instruments, Parchment, Pocket Books, Pens -- Quills, Paper: Blue -- Letter --
Wrapping -- Writing -- Marble, Powers of Attorney' Penknives, a variety,
Playing Cards, Paints, in boxes, Peceipt Books, Rulers, parallel and round,
Razors, and Razor, Scissors, Sealing Wax, Slates, and Slate Pencils, Sand, and
Sandboxes, Shaving Glasses, Tape, for counting houses, Visiting Cards, Wafers,
Watch Seal^.
* Country Storekeepers supplied on liberal terms.

Handbills, Cards, and Printing in general, attentively executed.

Music printed typographically.


