Evening Amusements FOR THE LADIES; OR, ORIGINAL ANECDOTES, INTENDED To promote
a Love of Virtue IN YOUNG MINDS. A Series of Letters.

"To paint the moral and the vicious mind;
"And teach the Young how far to live, but not
"To live in vain." --
Boston: Printed by MANNING and LORING, For EBENEZER LARKIN, No. 47, Cornhill.
MDCCXCVI.

Prelude.
WHEN we speculate on the vast productions of literary pens, we are apt to
suppose that every subject is discussed; but we find genius every day
expanding, and something new and interesting present itself to view. From
philosophical to sentimental writers the observation may be equally applied.
This, perhaps, may be deemed only a trivial reason for the publication of the
following Letters, the design of which is to convey instruction with amusement.

It may be objected, that there are already a variety of this description in
circulation. It is true there are; but are there not many philosophical
discoveries of the same nature conveyed by different pens? Are there not many
authors, who relate the same historical facts? many divines who make
disquisitions on one theological subject? and shall moral writers be denied
this privilege? Almost every author has some new ideas in his writing; and the
language of one may impress the minds of some readers, though it may scarcely
affect the understandings of others. This, it is hoped, will be considered a
little apology for the present intrusion: and were not some apology introduced,
sensibility would extort the latent blush, when the author contemplated those
shining ornaments of the age whose writings are so highly superior, and ought
to perpetuate their memories.

The generous and the candid will pass over any sentiments that may not be
entirely congenial with their own; and on the same principles the author would
rely for any inaccuracy that may occur. The censure of vulgar or unfeeling
minds, ought ever to be considered as too insignificant to be regarded.

These Tales are original; and if the reader only takes a slight perspective
around, there will appear may features in life which bear a perfect
resemblance. The author has endeavored to give a few real copies of some
important transactions, and from thence drawn ides tending to regulate moral
affections, to awaken a love of virtue, and to render civil intercourse more
pleasing.

Happiness is an object of universal search; and surely, if any thing can be
pointed out that may lead to so desirable and end, it will not lie neglected by
those who are votaries.

Should these little efforts meet with approbation, the author will feel ample
satisfaction.

Contents.
I. THOUGHTS ON FRIENDSHIP AND EDUCATION, IN TWO LETTERS Page 9 II. LOVE AND
FILIAL AFFECTION, IN FIVE LETTERS Page 19 III. VIRTUE IN DISTRESS: OR,
OPPRESSION AND AVARICE, IN TWO LETTERS Page 54 IV. FATAL CREDULITY: OR, THE
DESERTED DAUGHTER, IN TWO LETTERS Page 73 V. RURAL SCENES: WITH THE FEMALE
CONTRAST, A TALE, IN THREE LETTERS Page 88 VI. CONCLUSION, IN TWO LETTERS Page
121
Evening Amusements.
THOUGHTS ON FRIENDSHIP AND EDUCATION.
IN TWO LETTERS.
"And what is Friendship but a name,
"A charm that lulls to sleep;
"A shade that follows wealth and fame,
"But leaves the wretch to weep?"
GOLDSMITH. I consider an human soul without education like marble in the
quarry, which shows none of its inherent beauties, until the skill of the
polisher fetches out the colors, makes the surface shine, and discovers every
ornamented cloud, spot and vein, that runs through the body of it. Education,
after the same manner, when it works upon a noble mind, draws out to view every
latent virtue and perfection, which, without such helps, are never able to make
their appearance.

SPECTATOR.
LETTER I. TO MISS LOUISA HARTLEY.
LONDON.
I HAVE often almost persuaded myself, that if it were not for the singular
degree of attachment, which I flatter myself you feel for me, your patience
would are now have been tired with the trifling incidents I have so perpetually
heaped upon you in the course of my correspondence: but the candid manner in
which you continue to treat my scruples, I confess in a measure abates them. I
do not in the least dissemble, when I tell you, that one of the greatest
felicities I enjoy, is having a friend whose mind is so perfectly similar to my
own -- equally as happy to communicate as to receive; -- though I must be free
enough to add, I wish the former could be a little more practiced. Ah, my dear
Louisa! were friendship always contracted on right principles, we should seldom
see such revolutions in its profession, nor would our ears be so often offended
with its illiberal tendencies. But, alas! what extremes are continually
presented to our view, merely for want of properly understanding the term --
or, perhaps, be being too insensible to its sacred influences!

We need only take a perspective around us, and innumerable instances will
perfectly evince the reality of these reflections -- from excess of professed
friendship, to an equal extreme of actual hatred. And what adds to the
misfortune still more, is, that it ceases not its ravages, nor is confined to
either sex or station.

The female sex, my dear, of which we have the honor to be a part, too often
disfigure the natural delicacy with which they are favored by Providence, by a
propensity to these extremes; whilst those of the other sex, who are exalted in
life, abuse the beneficence of the great Creator, by not cultivating such
feelings as would reflect an honor on their benefactor, and afford a lasting
source of peace to themselves.

When we consider, my dear, that we are created social beings, and that it is
not repugnant to the finest principles of reason, religion, or humanity, to be
actuated by social principles; we cannot help lamenting, that people should so
degenerate in their ideas as well as in their practice. Nor is it less
unfortunate, that those who feel, or affect to feel, the pleasures of
friendship, should be so changeable in their profession of it. The truth
however is, we are more ready to discover and magnify error aboard than at
home. I cannot help persuading myself, how particularly unhappy it is for
females, that they expose themselves so frequently to this foible: for if, in
their civil intercourse with society, they are often discovering little
incidents to disgust and fluctuate their friendships, it is but too probable
they will divest themselves of every rational sentiment, and will equally
fluctuate in the nearer connexions of life -- even in those of wife and mother.
I would forbear -- but examples are too prevalent. Let women study themselves,
and only think a moment for what they were made; and, if they cannot heal a
wound, let them not make it deeper.

Happy, my dear, is it for us, that we are blessed with reason and sensibility
enough, to protect us, in some degree, from these extremes; and it would be the
highest ingratitude, were we to deny that we are restrained from excess by the
kind interposition of a superior power.

Though nature has been liberal in bestowing on us active minds, yet it would
be very irrational to deny the benefits of education. Many a gem continues
hidden in the earth, out of the reach of discovery; and there are many
capacities capable of the greatest improvement, which, by indigent
circumstances, are hid to the possessor and to the world; society is denied the
benefit of their services; and we have reason to fear, that many important
discoveries are forever lost.

I do not mean, however, to awaken gratitude in your breast for the superior
advantages you have enjoyed; I know you too well to doubt the efficacy of your
good sense. But as letters of friendship sometimes fall into the hands of other
friends besides those for whom they were originally intended, so mine may not,
perhaps, escape the eyes of some, whose minds, for want of cultivation, make
but and unpleasing appearance in life.

Reason and humanity teach us to love our fellow creatures; therefore we should
endeavor to promote their happiness, by communicating such ideas as may seem
most calculated for that purpose. If there are any within the limits of your
acquaintance who correspond with the portrait I have drawn, that which I write
for the amusement of my dear Louisa, will serve for their information.

To illustrate a virtuous character, I propose giving you a short account of my
two young friends, Mr. and Mrs. Ansell. We contracted an intimate acquaintance
with these amiable people a short time since at a watering-place. My mother was
so highly pleased with their conversation, that she gave them a general
invitation to our house, whenever they could make it convenient to visit the
metropolis. We little suspected, that they would have made choice of our
company, to cheer their drooping spirits, when the hand of death had caused
them to sink, by depriving them of the consolations of a tender father and kind
friend. The history of this good man is so pleasingly interwoven, that I know
you will be delighted at the tale; but the length of this epistle obliges me to
postpone it till my next.

I have trespassed, perhaps, on your time and patience too long. Pardon the
error, if it is so -- and be assured that the idea of having an affectionate
remembrance in the bosom of Louisa, will always be an addition to the happiness
of

Matilda Robinson.

LETTER II. TO MISS MATILDA ROBINSON.
WINDSOR.
You may well enough, my dear Matilda, conclude with the query, If it is so --
an error: but what would you, or the world, think of my judgment, if I
reproached you for the length of your epistles? You discover too much kindness
in communicating to Louisa examples of instruction, ever to suffer an
ungenerous conclusion to enter her bosom.

Your ideas of friendship and education perfectly coincide with mine. It is
certainly under the influence of the latter that the former is most likely to
have a permanent footing in the human heart. As the faculties of the mind are
expanded by education, so the judgment becomes less liable to err. Observation
is ever ready to discern -- but if reflection be mature, we shall
counterbalance the errors of our friends with those of our own -- and after
all, perhaps, the scale will preponderate on the side where we least expected
it.

A sensible mind will endeavor to resist every impediment to its peace;
convinced that if anger, resentment, or any other vice interpose, their baneful
effects will be more easily traced, both in person and action, and will produce
a more unseemly aspect, than in the professedly vulgar.

Your incidents, my dear, are not trifling -- therefore do not wound my
sensibility so much as to repeat the idea. It is not indeed trifling, to aim at
promoting virtue, and extirpating vice. That man or woman, who is so far
employed in the cause of humanity, as to endeavor to cheer those who are
sinking under the weighty oppressions of life, and to soften the obdurate heart
of the haughty oppressor, is engaged in a design that is of too noble a nature
to bear the epithet of trifling.

I anticipate something interesting in the relation of Mr. and Mrs. Ansell; and
I consider myself greatly indebted to your kindness for introducing the tale.
Precepts accompanied with examples, generally impress the young mind more than
when given separately: I shall therefore presume upon your conjecture, and show
your amusing letters to others of my young friends -- some of those too,
perhaps, of the description you have given me. Should their happiness thereby
be promoted, we shall feel a mutual reward.

You have liberty to exercise my patience as much as you please, it will not be
soon exhausted; nor will it be deemed a trespass. Let us each improve upon the
idea, not to dissemble in the pursuit of friendship. Be assured, I am as happy
to receive as you are kind to communicate. You must, however, acquit me of
neglect, in not writing to you oftener. I will do it at a more convenient
season. But the duty I owe to my aged parent, must, for the present, supersede
the necessity of my writing long letters. His declining state of life and
health requires so much attention, as to preclude me from a sufficient
interval. I know you will excuse me on the ground of duty: but I look forward
to days, when my father may enjoy a better state of health. In the mean time, I
will acknowledge the receipt of your epistles, either by verbal messages or
concise notes.

Matilda may ever believe she retains a considerable place in the affections of

Louisa Hartley.

LOVE AND FILIAL AFFECTION.
IN FIVE LETTERS.
"Two kindest souls alone must meet;
"'It Is Friendship makes the bondage sweet,
"And feeds their mutual loves;
"Bright Venus on her rolling throne
"Is drawn by gentlest birds alone,
"And Cupid yokes the doves."
WATTS. "Have I then no tears for thee, my father?
"Can I forget thy cares, from helpless years
"Thy tenderness for me? an eye still beamed
"With love? a brow that never knew a frown?
"Nor a harsh word thy tongue?" --
THOMSON.
LETTER III. TO MISS LOUISA HARTLEY.
LONDON.
LOUISA's affectionate letter I received, and her philosophical reasoning
afforded amusement.

Agreeably, my dear, to your request, I acquit you of neglect, since you have
suggested a future period. I will patiently wait till those intervals arrive,
when, by the re-establishment of your father's health, your time and
inclination will enable you to imitate the example of Matilda. Believe me, I
feel a pleasing exultation in the reflection, that I have a friend who will not
on any account desert her duty to her parent. Continue in the exercise of your
pleasing employment. Pleasing, did I say? Yes; -- indeed it must be so;
particularly if we look forward to the days of infirmity. Where shall we find
the child whose feelings are not amply satisfied with the reflection, that age
called them into exercise; and where shall we see the aged sire, who does not
receive the attention of a child, with double the pleasure he would that of an
indifferent person?

I shall now proceed with Mrs. Ansell's narrative. We were one day sitting
together after dinner, busily employed with our needle work, when I observed
that her spirits appeared very much depressed. Being under the necessity of
leaving the room a few minutes to give orders in the family, I was prevented
from endeavoring to investigate the cause. On my return, are I had opened the
door, methought I heard an echo like these words, "O my father! my father!" I
immediately looked steadfastly in her face; but she made every effort to conceal
her grief, and turned toward the window. A heavy sight, however, soon shook
her tender frame, and interested my heart in her favor. I accordingly took a
side-glance at her face, and observed a tear now and then steal involuntarily
down her cheek.

I must have been possessed of more than brutish insensibility, if my feelings
on such an occasion had not been called into action. I immediately ran to her,
and asked her the cause of her uneasiness. She begged met not to be frightened,
for that she hoped she should soon recover herself. I then lent her my
smelling-bottle, and after some minutes' pause she thus continued:

"If I were not convinced, my dear Matilda, of the goodness of your heart, I
should feel more uneasiness at the trouble I have just given you; but as I am
perfectly persuaded you are always as ready to share in the griefs and sorrows
of your friends as you are in their joys and pleasures, I will not hesitate to
disclose the feelings of my bosom. You are acquainted, my dear, with the loss I
have lately sustained in the death of my father." Here she sobbed, and it was
with great difficulty she could go on. "He was," says she, "an amiable parent,
and his virtues will ever be deeply impressed on my mind. The guardian of my
happiness in the years of childhood and youth is no more! -- I need not these
mournful colors with which I am decorated, to keep my sensibility alive; his
absence is sufficient! But you are already anxious to know something more
particular respecting him. I will, therefore, endeavor to satisfy your
curiosity: but I cannot separate the history of my father from that of myself
-- you must therefore take them in connection.

"My father was the son of a merchant in London; and, being left with a
considerable fortune, had but little to fear from the frowns, and less to court
from the smiles, of the world. He was naturally of a delicate turn of mind, and
very fond of retirement; in consequence of which, he fled from the busy crowd
to a beautiful seat in Hampshire, which bordered on the seashore. Here he
devoted a great part of his time to reading and study. The celebrated works of
the ancient Grecian and Roman authors were familiar to him; -- history and
philosophy were his chief delight; his imaginations were attentively carried to
all parts of the world; nor did he suffer scarce any thing to escape his
penetrating genius, from the minutest infect to the great globe itself. From
these acquisitions he had learned to make a proper estimate of men* and to be
very impartial in his decisions on manners.

"But though he had a taste for a solitary life, yet he was not insensible to
the pleasures of friendship. He made choice of a few select friends, whose
minds in some degree bore a similarity to his own. Occasional visits took
place; at one of which he became enamoured with the sister of his host.

"His partiality increased, from the repeated discoveries he made of the
goodness of her heart: nor could he, after a few intervals, cease to inform her
of the impression she had made on his mind. She received his caresses with a
becoming simplicity, without immediately stifling his hopes or increasing his
fears. At every interview he saw something more enchanting to animate his
prejudices in her favor. A mind possessed of the greatest tenderness, a
gentle, kind, and affable disposition, joined to a good understanding, were
discoveries that operated too powerfully to suffer him any longer to remain in
suspense.

"The next opportunity he assured her how much happiness he enjoyed in her
friendship; though he was in hopes a greater degree of it was still in reserve
for him, by his having a share in her affections. Yet he heartily confessed,
that if the latter were not possible, he would not hesitate to withdraw every
pretension; for, by persisting, he should not only destroy her present peace,
but make the recovery of his own, at least for a while, inevitable.

"It were next to impossible, for a susceptible heart not to be captivated with
a mind that could make a profession of esteem in so open and generous a manner.
Nor was her reply less pleasing.

'Your open and manly conduct toward me, my dear Sir, added to the benevolence
with which you are actuated, attract my admiration and esteem. It is true, I
have taken but a short period, in comparison with the generality of the world,
to investigate your pretensions, and to form an adequate idea of my own
determinate feelings. I am not, I hope, led to an extreme that will ever be a
bane to my peace. I have too much confidence in your good sense, to believe you
will put an illiberal construction on my sentiments, when I inform you how much
I have secretly admired your virtues. You are worthy the favor you ask, and I
now heartily avow my attachment. And though it may be deemed a deviation from
delicacy in me to declare so early in your favor, yet I can triumph no longer
over those feelings of your bosom, in which my own are so intimately concerned.
Take, Sir, my heart, which is your own. I place the firmest reliance on your
confidence, and anticipate the sweets of social enjoyment in your affectionate
society. At a proper time, my hand shall follow what you have already in
possession. Continue the generous character you have hitherto exhibited, and
you will be worthy of every feeble effort I can make to constitute your
happiness. Let propriety distinguish our conduct, and it will be well."

"The artless and unaffected style in which she spoke, so powerfully operated
on my father, that he exclaimed with a degree of rapture,

'How can I be silent any longer? Generous woman! I have often beheld thee as
one of the best of thy sex; but now, methinks, thou art the most exalted of
all. Thou art worthy -- yes -- thou art more than worthy of my highest
admiration and esteem. Friendship, love, and every sacred sweeter sound, the
attendants of virtue, shall be thine. If thou can anticipate happy moments in
futurity, what must be the delightful prospects which so pleasingly agitate my
soul! The distinction thou have favored me with shall never, no, never, abate
my constancy.'

"After a proper time had elapsed, the day of celebration was fixed on, and
they were married.

"Though I have only been able to collect a few scattered fragments of their
courtship (part of which I obtained from my father) yet I am persuaded they
were models of propriety and virtue; and were their example universally
adopted, it would save many from being the victims of folly and caprice. I
believe you will agree with me, when I read to you two letters which passed
between them a short time previous to their marriage, during my father's
absence from the country."

She then took from her pocketbook the letters, which she told me she should
keep as sacred to the latest period of her existence, being the only
interesting mementos of the kind she had been able to rescue from obscurity.

I have transcribed the letters, and enclosed them with this. In my next I
shall continue her narrative.

Your affectionate Matilda Robinson.

LETTER IV. TO ELIZA -- enclosed in the last.
LONDON
NEITHER time nor distance have obliterated from my memory my lovely, my
charming Eliza, nor obstructed one tender emotion of my bosom toward her. It
was with great reluctance I left the dearest object of my soul, and with still
greater do I continue so long absent. It seems as though time had undergone an
entire revolution: Days seem like weeks, and weeks like months. Such is the
infatuation which attends the sentimental lover!

Would some winged courser friendly speed me to thy presence, how exquisitely
happy must I feel in the flight! -- But you will call me enthusiast. I confess,
indeed, when I am thinking on you, I am often lost in a pleasing delirium. A
few days more will, however, enable me to settle my business in town, and I
shall then hasten to the joy I anticipate.

Happy, doubly happy am I, when I reflect on the virtues of your mind. It was
not, my dear, your personal charms alone that attracted my notice -- no, it was
something more.

-- Virtue will protect itself amidst
Ten thousand snares, amid ten thousand woes. --
Though I despise the sentiments of that man or woman, who can build their
hopes of happiness on shadows that quickly pass by; I pity the objects whose
passions are so blindly captivated as to leave them the dupes of their own
depravity. It is indeed possible for personal charms to be blended with a mind
equally attracting; nor can there, I think, be a more pleasing sight.

Time will naturally furrow the beauties of nature; but the mind must bear up
under every vicissitude, that the body may be protected from too strong
impressions. A mind like this, I am happy in believing you are possessed of. It
is highly necessary you should be thus armed; perplexities are natural to the
human species; and you may, perhaps, hereafter have to contend with many little
foibles in me, which at present you are a stranger to. But as I believe our
affections are mutual, I am the more ready to conclude we shall equally aim at
extenuating the effects of folly on each other's mind. Were I to tell you I
expected perfection, I should dissemble too much from my own persuasions to
gain any credit from one so capable of distinguishing as yourself. I must
however insist, that the degree of excellence you have discovered in the course
of our acquaintance, has rooted an idea in my mind that, unless I can claim the
possessor of such excellence for my own, virtue itself will be the destruction
of my peace.

"Then let me hold thee to my heart,
"And every care resign.
Speed on, ye fleeting moments, till I gain the summit of my wishes. In the
mean time, let me hear from you once more before I have the pleasure of
returning to the country.

Yours. Charles Elmer.

LETTER V. IN ANSWER -- enclosed with the former.
TO CHARLES ELMER, ESQUIRE
THE COTTAGE.
I CANNOT in justice to my own feelings deny your request; have therefore taken
my pen to address you previous to your return. But in the present state of my
mind, methinks it is impossible for me to write in such a manner as shall
contribute to my own satisfaction, or your happiness. You may learn, however,
-- you may be convinced in what a sacred view I hold your peace: yes, Charles,
it is linked with my own consolation; -- it is, in short, my own peace. And
however I may secretly blush at this open confession, yet believe me, I feel
for you as I never felt for any other person in my life.

The generosity and candor with which you dictated your last, merit all the
applause I can possibly give them. By protecting me from my own imperfections
on one hand, and warning me of your foibles on the other, you have imposed a
stronger motive for confidence and esteem: nor do I so much fluctuate under
present circumstances, as I might, perhaps, if I had not a perfect conviction
of the integrity of the man with whom I am sooner or later to be united.

Perplexities are indeed the common lot of humanity; yet I am convinced, that
rectitude of conduct, were it more universal, would spare many from the
troubles they experience. How depraved is the human mind! Though it dreads
natural and unavoidable calamities; yet, how swiftly does it fly to those
unfriendly excesses, which are certain to involve in still greater
difficulties! The reflection, I confess, is unpleasing -- but not more so, I
fear, than it is true.

View the principles which actuate the world in general; and instead of
wondering that life appears so very uncomfortable, we must be astonished that
it is not beyond conception worse. Pride, avarice, with all their horrid
attendants, seem to be the moving sources of action; and if vice remains at the
root, it cannot produce virtue. Such alas! are the propensities which are often
the means of joining the most disaffected minds in the conjugal state, and of
insuring to them a life of perpetual misery. I hope we shall escape these
snares, since a mutual and firm affection will guide us to the altar; nor will
one bitter reflection interpose, to diminish that sublime peace and
tranquillity which will invariably be nurtured in our bosoms. I do not mean,
however, to exult over the unfortunate: -- No; objects of distress, whatever
may be the original cause of their misery, demand the utmost pity from feeling
hearts.

But to be a little more serious with you, my dear Sir! You seem to lay by your
steady philosophical powers, when you start even the possibility of excellency
to be the destruction of your peace. The compliment you paid me I should have
received with disgust, as a piece of the most offensive flattery, from any
other but yourself; -- but how opposite were my feelings, when I shed the
silent tear over your wandering lines! It was not the tear of disdain -- no,
Charles; it was that of pity. I anticipated the penetrating sigh which burst
from your heart when you was penning the idea; and lamented the treachery of
your reason, that it should desert you at the very moment when the weakess of
humanity demanded its assistance.

Recollect, Sir, a thousand difficulties may yet await us, and finally dissolve
the union you wish: one moment does not bring a protection for the next, nor
does the evening shade insure to us the morning light. Were the arm of death to
cast an arrow at my feeble frame, and take me from you and all my friends;
would reason then forsake you, and leave you to dwindle out a miserable
existence, destitute of one consolatory moment? -- Forbid it, Heaven! The idea
pierces my heart.

It is probable, in the height of your ecstasy, you may have made a very
improper estimate of my excellence; but, supposing it to be a perfect one,
would you not triumph at the exchange of virtue which at best is only in a
fluctuating state, for that celestial purity and happiness which can never
change nor decay? Yes, surely you would. I will venture to indulge the thought,
that instead of virtue opposing your peace, it would produce an harmony which
would only close with your existence.

But in the midst of all my reasoning, I find it is easier to give advice than
apply it; and must confess, that I am often lost in the most pleasing
anticipations; these I am continually anxious to realize.

Farewell! May the sweetest repose be thine! -- Hasten, quickly hasten to the
cottage where thy absence feeds with impatience the bosom of

Eliza.

LETTER VI. TO MISS LOUISA HARTLEY.
LONDON.
NOTHING in this world can animate me to pursue the interesting history of Mr.
and Mrs. Ansell, but the pleasure I have received from it, and the desire of
communicating it to my dear Louisa. I know not where it will end, nor am I
particularly anxious about it.

Mrs. Ansell, after reading the letters, was going on with her narrative, when
we were interrupted by the appearance of the servant with the tea-things. As
soon as they were removed she resumed her tale, and related as follows:

"To be as concise as possible," said the excellent woman, "the first year
produced them a fine boy. It lived only a few months, during which period the
world seemed to be neglected by them, as an empty void, and their mutual
happiness centered in the dear babe. The next year produced them a girl, which
was your friend. This happy period too was but short: -- my mother, after
suckling me three months, was seized with a violent cold which settled on her
lungs. The physicians ordered her to refrain from suckling; but, alas! every
effort was in vain -- a hasty consumption carried her off in about six weeks.

"My father, rendered disconsolate by this adverse stroke, was seized with a
stupefaction. He saw but few people, and knew not those he saw; -- till at
length, one of his intimate friends, who had more influence over him than the
rest, ventured to reason with him on his situation.

"When his recollection was recovered, he remembered that the infant of his
dearest partner claimed his paternal regard -- and determined from that moment
to devote the whole of his time to me; and, to palliate his misfortune, to make
me (as he termed it) "the exact resemblance of his dear Eliza." How far my
father has succeeded in his wishes, I am not at liberty to say: though I may
with propriety affirm, that no parent ever took more pains to instill the purest
principles of virtue into the mind of a child than himself.

"A nurse was taken into the house, to attend me through my infant days. As I
grew, so my father's fondness increased. At the age of four years he began to
instruct my tender mind; and it affords me a singular degree of pleasure when I
recollect his assiduity, and the happiness it gave him.

"He procured me such books as he thought would gradually open and please my
tender mind, first carefully perusing them himself. He taught me every relative
duty; not with an air of austerity, which is too common among parents, but with
that serenity and cheerfulness, which, instead of agitating the breast with
fearful apprehensions, inspire the mind with a kind of modest confidence, and
diffuse mutual happiness to the sire and the babe. He kept me chiefly under his
own eye, yet he thought it absolutely necessary that I should be introduced a
little to society, lest a shyness became habitual, and rendered me a
disagreeable companion when necessity called me more immediately into life. He
sought a few young associates for me, as well that I might copy good examples,
as avoid bad ones; and when I remarked any misconduct in my young friends, as
not agreeable to the impressions I had received, he endeavored to stifle the
idea of my superiority, by construing every error into a lesson for my future
conduct. If I chanced myself to deviate from the path in which he had
instructed me, he pointed out my fault, and its consequence, with that degree
of delicacy and tenderness which is ever a more powerful mean of exciting
reformation, than austerity and correction.

"Thus instructed, the motives which impelled me to love, urged those tender
fears to offend an honored father, which spring from gratitude, and which
ought to inhabit the breast of every child.

"My mind, which was rather active, expanded itself every day; and I soon began
to learn the importance of religion and virtue. Young and susceptible as I was,
no wonder if the baits of vice had easy access to my heart. But though I did
not enter into those unhappy errors which so often ensnare the younger, yet I
felt such propensities to err as cost me many severe conflicts. Yes, Matilda! I
saw the excellence of education, and adored the wisdom of that Providence who
had appointed me such a friend and parent.

"In domestic exercises were my youthful hours partly employed; my father
judging that a knowledge of those affairs was as necessary for a woman, as an
extensive knowledge of the world. At length I arrived to those years when a
mutual confidence became indispensable; and he endeavored by gentle and
persuasive arguments to dispel every fear that opposed it.

"I now reached my twentieth year; and my vanity was often flattered by several
young beaux, who endeavored to ingratiate themselves in my favor. Though I
was at times pleased with their artifice, yet my reason kept the ascendancy so
far ever my heart, as to prevent my becoming a victim to imposture. I laid
every pretension before my father with simplicity, who always advised me as an
intimate friend, but never urged against my inclination.

"Mr. Ansell was soon after introduced to our house by a neighboring
gentleman. At first sight of the lovely youth I felt myself embarrassed, but
was almost at a loss to know the reason. The silent blush conveyed powerful
ideas to each of our minds; and I then for the first time began to think myself
really in love.

"While the two senior gentlemen were employed in talking over the news of the
day, the young stranger addressed me in an easy and bewitching manner. Our
conversation turned chiefly upon books and poetry. He appeared so intelligent,
that his company became every moment more desirable, and I wished him only to
give me the most distant hint of his approbation. But this he prudently
reserved for another opportunity, when both our judgments might be more mature.
However, he gave me to understand, that he should take the liberty of paying us
a morning visit or two during his residence in the country. Invitations were
exchanged on both sides by the old gentlemen, and the two visitors departed.

"I remained in a situation better conceived than expressed for the space of
three days, continually wishing for a second interview: my appetite began to
fail, and I was disagreeably harassed between fluctuating hopes and fears. The
day came that dissipated my anxiety.

"As I was looking from the window, I saw a young gentleman alight from his
horse, and hasten toward the door. My heart leaped as it were within me; I
felt those tender emotions which are familiar to sensible minds in these
situations.

"My father was gone to visit some poor objects who depended chiefly on his
generosity for their subsistence; we were therefore alone. Mr. Ansell
approached me with an air of modest assurance, which rendered him doubly
captivating; and after the first compliments were over, we employed ourselves
in a general conversation.

"Two hours fled with the utmost rapidity, and he began to think of returning.
He gently pressed my hand, as a prelude to something more momentous. I
anticipated his meaning, and fancied myself an excellent physiognomist. The
language of his eyes was so very pathetic, that I was ready to grant his
request before he had given me an opportunity.

"With a smile of tenderness, he requested to know if his addresses would be
agreeable. I was ready to answer in the affirmative; -- but the recollection of
duty which I owed my father, together with his generous behavior toward me,
forbad my doing it before I had at least consulted him. I therefore told Mr.
Ansell, that it was impossible for me to give him a positive answer, till I had
obtained paternal approbation. This I articulated in a confused manner,
attended with a blush that rendered me for the moment very uncomfortable. He
relieved me from this awkward situation by approving of my resolution, and
taking his leave, with a promise to wait on me in the course of a few days.

"When my father returned, I acquainted him with the circumstance. He approved
of my conduct, and promised to inquire into the character and situation of the
young man. He accordingly made inquiries, and received the most agreeable
intelligence respecting him.

"As I sat one day in my chamber, musing on my situation -- forming resolutions
and breaking them -- my father entered, and shut-to the door. His appearance
added to the confusion of my mind. I was convinced something remarkable must
have hurried him into my apartment. He observed my confusion, and dissipated my
apprehensions by assuming a familiar aspect, and addressing me as follows:

'I perceive, my dear, your embarrassment; but do not let the presence of your
father disturb the serenity of your heart. Be calm, my love, nor ever distress
me by doubting my confidence. I feel for you, as every parent ought to feel for
a child. Remember, I was once young myself, and felt those propensities which
you are at present acquainted with. I have made inquiries respecting Mr.
Ansell, but find nothing very flattering in his circumstances. This, however,
shall be no obstacle. He has been unfortunately deprived of a great part of his
property by the perfidious avarice of his guardian. I am highly pleased with
his character. It is superior to rank and fortune. Receive his addresses -- and
be happy. You are my only child, therefore I cannot bear the idea of parting
with you. I know you will not object to reside with me; particularly when I
tell you, that the prospect of your happiness will be a great addition to my
own. Do not, however, let me decide for you. You are come to an age in which
the laws of your country, as well as those of humanity, leave you to your own
choice. Think well, whether your mind be prepared to submit to be a wife. In
learning to be a child, I will hope you have learned also to be a parent. Many
important trusts will call your mind into action; -- your real character will
now be open to the world -- for in no situation are the good or bad qualities
of a person so readily delineated as in he marriage state: beauties and
deformities are traced with perspicuity -- virtues and vices are exposed to the
gazing world, and ridicule and contempt, or the most disgusting flattery, will
flow from the retrospect. These it is necessary you should be aware of, that
you may avoid the scrutiny of the one, and be indifferent to the artifice of
the other?

"He then held out the letters which I read to you, and continued:

'I present you with these letters, that you may be acquainted with the motives
which united your parents. If you imitate the precepts they contain, you will
arrive to the same summit of happiness we enjoyed; but of what duration it will
be, is only in the womb of Providence to determine.'

"Then, with tears of anguish which penetrated my heart, he said, 'Ours was but
short. The death of your mother was a severe shock to my feelings; and the only
consolation left me, was the certainty that she reached a superior abode of
happiness, where I hope one day or other to unite with her forever. In your
pursuit after happiness, be prepared to meet the events of Providence with
fortitude: steeled by the influence of religion and virtue, you will feel a
diminution of horror, and exhibit an example to the world worthy of imitation.'

"A sudden rap at the door put an end to his speech; and I had only time to
thank him for his kind intentions before his company was desired below.

"With tears of gratitude streaming from my eyes, I was again left to myself.
Contending between the passions of love and duty, I knew not which to place
uppermost in my bosom. When my judgment became a little cool, I resolved to
make them inseparable companions. 'I must,' thought I, 'be just, be dutiful and
affectionate to my father -- I feel I must; though my heart be divided with
another. Yes, I will nurse him in his old age; and, as he protected me in the
infirmities of infancy, so will be assiduous in lessening the pangs of
infirmity in his latter days. It is a blessing to have such a father, and a
privilege to be able to convince him of my esteem by every dutiful office.'

"I was awakened from my reverie by the maid, who came to inform me that Mr.
Ansell was waiting to see me. After collecting my scattered senses as much as
possible, I hastened to the parlour. He rose to salute me, and informed me that
he had obtained permission of my father to wait on me, and requested my
approbation to complete his wishes. This I granted with a smile -- and I can
only conceive of the feelings of his heart by those of my own."

Here, my dear Louisa, we were again interrupted by the servant, who came to
inform us, that the supper was ready; and I think it high time to close this
epistle.

Your affectionate Matilda Robinson.

LETTER VII. TO MISS LOUISA HARTLEY -- enclosed with the former.
LONDON.
MY last letter was rather too late for conveyance: but I think it a favorable
circumstance; otherwise you would, perhaps, have been unpleasingly suspended in
anxiety for the completion of Mrs. Ansell's history. As soon as the table was
cleared of the supper, she concluded as follows:

"The attachment between Mr. Ansell and myself became mutually sincere, and my
father beheld it with pleasure. I was sitting with the latter alone one day,
when he addressed me, as near as I can recollect, in these words: 'My dear
Eliza, I was once vain enough to hope, that your merit would have raised you to
a distinction in life, that would have been an honor to my old age; but, upon
reflection, I found that my rational moments were sometimes invaded by slights
of fancy that flowed from ambition and pride -- imagination at times elevated
my mind, as well as my body, to an immense height; but, alas! a slight movement
hurried it from the baneful precipice; it returned chagrined to its former
sentiments, and folly stared it in the face. I forgot that contentment was
equally attainable in the middle as in the higher ranks of society -- and that
a peasant could boast of its familiar intercourse with a king. Observation
however interposed, and ridiculed my delirium -- I then called myself a fool,
and determined never to be biassed by such motives in future. In this
resolution I have continued steadfast, and am happy in the prospect that you are
likely to be united with one, who, though he cannot bestow on you wealth nor
titles, yet will watch tenderly over your peace. I long for the morning to dawn
when you will both be happy; and I hope you will cultivate those principles
(however unfashionable) that are most likely to conduce to happiness.'

"Mr. Ansell was obliged to return to London -- but as soon as a convenient
opportunity presented itself we were married, in the presence of my father. He
lived with us fifteen months, and was delighted with the conjugal happiness we
enjoyed; for which he offered up his tribute of praise to the Giver of every
good gift, who had preserved him to witness such enjoyment." She sighed, and
faintly articulated, "I now come to the closing period of his existence. He was
taken with a violent cold, which brought on a fever. At intervals he was
perfectly sensible: he saw that his end approached; nor did he murmur at his
fate. No timidity was to be seen on his countenance; no desire to prolong his
days. The consolations of religion animated him with calmness and composure,
and taught him to look beyond the grave. He called us to his bedside, and
taking each of us by the hand he said,

'My dear children, you have now to witness a scene that humanity in general
shudders at. I feel I am hastening to my exit. The stroke I suppose will be
affecting to you both. But recollect, we were not sent into this world to live
in it forever; our probation is but short -- we wander but a little season, and
then we retire to a settled residence. It is good to be ready when the grim
monster, impelled by Omnipotence, ' -- Draw his steady bow,
And throw his quivering dart' --
I will extort no promise of tenderness to each other after my decease: my
confidence forbids it, because I have beheld your mutual attachment with
uninterrupted pleasure; and were it not that my mind is prepossessed with joys
beyond the grave, nature would submit with greater reluctance to the fatal
blow. It is indeed a consolation, that I leave my daughter in the hands of one
who regards her happiness as his own: this reflection divests me of every
unpleasing apprehension, and I retire without a dread to the silent tomb. I
fondly hoped to have enjoyed your society many years; but these hopes are
destroyed, and I am supported by a more permanent one -- even that of
anticipating an inseparable union. Continue in the exercise of religious
virtue, and train your children up in her paths; and when you come to the
closing period, terror will yield to tranquillity, and the horrors of death
will become the implements of bliss.'

"Then he pressed our hands; and while the paternal tear stole gently down his
venerable cheek, he continued in a still fainter voice, 'I now take an
affectionate leave of you. Farewell, my dear children! May you be blessed; and
may the smiles of Heaven prosper you! -- I die in peace.'

"Exhausted with this exertion, he called for a little wine, and after wetting
his lips, he laid down and expired without a groan. Mr. Ansell and myself were
bathed in agonizing tears, and with the most sorrowful hearts we performed the
last duties. Now say, Matilda, have I not enough to affect my feelings, to urge
my tears? Few such fathers -- few such friends!"

Here the sweet woman closed her narrative; and I think she has given us as
perfect a history of an upright character as the world can produce. Her father
had a generous mind, which made him the friend of virtue, and rendered him
great through almost every action of his life. Magnanimity was conspicuous in
his latter moments; and the serenity with which he made his exit was a
spectacle of grandeur rarely to be equalled: and though his death was a severe
stroke to surviving relatives, who but the unthinking would wish to have
detained him a moment from the peaceful habitation to which he is gone?

Mr. and Mrs. Ansell have just left us, and are returned to the family mansion
in Hampshire. They have made my father and self promise to visit them early in
the spring; and I confess I shall be happy to embrace the opportunity. I felt a
kind of selfish sorrow at parting with them, and know not how to make up the
loss any other way than by hoping again to see them.

I have taken a deal of trouble in committing the above to paper. You will now
be able to imitate my precedent, as I am informed your father gains strength;
for which reason you will have a little more time. By complying with my wishes,
you will convince me of your unalterable affection for

Matilda Robinson.

VIRTUE IN DISTRESS; OR, OPPRESSION AND AVARICE.
IN TWO LETTERS.
"Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful."

SHAKESPEARE. "He then or be that marries for so base an end as profit, without
any possibility or (...) of (...) is guilty of the highest brutality
imaginable, (...) to a (...) without a soul" --

ATHENIAN CRACLE.
LETTER VIII. TO MISS MATILDA ROBINSON.
BATH.
MY dear Matilda will be a little surprised at the date of my letter. Just as
your last epistles arrived we were preparing for our journey, the physician
having advised my father to drink the Bath waters. Perhaps I cannot better
satisfy you for the trouble you have taken, than by informing you that your
letters afforded us so much pleasure as made us forget the fatigues of
traveling. I am at a loss where to begin my commendation -- and yet I think
you have a prior claim. I admire your patience, and am going in a measure to
imitate it.

The description Mrs. Ansell has given you of her father and mother, surpasses
every thing of the kind that has come within the circle of my knowledge. She
might well say, that "were their example universally adopted, it would spare
many from becoming the victims of folly and caprice." Such instances of
simplicity and candor are seldom to be met with.

I am equally charmed with the characters of the parent and the child. I am
affected at their loss, and feel a tender sympathy for them.

How happy would it be for the world, if parents in general adopted Mr. Elmer's
plan! By instilling principles of virtue into the mind of his child, he laid a
foundation for confidence, and converted that duty to a privilege, which to a
mind otherwise educated would have appeared a task. Heaven certainly designed
him for a being of a superior order: he knew how to combine the father and the
friend; and, instead of acting the tyrant where he had power, he generously
disdained to oppress humanity. Yes, Matilda, I feel a high veneration for those
characters, who can boldly step out of the common track, and bid defiance to
the prejudices of mankind, by facilitating the happiness even of a child.

How are the registers of marriage converted into monuments of disgrace! See
the parties most intimately concerned standing like a beast -- neuter. The
miser and the proud sire contract, while the poor victims remain passive; and
at last, to appease the craving appetites of pride, are obliged to submit to
misery and disgrace, or, in seeking an asylum of peace, be abandoned to poverty
and wretchedness. O humanity, how art thou fallen from thy original purity!

Instances of depravity are common in this city. We generally visit the
Pump-room, where he company resort, every morning. Here we are presented with a
group of figures that at once excite pity and contempt. You can hardly conceive
the contrasts that alternately appear before us.

The old and decrepit libertine, unable to support his steps only a few paces,
is obliged to be wheeled in a chair. His countenance is a picture of
debauchery; and you may observe, amidst all the distortions of his features, a
desire to repair the emaciated injuries which his constitution has sustained.

The aged female tottering with infirmity, though convinced that she is
hastening to her exit, would fain deceive herself and the world with respect to
the date of her existence: she daubs her venerable locks, the color of which,
to a virtuous mind, would reflect an honor and a comfort, and decks herself in
all the gaudy trappings of fashion; and were it not for those unavoidable
wrinkles which furrow her brow, and the reeling of her fabric, scarce able to
support itself against a puff of wind, one would be at a loss to distinguish
the young and the giddy, from those who are just ready to step into the grave.

Here the proud coxcomb, whom folly and dissipation have reduced almost to a
state of dependence, dreads the most distant idea of poverty, and, like a bird
of prey, watches an impetuous moment when he may rush on the unwary woman, who,
by reinstating him in his former possessions, too often becomes the partner of
his disgrace, with a certain prospect of misery.

Many, too, are the unthinking girls whose happiness centres in flirting about
with fops. Aiming to gain the ascendancy over their gallants, they lay aside
the modest veil of delicacy. This affords them only a temporary triumph. At
length, mortified by successive disappointment and vexation, they descend to be
the dupes of their own folly, and finally swell the annals of infamy.

But you will say, Are there no characters that deserve a more pleasing
description? -- Yes, my dear, there are. Here you may see blended in one, the
fair, the gentle, and the amiable -- here the wise and the prudent -- and here
also the unfortunate. An instance of the latter description I will give you.

I was one day walking in the fields, contemplating the beauties of nature,
when I saw, seated on a bank under a hedge, a female. Her appearance was
pensive and dejected. I approached her, to convince myself of her situation. To
my surprise, I beheld a countenance beautifully delicate; and though time had
given her clothes the marks of poverty, yet it was evident she was a being
above the common ranks of society. I felt myself interested in her favor. She
observed me drawing near her, and in all probability, had I not quickened my
pace, would have concealed her distress some time longer.

I endeavored to appear as cheerful as my feelings would admit, and prudence
forbad my inquiring abruptly into the cause of her distress; I therefore asked
her the way to a neighboring village. She replied with an accent that at once
convinced me of my suspicions,

'Madam, I am a stranger to the country; otherwise I should be happy to inform
you.'

'From what part then did you come?' said I with a smile. She blushed, and a
torrent of tears streamed from her eyes, when she saintly said,

'I am an unfortunate woman, early exiled from my friends and myself; but
perhaps it were better to hide my misfortunes than -- '

'Why hide your misfortunes? Whatever may have been the cause of your distress,
you are not undeserving of pity.'

'Can you feel then for distress?' said she.

'I can not only feel, but I can be happy also in being the friend of virtue,
and in relieving distress. Tell me by what means you are deserted by your
friends, and I will endeavor to -- '

'Impossible, Madam; endeavors will be fruitless. I, perhaps, shall be
considered the aggressor, by first deserting them; nor do I wish to return,
till the arbitrary feelings of a mother be reduced to those of a friend.'

A mother! Is it possible that a mother can act the tyrant to such excess, as
to oblige her daughter to fly from her presence? By what motives was she
actuated?'

'By pride and avarice, Madam. As you seem to be interested in my distress, I
will entrust you with my history. I need not descend into all the particulars
respecting my parents. It will be sufficient to inform you, that I was born in
Birmingham.

'My father was concerned in a capital manufactory, and acquired a considerable
fortune by his assiduity. He died in the prime of life, leaving my mother sole
executrix. And though I was, of four children, the only one that survived, yet
she felt herself happy in resigning me to the care of a maiden aunt; who,
fearing my morals would be either extirpated or corrupted, requested as a
favor to have me for a companion.

'My mother was as much pleased at the idea of being relieved from so much
trouble, as my aunt was at rescuing the daughter of her brother from certain
ruin. I am sorry to say, that the former always delighted more in dissipation
and fashionable amusements, than in those domestic concerns which ornament the
character of a woman.

'My aunt's general employment was instructing me in relative duties; nor did
she exempt me from those accomplishments which with prudence are so beautifully
attracting in our sex. She carefully endeavored to encourage such principles
of virtue in my young mind, as she thought would be necessary to guard me from
error.

'At length I was attended by several young suitors. Age and education had so
far matured my understanding, as to make me prefer the virtuous mind, even
though his fortune were contracted, to the man who had habituated himself to
vice. My good aunt approved of my choice; and the sanction of my mother only
remained to complete my wishes.

'The addresses of one gentleman, who had a fortune even beyond my expectation,
but whose character and conduct had equally rendered him disagreeable* I
refused. Instead of receiving my answer as positive, he immediately hastened to
my mother; thinking that by an offer of a splendid settlement he should easily
overcome by force, what would be otherwise inaccessible; and when Mr. Williams,
for whom I was partial, applied for the same favor, he was rejected with
contempt, and informed, that her daughter had already an admirer more suited to
her birth and fortune.

'In a few days I was summoned to appear before her; and, to my surprise, was
informed that she had given her consent to Mr. Green to wait on me, at the same
time praising him for his personal accomplishments, and reminding me of the
advantages of his superior fortune; telling me that she expected I would
receive his addresses without any hesitation.

'I could no longer be silent; I therefore told her, I was exceedingly sorry
that it was not in my power to comply with her wishes -- for I had conceived a
settled dislike to his person as well as to his character; and that I must beg
leave to decline the favor she had intended me. At this she threw herself into
a most violent passion -- wondering at my taste -- and threatening to desert me
if I did not immediately consent to his proposals. She said, that she had a
right to dispose of me as she pleased without hearkening to the silly nonsense
of a foolish girl; and that she had fixed the time for the ceremony, which was
to be in the course of two months. She permitted me to take my leave, and
desired me to prepare myself for the event.

'I returned with a sorrowful heart to my aunt, whom I found speechless. An
apoplectic fit during my absence had deprived her of her senses. She soon,
however, recovered, so far as to attend to my discourse, and appeared anxious
to know the reason of so sudden a call to my parent. I related every
particular. She heard me with attention, and raised herself in bed to write to
my mother. All was in vain* the latter continued inflexible, and ordered me
immediately to come and reside with her. This unexpected news had so great an
effect on the mind of my aunt, that several fits succeeded, and at last carried
her off.

'To complete my misery, a billet was put into my hand by the servant, which
she said came from Mr. Williams. The person who brought it desired that it
might be delivered immediately, as the gentleman from whom it came was gone
abroad; a copy of which I will show you.' She then took it from her pocket. It
runs thus:

TO MISS BLAIR.
"YOU cannot be a stranger to the impression you have made on my heart.

"The beauties of your mind as well as your person, have captivated my
tenderness. But, alas! this is not enough.

"Your mother has informed me with a contemptuous countenance, that you have an
admirer more suited to your birth and fortune, and that a few days only
remained to settle it.

"My pride forbids my further intrusion -- perhaps you have consented. Be it
so; I will never molest your happiness -- a short time, and I am beyond reach.

Farewell. Williams."


She now gave vent to her tears, and you will naturally suppose I became a
partner in her excessive grief.

I have written till my hand tires. Make my kind respects to your mother, and
compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Ansell; tell them I hope one day or other we shall
be personally acquainted.

My father is something better, otherwise I should not be at liberty to scrawl
so long. He joins in compliments. Allow me to beg you will believe me

Yours, Louisa Hartley.

LETTER IX. TO MISS MATILDA ROBINSON.
BATH.
I DID not intend, my dear, to deprive you of the remaining part of the
unfortunate Miss Blair's history. You have now her continuation. After a short
pause she related as follows:

'I was distracted with the heap of misfortunes that attended me. To add to the
rest -- the next day, before I had recovered my shock, I was mortified by the
appearance of Mr. Green. His manner appeared more disgusting than ever. He
began by informing me of his success with my mother. I interrupted him, and
begged him at least to be silent for the present on the subject, as my mind was
sufficiently agitated by the affliction that had so recently befallen me. After
a few inquiries he left me, and promised to wait on me again at a more
convenient season.

'I was now obliged to attend to the last duties Lowed my aunt, before I could
obey my mother's mandate. You will, perhaps, wonder that my aunt did not
provide for me before she died; but this was impossible, as her estate, which
was but small, became the property of my cousin, the next heir at law. She left
me all that she could; which amounted in value to about four hundred pounds,
including her clothes and furniture. As soon as I had deposited her remains, I
hastened to my mother. She suffered me to live in peace a week; when she
informed me, Mr. Green had sent a card to acquaint us, that he intended waiting
on us in the afternoon, and desired me to conduct myself toward him as though
I approved of his suit.

'I told her, it was impossible; that I could by no means accept of him. She
replied, that in a few days she would see the ceremony performed; otherwise I
must quit her presence, nay, her house. The latter I preferred, rather than
become a legal prostitute. I was convinced, in such a connection I could not do
justice to my own feelings in the character of a wife, nor to him as my husband.

'My mother previously possessed herself of nearly all my clothes, and I had
only about fifty pounds left: it did not, however, deter me from my design. I
have wandered these six months, my little treasure is nearly exhausted, and I
am at last arrived at the pitiful condition in which you see me.'

I then asked her if I should write to her mother, and endeavor to soften her
heart by argument. She consented to my proposal. I immediately took her home to
our lodgings, and made her as comfortable as I could. The gratitude she
discovered at my little attentions increased my ardour.

I wrote to her mother; and in four days had a letter to inform me, that she
was on the point of death, and only wished to see her daughter, that she might
confess the injuries she had done her, and receive her forgiveness; that Mr.
Green had died a miserable victim to vice; and that a letter had been received
from Mr. Williams, who was in the West Indies, but was expected soon to return.
This Account I read to her; and such was the filial tenderness of her heart,
that she immediately swooned away. When she recovered herself, she appeared in
a kind of frenzy at the idea of her mother's death. I procured her every
medical assistance that was necessary; and when she was able to bear the
journey, assisted her with my purse.

Miss Blair had only left us a week before I had a letter from her, written in
such a style, that I now consider her acquaintance as an acquisition rarely to
be met with. After reciting the death of her mother, with the disagreeable
incidents attending it, she concludes,

'I should charge myself with ingratitude, were I not to acknowledge your kind
interposition, when I was sinking under a weight of obscurity and distress: the
rugged hand of poverty had nearly deranged my animal system. To whom am I
indebted? to whom can I make a return? I know the generosity of your nature,
nor will I disturb it. You feel a recompense within that springs from a
consciousness of doing good: this is all you wish. I confess I am happy in
claiming a friendship with a person who can delight in being the friend of the
oppressed. My heart dictates more -- but the unhappy circumstances that now
attend me forbid it. The death of my mother is a shock to my feelings. I can
forget the injuries I received from her hand, and hide them under the weakness
of humanity. You will not wait for invitations, but come and see me when you
can make it convenient. -- Adieu, etc.'

The last accounts I received of this amiable woman were, that Mr. Williams was
arrived from abroad, and that they expected soon to be married.

What a contrast do the characters of Mrs. Ansell's father, and of the mother
whom I have described, present! The former considered his child had an equal
right to the privileges of humanity with himself; but the latter, poor woman!
never gave herself the trouble to think. She concluded, that the idea of parent
was inseparable from usurpation and tyranny; and that peace of mind was only a
small compensation for wealth and titles. In these, however, she was
unfortunately deceived, and no arguments were ever forcible enough to
controvert her mistaken ideas, till the near approach of death removed the veil
from her bewildered senses. Then it is, in general, that the human mind begins
to feel the importance of truth and equity, and confess them superior in
quality to fashionable and dissipated notions. How ill calculated was Mrs.
Blair for either wife or mother! She discovered a very contracted mind, with
little education, or less of its good effects.

I must now conclude with a desire to have a letter from you immediately. I
have written till I feel myself fatigued: follow my example, and you will add
to the happiness of

Louisa Hartley.
Eleven at night.
FATAL CREDULITY: OR, THE DESERTED DAUGHTER.
IN TWO LETTERS.
"Dangerous is that lover who has were sense than virtue.
"When a woman his taken one false step it is (in general) tea late to think of
receding; she is necessitated to go on."
CHATTERTON.
LETTER X. TO MISS LOUISA HARTLEY.
LONDON.
REALLY, my dear Louisa, you have acquitted yourself admirably. I return you a
thousand thanks for your tale, and should be happy in a personal acquaintance
with Miss Blair. I applaud her motives for leaving her mother -- though it was
a dangerous experiment. What are not wandering women exposed to! Many unhappy
creatures, by endeavoring to avoid one evil, are insensibly led into snares
and temptations which they little suspect. This world is treacherous; and sew
females have learned the art of defense enough to be always on their guard,
when their peaceful hours are likely to be invaded. Inexperienced in the arts
of vice themselves, they cannot bear to harbor suspicion of others, till at
length they are caught in the net, and feel themselves obliged to bow at the
shrine of infamy. To add to their misfortunes, they are deserted by their
nearest friends; and what they submitted to in an unguarded moment, they are
compelled to continue for a pitiful subsistence. Lucinda, the daughter of a
respectable citizen, is an eminent instance of this kind of misfortune.

Lucinda had all the advantages that affluence could bestow, at an age when,
without a little restraint, it is most dangerous. She was young, beautiful, and
sprightly in her imaginations -- but withal virtuous. Her charms attracted a
retinue of admirers: each one strove for the conquest; but all were equally
unsuccessful. At length the young Philaster, who had some previous knowledge of
Lucinda's family, saw her at the playhouse. He was attracted by the beauty of
her person, and the elegance of her dress; and being of a genteel appearance,
he easily introduced himself to her notice. He was perfectly versed in
frivolous conversation, remarks on the dress, scenery, etc. The awkward manner
in which she conducted herself, soon convinced him of the state of her mind.

When the play was over, he begged leave to attend the young lady and her
mother home. The accepted his proposal; and he had sagacity enough to discover
the further impression he had made on the former.

Philaster was the son of a wealthy knight at the west end of the town -- but
an extravagant libertine -- possessed of more loquacious sense, than solid
virtue. The volubility of his tongue, together with his personal appearance,
were much in his favor; and in a little time he obtained a passport to the
tender heart of Lucinda. He was her equal in fortune -- but, owing to an old
family dispute, had a difficulty in getting the consent of parents on each
side. Every thing, however, was at length amicably settled. The time was
appointed for the marriage, and the news readily circulated.

Some days before the period arrived, the following note was sent to Lucinda by
a young lady, whose fortune was rather contracted, but whose agreeable manners
made her beloved by all who had the pleasure of knowing her.

TO LUCINDA.
"THE news of the day informs me, you are shortly to be united to Philaster. Be
it so -- you are innocent. But feel for me, Madam, when I tell you, that the
treachery of the man who is soon to be your husband has reduced me to shame,
has constituted me wretched. My state of mind forbids the unfolding my tale of
woe: could you know it, you would drop the sympathetic tear. I once anticipated
the morn like yourself -- but may you escape the misery of the unfortunate -- "


Lucinda's father intercepted the above, and in consequence countermanded his
former consent. He made inquiries respecting the unfortunate young lady, and
found that Philaster had by promises seduced her, and them deserted her. He
presented the note to his daughter, and informed her of the particulars he had
heard, forbidding her to suffer Philaster to enter her presence again, or
forfeit his paternal esteem. It did not, however, affect the feelings of the
hardened debauchee, nor deter him from villainous purposes. He had never felt
the virtuous influence of love; and instead of being mortified at the
discovery, he considered it a favorable opportunity to be revenged of a family
enemy.

Lucinda, unfortunately, too early informed Philaster of her attachment to him,
before she had properly studied his character or the bent of his inclinations:
she had gone too far -- nor would the feelings of her heart permit her to obey
her father's injunction. Fatal love! Unhappy woman! Why did thou form weapons
to appose thy own peace? Why betray thy weak credulity, and suffer the monster
to increase in power?

Philaster found means to get admission to her company. He was not at a loss to
justify his conduct, nor to reprobate the severity of her father. He made use
of insinuating protestations, that are too often proof against reason. He told
her, there was no possibility of their being ever united but by stealth -- that
she must elope with him, and depend on his honor -- that he should believe she
had no affection for him, unless she complied immediately with his wishes.
This, however, she refused -- though with such a spirit of timidity, that it
did not deprive him of the hope of succeeding in his base design. He swore to
love and constancy -- painted the horrors to which she must expose him if she
persisted in denying his request -- the sea -- the sword -- the ball -- with a
thousand other terrifying scenes which the humane female trembles at. At last
she thought him sincere. Neither the threats of her father, nor the entreaties
of her mother, had any weight on her mind. She consented -- fatal consent! --
fatal moment! -- she packed up all her movables against the time appointed --
she fled -- and that too with a wretch who had no sooner deprived her of the
consolations of virtue, that he retired from her presence, and left her a
considerable distance from home. In a few hours after he sent her the following
card:

TO LUCINDA.
"IF Lucinda had continued inflexible in her virtue, she would never have been
deserted.

-- The vile love virtue,
Though they never practice. --
If she cannot be constant to herself, she would, perhaps, never be constant to

Philaster."


In consequence of this unhappy catastrophe, Lucinda dreaded to return to her
parents; she spent all her money; and not till the pinching hand of poverty had
overtaken her did she make know her situation. The pride of her friends was too
great to take a repenting child again to their bosom. She had been guilty of a
crime that had disgraced herself and her family, and no pardon was to be
obtained. A wretched situation for a sensible mind! -- Her resources were
entirely stopped. Poverty threatened her on one hand, and infamy on the other:
to avoid the former, she submitted to the latter.

She was soon reduced to those unhappy extremities that attend the miserable
wretches who wander the streets; and ere two months had elapsed, her delicate
constitution began to decay. Death stared her in the face. She made it known to
her friends.

The idea of death awakened parental tenderness, and her father hastened to her
lodgings. He entered her miserable apartment, where he found her surrounded
with a group of wretches -- who, though they were lost to the common feelings
of humanity, yet had sensibility enough to lament her situation in tears.

She knew his venerable voice, and lifted up her worn-out eyelids. She saw him
approach; and with a shriek, which shook the bed that supported her, she
stretched forth her hand, closed her eyes, and expired. He, in return, beheld
her pallid cheek -- and whilst his fabric shivered with horror at the affecting
spectacle, he exclaimed,

"My child, my child! What have I done! Had I taken thee to my bosom, when thou
were first seduced, I might have prevented thy premature, thy shocking end."
His repentance, alas! was too late.

An acquaintance who related to me the tale, savoured me with a manuscript of
reflections which was found in a box directed to her father. I will transcribe
them for your perusal -- but must beg to reserve it for my next. I feel sleepy
-- assure yourself I am still

Your affectionate Matilda Robinson.

LETTER XI. TO MISS LOUISA HARTLEY.
LONDON
I COMPLY with my promise and my wishes in sending you the manuscript of
Lucinda's reflections.

"To the Instruments of my Life.
"HAD I hearkened to your menaces, had I regarded your kind entreaties, peace
might have encircled my heart. I might have reposed in the lap of plenty,
happiness might have been mine. Miserable alternative! But, alas! why were ye
the means of my being? why the first cause of my misery? Why did ye not consign
me to the shades of immortality, ere the innocence of infancy had been blasted
with vice? Why did ye mature me for wretchedness? why desert me in the moment
of error, and oblige me to yield to crimes -- crimes which my soul shudders at?

"Had you extended your parental arms, and caught me from the brink of
destruction, when the perfidy of Philaster betrayed me, it would have been an
action worthy of yourselves -- you would have extenuated my misfortune; you
would have softened the pangs of my heart, and spared the pains which must have
attended your own.

"You might have rescued your deluded daughter from infamy, and have enjoyed
many pleasing hours in her tenderness: but you have unhappily denied yourselves
these comforts -- you have exiled her to poverty and wickedness. I would not
reflect, but how am I tortured! -- Disease -- ah! dire disease,
It racks my feeble frame.
I forbear, my hand is weary.

"Twelve at night.

Hark! the miserable victims are returning from their vices. Some intoxicated,
forget their wretchedness: -- others, alas! ascend with slower steps, and every
stair extorts some keen reflection, or bitter remorse: -- they enter.

"Three o'clock in the morning

"The consolations of the wretched are fled; fatigue has overcome them, they
have administered their little kindnesses, and are retired to rest. I am left a
solitary, neglected being, emaciated with disease, and nature yielding to its
superior force. I find I must shortly bid adieu to life. Now am I constrained
to address myself to my parents for the last time. I cannot long survive -- the
fatal moment is hastening to relieve me from misery. My heart is ready to burst
with filial tenderness! -- my mind ponders what I cannot express! -- Affection!
What would I not give to see them! -- my father! -- my mother! Perhaps they
would relent, if they beheld this couch of sorrow. But, ah! were this the case,
they would have sought their long-lost child: -- they might have reclaimed --
they might have spared me these bitter agonies! I must not reproach them -- I
will not. Gracious Father of the universe! Friend of the unfortunate! -- pardon
their errors -- pardon mine -- and unite us finally with thyself! Farewell,
farewell!

Lucinda."


Will not Louisa join in shedding a tear at the shrine of sorrow? Poor Lucinda!
how did her credulity betray her into errors the most fatal! She seems as
though she had been born to be a victim to wretchedness. Betrayed by a monster
in human shape, rejected and despised by her friends, and consoled only by the
miserable, what must she feel! Unhappy woman! How many females escape thy
punishment, who are more deserving of it than thyself! Many a splendid equipage
supports a despicable prostitute, who delights in infamy, but by cunning
preserves her character; and from circumstances unknown, or scarcely to be
conceived, many deluded creatures are consigned to perpetual disgrace. Perhaps
they will experience a transposition in their feelings hereafter.

Fatal pride, that will not suffer the exasperated parent to pardon an
unfortunate crime in a child! Though, in a moment of delusion, her virtue and
her reason forsook her, yet she might have been rescued from the ruinous
consequences that followed. How many of those deluded wretches might be
recovered, were only the hand of pity extended toward them!

The unhappy tale of Lucinda, however, should be a lesson of caution to
females, ever to be aware of either too much levity or credulity in their
conduct, whilst in the presence of the other sex. Nor let the sycophant or the
fop -- the servile or the proud -- nor even the steady -- the brave -- the wise
-- or the prudent, be the subjects of confidence, till convinced of their
integrity; but let females remember, that love without reason is dangerous.

Happy are those who are out of the reach of temptation! Let them not triumph.
Had they been exposed alike with the unfortunate, their fate, perhaps, would
have involved them in the same calamities. Nor have those who resist the power
of temptation a right to exult, since, were it their reason, education, or
religion, that prevented them from becoming victims, they are indebted to
something more than humanity for these inestimable blessings.

Write soon. Should any thing happen before I hear from you, I shall not stand
upon etiquette, but apply pen again to to paper. Adieu, Louisa!

Yours affectionately, Matilda Robinson.
P. S. We expect very soon to visit our friends in Hampshire: from thence I
shall, perhaps, date my next.



RURAL SCENES: WITH THE FEMALE CONTRAST. A TALE.
IN TWO LETTERS.
"Can there he a more powerful incentive to devout Gratitude, than to consider
the magnificent and delicate Scenes of the Universe --?"

HERVEY. "Have you ever seen a vulgar mind warm or humble? or a proud one that
could love? Where pride begins, love ceases. As love, so humility -- as both,
so the still real power of man. "A woman whose ruling passion is not vanity, is
superior to any man of equal faculties."

LAVATEA'S APHORISMS.
LETTER XII. TO MISS LOUISA HARTLEY.
THE HAPPY LODGDE, HANTS.
We have at last, my dear, complied with the entreaties of our kind friends Mr.
and Mrs. Ansell, and are arrived at this mansion of bliss. Really, Louisa, you
would be delighted if you could imagine the extent of their conjugal happiness.
Nature herself seems ambitious to add to their felicity.

The situation of the house is beautiful beyond conception: a rising hill which
commands an extensive prospect over the sea -- a view of the Isle of Wight --
and the varying scenes which surround us by land and by sea, make as pleasant
an appearance as ever I saw.

In the bottom of yonder dale I see a lesser farm: the peasant and his family
are busily employed -- and surely they have enough to excite them to industry.
The field wants the laboring hand to preserve its cultivation; the cattle
depend on their steady care. In the yard are the fowls pecking round the barn;
the straggling ducks in the pond; the milk-maid milking her cows; and the pigs
following the dairy-woman to their trough.

In a further vale I view a lonely cottage surrounded with a small garden: its
poor inhabitant has stowed it with vegetables and fruits, and in a corner has
placed a few bee-hives: with these he provides a little winter store, that he
may abate the craving appetites of his family, when the rigor of the season
prevents his manual exercise, and threatens them with want. A friendly stranger
enters the decaying wicket -- he is complimented by a snarling cur -- nor dares
he approach, till the faithful animal is relieved from his trust by the
appearance of his master, or some of the domestics.

On one side is a winding river, with a mill -- on the other, an ascent, in the
middle of which is a village church with a spot of ground the receptacle of the
dead. There, think I, the hero and the vanquished have equal claims to
distinction: there the squire has nothing to boast over his dependent tenant:
one cannot oppress, the other has no reason to murmur. There the philosopher,
the divine, and the libertine sink to a common heap; nor can human sagacity
distinguish the particles of either. There, those whom the smiles of Providence
have elevated above their fellows, rest on the same mouldering couch with the
unfortunate.

At the top of the ascent are the shattered remains of an an ancient castle. At
sight of this venerable pile I am lost in thought. Here the rich and the poor
have equally murmured at their hard fate. Misfortunes have followed them alike.
How many brave, animated souls have fallen sacrifices in its defense! How many
anxious, hapless wives have been deprived of their tender, their endearing
husbands! How many helpless infants have lost their only support! How many
families have been reduced from poverty to wretchedness! Ah happier days, that
screen the present age from such woes! Gratitude should usurp an universal
empire in the human heart. Now the strength of the mighty is yielding to the
influence of time -- is become a tottering fabric -- But enough.

I believe this scene is calculated to inspire the muse. I send the following
lines as a continuation, which have flowed from my heart this morning whilst
contemplating in an arbor. If I thought you were fond of discovering faults, I
would beg you to be favorable in your criticisms.

The constant brook, the murmuring stream,
With all their little train,
The sparkling sun-beam's cheering rays,
Remove the heartfelt pain.
The rising hillock, mossy bank,
The spreading oak and vine,
The shooting sprouts and tender buds,
To joy and peace incline.
The cattle and the bleating flocks,
The fleecy lambkins too,
Move slowly up the craggy steep,
And form a pleasing view.
The feathered songsters in their turn
Add beauty to the scene;
With vocal notes they scale the skies,
And dissipate the spleen.
In yonder drooping village tower
The rural four bells tune;
From thence the striking knell is beard
To warn us of our doom.
Across the unruly trembling main
The shivering topsail flies;
Waves roll over waves, the ships sink down,
And with a billow rise.
I feel a thousand fluttering fears --
Perhaps a kindred there --
Perhaps some youth once more inhales
His favorite native air.
With gazing eyes he thus repeats,
"Haste on, ye wings of time!
(...) long, I long to clasp my love
In these fond arms of mine."
In addition to the above description, our friends have a dear little infant:
they unite in telling me it is the sweets of matrimony. I am ready to believe
them, and feel myself almost inclined to envy.

How do you think we spend our time? Perhaps it may be called an unfashionable
manner, but I believe you would like it much.

In the morning we rise about seven o'clock, and take a walk, if we have time,
in the fields -- otherwise, in the garden, till eight. After breakfast, when
the duties of the family are over, if we have no particular engagement, we
again resume our walk to some adjacent village, or to visit one of the lonely
cots.

Sometimes we witness the most affecting scenes of poverty and distress; and
when this is the case, our dear friends show themselves so very assiduous in
lessening affliction, that I begin to think them almost without their equal.
They distribute a cheerfulness where ever they go; and the countenances of the
poor creatures are so admirably marked with gratitude, that a sensible mind
must ever feel itself amply rewarded in administering to their necessities.

At other times, we have a more pleasing scene. Picture to yourself a group of
four, five, or six children, rising in regular gradation, and running to the
door to meet and welcome us to their hospitable dwelling. Here we are employed
a quarter or perhaps half an hour, in inquiring into the conduct and behavior
of each child; that who has the best character is rewarded with a little book,
as a token of approbation. By this means each is ambitous to merit the good
opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Ansell; and it sometimes happens that they have all an
equal claim to a present. After visiting several of these cottages of different
descriptions, we return home to dinner.

Some mornings we visit the genteel and respectable neighbors, and then those
of the middling rank; for our friends' affability has secured them the
good will of all.

I absolutely think that, of every class of mankind, to be neither rich nor
poor ought to be the most preferable, as it is certainly the situation wherein
the human mind is most capable of enjoyment. These are the people, who, in
general, know the state of their finances, and the extent of their abilities.
And though they cannot boast of splendid equipages or glittering liveries, yet
they have enough to secure them from the inroads of poverty, or to prevent
their being perpetually harassed by mercenary creditors. Neither extreme to
corrode the peace of their bosoms, how thankfully happy ought they to be! --
and yet, alas! how little gratitude is to be seen even among them!

We were a few evenings since at a concert of vocal and instrumental music;
where, among a variety of other company, I observed two young ladies, who
appeared to be sisters; and having a little physiognomical skill, I concluded
their dispositions were opposite. One of them, whom I supposed to be the
eldest, was of a sour, morose countenance; she had a brow of contempt, a
satirical grin, and a conceited smile. The other had an open countenance, which
rather attracted admiration. My notice, however, was soon transferred from them
to the music; but I determined when I returned, if possible, to make myself
acquainted who they were.

When we are at home, if we have no company, our evenings are employed with the
needle. Mr. Ansell sometimes reads, of else we divert ourselves with tales. I
thought it therefore a favorable opportunity to make my inquiries respecting
the two young ladies I had seen at the concert, and of whom I had formed my
opinion. Mr. Ansell thanked me for the honor I had done him; though he
confessed it was rather an unpleasing task to analyze living characters; but as
he had a personal acquaintance with them, he would endeavor to be impartial in
his sketches. He continued thus:

"The names of the ladies you allude to, are Caroline and Sabina. They are
daughters of a gentleman who died about fifteen years ago in the neighborhood;
their mother being previously dead. Their father was of a proud, imperious
disposition, a despot to all who were necessitated to bend to his power; but
their mother was universally beloved and respected for her amiable manners.

"Caroline and Sabina were left orphans, when the age of the eldest did not
exceed five years, with a fortune of 10,000 l. each, under the direction of
guardians. It was easy to discern even from infancy a contrast in their
dispositions.

"They had an education suited to a superior rank. All the polite
accomplishments that could possibly ornament the sex, they were made acquainted
with. But natural inclinations, unfortunately, too often are not to be governed
by these. It is indeed possible for the mind that has received the polish of
education, to be more easily convinced of error than the uncultivated; but it
is frequently difficult to regulate actions by moral impressions. So it is with
Sabina, whom you thought to be the eldest of the two, but who in fact is the
youngest. With her existence she seems to have received the principles of her
father; she is vain enough to believe every one beneath her. It is true, she
has a fine person; but her unhappy temper having habituated her to distort her
features, that which imperceptibly stole on her from pride, will never, I fear,
forsake her, till the cold hand of death shall display its irresistible power.

"If you happen to be in her company, she is incessantly engrossing the
conversation to herself; her lap-dog is a favorite topic; and if you chance to
be heedless of her frivolous chat, she seels herself mortified; her countenance
becomes the transcript of her mind; she gives you a sullen contemptuous look,
and often will flirt out of the room.

"Sabina is now about nineteen years of age. She has had several admirers of
her person; but as soon as they have penetrated a little into her mind, they
feel themselves disgusted, and forsake her with ridicule. It is true, she has
had one gentleman, who would have made a sacrifice of himself if she had only
accepted him. It was a happy disappointment, could he have thought it so; but
the infatuation which seizes some minds is so great, that though they were hang
over a dreadful precipice by the most brittle thread, yet would they be
unconscious of danger; they would convert fortunate events into unfortunate
ones: in short, nothing but direful circumstances will awaken them from
delusion, and rescue them from misery.

"Sabina would often appoint to meet the young Alphonso, and as often
disappoint him; or, to mortify him still more, she would contrive to invite
some other beau, with whom she would be more familiar. At length his patience
was exhausted; he saw no hope of ever attaining the summit of his wishes;
despair and vexation preyed upon his spirits, and a resolution at once big with
horror and disgrace haunted his imagination. He went one morning to a river,
and threw himself in; but happily some laborers coming by whilst he was in the
struggles of death, prevented the fatal stroke: he was to appearance dead, but
immediate recourse being had to medical assistance he recovered.

"Sabina was informed of the event: but instead of being touched with
Alphonso's misfortunes, she triumphed in her consequence, that she was capable
of being the means of so much mischief.

"Alphonso, when he grew well, perceived his mistake, and determined never to
have any thing more to say to a woman, who could trifle with his affections,
and expose him to inconceivable pangs. He now saw, that her heart was formed of
too harsh materials ever to afford him any consolation in the marriage state.
She was not the lovely woman his hasty imagination had formed her. No traits of
delicate sentiment could he now discover in her mind. It is natural to suppose,
that when he reflected on the recent circum stances of his life, his
understanding must be shocked. When his frenzy however was subsided, and reason
resumed her seat in his heart, he again began to turn his thoughts to social
life, and made choice of an amiable young lady, who was every way qualified to
render him happy.

"Sabina is now an object of pity and contempt. Even her servants are
perpetually complaining of her unfeeling behavior: she treats them as though
they were of the animal kind; and if she thinks they are a moment happy and
peaceable in themselves, she will harass them to such a degree as to deprive
them of the least enjoyment. She never regards the entreaties of the poor, nor
turns an eye of pity to the afflicted. She is unhappy in herself, nor can she
communicate any thing but unhappiness to those around her. Her ambition is
unbounded: she envies her superiors, and despises her inferiors. If it were not
for the gentle Caroline, it is probable she would be utterly forsaken by all.
This is the character of Sabina; the lateness of hour obliges me to postpone
that of Caroline till another evening."

I must follow Mr. Ansell, and break off for the present, reserving the
character of Caroline for my next. Mr. and Mrs. Ansell unite in kind love; I
believe the latter will enclose a few lines when I write again, to beg the
favor of you to return this way to London. My mother also joins in love to
Louisa, with

Matilda Robinson.

LETTER XIII. TO MISS LOUISA HARTLEY.
HANTS.
THE following evening Mr. Ansell favored us with his continuation of the
contrast.

"In the countenance of Caroline," said he, "you may observe an open, generous
and cheerful disposition; from her infancy she has been beloved by all -- even
the noble and the beggar unite in her praise. She does not, like Sabina,
intimidate with a frown, but engages by her amiable smiles. I cannot better
describe her character, than by descending into some of her more retired
actions, to which I have been witness.

"I have seen her at assemblies and concerts, where she has universally
attracted notice: it did not, however, elevate her above herself: she preserved
a bewitching decorum.

"In her dress she always discovers simple elegance with taste; in her manners,
she has ease unaccompanied with disgusting freedom; and in her conversation she
betrays no affected airs, but pleases without the least oftentation. With such
qualifications, you may suppose that Caroline possesses the admiration of every
one.

"Her purse is ever ready to assist the poor; and she takes a delight in
retiring at intervals from the more busy and animating scenes of life, to visit
the houses of poverty and the beds of affliction.

"I once met her at the hut of some poor old decrepit people, who were hardly
able to support their existence, owing to poverty, age, and infirmity. She
hearkens to their tales of distress; and I have seen the commiserating tear of
sympathy trickling down her cheek, while she bold forth her beneficent hand to
relieve their wants.

"I asked her, if she was not afraid of venturing to visit those decayed
houses, as well from their antiquity, as from the danger of catching disorders?
to which she replied,

'Shall I be afraid to visit my fellow mortals, who are formed of the same
materials with myself? No: I am too well persuaded that the cause of humanity
is the cause of God. Were every one to fly from the beds of the afflicted, what
would finally become of the whole human race? Can I live in affluence, and see
the poor dying with hunger? Can I see them linger to their exit, unregarded
like brutes, and not turn an eye of pity toward them? No: humanity forbids it,
my feelings would upbraid me, and reason would condemn me for not being more
attentive to its dictates.'

"A singular instance has lately come to my knowledge, which eminently
distinguishes Caroline's compassionate tenderness. A poor man came from a
neighboring parish to that in which she lives, because it was more contiguous
to his employment. He brought with him his family, which consisted of his wife
and three children, and provided a small house (or rather hovel) for their
reception. They lived in the greatest harmony and affection, and supported
themselves as comfortably as it was possible, out of the little pittance from
their joint labor, which seldom exceeded ten shillings a week. The family was
increasing; the poor woman was very far advanced in pregnancy. Of this the
overseers had information; and fearing they would become burdensome to the
parish, came and persecuted them in the most unjustifiable manner -- contrary
to every sentiment of humanity, and in opposition to the sacred principles of
religion; and insisted on their leaving the parish in four days.

"As their little mansion was not of consequence enough to constitute them
parishioners, they had no other choice than to leave the parish quietly, or to
be forcibly dragged like slaves or criminals in a cart.

"The good man endeavored to get his former habitation again, but it had been
newly occupied since he had left it; nor could he meet with a place to shelter
himself and family from the weather, in his native parish. These unfortunate
circumstances had so great an effect on the mind of his wife, that it brought
on a premature labor, and had nearly been the means of depriving her helpless
infants of a mother's care.

"The amiable Caroline, hearing of the disasters which had happened to this
industrious family, fled immediately to their assistance. She inquired into the
particulars; and finding the overseers were the instruments of their misery,
hurried away to them. She charged them in the most delicate manner with
inhumanity, painted the distress in which they had involved the poor victims of
their displeasure, and reprobated their conduct in the most severe manner. She
told them, that from their industry; there was no prospect of their becoming
burdensome; and that such a circumstance ought to have had a little more
weight on their minds, and to have encouraged them to lenity.

"By the feeling manner with which she spoke, she convinced them that they had
done wrong, and they promised to permit the poor creatures to remain unmolested
till the woman was recovered. Caroline disdained their terms, and told them she
would become their security.

"She fled again to the distressed family, and left them a little money, that
they might provide what necessary comforts the poor woman stood in need of;
then hastened home, and sent some food for the helpless babes. As soon as they
were recovered from this melancholy affliction, Caroline sought a better
employment for them. She put them in a small shop, and collected a sum of
money; to which she added a loan of twenty pounds, which they were to repay if
they succeeded. With these helps they purchased a stock of goods in the grocery
line; from which they had a comfortable subsistence, and were soon enabled to
pay the loan of their kind benefactress.

"Their house now constituted them parishioners; and instead of becoming a
burden themselves, they contributed to the support of those who were already
burdensome. Prosperity attended them in all their undertakings -- and they
continued to manifest gratitude and affection to the person who was the
instrument of raising them from indigence to comfort.

"Thus we have reason to believe, that many poor creatures who are now starving
with poverty and oppression, many who are treated with derision and contempt by
those who are a step or two above them, if the smiles of fortune and providence
attended them, would move in a sphere very different from that in which they
now are, and would become shining ornaments to society.

"To the benevolence of Caroline may be added her distinguished piety. How
amiable does a character appear when ornamented with these united graces! Where
the human mind is thoroughly impressed with the latter, it will produce eminent
instances of the former; for I maintain, that religion is no more religion,
than while it influences to feeling, and charity to fellow creatures in
distress.

"I think, ladies, you will share an impulse of veneration and affection while
I relate an instance of Caroline's benevolent piety.

"I was entering the house of an old woman, who lived about half a mile from
ours, was universally respected for her exemplary conduct, and was indebted for
her subsistence to the generosity of those around her; where I heard the echo
of a female voice. I had previously been informed the poor woman was near her
end, and made it my business to go and inquire.

"When I opened the door of the decayed apartment, I found the lovely Caroline
in the exercise of prayer. Ah, methought I could have continued days and weeks
a spectator of such devotion; and I think I shall ever remember a sentence or
two which dropped from her lips.

' -- O thou Eternal Father of the wide Universe! thou Supreme Judge and
Everlasting King! who reignest through the vast expanse of eternal ages -- who
can call millions and millions of angels to manifest thine unparalleled
splendour at the twinkling of an eye! -- Thou to whom kings must yield
obedience, and princes bow their knees! -- Thou, who had the command of
universal empire, can dispose of kingdoms at thy pleasure, and art not to be
controlled by the wisdom of senators! -- shall we dare to approach thy
celestial Majesty? shall we dare to celebrate thy praise with our feeble
tongues, or to ask a blessing at thy hands? Is it possible that thou, who can
scarcely behold purity in the inhabitants of heaven, should condescend to the
infirmities of mortality? Yes, Lord, thou have said it! The rich and the poor
are equal in thine estimation -- Oh! do thou look down on thy poor worm, teach
her to be resigned to thy wisdom, animate her soul with sublime prospects, and,
whether she lives or dies, may she be happy, etc. -- '

"The poor afflicted woman heard her with silent ecstacy -- her soul seemed to
be carried to the summit of glorious immortality, contemplating the goodness of
God, and cheerful in the hope of happiness. She took Caroline's hand, and
bathed it with grateful tears -- acknowledged the many favors she had
received, and expired while she was uttering her blessing.

"To servants, Caroline is kind and gentle. They all seem pleased when she is
happy, and affected if she is otherwise. What a contrast in the characters of
the two sisters! One is hated and rejected for her pride -- the other beloved
and courted for her condescension, affability and kindness.

"Caroline is now admired by a young gentleman of considerable property. He is
delighted with her charms, and promises a great addition to her happiness. I
have given them both, together with Sabina, an invitation to our house to spend
the evening, early in next week; you will then, ladies, be able to form your
own opinion of them."

Here Mr. Ansell finished his description of the young ladies. I believe I
shall wait till I have a personal interview with them, before I send you these
lines. I shall then, perhaps, give you a further account.

Matilda Robinson.


IN CONTINUATION.
Monday evening.
Caroline and Sabina, and the gentleman who admires the former, have been with
us; we have spent a very agreeable evening together, owing to the polite
behavior of Mr. Milward and the pleasing manner of Caroline. Of Sabina I must
suspend my judgment, allowing the picture which Mr. Ansell has already drawn to
be nearly perfect.

Mr. Milward is a man of considerable abilities, and, I think, a very suitable
companion for the amiable Caroline: integrity is the characteristic of his
countenance. An unity of spirits plainly appears; and surely those who are thus
united in the sacred bonds of affection, will be happy and blessed in bonds
which are of a civil nature. They parted with us about eleven o'clock; and if
we live, we are to return the visit soon.

These few lines I have written in my chamber before I retire to rest. For want
of conveyance I shall be obliged to detain the whole of this letter some days
longer.

Adieu. Twelve at night.

Tuesday.
We have this day heard that our engaging friend Caroline is taken dangerously
ill. Mr. and Mrs. Ansell are fled to see her. We are all in consternation Every
one seems anxious to hear she is better. But, alas! I fear the consequences.

This hurry will again prevent my sending these lines to you. I shall scrawl
several sheets of paper.


Wednesday.
She continues in violent convulsions, attended with a fever; though at times
she has her senses. Every minute is expected to be the last. The faculty have
given her over. Our friends are still with her.


Thursday.
My fears are realized! The benevolent, the kind, the attracting Caroline is
gone forever. She is gone to the regions of immortal bliss. She is fled to
receive eternal honors. My heart bleeds for the distressed Milward. He is
inconsolable. It is thought he will not long survive her.


Mr. and Mrs. Ansell are returned. Gloom is painted in every feature. We all
drop tears, those silent tokens of grief, at their recital. Oh! Louisa, your
conception will be deficient for the scene. My pen is inadequate to the task.

"At intervals (said Mrs. Ansell) Caroline was perfectly sensible. She called
for her beloved Milward; and when he approached, she pressed his hand, and
begged him to be composed; and when she saw the agonies of his mind, she
continued:

'My dearest Friend, I have, perhaps, too much indulged myself with the
pleasing hopes of being happy in your affections: but it is now time to bid
adieu to these fascinating charms. I am persuaded it cannot be long ere I leave
you, and retire to yonder world: but till I see you calm, I cannot yield to the
fatal stroke with Christian dignity. Do not disturb my last moments. I carry my
affection for you to the grave; and I hope to unite with you where we can never
part. The eternal goodness of God decreed this seeming calamity for wise and
better purposes. It is our duty mutually to submit without a murmur to the
great demands of Omnipotence. It Is he that gave, or rather lent us life: he has
a right to dispose of us as he pleases, and a claim to our implicit obedience.
Be virtuous, my dear Milward! Let piety distinguish your conduct. Remember,
that virtue will have its own reward. You will feel those consolations in the
hour of departure, which can be derived from no other source. Let the poor be
objects of your concern: succor them in their distress, and endeavor to abate
their oppressions.'

"She again pressed his hand; and while they were exchanging the parting kiss,
she faintly articulated,

'Farewel! Be comforted, and assure yourself you will find many friends; I
hope, some too who will be able to mitigate your sorrows, and supply your loss.
Adieu!'

Mr. Milward was too much agitated to make any reply. We perceived it was more
than his spirits could support. He was accordingly prevailed on by Mr. Ansell
to leave the room. When he came to the door, he looked back, and then hastened
again to her bedside. He gazed with fearful eyes on the expiring object of his
faithful love -- stole a few more tender embraces, and retired with reluctance
from her presence. How heart-rending was this scene! Before he had reached
another apartment in the house, he sighed with violence, and then gave vent to
his grief by fainting away. In this insensible state he remained a considerable
time. Surely this was unaffected sorrow!

The dying Caroline took an affectionate leave of those around her: she spoke
tenderly to her sister -- and when she had recommended us all to the merciful
kindness of that God in whom she had repeatedly trusted, she became a lifeless
corse, and fled beyond pain or sorrow. Thus ended the days of an amiable young
woman, one who lived as she died -- pious in her life, and resigned in her
death -- universally beloved, and as universally sorrowed after.

"The village is already become a spectacle of distress. Countenances which
were once lively, betray inward dejection. Every aged furrow enfolds bitter
anguish. Those who have enjoyed the sweets of her friendship, and those who
have shared her beneficence, are drooping with despair. The tears which have
fallen on this occasion have spread a dimness on the eyes of all, insomuch that
the beauties of spring have no charms -- the fields are become discolored. The
tuneful birds seem to have forgot their cheerful notes -- nor have all the
united scenes of nature enough to lull the aching hearts to repose" Here Mrs.
Ansell ceased.

Thus, Louisa, I have been faithful in penning, as far as my recollection will
permit, the whole of this affecting event. A young woman in the bloom of life,
animated with a prospect of a happy connection, is of a sudden taken off, and
the hapless lover deprived of the pleasures he so fondly sought after. But
there is a consolation left; she was prepared for either life or death. In both
she evinced her virtue and her piety; and I think those only who are fit to
live, can be fit to die. It should teach us never to be too anxiously concerned
for the things of time. Prosperity and adversity are alike fluctuating. Virtue
itself cannot boast of a power to resist the cold impulse of death; and vice is
too feeble to fly from its impress. Youth is not superior to age: each must
submit, each must die.

I need not say more to excite your sensibility. Already fancy has painted
Louisa bedewing my letter with tears while she reads the melancholy tale:
indeed we have all sought relief by this means. Mrs. Ansell intends writing a
few lines tomorrow, according to her promise; but it will be by way of
postscript to what I have already written: for the present, they both join with
my mother in kind respects to your father, and love to yourself.

Matilda Robinson.
POSTSCRIPT BY MRS. ANSELL.
Mrs. Ansell's compliments to Miss Louisa Hartley, and begs she will excuse her
from writing a formal epistle. The disagreeable circumstances which Matilda has
already related, she hopes will be a sufficient plea. Mrs. Ansell, however, has
been highly delighted with Matilda's description of her friend -- for which
reason she wishes to be personally acquainted; and has therefore added this
postscript, to request the favor of Louisa and her father to extend their
journey into Hampshire, before they return to the metropolis. Should it be
convenient for them to honor this request, Matilda, and perhaps Mr. and Mrs.
Ansell, will then accompany them.


Friday forenoon.
LETTER XIV. TO MRS. ANSELL.
PATH.
I RECEIVED your kind invitation in Louisa's last epistle. I am happy in the
idea of your friendship; and, by my father's permission, we shall certainly
return through Hampshire, and make your hospitable mansion a home. I hope no
material event will deprive us of this happiness.

My father is at present at a neighboring town, from whence I expect him
either tomorrow or the following day. We are shortly to leave this city for
Weymouth. Our stay there is uncertain. I must therefore beg leave to decline
informing you when we shall arrive at your house; but perhaps when I write to
Louisa I may be better able to acquaint you. I conclude, with compliments and
love.

Louisa Hartley.

CONCLUSION.
IN TWO LETTERS.
" -- To be good is to be happy * angels Are happier than men, because they are
Better."

ROW. "I tell thee, then, whoever amidst the sons Of reason, valor, liberty,
and virtue, Displays distinguished merit, is a Noble Of Nature's own creating."

THOMSON.
LETTER XV. TO MISS MATILDA ROBINSON.
WETMOUTH.
SINCE I received your last, we have thought proper to visit this place: the
variegated hue which Spring affords, invited us to partake of her sweets by
extending our travels.

But ere I go farther, I should inform you, that since I wrote to Mrs. Ansell,
I have laid her kind invitation before my father, and pressed him to accept of
it, as it would add considerably to my happiness, to be favored with the
friendship and society of one whom you have traced through every circumstance
of her life, and in whom you have discovered such amiable qualities. Her
actions have already excited liberal opinions, and endeared her to all; and
need not the feeble panegyric of my pen to enhance her merit. In addition to my
father's compliments, be so obliging as to present my love, and tell her we
shall be at her house in about one month. It is our united request, that there
may be no kind of ceremony in our reception, as we prefer friendly interviews
to the modern inconveniences which attend visiting.

I cannot pass over the tale of Caroline and Sabina in silence; and yet it were
almost superfluous to say more than that it has entirely engaged all my
speculative faculties. I have, indeed, bedewed your lines with my tears; and I
think the wise conclusion of that ancient philosopher Plato, has been
thoroughly verified in my feelings -- that one extreme succeeds another. I felt
disgust at the character of Sabina, but it subsided in pity. All the pleasing
enthusiasm of joy and friendship employed my mind, whilst I contemplated the
amiable Caroline; -- but, alas! these were soon swallowed up in the most
excessive grief. I have raised a monument in my heart to her memory -- I have
venerated a mind that was every way lovely -- I have sighed at her dissolution
-- I have rejoiced at her happy exchange.

But will not those who have been blessed with her society, and admired the
beauties of her mind, erect a marble pile to perpetuate her virtues as an
example to succeeding ages? Yes, surely they will; and I would gladly
contribute to so noble a purpose. Ah! as I passed by the honored spot wherein
were deposited the sacred remains of this valuable woman, sympathy would steal
the silent drop from my eyes; my soul would be suspended in thought -- I would
seat myself near her tomb, and methinks I should contemplate thus:

There rest in peace, thou lovely maid!
There sleep in sweet repose;
And though thou moulder with the dust,
You Are fairer than the rose.
From cares and fears and piercing pains,
You Are fled to joys above;
Nor dare we wish thee to return,
Nor may we court thy love.
But while we view the stately pile,
And read thy virtues over,
We drop the unconscious tear, and say,
"We never shall see her more!"
Be still, fond youth, nor once repine;
Be still, and cease thy strife:
Death was a passport to her soul;
She Is wandered into life.
A few revolving rounds of time,
A few more rolling years;
Perhaps a few more setting suns,
Will case thy sighs and tears;
And should thou live the life she lived,
And die her virtuous death,
Thou Wilt feel her pleasures, join her praise
With sweet celestial, breath.
I could dwell a long time on this subject; but I must forbear, to inform you
of our journey. Perhaps a little variety will engage your heart, and help to
dissipate your sorrows.

You will naturally imagine that I visited all the public places in Bath,
before I left it. Yes, Matilda, I did so; but more from curiosity than
inclination. I must however acknowledge, that its amusements are scarcely to be
equaled even in London. The ball and concert rooms are elegant indeed; and when
they are ornamented by such crowds of beauties so richly attired, as are
sometimes to be seen, one cannot help being charmed at the sight. The
playhouse is neat. In short, the city is composed of magnificent buildings,
squares, and crescents. Your last letter overshadowed my mind with such gloom,
that it deprived me of every relish for those social enjoyments. When I see
young folks regardless of every thing but gaiety and dissipation, I feel a kind
of pity for them. I do not wish to deprive them of rational pleasures -- no; I
believe them innocent; but I want them to divest themselves of pride -- to
consider they are but creatures -- creatures of a day -- and sometimes of a
moment -- that in the midst of delusive joys they are exposed to death.

The human mind wants relaxation; but having once tasted fancied delights, it
can seldom be satisfied, and excess becomes dangerous. I think parents should
lay a little more restraint on their children, than to suffer them to frequent
balls. There are perhaps no amusements more calculated to do mischief than
those of dancing. The young females are surrounded with beaux who delight in
dissipation, and who scarce ever feel a virtuous or a generous sentiment; but
exult in destroying the peace of those who fall victims to their villainy. In
the exercise I allude to, the body is warmed, the heart is elated, and the
imaginations are heated; the consequence of which is, the stripling hero takes
advantages of those delirious moments -- he ogles and he sighs, and the silly
girl hearkens implicitly to his tale. If she escapes the worser evil, she
afterward feels herself unable to resist the powerful impulse of love -- she
flies from civil intercourse -- she lingers and dies. A young married gentleman
with whom my father is intimate, related the following anecdote:

"When I once," said he, "returned to London in one of the stage coaches, the
company consisted of two young ladies, a gentleman, and myself. The gentleman
was one of those vulgar beings which seem to be formed to make a variety on the
theater of the world: he uttered but few speeches, and those of a courser sort,
during the journey, but sat heedless of himself or his company. One of the
ladies was young; she was not handsome, but had something attracting in her
countenance: the other (who was of superior age, and seemed to be a friendly
companion) called her Maria.

"Maria entered the coach with reluctance: she wept bitterly; nor could the
kind entreaties of the other lady prevail on her to be composed. I sat opposite
to her; and before we had left the city she became senseless. I leaned forward
and supported her. In this situation she continued for some miles. When she
awoke, she asked pardon for the trouble she had given me. I endeavored to
cheer her spirits by conversation, but she was too much dejected.

"As we passed by some decayed houses, she looked out at the window, and
sighed. 'Ah!' said Maria, 'could I but inhabit one of those lonely cottages,
how happy should I be! I would gladly exchange situations. The rays of
contentment spread their genial sweets -- there their days of poverty are not
embittered with pride. Ambition is bounded by manual employments! -- I am
unhappy!' -- To which I replied:

'If you knew, Madam, the hardships which poverty exposes them to, you would be
led to different conclusions. The poor think, if they were rich, sorrow and
pain would forsake them; but they, perhaps, are equally mistaken with yourself.
Every rank in society is properly filled: those who are now poor, would make
but an indifferent figure in a higher sphere; and you would find it a difficult
task to support oppression and want.'

"But they are contented," said she.

'Contentment is equally attainable in every rank. Neither riches nor poverty
can constitute the invaluable prize: but the mind that can confine itself
within its own bounds is sure to be in possession of it. If you sought through
the whole system of creation, you would find that Providence had dispensed his
blessings alike. Every one has an inward source of happiness. The rich should
feel thankful for their measure of comforts; the poor be grateful that it is
not worse with them.'

"Maria's heart was too much agitated to continue the conversation -- she again
became convulsed, and continued in alternate fits till we reached our journey's
end. I inquired of the other lady the cause of her disorder, and found that she
had been some time poorly, and that her parents had permitted her to go to
Bath, in compliance with the physician's prescription, for the benefit of the
waters. When she grew better, she frequented the public places of amusement,
and happened to dance with a handsome young gentleman, whose genteel deportment
engaged her affections: but finding that her charms had not made the tender
impression she wished on his heart, she suddenly gave way to melancholy. Her
father and mother hearing that the waters had restored her (though ignorant of
the other circumstance) requested her to return. In obedience to their
injunctions she complied; but the idea of leaving the object of her love behind
had this strange effect on her mind, and I fear will produce a fatal
conclusion."

I will not insist more on the impropriety of exposing the credulous girl to
temptation; this instance will perhaps more readily convince, than all the
powers of rhetoric.

We left Bath in the morning, and arrived at Wells early enough for dinner. My
father's curiosity leads him to inspect every venerable pile he passes by. For
my own part, I am at present engaged too much in sentiment to attend to these
things.

My father visited the Cathedral; after which we pursued our journey till it
became late, and then reposed at an inn on the road. In the morning we set
forward again, and reached the town of Dorset to dinner.

At the entrance of this town is a beautiful and spacious lawn, where are a
vast number of sheep continually feeding. I think it an excellent spot for the
pencil of an artist; and if I had time, I should certainly employ my own pencil.

In the afternoon, after two hours' ride, we approached Weymouth. We have a
view of the rolling waves some miles before we enter the town. The place is so
much exposed to the wind, that it is intensely cold; and I hope our stay will
be short. I shall be more ready to communicate at a personal interview. Believe
me, Matilda, I want to see you after so long an absence. Our affections, I
believe, still subsist uncontaminated under all the changes of life. I shall
not have an opportunity of writing to you again before we meet; therefore this
letter will close my correspondence till we shall experience another
separation. Your engagements are not urgent; I must beg you to send me a few
more lines, and entreat you will not deny my request. Adieu.

Louisa Hartley.

LETTER XVI. TO MISS LOUISA HARTLEY.
HANTS.
A MONUMENT to the memory of Caroline is shortly to be erected, at the sole
expense of her faithful Milward. He thinks it the least tribute he can pay her.
It is to be of entire marble, and the workmen are busily employed about it. A
cross is to be supported by a pillar on each side, which are to ascend from
beautiful pedestals. There are to be several emblematical figures, which will
render it superbly rich.

I have shown your lines to Mr. Milward; he is so highly pleased with them,
that he says they shall follow the epitaph, which runs thus: Stop, Stranger --
pause awhile, And read The following Lines: Not Far from hence, Secure from
human view, In Yonder silent Vault, Where cares or troubles never enter; Where
soft repose is never disturbed, Nor human ills inrade; In yonder dark Retreat,
In yonder solitary Cave, Lies unmolested CAROLINE. Her frame lies mouldering
there; But ah! her happy spirit's gone to blessedness. Peace sits smiling on
her Heavenly brow, And Love celestial brightens every feature. The village
mourned her death; It felt the loss Of Virtue and Benevolence like hers. Her
hapless Swain Bore all the agonies of grief; The raised this Marble Monument,
To tell the gazing throng That Virtue never dies, And Bid the world be
virtuous. LINES BY A LADY. There rest in peace, thou lovely maid! etc.

Thus, Louisa, your wishes will be literally fulfilled. You will pardon me for
giving up your lines; I am persuaded your vanity will not be too much
flattered. It was the request of the disconsolate Milward,

I have another secret to unfold. Mrs. Ansell has seen the whole of our letters
since our last separation. She is incessantly teazing me to give her copies of
them, and wishes me to submit them to public view. She thinks the young will be
amused, without the danger of having their morals corrupted. I have at length
yielded to her entreaties, before I have obtained your consent. I know you
cannot object to it, particularly as Mrs. Ansell has promised to conceal our
real signatures, and adopt others; and the perusal of genuine letters of
friendship, may perhaps be of service to many young people.

Before I close this correspondence, give me leave to say, I have cast my eyes
round my own little circle, and observation leads me to conclude that life has
its difficulties as well as its pleasures. We ought to be prepared to meet
vicissitudes with composure; and if we escape the woes of the unfortunate, let
us not be indifferent to their sighs. The brightest genius, or the most exalted
character, will never be disgraced by sensibility. We are all fond of pity in
misfortune, and shall we deny the troubled soul that sympathetic tenderness we
should consider an hardship to be deprived of ourselves?

I anticipate our happy meeting; but I fear to be too anxious, lest our
pleasures should be marred by some unpleasing occurrence. I need not beg Louisa
to continue he affectionate regard for

Matilda Robinson.

FINIS.

