LETTERS OF PACIFICUS.
No. 1.
AS attempts are making very dangerous to the peace, and it is to be feared not
very friendly to the constitution of the United States -- it becomes the duty
of those who wish well to both to endeavor to prevent their success.

The objections which have been raised against the proclamation of neutrality
lately issued by the President, have been urged in a spirit of acrimony and
invective, which demonstrates that more was in view than merely a free
discussion of an important public measure; that the discussion covers a design
of weakening the confidence of the people in the author of the measure, in
order to remove or lessen a powerful obstacle to the success of an opposition
to the government, which however it may change its form, according to
circumstances, seems still to be adhered to and pursued with persevering
industry.

This reflection adds to the motives connected with the measure itself to
recommend endeavors, by proper explanations, to place it in a just light. Such
explanations at least cannot but be satisfactory to those who may not have
leisure or opportunity for pursuing themselves an investigation of the subject,
and who may wish to perceive, that the policy of the government is not
inconsistent with its obligations or its honor.

The objections in question fall under four heads:

1. That the proclamation was without authority.

2. That it was contrary to our treaties with France.

3. That it was contrary to the gratitude, which is due from this to that
country, for the succors rendered us in our own revolution.

4. That it was out of time and unnecessary.

In order to judge of the solidity of the first of these objections, it is
necessary to examine, what is the nature and design of a proclamation of
neutrality.

The true nature and design of such an act is -- to make known to the powers at
war, and to the citizens of the country, whose government does the act, that
such country is in the condition of a nation at peace with the belligerent
parties, and under no obligations of treaty, to become an associate in the war
with either of them; that this being its situation, its intention is to observe
a conduct conformable with it, and to perform toward each the duties of
neutrality; and as a consequence of this state of things, to give warning to
all within its jurisdiction to abstain from acts that shall contravene those
duties, under the penalties which the laws of the land (of which the law of
nations is a part) annexes to acts of (...).

This, and no more, is conceived to be the true import of a proclamation of
neutrality.

It does not imply, that the nation which makes the declaration will forbear to
perform to any of the warring powers, any stipulations in treaties which can be
performed, without rendering it an associate or party in the war. It therefore
does not imply in our case, that the United States will not make those
distinctions, between the present belligerent powers, which are stipulated in
the 7th and 22d articles of our treaty with France; because these distinctions
are not incompatible with a state of neutrality: they will in no shape render
the United States an associate or party in the war. This must be evident, when
it is considered, that even to furnish determinate succors of a certain number
of ships or troops, to a power at war, in consequence of antecedent treaties
having no particular reference to the existing war, is not inconsistent with
neutrality: a position well established by the doctrines of writers, and the
practice of nations See Vatel, Book III. Chapter 6. Sec. 101.


But no special aids, succors, or favors having relation to war, not
positively and precisely stipulated by some treaty of the above description,
can be afforded to either party, without a breach of neutrality.

In stating that the proclamation of neutrality does not imply the
nonperformance of any stipulations of treaties, which are not of a nature to
make the nation an associate or party in the war, it is conceded, that an
execution of the clause of guarantee contained in the eleventh article of our
treaty of alliance with France would be contrary to the sense and spirit of the
proclamation; because it would engage us with our whole force, as an associate
or auxiliary in the war; it would be much more than the case of a definite
limited succor, previously ascertained.

It follows, that the proclamation is virtually a manifestation of the sense of
the government, that the United States are, under the circumstances of the
case, not bound to execute the clause of guarantee.

If this be a just view of the force and import of the proclamation, it will
remain to see, whether the President in issuing it acted within his proper
sphere or stepped beyond the bounds of his constitutional authority and duty.

It will not be disputed, that the management of the affairs of this country
with foreign nations, is confided to the government of the United States.

It can as little be disputed, that a proclamation of neutrality, when a nation
is at liberty to keep out of a war in which other nations are engaged, and
means so to do, is a usual and a proper measure. Its main object and effect are
to prevent the nation being immediately responsible for acts done by its
citizens, without the privity or connivance of the government in contravention
of the principles of neutrality See Vatel, Book III. Chap. 7. Sec. 113.


An object this of the greatest importance to a country, whose true interest
lies in the preservation of peace.

The enquiry then is, what department of the government of the United States is
the proper one to make a declaration of neutrality in the cases in which the
engagements of the nation permit, and its interests require such a declaration.

A correct and well informed mind will discern at once, that it can belong
neither to the legislative, nor judicial department, and of course must belong
to the executive.

The legislative department is not the organ of intercourse between the United
States and foreign nations. It is charged neither with making nor interpreting
treaties. It is therefore not naturally that organ of the government, which is
to pronounce the existing condition of the nation, with regard to foreign
powers, or to admonish the citizens of their obligations and duties as founded
upon that condition of things; still less is it charged with enforcing the
execution and observance of those obligations and those duties.

It is equally obvious, that the act in question is foreign to the judiciary
department of the government. The province of that department is to decide
litigations in particular cases. It is indeed charged with the interpretation
of treaties, but it exercises this function only in the litigated cases, that
is where contending parties bring before it a specific controversy. It has no
concern with pronouncing upon the external political relations of treaties
between government and government. This position is too plain to need being
insisted upon.

It must then of necessity belong to the executive department to exercise the
function in question, when a proper case for the exercise of it occurs.

It appears to be connected with that department in various capacities -- As
the organ of intercourse between the nation and foreign nations -- as the
interpreter of the national treaties in those cases in which the judiciary is
not competent, that is, in the cases between government and government -- as
that power which is charged with the execution of the laws, of which treaties
form a part -- as that power which is charged with the command and application
of the public force.

This view of the subject is so natural and obvious, so analogous to general
theory and practice, that no doubt can be entertained of its justness, unless
such doubt can be deduced from particular provisions of the constitution of the
United States.

Let us see then if cause for such doubt is to be found in that constitution.

The second article of the constitution of the United States, section first,
establishes this general proposition, that "the executive power shall be vested
in a President of the United States of America."

The same article in a succeeding section proceeds to delineate particular
cases of executive power. It declares among other things, that the President
shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the United States, and of
the militia of the several states, when called into the actual service of the
United States; that he shall have power by and with the advice and consent of
the Senate, to make treaties; that it shall be his duty to receive ambassadors
and other public ministers, and to take care that the laws be faithfully
executed.

It would not consist with the rules of sound construction to consider this
enumeration of particular authorities as derogating from the more comprehensive
grant contained in the general clause, further than as it may be coupled with
express restrictions or qualifications; as in regard to the cooperation of the
Senate in the appointment of officers and the making of treaties; which are
qualifications of the general executive powers of appointing officers and
making treaties; because the difficulty of a complete and perfect specification
of all the cases of executive authority, would naturally dictate the use of
general terms, and would render it improbable that a specification of certain
particulars was designed as a substitute for those terms, when antecedently
used. The different mode of expression employed in the constitution in regard
to the two powers, the legislative and the executive, serves to confirm this
inference. In the article which grants the legislative powers of the
government, the expressions are, "All legislative powers herein granted shall
be vested in a Congress of the United States." In that which grants the
executive power, the expressions are, as already quoted, "The executive power
shall be vested in a President of the United States of America."

The enumeration ought rather therefore to be considered as intended by way of
greater caution to specify and regulate the principal articles implied in the
definition of executive power: leaving the rest to flow from the general grant
of that power, interpreted in conformity to other parts of the constitution,
and to the principles of free government.

The general doctrine of our constitution then is, that the executive power of
the nation is vested in the President; subject only to the exceptions and
qualifications which are expressed in the instrument.

Two of these have been already noticed -- the participation of the Senate in
the appointment of officers, and the making of treaties. A third remains to be
mentioned -- the right of the legislature "to declare war and grant letters of
marque and reprisal."

With these exceptions the executive power of the union is completely lodged in
the President. This mode of construing the constitution has indeed been
recognized by Congress in formal acts, upon full consideration and debate. The
power of removal from office is an important instance. And since upon general
principles, for reasons already given, the issuing of a proclamation of
neutrality is merely an executive act: since also the general executive power
of the union is vested in the President, the conclusion is that the step which
has been taken by him, is liable to no just exception on the score of authority.

It may be observed that this inference would be just, if the power of
declaring war had not been vested in the legislature, but that this power
naturally includes the right of judging, whether the nation is under
obligations to make war or not.

The answer to this is, that however true it may be, that the right of the
legislature to declare war, includes the right of judging whether the nation be
under obligations to make war or not, it will not follow, that the executive is
in any case excluded from a similar right of judgment in the execution of its
own functions.

If the legislature have a right to make war on the one hand, it is on the
other, the duty of the executive to preserve peace till war is declared; and in
fulfilling that duty, it must necessarily possess a right of judging what is
the nature of the obligations which the treaties of the country impose on the
government; and when in pursuance of this right it has concluded, that there is
nothing in them inconsistent with a state of neutrality, it becomes both its
province and its duty to enforce the laws incident to that state of the nation.
The executive is charged with the execution of all laws, the laws of nations as
well as the municipal law, which recognizes and adopts those laws. It is
consequently bound, by faithfully executing the laws of neutrality, when that
is the state of the nation, to avoid giving a cause of war, to foreign powers.

This is the direct and proper end of the proclamation of neutrality -- it
declares to the United States their situation with regard to the powers at war,
and makes known to the community, that the laws incident to that situation will
be enforced. In doing this, it conforms to an established usage of nations, the
operation of which, as before remarked, is to obviate a responsibility on the
part of the whole society, for secret and unknown violations of the rights of
any of the warring parties by its citizens.

Those who object to the proclamation will readily admit, that it is the right
and duty of the executive to judge of, or to interpret, those articles of our
treaties which give to France particular privileges, in order to the
enforcement of those privileges: But the necessary consequence of this is, that
the executive must judge what are the proper bounds of those privileges -- what
rights are given to other nations by our treaties with them -- what rights the
law of nature and nations gives and our treaties permit, in respect to those
nations with whom we have no treaties; in fine, what are the reciprocal rights
and obligations of the United States, and of all and each of the powers at war.

The right of the executive to receive ambassadors and other public ministers,
may serve to illustrate the relative duties of the executive and legislative
departments. This right includes that of judging, in the case of a revolution
of government in a foreign country, whether the new rulers are competent organs
of the national will, and ought to be recognized or not: And where a treaty
antecedently exists between the United States and such nation that right
involves the power of giving operation, or not, to such treaty. For until the
new government is acknowledged, the treaties between the nations, as far, at
least, as regards public rights, are of course suspended.

This power of determining virtually in the case supposed upon the operation of
national treaties, as a consequence of the power to receive ambassadors and
other public ministers, is an important instance of the right of the executive
to decide the obligations of the nation with regard to foreign nations. To
apply it to the case of France, if there had been a treaty of alliance
offensive and defensive between the United States and that country, the
unqualified acknowledgement of the new government would have put the United
States in a condition to become an associate in the war in which France was
engaged, and would have laid the legislature under an obligation if required,
and there was otherwise no valid excuse, of exercising its power of declaring
war.

This serves as an example of the right of the executive in certain cases, to
determine the condition of the nation, though it may consequently affect the
proper or improper exercise of the power of the legislature to declare war. The
executive, indeed, cannot control the exercise of that power further than by
its exercise of its general right of objecting to all acts of the legislature;
liable to being overruled by two thirds of both houses of Congress. The
legislature is free to perform its own duties according to its own sense of
them; though the executive in the exercise of its constitutional powers, may
establish an antecedent state of things, which ought to weigh in the
legislative decisions.

From the division of the executive power, there results in reference to it, a
concurrent authority in the distributed cases.

Hence in the case stated, though treaties can only be made by the President
and senate, their activity may be continued or suspended by the President alone.

No objection has been made to the President's having acknowledged the Republic
of France, by the reception of its minister, without having consulted the
Senate; though that body is connected with him in the making of treaties, and
though the consequence of his act of reception is to give operation to the
treaties heretofore made with that country. But he is censured for having
declared the United States to be in a state of peace and neutrality with regard
to the powers at war; because the right of changing that state and declaring
war belongs to the legislature.

It deserves to be remarked, that as the participation of the Senate in the
making of treaties, and the power of the legislature to declare war, are
exceptions out of the general "executive power" vested in the President, they
are to be construed strictly, and ought to be extended no further than is
essential to their execution.

While therefore the legislature can alone declare war, can alone actually
transfer the nation from a state of peace to a state of war -- it belongs to
the "executive power" to do whatever else the law of nations, cooperating with
the treaties of the country, enjoin in the intercourse of the United States
with foreign powers.

In this distribution of powers, the wisdom of our constitution is manifested.
It is the province and duty of the executive to preserve to the nation the
blessings of peace. The legislature alone can interrupt those blessings, by
placing the nation in a state of war.

But though it has been thought advisable to vindicate the authority of the
executive on this broad and comprehensive ground, it was not absolutely
necessary to do so. That clause of the constitution which makes it his duty to
"take care that the laws be faithfully executed," might alone have been relied
upon, and this simple process of argument pursued.

The President is the constitutional EXECUTOR of the laws. Our treaties and the
laws of nations form a part of the law of the land. He who is to execute the
laws, must first judge for himself of their meaning. In order to the observance
of that conduct which the laws of nations, combined with our treaties,
prescribed to this country, in reference to the present war in Europe, it was
necessary for the President to judge for himself, whether there was any thing
in our treaties incompatible with an adherence to neutrality. Having judged
that there was not, he had a right, and if in his opinion the interests of the
nation required it, it was his duty as an executor of the laws, to proclaim the
neutrality of the nation, to exhort all persons to observe it, and to warn them
of the penalties which would attend its non-observance.

The proclamation has been represented as enacting some new law. This is a view
of it entirely erroneous. It only proclaims a fact with regard to the existing
state of the nation, informs the citizens of what the laws previously
established require of them in that state, and warns them that these laws will
be put in execution against the infractors of them.

No. II.
THE second and principal objection to the proclamation, namely, that it is
inconsistent with the treaties between the United States and France, will now
be examined.

It has been already shown, that it is not inconsistent with the performance of
any of the stipulations in those treaties, which would not make us an associate
or party in the war, and particularly that it is incompatible with the
privileges secured to France by the seventeenth and twenty-second articles of
the treaty of Commerce; which, except the clause of guarantee, constitute the
most material discriminations to be found in our treaties in favor of that
country.

Official documents have likewise appeared, in the public papers, which are
understood to be authentic, that serve as a comment upon the sense of the
proclamation in this particular, proving that it was not deemed by the
executive incompatible with the performance of the stipulations in those
articles, and that in practice they are intended to be observed.

It has, however been admitted, that the declaration of neutrality excludes the
idea of an execution of the clause of guarantee.

It becomes necessary therefore to examine whether the United States would have
a valid justification for not complying with it in case of their being called
upon for that purpose by France.

Without knowing how far the reasons, which have occured to me, may have
influenced the President, there appear to me to exist very good and substantial
grounds for a refusal.

The alliance between the United States and France is a defensive alliance. In
the caption of it, it is denominated a "treaty of alliance eventual and
defensive." In the body of it (article second) it is called a defensive
alliance. The words of that article are as follow, "the essential and direct
end of the present defensive alliance is to maintain effectually the liberty,
sovereignty and independence absolute and unlimited of the United States, as
well in matters of government, as of commerce."

The predominant quality or character then of our alliance with France is, that
it is defensive in its principle, of course the meaning, obligation and force
of every stipulation in the treaty must be tested and determined by that
principle. It is not necessary (and would be absurd) that it should be repeated
in every article. It is sufficient that it be once declared, to be understood
in every part of the treaty, unless coupled with express negative words
excluding the implication.

The great question consequently is -- what are the nature and effect of a
defensive alliance? When does the casus federis, or condition of the contract
take place, in such an alliance?

Reason, the concurring opinions of writers, and the practice of nations will
answer: -- "when either of the allies is attacked, when war is made upon him,
not when he makes war upon another;" in other words, the stipulated assistance
is to be given to the ally when engaged in a defensive, not when engaged in an
offensive war. This obligation to assist only in a defensive war, constitutes
the essential difference between a defensive alliance, and one which is both
offensive and defensive. In the latter case there is an obligation to
cooperate as well when the war, on the part of our ally, is offensive, as when
it is defensive. To affirm, therefore, that the United States are bound to
assist France in the war in which she is at present engaged, would be to
convert our treaty with her into an alliance offensive and defensive, contrary
to the express and reiterated declarations of the instrument itself.

This assertion implies, that the war in question is an offensive war on the
part of France.

And so it undoubtedly is with regard to all the powers with whom she was at
war at the time of issuing the proclamation.

No position is better established, than that the power which first declares or
actually begins a war, whatever may have been the causes leading to it, is that
which makes an offensive war. Nor is there any doubt that France first declared
and began the war, against Austria, Prussia, Savoy, Holland, England and Spain.

Upon this point there is apt to be some incorrectness of ideas. Those who have
not examined subjects of such a nature, are led to imagine that the party which
commits the first injury, or gives the first provocation, is on the offensive
side in the war, though begun by the other party.

But the cause or the occasion of the war, and the war itself, are things
entirely distinct. It Is the commencement of the war itself, that decides the
question of being on the offensive or defensive. All writers on the laws of
nations agree in this principle, but it is more accurately laid down in the
following extract from Burlamaqui Vol. II. Book IV. chap. III. sect. 4, 5.


"Neither are we to believe (says he) that he who first injures another, begins
by that an offensive war, and that the other who demands the satisfaction for
the injury received is always on the defensive. There are a great many unjust
acts, which may kindle a war, and which, however, are not the war itself; as
the ill treatment of a prince's ambassadors, the plundering of his subjects,
etc."

"If therefore we take up arms to revenge such an unjust act, we commence an
offensive but a just war; and the prince who has done the injury, and will not
give satisfaction, makes a defensive but an unjust war."

"We must therefore affirm, in general, that the first who takes up arms,
whether justly or unjustly, commences an offensive war, and he who opposes him
whether with or without reason, begins a defensive war."

France then being on the offensive in the war in which she is engaged and our
alliance with her being defensive only, it follows, that the casus federis, or
condition of our guarantee cannot take place; and that the United States are
free to refuse a performance of that guarantee, if demanded.

Those who are disposed to justify indiscriminately every thing in the conduct
of France, may reply, that though the war in point of form may be offensive on
her part, yet in point of principle, it is defensive; was in each instance a
mere anticipation of attacks meditated against her, and was justified by
previous aggressions of the opposite parties.

It is believed, that it would be a sufficient answer to this observation to
say, that in determining the legal and positive obligations of the United
States, the only point of enquiry is, whether the war was in fact begun by
France, or by her enemies -- that all beyond this will be too vague, too liable
to dispute, too much matter of opinion to be a proper criterion of national
conduct; that when a war breaks out between two nations, all other nations, in
regard to the positive rights of the parties, and their positive duties toward
them, are bound to consider it as equally just on both sides -- that
consequently in a defensive alliance, when war is made upon one of the allies,
the other is bound to fulfill the conditions stipulated on its part, without
inquiry, whether the war is rightfully begun or not -- as, on the other hand,
when war is begun by one of the allies, the other is exempted from the
obligation for assisting, however just the commencement of it may have been.

The foundation of this doctrine is, the utility of clear and certain rules for
determining the reciprocal duties of nations -- that as little as possible may
be left to opinion, and to the subterfuges of a refining or unfaithful
casuistry.

Some writers indeed of great authority affirm, that it is a tacit condition of
every treaty of alliance, that one ally is not bound to assist the other in a
war manifestly unjust. But this is questioned on the ground which has been
stated by other respectable authorities. And though the manifest injustice of
the war has been affirmed by some, to be a good cause for not executing the
formal obligations of a treaty, I have no where found it maintained, that the
justice of a war is a consideration which can oblige a nation to do what its
formal obligations do not require; as in the case of a defensive alliance to
furnish the succors stipulated, though the formal obligation did not exist, by
reason of the ally having begun the war instead of being the party attacked.

But if this were not the true doctrine, an impartial examination would prove
that, with respect to some of the powers, France is not blameless in the
circumstances which preceded and led to the war with those powers; that if she
received, she also gave causes of offense, and that the justice of the war, on
her side, is in those cases not a little problematical.

There are prudential reasons which dissuade from going largely into this
examination, unless it shall be rendered necessary by the future turn of the
discussion.

It will be sufficient here, to notice cursorily the following facts.

France committed an agression upon Holland, in declaring free the navigation
of the Scheldt, and acting upon that declaration; contrary to Treaties in which
she had explicitly acknowledged and even guaranteed the exclusive right of
Holland to the navigation of that river, and contrary to the doctrines of the
best writers, and the established usages of nations in such cases.

She gave a general and just cause of alarm to nations, by that decree of the
19th of November, 1792, whereby the Convention, in the name of the French
nation, declare that they will grant fraternity and assistance to every people
who wish to recover their liberty, and charge the executive power to send the
necessary orders to the generals to give assistance to such people, and to
defend those citizens who may have been, or who may be vexed for the cause of
liberty; which decree was ordered to be printed in all languages.

When a nation has actually come to a resolution to throw off a yoke, under
which it may have groaned, and to assert its liberties, it is justifiable and
meritorious in another nation to afford assistance to the one which has been
oppressed, and is in the act of liberating itself; but it is not warrantable
for any nation beforehand to hold out a general invitation to insurrection and
revolution, by promising to assist every people who may wish to recover their
liberty, and to defend those citizens of every country, who may have been, or
who may be vexed for the cause of liberty: still less to commit to the generals
of its armies the discretionary power of judging, when the citizens of a
foreign country have been vexed for the cause of liberty by their own
government.

The latter part of the decree amounted exactly to what France herself had most
complained of -- an interference by one nation in the internal government of
another.

Vatel justly observes, as a consequence of the liberty and independence of
nations -- "that it does not belong to any foreign power to take cognizance of
the administration of the sovereign of another country, to set himself up as a
judge of his conduct or to oblige him to alter it."

Such a conduct as that indicated by this decree has a natural tendency to
disturb the tranquillity of nations, to excite fermentation and revolt every
where; and therefore justified neutral powers, who were in a situation to be
affected by it, in taking measures to repress the spirit by which it had been
dictated.

But the principle of this decree received a more particular application to
Great Britain, by some subsequent circumstances.

Among the proofs of this are two answers, which were given by the President of
the National Convention, at a public sitting on the 28th of November, to two
different addresses; one presented by a deputation from "The Society for
Constitutional Information in London" -- the other by a deputation of English
and Irish citizens at Paris.

The following are extracts from these answers:

"The shades of Penn, of Hambden and of Sydney, hover over your heads; and the
moment, without doubt; approaches, in which the French will bring
congratulations to the National Convention of Great Britain."

"Nature and principles draw toward us England, Scotland and Ireland. Let the
cries of friendship refound through the two Republics." -- "Principles are
waging war against tyranny, which will fall under the blows of philosophy.
Royalty in Europe is either destroyed, or on the point of perishing, on the
ruins of soeodality: and the declaration of rights placed by the side of
thrones, is a devouring fire which will consume them -- Worthy Republicans,"
etc.

Declarations of this sort cannot but be considered as a direct application of
the principle of the decree to Great Britain; as an open patronage of a
revolution in that country; a conduct which proceeding from the head or the
body that governs France, in the presence and on behalf of that body, was
unquestionably an offense and injury to the nation to which it related.

The decree of the 15th of November is another cause of offense to all the
governments of Europe. By that decree "the French nation declares, that it will
treat as enemies the people, who refusing or renouncing liberty and equality,
are desirous of preserving their prince and privileged casts or of entering
into an accommodation with them,etc." This decree was little short of a
declaration of war against all nations having princes and privileged classes.

The incorporation of the territories, over which the arms of France had
temporarily prevailed, with and as a part of herself, is another violation of
the rights of nations, into which the convention was betrayed by an intemperate
zeal, if not by a culpable ambition.

The laws of nations give to a power at war nothing more than a usufructuary or
possessory right to the territories which it conquers; suspending the absolute
property and dominion till a treaty of peace or something equivalent shall cede
or relinquish the conquered territory to the conqueror. This principle is one
of the greatest importance to the tranquillity and security of nations --
facilitating an adjustment of their quarrels and the preservation of ancient
limits.

But France by incorporating with herself, in several instances, the
territories she had acquired, violated this important principle and multiplied
infinitely the obstacles of peace and accommodation. The doctrine, that a
nation cannot consent to its own dismemberment, but in a case of extreme
necessity, immediately attached itself to all the important territories: while
the progressive augmentation of the dominions of the most powerful nation in
Europe, on a principle not of temporary acquisition, but of permanent union,
threatened the independence of all other countries and gave to neighboring
neutral powers the justest cause of umbrage and alarm. It is a principle well
argreed and founded on the best reasons, that whenever a particular nation
adopts maxims of conduct contrary to those generally established among nations,
calculated to disturb their tranquillity and to expose their safety, they may
justifiably make a common cause to oppose and control such nation.

Whatever partiality may be entertained for the general object of the French
revolution, it is impossible for any well informed or sober minded man not to
condemn the proceedings which have been stated; as repugnant to the general
rights of nations, to the true principles of liberty, to the freedom of opinion
of mankind: and not to acknowledge as a consequence of this, that the justice
of the war on the part of France, with regard to some of the powers with which
she is engaged, is from those causes questionable enough to free the United
States from all embarrassments on that score; if it be at all incumbent upon
them to go into the inquiry.

The policy of a defensive alliance is so essentially distinct from that of an
offensive one, that it is every way important not to confound their effects.
The first kind has in view the prudent object of mutual defense, when either of
the allies is involuntarily forced into a war by the attack of some third
power. The latter kind subjects the peace of each ally to the will of the
other, and obliges each to partake in the wars of policy and interest, as well
as in those of safety and defense, of the other. To preserve their boundaries
distinct, it is necessary that each kind should be governed by plain and
obvious rules.

This would not be the case, if instead of taking the simple fact of who began
the war as a guide, it was necessary to travel into metaphysical niceties about
the justice or injustice of the causes which led to it. Since also the not
furnishing a stipulated succor, when it is due, is itself a cause of war, it
is very requisite, that there should be some palpable criterion for
ascertaining when it is due. This criterion, as before observed, in a defensive
alliance is the commencement or not, of the war by our ally as a mere matter of
fact.

Other topics calculated to illustrate the position, that the United States are
not bound to execute the clause of guarantee, are reserved for another paper.

No. III.
FRANCE at the time of issuing the proclamation was engaged, and likely to be
engaged in war, with all, or almost all Europe, without a single ally in that
quarter of the globe.

In such a state of things, it is evident, that however she may be able to
defend herself at home, (of which her factions and agitations have furnished
the only serious doubt) she cannot make external efforts in any degree
proportioned to those which can be made against her.

By this situation of things alone, the United States would be dispensed from
an obligation to embark in her quarrel.

It is known, that we are wholly destitute of naval force. France, with all the
great maritime powers united against her, is unable to supply this deficiency.
She cannot afford us that species of cooperation, which is necessary to render
the efforts useful to her, and to prevent our experiencing the destruction of
our trade and the most calamitous inconvenience in other respects.

Our guarantee does not respect France herself. It does not relate to her own
immediate defense, it relates merely to the defense and preservation of her
American colonies; objects of which (though of considerable importance) the
might be deprived, and yet remain a great, a powerful, and a happy nation.

In the actual situation of this country, and in relation to an object so
secondary to France, it may fairly be maintained, that an ability in her to
supply in a competent degree our deficiency of naval force, is a condition of
our obligation to perform the guarantee on our part.

Had the United States a powerful marine, or could they command one in time,
this reasoning would not be solid; but circumstanced as they are, it is
presumed to be well founded.

There would be no proportion between the mischiefs and perils, to which the
United States would expose themselves, by embarking in the war, and the benefit
which the nature of their stipulation aims at securing to France, or that which
it would be in their power actually to render her, by becoming a party.

This disproportion would be a valid reason, for not executing the guarantee.
All contracts are to receive a reasonable construction. Self preservation is
the first duty of a nation; and though in the performance of stipulations
relating to war, good faith requires, that the ordinary hazards of war should
be fairly encountered, because they are directly contemplated by such
stipulations, yet it does not require that extraordinary and extreme hazards
should be run; especially where the object for which they are to be run, is
only a partial and particular interest of the ally, for whom they are to be run.

As in the present instance; good faith does not require, that the United
States should put in jeopardy their essential interests, perhaps their very
existence, in one of the most unequal contests in which a nation could be
engaged to -- secure to France -- What? -- Her West India Islands, and other
less important possessions in America -- For it is to be remembered, that the
stipulations of the United States do in no event reach beyond this point. If
they were upon the strength of their guarantee, to engage in the war, and could
make any arrangement with the belligerent powers, for securing to France those
islands and those possessions, they would be at perfect liberty instantly to
withdraw. They would not be bound to prosecute the war one moment longer.

They are under no obligation in any event, as far as the faith of treaties is
concerned, to assist France in defense of her liberty; a topic on which so much
has been said, so very little to the purpose, as it regards the present
question.

The contest in which the United States would plunge themselves, were they to
take part with France, would possibly be still more unequal, than that in which
France herself is engaged. With the possessions of Great Britain and Spain on
both flanks, the numerous Indian tribes under the influence and direction of
those powers, along our whole interior frontier, with a long extended sea
coast, with no maritime force of our own, and with the maritime force of all
Europe against us, with no fortifications whatever, and with a population not
exceeding four millions -- it is impossible to imagine a more unequal contest,
than that in which we should be involved in the case supposed; a contest from
which we are dissuaded by the most cogent motives of self preservation, as well
as of interest.

We may learn from Vatel, one of the best writers on the laws of nations, that
"if a State which has promised succors finds itself unable to furnish them,
its very inability is its exemption; and if the furnishing the succors would
expose it to an evident danger this also is a lawful dispensation. The case
would render the treaty pernicious to the State and therefore not obligatory.
But this applies to an imminent danger threatening the safety of the State; the
case of such a danger is tacitly and necessarily reserved in every treaty See
Book III. Chap. VI. Sec. 92.
"

If too (as no sensible and candid man will deny) the extent of the present
combination against France is in a degree to be ascribed to imprudences on her
part; the exemption to the United States is still more manifest and complete.
No country is bound to partake in hazards of the most critical kind, which may
have been produced or promoted, by the indiscretion and intemperance of
another. This is an obvious dictate of reason, with which the common sense and
common practice of mankind coincide.

To the foregoing considerations it may perhaps be added, with no small degree
of force, that military stipulations in national treades contemplate only the
ordinary case of foreign war, and are irrelative to the contests which grow out
of Revolutions of Government; unless where they have express reference to a
Revolution begun, or where there is a guarantee of the existing constitution of
a nation, or where there is personal alliance for the defense of a prince and
his family Puffendorf, book VIII. Chap. IX. Section IX.


The Revolution in France is the primitive source of the war, in which she is
engaged. The restoration of the monarchy is the avowed object of some of her
enemies -- and the implied one of all them. That question then is essentially
involved in the principle of war; a question certainly never in the
contemplation of that government, with which our treaty was made, and it may
thence be fairly inferred never intended to be embraced by it.

The inference would be that the United States have fulfilled the utmost that
could be claimed by the nation of France, when they so far respected its
decision as to recognize the newly constituted powers; giving operation to the
treaty of alliance for future occasions, but considering the present war as a
tacit exception. Perhaps too this exception is in other respects due to the
circumstances under which the engagements between the two countries were
contracted. It is impossible, prejudice apart, not to perceive a delicate
embarrassment between the theory and fact of our political relations to France.

On these grounds, also, as well as that of the present war being offensive on
the side of France, the United States have valid and honorable pleas to offer
against the execution of the guarantee, if it should be claimed of them by
France. And the President was in every view fully justified in pronouncing,
that the duty and interest of the United States dictated a neutrality in the
war.

No. IV.
A THIRD objection to the proclamation is, that it is inconsistent with the
gratitude due to France, for the services rendered us in our revolution.

Those who make this objection, disavow, at the same time, all intention to
advocate the position, that the United States ought to take part in the war.
They profess to be friends to our remaining at peace. What then do they mean by
the objection?

If it be no breach of gratitude to refrain from joining France in the war --
how can it be a breach of gratitude to declare that such is our disposition and
intention?

The two positions are at variance with each other; and the true inference is,
either that those who make the objection really wish to engage this country in
the war, or that they seek a pretext for censuring the conduct of the chief
magistrate, for some purpose very different from the public good.

They endeavor in vain to elude this inference by saying, that the
proclamation places France upon an equal footing with her enemies; while our
treaties require distinctions in her favor, and our relative situation would
dictate kind offices to her, which ought not to be granted to her adversaries.

They are not ignorant, that the proclamation is reconcilable with both those
objects, as far as they have any foundation in truth or propriety.

It has been shown, that the promise of a "friendly and impartial conduct"
toward all the belligerent powers is not inconsistent with the performance of
any stipulations in our treaties, which would not include our becoming an
associate in the war; and it has been observed, that the conduct of the
executive, in regard to the seventeenth and twenty-second articles of the
treaty of commerce, is an unequivocal comment upon those terms. The expressions
indeed were naturally to be understood with the exception of those matters of
positive compact, which would not amount to taking part in the war; for a
nation then observes a friendly and impartial conduct, toward two contending
powers, when it only performs to one of them what it is obliged to do by the
positive stipulations of antecedent treaties; those stipulations not amounting
to a participation in the war.

Neither do those expressions imply, that the United States will not exercise
their discretion, in doing kind offices to some of the parties, without
extending them to the others; so long as those offices have no relation to war:
For kind offices of that description may, consistently with neutrality, be
shown to one party and refused to another.

If the objectors mean, that the United States ought to favor France, in
things relating to war, and where they are not bound to do it by treaty; they
must in this case also abandon their pretension of being friends to peace. For
such a conduct would be a violation of neutrality, which could not fail to
produce war.

It follows then that the proclamation is reconcilable with all that those who
censure it contend for; taking them upon their own ground, that nothing is to
be done incompatible with the preservation of peace.

But though this would be a sufficient answer to the objection under
consideration; yet it may not be without use to indulge some reflections on
this very favorite topic of gratitude to France; since it is at this shrine we
are continually invited to sacrifice the true interests of the country; as if
"all, for love and the world well lost" were a fundamental maxim in politics.

Faith and justice between nations are virtues of a nature sacred and
unequivocal. They cannot be too strongly inculcated, nor too highly respected.
Their obligations are definite and positive, their utility unquestionable; they
relate to objects, which with probity and sincerity generally admit of being
brought within clear and intelligible rules.

But the same cannot be said of gratitude. It is not very often, between
nations, that it can be pronounced with certainty, that there exists a solid
foundation for the sentiment -- and how far it can justifiably be permitted to
operate is always a question of still greater difficulty.

The basis of gratitude is a benefit received or intended, which there was no
right to claim, originating in a regard to the interest or advantage of the
party, on whom the benefit is, or is meant to be conferred. If a service is
rendered from views relative to the immediate interest of the party, who
renders it, and is productive of reciprocal advantages, there seems scarcely in
such a case to be an adequate basis for a sentiment like that of gratitude. The
effect would be disproportioned to the cause, if such a service ought to beget
more than a disposition to render in turn a correspondent good office, founded
on mutual interest and reciprocal advantage. But gratitude would require more
than this; it would require, to a certain extent, even a sacrifice of the
interest of the party obliged, to the service or benefit of the party by whom
the obligation had been conferred.

Between individuals, occasion is not unfrequently given to the exercise of
gratitude. Instances of conferring benefits, from kind and benevolent
dispositions or feelings toward the person benefited, without any other
interest on the part of the person who confers the benefit, than the pleasure
of doing a good action, occur every day among individuals. But among nations
they perhaps never occur. It may be affirmed as a general principle, that the
predominant motive of good offices from one nation to another is the interest
or advantage of the nation which performs them.

Indeed the rule of morality is in this respect nor exactly the same between
nations as between individuals. The duty of making its own welfare the guide of
its actions is much stronger upon the former than upon the latter, in
proportion to the greater magnitude and importance of national compared with
individual happiness, to the greater permanency of the effects of national than
of individual conduct. Existing millions, and for the most part future
generations are concerned in the present measures of a government: -- while the
consequences of the private actions of an individual, for the most part
terminate with himself, or are circumscribed within a narrow compass.

Whence it follows, that an individual may on numerous occasions meritoriously
indulge the emotions of generosity and benevolence, not only without an eye to,
but even at the expense of, his own interest. But a government can rarely, if
at all, be justifiable in pursuing a similar course; and if it does so ought to
confine itself within much stricter bounds This conclusion derives confirmation
from the reflection, that under every form of government Rulers are only
Trustees for the happiness and interest of their nation, and cannot,
consistently with their trust, follow the suggestions of kindness or humanity
toward others, to the prejudice of their constituent.
Good offices which are indifferent to the interest of a nation performing
them, or which are compensated by the existence or expectation of some
reasonable equivalent -- or which produce an essential good to the nation to
which they are rendered, without real detriment to the affairs of the nation
rendering them, prescribe the limits of national generosity or benevolence.

It is not meant here to advocate a policy absolutely selfish or interested in
nations; but to show, that a policy regulated by their own interest, as far as
justice and good faith permit, is, and ought to be their prevailing one; and
that either to ascribe to them a different principle of action, or to deduce
from the supposition of it arguments for a self-denying and self-sacrificing
gratitude on the part of a nation, which may have received from another good
offices, is to misconceive or mistake what usually are and ought to be the
springs of national conduct.

These general reflections will be auxiliary to a just estimate of our real
situation with regard to France: of which a closer view will be taken in a
succeeding paper.

No. V.
FRANCE, the rival, time immemorial, of Great Britain, had in the course of the
war, which ended in 1763, suffered from the successful arms of the latter the
severest losses and the most mortifying defeats. Britain from that moment had
acquired an ascendant over France in the affairs of Europe, and in the commerce
of the world, too decided to be endured without impatience, or without an eager
desire of finding a favorable opportunity to destroy it, and repair the breach
which had been made in the national glory. The animosity of wounded pride
conspired with calculations of the interest of the state to give a keen edge to
that impatience and to that desire.

The American revolution offered the occasion. It attracted early the notice of
France, though with extreme circumspection. As far as countenance and aid may
be presumed to have been given prior to the epoch of the acknowledgment of our
independence, it will be no unkind derogation to assert, that they were marked
neither with liberality nor with vigor; that they wore the appearance rather
of a desire to keep alive disturbances, which would embarrass a rival power,
than of a serious design to assist a revolution, or a serious expectation that
it would be effected.

The victories of Saratoga, the capture of an army, which went a great way
toward deciding the issue of the contest, decided also the hesitations of
France. They established in the government of that country a confidence of our
ability to accomplish our purpose, and as a consequence of it produced the
treaties of alliance and commerce.

It is impossible to see in all this any thing more than the conduct of a rival
nation, embracing a most promising opportunity to repress the pride and
diminish the dangerous power of its rival, by seconding a successful resistance
to its authority, and by lopping off a valuable portion of its dominions. The
dismemberment of this country from Great Britain was an obvious and a very
important interest of France. It cannot be doubted, that it was the determining
motive and an adequate compensation for the assistance afforded us.

Men of sense, in this country, deduced an encouragement to the part which
their zeal for liberty prompted them to take in our revolution, from the
probability of the cooperation of France and Spain. It will be remembered,
that this argument was used in the publications of the day; but upon what was
it bottomed? Upon the known competition between those powers and Great Britain,
upon their evident interest to reduce her power and circumscribe her empire;
not upon motives of regard to our interest, or of attachment to our cause.
Whoever should have alleged the latter, as grounds of the expectation held out,
would have been then justly considered as a visionary or a deceiver. And
whoever shall now ascribe the aid we received to such motives would not deserve
to be viewed in a better light.

The inference from these facts is not obscure. Aid and cooperation founded
upon a great interest, pursued and obtained by the party affording them, is not
a proper stock upon which to engraft that enthusiastic gratitude, which is
claimed from us, by those who love France more than the United States.

This view of the subject, extorted by the extravagancy of such a claim, is not
meant to disparage the just pretensions of France upon our good will. Though
neither in the motives to the succors which she furnished us, nor in their
extent (considering how powerfully the point of honor in such a war reinforced
the considerations of interest when she was once engaged) can be found a
sufficient basis for that gratitude which is the theme of so much declamation:
Yet we shall find in the manner of affording us those succors just cause for
our esteem and friendship.

France did not attempt, in the first instance, to take advantage of our
situation to extort from us any humiliating or injurious concessions, as the
price of her assistance; nor afterward in the progress of the war, to impose
hard terms as the condition of particular aids.

Though this course was certainly dictated by policy; yet it was an honorable
and a magnanimous policy; such a one as always constitutes a title to the
approbation and esteem of mankind; and a claim to the friendship and
acknowledgement of the party, in whose favor it is practiced.

But these sentiments are satisfied on the part of a nation, when they produce
sincere wishes for the happiness of the party from whom it has experienced such
conduct, and a cordial disposition to render all good and friendly offices,
which can be rendered without prejudice to its own solid and permanent
interests.

To ask of a nation so situated, to make a sacrifice of substantial interest;
to expose itself to the jealousy, ill will, or resentment of the rest of the
world; to hazard, in art eminent degree, its own safety, for the benefit of the
party who may have observed toward it the conduct which has been described --
would be to ask more than the nature of the case demands, more than the
fundamental maxims of society authorize, more than the dictates of found reason
justify.

A question has arisen, with regard to the proper object of that gratitude,
which is so much insisted upon; whether the unfortunate Prince by whom the
assistance received was given; or the nation of whom he was the chief or the
organ. In interests the national justice to form right conceptions on this
point.

The arguments which support the latter idea are as follow.

"Louis the XVI. was but the constitutional agent of the French nation. He
acted for and on behalf of the nation; 'twas with their money and their blood
he supported our cause. It Is to them therefore, not to him, that our
obligations are due. Louis the XVI. in taking our part, was no doubt actuated
by state policy. An absolute prince could not love liberty. But the people of
France patronised our cause with zeal, from sympathy in its object. The people
therefore, not its monarch, are entitled to our sympathy."

This reasoning may be ingenious, but it is not founded in nature or fact.

Louis the XVI. though no more than the constitutional agent of the nation, had
at the time the sole power of managing its affairs, the legal right of
directing its will and its forces. It belonged to him to assist us, or not,
without consulting the nation; and he did assist us without such consultation.
His will alone was active; that of the nation passive. If there was any
kindness in the decision, demanding a return of kindness from us, it was the
kindness of Louis XVI.; his heart was the depository of the sentiment. Let the
genuine voice of nature then, unperverted by political subtleties, pronounce
whether the acknowledgment, which may be due for that kindness, can be
equitably transferred from him to others, who had no share in the decision.
Whether the principle of gratitude ought to determine us to behold with
indifference his misfortunes, and with satisfaction the triumphs of his enemies.

The doctrine, that the prince is only the organ of his nation, is conclusive
to enforce the obligations of good faith between nation and nation; in other
words, the observance of duties stipulated in treaties for national purposes --
and it will even suffice to continue to a nation a claim to the friendship and
good will of another, resulting from friendly offices done by its prince; but
it would be to carry it too far and to render it too artifical, to attribute to
it the effect of transferring that claim from the prince to the nation, by way
of opposition and contrast. Friendship, good will, gratitude for favors
received, have so inseparable a reference to the motives with which, and to the
persons by whom they were rendered, as to be incapable of being transferred to
another at his expense.

But Louis XVI. it is said, acted from reasons of state without regard to our
cause; while the people of France patronised it with zeal and attachment.

As far as the assertion with regard to the monarch is founded, and is an
objection to our gratitude to him, it destroys the whole frabric of gratitude
to France: For our gratitude is, and must be, relative to the services rendered
us. The nation can only claim it on the score of their having been rendered by
their agent with their means. If the views with which he rendered them divested
them of that merit which ought to inspire gratitude -- none is due. The nation
no more than their agent can claim it.

As to the individual good wishes of the citizens of France, as they did not
produce the services rendered to us as a nation, they can be no foundation for
national gratitude. They can only call for a reciprocation of individual good
wishes. They cannot form the basis of public obligation.

But the assertion takes more for granted than there is reason to believe true.

Louis the XVI. no doubt took part in our contest from reasons of state; but
Louis the XVI. was a humane kind-hearted man. The acts of his early youth had
entitled him to this character. It is natural for a man of such a disposition
to become interested in the cause of those whom he protects or aids: and if the
concurrent testimony of the period may be credited, there was no man in France
more personaily friendly to the cause of this country than Louis the XVI. I am
much misinformed if repeated declarations of the venerable Franklin did not
attest this fact.

It is a just tribute to the people of France to admit, that they manifested a
lively interest in the cause of America; but while motives are scanned, who can
say how much of it is to be ascribed to the antipathy which they bore to their
rival neighbors; how much to their sympathy in the object of our pursuit? It
is certain that the love of liberty was not a national sentiment in France,
when a zeal for our cause first appeared among that people.

There is reason to believe too, that the attachment to our cause, which
ultimately became very extensive, if not general, did not originate with the
mass of the French people. It began with the circles more immediately connected
with the government, and was thence diffused through the nation.

This observation, besides its tendency to correct ideas, which are calculated
to give a false direction to the public feeling, may serve to check the spirit
of illiberal invective, which has been wantonly indulged against those
distinguished friends of America, who, though the authors of the French
revolution, have fallen victims to it; because their principles would not
permit them to go the length of an entire subversion of the monarchy.

The preachers of gratitude are not ashamed to brand Louis the XVI, as a
tyrant, and La Fayette as a traitor. But how can we wonder at this, when they
insinuate a distrust even of a --!!!

In urging the friendly disposition to our cause, manifested by the people of
France, as a motive to our gratitude toward that people, it ought not to be
forgotten, that those dispositions were not confined to the inhabitants of that
country. They were eminently shared by the people of the United Provinces,
produced to us valuable pecuniary aids from their citizens, and eventually
involved them in the war on the same side with us. It may be added too, that
here the patronage of our cause emphatically began with the community, not
originating as in France with the government, but finally implicating the
government in the consequences.

Our cause had also numerous friends in other countries; even in that with
which we were at war. -- Conducted with prudence, moderation, justice, and
humanity, it may be said to have been a popular cause among mankind,
conciliating the countenances of princes, and the affection of nations.

The dispositions of the individual citizens of France can therefore in no
sense be urged as constituting a peculiar claim to our gratitude. As far as
there is foundation for it, it must be referred to the services rendered to us;
and, in the first instance, to the unfortunate monarch that rendered them. This
is the conclusion of nature and reason.

A further view of this subject is reserved for another paper.

No. VI.
THE very men who not long since, with a holy zeal, would have been glad to
make an auto de fe of any one who should have presumed to assign bounds to our
obligations to Louis the XVI. are now ready to consign to the flames those who
venture even to think, that he died a proper object of our sympathy or regret.
The greatest pains are taken to excite against him our detestation. His
supposed perjuries and crimes are founded in the public ear, with all the
exaggerations of intemperate declaiming. All the unproved and contradicted
allegations which have been brought against him are taken for granted, as the
oracles of truth, on no better grounds than the mere general presumptions --
that he could not have been a friend to a revolution which stripped him of so
much power -- that it is not likely the Convention would have pronounced him
guilty, and consigned him to so ignominious a fate, if he had been really
innocent.

It is very possible that time may disclose facts and proofs, which will
substantiate the guilt imputed to Louis: but these facts and proofs have not
yet been authenticated to the world; and justice admonishes us to wait for
their production and authentication.

Those who have most closely attended to the course of the transaction, find
least cause to be convinced of the criminality of the deceased monarch. While
his counsel, whose characters give weight to their assertions, with an air of
confcious truth, boldly appeal to facts and proofs, in the knowledge and
possession of the Convention, for the refutation of the charges thought against
him -- the members of that body, in all the debates upon the subject which have
reached this country, either directly from France, or circuitously through
England, appear to have contented themselves with assuming the existence of the
facts charged, and inferring from them a criminality which, after the abolition
of the royalty, they were interested to establish.

The presumptions of guilt drawn from the suggestions which have been stated,
are more than counterbalanced by an opposite presumption, which is too obvious
not to have occurred to many, though I do not recollect yet to have met with it
in print. -- It is this:

If the Convention had possessed clear evidence of the guilt of Louis, they
would have promulgated it to the world in an authentic and unquestionable
shape. Respect for the opinion of mankind, regard for their own character, the
interest of their cause, made this an indispensible duty; nor can the omission
be satisfactorily ascribed to any other reason, than the want of such evidence.

The inference from this is, that the melancholy catastrophe of Louis XVI. was
the result of a supposed political expediency, rather than of real criminality.

In a case so circumstanced, does it, can it consist with our justice or our
humanity, to partake in the angry and vindictive passions which are endeavored
to be excited against the unfortunate monarch? Was it a crime in him to have
been born a Prince? Could this circumstance forfeit his title to the
commiseration due to his misfortunes as a man?

Would gratitude dictate to a people, situated as are the people of this
country, to lend their aid to extend to the son the misfortunes of the father?
Should we not be more certain of violating no obligation of that kind -- of not
implicating the delicacy of our national character -- by taking no part in the
contest -- than by throwing our weight into either scale?

Would not a just estimate of the origin and progress of our relations to
France, viewed with reference to the mere question of gratitude, lead us to
this result -- that we ought not to take part against the son and successor of
a father, on whose sole will depended the assistance which we received -- that
we ought not to take part with him against the nation, whose blood and whose
treasure had been in the hands of the father, the means of the assistance
afforded us?

But we are sometimes told, by way of answer, that the cause of France is the
cause of Liberty; and that we are bound to assist the nation on the score of
their being engaged in the defense of that cause. How far this idea ought to
carry us, will be the subject of future examination.

It is only necessary here to observe, that it presents a question essentially
different from that which has been in discussion. If we are bound to assist the
French nation, on the principle of their being emed in the defense of liberty,
this is a ground altogether foreign to that of gratitude. Gratitude has
reference only to kind offices received. The obligation to assist the cause of
liberty, has reference to the merits of that cause, and to the interest we have
in its support. It is possible, that the benefactor may be on one side -- the
defenders and supporters of liberty on the other. Gratitude may point one way
-- the love of liberty another. It is therefore important to just conclusions,
not to confound the two things.

A sentiment of justice more than the importance of the question itself, has
led to so particular a discussion respecting the proper object of whatever
acknowledgment may be due from the United States, for the aid which they
received from France during their own revolution.

The extent of the obligation which it may impose is by far the most
interesting enquiry. And though it is presumed, that enough has been already
said, to evince, that it does in no degree require us to embark in the war; yet
there is another, and a very simple view of the subject, which is too
convincing to be omitted.

The assistance lent us by France was afforded by a great and powerful nation,
possessing numerous armies, a respectable fleet, and the means of rendering it
a match for the force to be contended with. -- The position of Europe was
favorable to the enterprise; a general disposition prevailing to see the power
of Great Britain abridged. -- The cooperation of Spain was very much a matter
of course, and the probability of other powers becoming engaged on the same
side not remote. -- Great Britain was alone and likely to continue so -- France
had a great and persuasive interest in the separation of this country from
Britain. In this situation, with much to hope and not much to fear, she took
part in our quarrel.

France is at this time singly engaged with the greatest part of Europe,
including all the first rate powers, except one, and in danger of being engaged
with all the rest. To use the emphatic language of a member of the National
Convention -- she has but one enemy, and that is all Europe. Her internal
affairs are without doubt in serious disorder. -- Her navy comparatively
inconsiderable. The United States are a young nation; their population, though
rapidly increasing, still small -- their resources, though growing, not great;
without armies, without fleets -- capable, from the nature of the country and
the spirit of its inhabitants, of immense exertions for self-defence, but
little capable of those external efforts which could materially serve the cause
of France. So far from having any direct interest in going to war, they have
the strongest motives of interest to avoid it. By embarking with France in the
war, they would have incomparably more to apprehend, than to hope.

This contrast of situations and inducements is alone a conclusive
demonstration, that the United States are not under an obligation, from
gratitude, to join France in the war. The utter disparity between the
circumstances of the service to be rendered, and of the service received,
proves that the one cannot be an adequate basis of obligation for the other.
There would be a want of equality, and consequently of reciprocity.

But complete justice would not be done to this question of gratitude, were no
notice to be taken of the address, which has appeared in the public papers (the
authenticity of which has not been impeached) from the Convention of France to
the United States; announcing the appointment of the present Minister
Plenipotentiary. In that address the Convention informs us, that "the support
which the ancient French Court had afforded the United States to recover their
independence, was only the fruit of a base speculation: and that their glory
offended its ambitions views, and the ambassadors of France bore the criminal
orders of stopping the career of their prosperity."

If this information is to be admitted in the full force of the terms it is
very fatal to the claim of gratitude toward France. An observation similar to
one made in a former paper occurs here. If the organ of the nation, on whose
will the aid given us depended, acted not only from motives irrelative to our
advantage, but from unworthy motives, or as it is stated, from a base
speculation -- if afterward he displayed a temper hostile to the confirmation
of our security and prosperity, he acquired no title to our gratitude in the
first instance, or he forfeited it in the second. And the nation of France, who
can only claim it in virtue of the conduct of their agent, must together with
him renounce the pretension. It is an obvious principle, that if a nation can
claim merit from the good deeds of its sovereign, it must answer for the
demerit of his misdeeds. The rule to be a good one, must apply both ways.

But some deductions are to be made from the suggestions contained in the
address of the Convention, in reference to the motives which evidently dictated
the communication. Their zeal to alienate the good will of this country from
the late monarch, and to increase the odium of the French nation against the
monarcy, which was so ardent as to make them overlook the tendency of their
communication, to disarm their (...) among us of the plea of gratitude, may
justly be suspected of exaggeration.

The truth probably is that the base speculation charged, amounts to nothing
more than that the government of France, in affording us assistance, was
directed by the motives which have been attributed to it, namely, the desire of
promoting the interest of France by (...) the power of Great Britain, and
opening a new channel of commerce to herself -- that the orders said to have
been given to the Ambassadors of France to stop the career of our prosperity
are resolvable into a speculative jealousy of the ministers of the day, left
the United States, by becoming as powerful and great as they are capable of
becoming under an efficient government, might prove formidable to the European
possessions in America. With these qualifications and allowances, the address
offers no new discovery to the intelligent and unbiassed friends of their
country. They knew long ago that the interest of France had been the governing
motive of the aid afforded; and they saw clearly enough, in the conversation
and conduct of her agents, while the present constitution of the United States
was under consideration, that the government of which they were the
instruments, would have preferred our remaining under the old form for the
reason which has been stated. They received also, that these views had their
effect upon some of the devoted partisans of France among ourselves, as they
now perceive, that the same characters are embodying themselves with all the
aid they can obtain, under the (...) influence, to resist the (...) of that
government of which they (...) the establishment.

All this was and is seen, and the body of the people of America are too
discerning to be long in the dark about it. Too wise to have been misled by
foreign or domestic machinations, they adopted a constitution which was
necessary to their safety and to their happiness. Too wise still to be ensnared
by the same (...), they will support the government they have established, and
will take care of their own peace, in spite of the insidious efforts which are
making to detach them from the one, and to disturb the other.

The information which the address of the Convention contains, ought to serve
as an instructive lesson to the people of this country. It ought to teach us
not to over-rate foreign friendships -- to be upon our guard against foreign
attachments. The former will generally be found hollow and delusive; the latter
will have a natural tendency to lead us aside from our own true interest, and
to make us the dupes of foreign influence. They introduce a principle of
action, which in its effects, if the expression may be allowed, is
anti-national. Foreign influence is truly the Grecian Horse to a republic. We
cannot be too careful to exclude its entrance. Nor ought we to imagine, that it
can only make its approaches in the gross form of direct bribery. It is then
most dangerous, when it comes under the patronage of our passions, under the
auspices of national prejudice and partiality.

I trust the morals of this country are yet too good to leave much to apprehend
on the score of bribery. Caresses, condescentions, flattery, in unison with our
prepossessions, are infinitely more to be feared; and as far as there is
opportunity for corruption, it is to be remembered, that one foreign power can
employ this resource as well as another, and that the effect must be much
greater, when it is combined with the other means of influence, than where it
stands alone.

No. VII.
THE remaining objection to the Proclamation of neutrality, still to be
discussed, is that it was out of time and unnecessary.

To give color to this objection it is asked -- why did not the Proclamation
appear when the war commenced with Austria and Prussia? why was it forborne,
till Great Britain, Holland and Spain became engaged? why did not the
government wait till the arrival at Philadelphia of the Minister of the French
Republic? why did it volunteer a declaration not required of it by any of the
belligerent parties?

To most of these questions solid answers have already appeared in the public
prints. Little more can be done than to repeat and enforce them.

Austria and Prussia are not maritime powers. Contraventions of neutrality as
against them were not likely to take place to any extent, or in a shape that
would attract their notice. It would therefore have been useless, if not
ridiculous, to have made a formal declaration on the subject, while they were
the only parties opposed to France.

But the reverse of this is the case with regard to Spain, Holland and England.
-- These are all commercial maritime nations. It was to be expected, that their
attention would be immediately drawn toward the United States, with
sensibility and even with jealousy. It was to be feared, that some of our
citizens might be tempted by the prospect of gain to go into measures, which
would injure them and commit the peace of the country. Attacks by some of these
powers upon the possessions of France in America were to be looked for as a
matter of course. While the view of the United States as to that particular,
were problematical, they would naturally consider us as a power that might
become their enemy. This they would have been the more apt to do, on account of
those public demonstrations of attachment to the cause of France, of which
there has been so great a display. Jealousy, every body knows, especially if
sharpened by resentment, is apt to lead to ill treatment; ill treatment to
hostility.

In proportion to the probability of our being regarded with a suspicious and
consequently an unfriendly eye, by the powers at war with France; in proportion
to the danger of imprudencies being committed by any of our citizens, which
might occasion a rupture with them -- the policy on the part of the government,
of removing all doubt as to its own disposition, and of deciding the condition
of the United States, in the view of the parties concerned, became obvious and
urgent.

Were the United States now what, if we do not rashly throw away the advantages
we possess, they may expect to be in fifteen or twenty years, there would have
been more room for an insinuation which has been thrown out -- namely, that
they ought to have secured to themselves some advantage, as the consideration
of their neutrality; an idea, however, of which the justice and magnanimity
cannot be commended. But in their present situation, with their present
strength and resources, an attempt of that kind could have only served to
display pretensions at once excessive and unprincipled. The chance of obtaining
any collateral advantage, if such a chance there was, by leaving a doubt upon
our intentions, as to peace or war, could not wisely have been put for a single
instant in competition with the tendency of a contrary conduct to secure our
peace.

The conduciveness of the declaration of neutrality to that end was not the
only recommendation to the adoption of the measure. It was of great importance
that our own citizens should understand, as soon as possible, the opinion which
the government entertained of the nature of our relations to the warring
parties, and of the propriety or expediency of our taking a side or remaining
neuter. The arrangements of our merchants could not but be very differently
affected, by the one hypothesis or the other; and it would necessarily have
been very detrimental and perplexing to them to have been left in uncertainty.
It is not requisite to say how much our agriculture and other interests would
have been likely to have suffered by embarrassments to our merchants.

The idea of its having been incumbent on the government to delay the measure
for the coming of the minister of the French Republic, is as absurd as it is
humiliating. Did the executive stand in need of the logic of a foreign agent to
enlighten it as to the duties or interests of the nation? or was it bound to
ask his consent to a step which appeared to itself consistent with the former
and conducive to the latter?

The sense of our treaties was to be learnt from the treaties themselves. It
was not difficult to pronounce beforehand, that we had a greater interest in
the preservation of peace, than in any advantages with which France might tempt
our participation in the war -- Commercial privileges were all that she could
offer of real value in our estimation, and a carle blanch on this head would
have been an inadequate recompense for renouncing peace and committing
ourselves voluntarily to the chances of so precarious and perilous a war.
Besides, if the privileges which might have been conceded were not founded in a
real permanent mutual interest, of what value would be the treaty that should
concede them? ought not the calculation, in such case, to be upon a speedy
resumption of them, with, perhaps, a quarrel as the pretext? on the other hand,
may we not trust that commercial privileges which are truly founded in mutual
interest will grow out of that interest; without the necessity of giving a
premium for them at the expense of our peace?

To what purpose then was the executive to have waited for the arrival of the
minister? was it to give opportunity to contentious discussions -- to
intriguing machinations -- to the clamours of a faction won to a foreign
interest?

Whether the declaration of neutrality issued upon or without the requisition
of any of the belligerent powers, can only be known to their respective
ministers and to the proper officers of our government. But if it be true that
it issued without any such requisition, it is an additional indication of the
wisdom of the measure.

It is of much importance to the end of preserving peace, that the belligerent
powers should be thoroughly convinced of the sincerity of our intentions to
observe the neutrality we profess; and it cannot fail to have weight in
producing this conviction that the declaration of it was a (...) act -- not
stimulated by any requisition on the part of either of them -- proceeding
purely from our own view of our duty and interest.

It was not surely necessary for the government to wait for such a requisition;
while there were advantages and no disadvantages in anticipating it. The
benefit of an early notification to our merchants, conspired with the
consideration just mentioned to recommend the course which was pursued.

If in addition to the rest, the early manifestation of the views of the
government has had any effect in fixing the public opinion on the subject, and
in counteracting the success of the efforts, which, it was to be foreseen would
be made to disunite it, this alone would be a great recommendation of the
policy of having suffered no delay to intervene.

What has been already said in this and in preceding papers, affords a full
answer to the suggestion, that the proclamation was unnecessary. It would be a
waste of time to add any thing more.

But there has been a criticism several times repeated, which may deserve a
moment's attention. It has been urged, that the proclamation ought to have
contained some reference to our treaties, and that the generality of the
promise to observe a conduct friendly and impartial toward the belligerent
powers, ought to have been qualified with expressions equivalent to these --
"as far as may consist with the treaties of the United States."

The insertion of such a clause would have entirely defeated the object of the
proclamation, by rendering the intention of the government equivocal. That
object was to assure the powers at war and our own citizens, that in the
opinion of the executive, it was consistent with the duty and interest of the
nation to observe a neutrality in the war, and that it was intended to pursue a
conduct corresponding with that opinion. Words equivalent to those contended
for, would have rendered the other part of the declaration nugatory; by leaving
it uncertain, whether, the executive did or did not believe a state of
neutrality to be consistent with our treaties. Neither foreign powers nor our
own citizens would have been able to have drawn any conclusion from the
proclamation, and both would have had a right to consider it as a mere
equivocation.

By not inserting any such ambiguous expressions, the proclamation was
susceptible of an intelligible and proper construction. While it denoted on the
one hand, that in the judgment of the executive, there was nothing in our
treaties obliging us to become a party in the war, it left it to be expected on
the other -- that all stipulations compatible with neutrality, according to the
laws and usages of nations, would be enforced. It follows, that the
proclamation was, in this particular, exactly what it ought to have been.

The words, "make known the disposition of the United States," have also given
a handle to cavil. It has been asked, how could the President undertake to
declare the disposition of the United States? The people, for aught he knew,
may have been in a very different sentiment -- Thus a conformity with
republican propriety and modesty, is turned into a topic of accusation.

Had the President announced his own disposition, he would have been chargeable
with egotism, if not presumption. The constitutional organ of intercourse
between the United States and foreign nations -- whenever he speaks to them, it
is in that capacity: it is in the name, and on behalf of, the United States. It
must therefore be with greater propriety, that he speaks of their disposition
than of his own.

It is easy to imagine, that occasions frequently occur in the communications
to foreign governments and foreign agents, which render it necessary to speak
of the friendship or friendly disposition of the United States, of their
disposition to cultivate harmony and good understanding, to reciprocate
neighbourly offices, etc. etc. -- It is usual, for example, when public
ministers are received, for some complimentary expressions to be interchanged.
It is presumable, that the late reception of the French minister did not pass,
without some assurance on the part of the President, of the friendly
disposition of the United States toward France. Admitting it to have happened,
would it be deemed an improper arrogation? if not, why was it more so, to
declare the disposition of the United States to observe a neutrality in the
existing war?

In all such cases, nothing more is to be understood than an official
expression of the political disposition of the nation inferred from its
political relations, obligations and interests. It is never to be supposed,
that the expression is meant to convey the precise state of the individual
sentiments or opinions of the great mass of the people.

Kings and Princes speak of their own dispositions. The magistrates of
republics, of the dispositions of their nations. The President therefore, has
evidently used the style adapted to his situation, and the criticism upon it is
plainly a cavil.

PACIFICUS.

THE END.
JUST PUBLISHED BY SAMUEL H. SMITH, No. 118, Chesnut-Street, POLITICAL TRUTH:
OR, Animadversions on the PAST and PRESENT state of Public Affairs;

With an Inquiry into the TRUTH of the Charges preferred against MR. RANDOLPH.

-- Price 25 Cents. --

CHARGE OF JUDGE PATERSON, In the WYOMING Cause.

-- Price 25 Cents. --


