A FATHER's LEGACY TO HIS DAUGHTERS. BY DR. GREGORY. TO WHICH IS ADDED A
COLLECTION OF THOUGHTS ON CIVIL MORAL AND RELIGIOUS SUBJECTS, CALCULATED TO
IMPROVE THE MINDS OF BOTH SEXES.

"Wisdom to gold prefer, for it is much less
To make your fortune, than your happiness."
Second Edition.

WORCESTER Massachusetts, PRINTED BY ISAIAH THOMAS, JUN. And sold WHOLESALE and
RETAIL at his BOOK SHOPE. -- APRIL, 1796. --

PREFACE.
THAT the subsequent letters were written by a tender father, in a declining
state of health, for the instruction of his daughters, and not intended for the
public, is a circumstance which will recommend them to every one who considers
them in the light of admonition and advice. In such domestic intercourse, no
sacrifices are made to prejudices, to customs, to fashionable opinions.
Paternal love, paternal care, speak their genuine sentiments, undisguised and
unrestrained. A father's zeal for his daughters' improvement, in whatever can
make a woman amiable, with a father's quick apprehension of the dangers that
too often arise, even from the attainment of that very point suggest his
admonitions, and render him attentive to a thousand little graces and little
(...) which would escape the nicest moralist who should undertake the subject
on uninterested speculation. Every faculty is on the alarm, when the objects of
such tender affection are concerned.

In the writer of these letters paternal tenderness and vigilance were doubled,
as he was at that time sole parent, death having before deprived the young
ladies of their excellent mother. His own precarious state of health inspired
him with the most tender solicitude for their future welfare; and though he
might have concluded that the impression made by his instruction and uniform
example could never be effaced from the memory of his children, yet his anxiety
for their orphan condition suggested to him this method of continuing to them
those advantages.

The Editor is encouraged to offer this treatise to the public, by the very
favorable reception which the rest of his father's works have met with. The
comparative view of the state of man and other animals, and the essay on the
office and duties of a physician, have been very generally read; and, if he is
not deceived by the partiality of his friends, he has reason to believe they
have met with general approbation.

In some of those tracts the author's object was to improve the taste and
understanding of his reader; in others, to mend his heart; in others to point
out to him the proper use of philosophy, by showing its application to the
duties of common life. In all his writings his chief view was the good of his
fellow creatures; and as those among his friends, in whose taste and judgment
he most confided, think the publication of this work will contribute to that
general design, and at the same time do honor to his memory, the editor can no
longer hesitate to comply with their advice in communicating it to the public.

CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION, Page 9 RELIGION, Page 14 CONDUCT and BEHAVIOR, Page 25
AMUSEMENTS, Page 38 FRIENDSHIP, LOVE, MARRIAGE, Page 48 CHASTITY, Page 91
CHEERFULNESS, Page 93 COMPANY, Page 95 CONTENTMENT, Page 96 CHARITY, Page 97
CONVERSATION, Page 98 DEATH, Page 99 FRIENDSHIP, Page 101 GRATITUDE, Page 103
HONESTY, Page 104 HONOR, Page 105 LOVE, Page 106 MARRIAGE, Page 107
OBLIGATIONS, Page 108 OATHS, Page 109 POVERTY, Page 110 PLEASURE, Page 111
PRIDE, Page 112 RICHES, Page 113 SENSIBILITY, Page 114 SECRECY, ibid SLANDER,
Page 115 TIME. Page 117
A FATHER's LEGACY TO HIS DAUGHTERS.
MY DEAR GIRLS,
YOU had the misfortune to be deprived of your mother, at a time of life when
you were insensible of your loss, and could receive little benefit, either from
her instruction, or her example. Before this comes to your hands, you will
likewise have lost your father.

I HAVE had many melancholy reflections on the forlorn and helpless situation
you must be in, if it should please God to remove me from you, before you
arrive at that period of life, when you will be able to think and act for
yourselves. I know mankind too well. I know their falsehoods, their
dissipations, their coldness to all the duties of friendship and humanity. I
know the little attention paid to helpless infancy. You will meet with few
friends disinterested enough to do you good offices, when you are incapable of
making them any return, by contributing to their interest, or their pleasure,
or even to the gratification of their vanity.

I HAVE been supported. under the gloom naturally arising from these
reflections, by a reliance on the goodness of that providence which has
hitherto preserved you, and given me the most pleasing prospect of the goodness
of your dispositions; and by the secret hope that your mother's virtues will
entail a blessing on her children.

THE anxiety I have for your happiness has made me resolve to throw together my
sentiments relating to your future conduct in life. If I live for some years,
you will receive them with much greater advantage, suited to your different
geniuses and dispositions. If I die sooner, you must receive them in this very
imperfect manner -- the last proof of my affection.

YOU will all remember your father's fondness, when perhaps every other
circumstance relating to him is forgotten; this remembrance, I hope, will
induce you to give a serious attention to the advices I am now going to leave
you. I can request this attention with the greater confidence, as my sentiments
on the most interesting points that regard life and manners, were entirely
correspondent to your mother's, whose judgment and taste I trusted much more
than my own.

YOU must expect that the advices which I shall give you will be very
imperfect, as there are many nameless delicacies, in female manners, of which
none but a woman can judge -- You will have one advantage by attending to what
I am going to leave with you; you will hear, at least for once in your lives,
the genuine sentiments of a man who has no interest in flattering or deceiving
you. I shall throw my reflections together, without any studied order, and
shall only, to avoid confusion, range them under a few general heads.

YOU will see, in a little treatise of mine just published, in what an
honorable point of view I have considered your sex; not as domestic drudges, or
the slaves of our pleasures, but as our companions and equals; as designed to
soften our hearts and polish our manners; and as Thompson finely says, "To
raise the virtues, animate the bliss,
"And sweeten all the toils of human life.


I SHALL not repeat what I have there said on this subject, and shall only
observe, that from the view I have given of your natural character and place in
society, there arises a certain propriety of conduct peculiar to your sex. It
is this peculiar propriety of manners of which I intend to give you my
sentiments, without touching on these general rules of conduct, by which men
and women are equally bound.

WHILE I explain to you that system of conduct which I think will tend most to
your honor and happiness, I shall, at the same time, endeavor to point out
those virtues and accomplishments which render you most respectable and most
amiable in the eyes of my own sex.

RELIGION.
THOUGH the duties of religion, strictly speaking, are equally binding on both
sexes, yet certain differences, in their natural character and education,
render some vices in your sex particularly odious. The natural hardness of our
hearts, and strength of our passions inflamed by the uncontrouled license we
are too often indulged with in our youth, are apt to render our manners
dissolute, and make us less susceptible of the finer feelings of the heart.
Your superior delicacy, your modesty, and the usual severity of your education,
preserve you in a measure from any temptation to those vices to which we are
most subjected. The natural softness and sensibility of your dispositions
particularly fit you for the practice of those duties where the heart is
chiefly concerned. And this along with the natural warmth of your imagination,
renders you peculiarly susceptible to the feelings of devotion.

THERE are many circumstances in your situation that peculiarly require the
support of religion to enable you to act in them with spirit and propriety.
Your whole life is often a life of suffering. You cannot plunge into business,
or dissipate yourself in pleasure and riot, as men too often do, when under the
pressure of misfortunes. You must bear your sorrows in silence, unknown and
unpitied. You must often put on a face of serenity and cheerfulness, when your
hearts are torn with anguish, or sinking in despair. Then your only resource is
in the consolations of religion. It is chiefly owing to these, that you bear
domestic misfortunes better than we do.

BUT you are sometimes in very different circumstances, that equally require
the restraints of religion. The natural vivacity, and perhaps the natural
vanity of your sex, is very apt to lead you into a dissipated state of life
that deceives you, under the appearance of innocent pleasure, but which in
reality wastes your spirits, impairs your health, weakens all the superior
faculties of your minds, and often sullies your reputations. Religion, by
checking this dissipation and rage for pleasure, enables you to draw more
happiness, even from those very sources of amusement, which, when too
frequently applied to, are often productive of satiety and disgust.

RELIGION is rather a matter of sentiment than reasoning. The important and
interesting articles of faith are sufficiently plain. Fix your attention on
these, and do not meddle with controversy. If you get into that, you plunge
into a chaos, from which you will never be able to extricate yourselves. It
spoils the temper, and I suspect, has no good effect on the heart.

AVOID all books, and all conversation, that tend to shake your faith on those
great points of religion which should serve to regulate your conduct, and on
which your hopes of future and eternal happiness depend.

NEVER indulge yourselves in ridicule on religious subjects; nor give
countenance to it in others, by seeming diverted with what they say. This, to
people of good breeding, will be a sufficient check.

I WISH you to go no farther than the scriptures for your religious opinions.
Embrace those you find clearly revealed. Never perplex yourselves about such as
you do not understand, but treat them with silent and becoming reverence. I
would advise you to read only such religious books as are addressed to the
heart, such as inspire pious and devout affections, such as are proper to
direct you in your conduct, and not such as tend to entangle you in the endless
maze of opinions and systems.

BE punctual in the stated performance of your private devotions, morning and
evening. If you have any sensibility or imagination, this will establish such
an intercourse between you and the supreme Being, as will be of infinite
consequence to you in life. It will communicate an habitual cheerfulness to
your tempers, give a firmness and steadiness to your virtue, and enable you to
go through all the vicissitudes of human life with propriety and dignity.

I WISH you to be regular in your attendance on public worship, and in
receiving the communion. Allow nothing to interupt your public or private
devotions, except the performance of some active duty in life, to which they
should always give place. In your behavior at public worship, observe an
exemplary attention and gravity.

THAT extreme strictness which I recommend to you in these duties, will be
considered by many of your acquaintance as a superstitious attachment to forms;
but in the advices I give you on this and other subjects, I have an eye to the
spirit and manners of the age. There is a levity and dissipation in the present
manners, a coldness and listlessness in whatever relates to religion, which
cannot fail to infect you, unless you purposely cultivate in your minds a
contrary bias, and make the devotional taste habitual.

AVOID all grimace and ostentation in your religious duties. They are the usual
cloaks of hypocrisy; at least they show a weak and vain mind.

DO not make religion a subject of common conversation in mixed companies. When
it is introduced, rather seem to decline it. At the same time, never suffer any
person to insult you by any foolish ribaldry on your religious opinions, but
show the same resentment you would naturally do on being offered any other
personal insult. -- But the surest way to avoid this, is by a modest reserve on
the subject, and by using no freedom with others about their religious
sentiments.

CULTIVATE an enlarged charity for all mankind, however they may differ from
you in their religious opinions. That difference may probably arise from causes
in which you had no share, and from which you can derive no merit.

SHOW your regard to religion, by a distinguished respect to all its ministers,
of whatever persuasion, who do not by their lives dishonor their profession;
but never allow them the direction of your consciences, lest they taint you
with the narrow spirit of their party.

THE best effect of your religion will be a diffusive humanity to all in
distress. Set apart a certain proportion of your income as sacred to charitable
purposes. But in this, as well as in the practice of every other duty,
carefully avoid ostentation. Vanity is always defeating her own purposes. Fame
is one of the natural rewards of virtue. Do not pursue her, and she will follow
you.

DO not confine your charity to giving money. You may have many opportunities
of showing a tender and compassionate spirit where your money is not wanted.
There is a false and unnatural refinement in sensibility, which makes some
people shun the sight of every object in distress. Never indulge this,
especially where your friends or acquaintance are concerned. Let the days of
their misfortunes, when the world forgets or avoids them, be the season for you
to exercise your humanity and friendship. The sight of human misery softens the
heart, and makes it better; it checks the pride of health and prosperity, and
the distress it occasions is amply compensated by the consciousness of doing
your duty, and by the secret endearment which nature has annexed to all our
sympathetic sorrows.

WOMEN are greatly deceived, when they think they recommend themselves to our
sex by their indifference about religion. Even these men who are themselves
unbelievers, dislike infidelity in you. Every man who knows human nature,
connects a religious taste in your sex with softness and sensibility of heart;
at least we always consider the want of it as a proof of that hard and
masculine spirit, which of all your faults we dislike the most. Besides, men
consider your religion as one of their principal securities for that female
virtue in which they are most interested. If a gentleman pretends an attachment
to any of you, and endeavors to shake your religious principles, be assured he
is either a fool, or has designs on you which he dares not openly avow.

YOU will probably wonder at my having educated you in a church different from
my own. The reason was plainly this; I looked on the difference between our
churches to be of no real importance, and that the preference of one to the
other was a mere matter of taste. Your mother was educated in the church of
England, and had an attachment to it, and I had a prejudice in favor of every
thing she liked. It never was her desire that you should be baptized by a
clergyman of the church of England, or be educated in that church. On the
contrary, the delicacy of her regard to the smallest circumstance that could
affect me in the eye of the world, made her anxiously insist it might be
otherways. But I could not yield to her in that kind of generosity. When I lost
her, I became still more determined to educate you in the church, as I feel a
secret pleasure in doing every thing that appears to me to express my
satisfaction and veneration for her memory. I draw but a very faint and
imperfect picture of what your mother was, while I endeavor to point out what
you should be. The reader will remember, that such observations as respect
equally both the sexes, are all along as much as possible avoided.


CONDUCT AND BEHAVIOR.
ONE of the chief beauties in a female character, is that modest reserve, that
retiring delicacy, which avoids the public eye, and is disconcerted even at the
gaze of admiration. I do not wish you to be insensible to applause. If you
were, you must become, if not worse, at least less amiable women. But you may
avoid being dazzled by that admiration, which yet rejoices your hearts.

WHEN a girl ceases to blush, she has lost the most powerful charm of beauty.
That extreme sensibility which it indicates, may be a weakness and encumbrance
in our sex, as I have too often felt; but in yours it is peculiarly engaging.
Pedants who think themselves philosophers, ask why a woman should blush when
she is conscious of no crime? It is a sufficient answer. that Nature has made
you to blush when you are guilty of no fault, and has forced us to love you
because you do so. Blushing is so far from being necessarily an attendant on
guilt, that it is the usual companion of innocence.

THIS modesty, which I think so essential in your sex, will naturally dispose
you to be rather silent in company, especially in a large one. People of sense
and discernment will never mistake such silence for dullness. One may take a
share in conversation without uttering a syllable. The expression in the
countenance shows it, and this never escapes an observing eye.

I should be glad that you had an easy dignity in your behavior at public
places, but not that confident ease, that unbashed countenance, which seem to
set the company at defiance. If, while a gentleman is speaking to you, one of
superior rank addresses you, do not let your eager attention and visible
preference betray the flutter of your heart. Let your pride upon this occasion
preserve you from that meanness into which your vanity would sink you. Consider
that you expose yourselves to the ridicule of the company, and affront one
gentleman only to swell the triumph of another, who perhaps thinks he does you
an honor in speaking to you.

CONVERSE with men even of the first rank with that dignified modesty which may
prevent the approach of the most distant familiarity, and consequently prevent
them from feeling themselves your superiors.

WIT is the most dangerous talent you can possess. It must be guarded with
great discretion and good nature, otherwise it will create you many enemies.
Wit is perfectly consistent with softness and delicacy; yet they are seldom
found united. Wit is so flattering to vanity, that they who possess it become
intoxicated and lose all self command.

HUMOR is a different quality -- It will make your company much solicited; but
be cautious how you indulge it. It is a great enemy to delicacy, and still a
greater one to dignity of a character. It may sometimes gain you applause, but
will never procure you respect.

BE even cautious in displaying your good sense. It will be thought you assume
a superiority over the rest of the company. But if you happen to have any
learning, keep it a profound secret, especially from the men, who generally
look with a jealous and malignant eye on a woman of great parts, and a
cultivated understanding.

A MAN of real genius and candor is far superior to this meanness. But such a
one will seldom fall in your way* and if by accident he should, do not be
anxious to show the full extent of your knowledge. If he has any opportunities
of seeing you, he will soon discover it himself; and if you have any advantages
of person or manner, and keep your own secret, he will probably give you credit
for a great deal more than you possess. The great art of pleasing in
conversation consists in making the company pleased with themselves. You will
more readily hear them talk yourselves into their good graces.

BEWARE of detraction, especially where your own sex are concerned. You are
generally accused of being particularly addicted to this vice; I think
unjustly. Men are full as guilty of it when their interests interfere. As your
interests more frequently clash, and as your feelings are quicker than ours,
your temptations to it are more frequent. For this reason, be particularly
tender of the reputation of your own sex, especially when they happen to rival
you in our regards. We look on this as the strongest proof of dignity and true
greatness of mind.

SHOW a compassionate sympathy to unfortunate women, especially to those who
are rendered so by the villainy of men. Indulge a secret pleasure, I may say
pride, in being the friends and refuge of the unhappy, but without the vanity
of showing it.

CONSIDER every species of indelicacy in conversation as shameful in itself,
and as highly disgusting to us. All double entendre is of this sort. -- The
dissolution of men's education allows them to be diverted with a kind of wit,
which yet they have delicacy enough to be shocked at, when it comes from your
mouths, or even when you hear it without pain and contempt. Virgin purity is of
that delicate nature, that it cannot hear certain things without contamination.
It is always in your power to avoid these. No man, but a brute, or a fool would
insult a woman with conversation which he sees gives her pain; nor will he dare
to do it, if she resent the injury with a becoming spirit. There is a dignity
in conscious virtue which is able to awe the most shameless and abandoned of
men.

YOU will be reproached perhaps with prudery. By prudery is generally meant an
affectation of delicacy. Now I do not wish you to affect delicacy, I wish you
to possess it. At any rate it is better to run the risk of being thought
ridiculous than disgusting.

THE men will complain of your reserve. They will assure you that a franker
behavior would make you more amiable. But trust me, they are not sincere, when
they tell you so. I acknowledge, that on some occasions it might render you
more agreeable as companions, but it would make you less amiable as women: An
important distinction, which many of your sex are not aware of. After all, I
wish you to have great ease and openness in your conversation. I only point out
some considerations which ought to regulate your behavior in that respect.

HAVE a sacred regard to truth: Lying is a mean and despicable vice. I have
known some women of excellent parts, who were so much addicted to it, that they
could not be trusted in the relation of any story, especially if it contained
any thing of the mavelous, or if they themselves were the heroines of the
tale. This weakness did not proceed from a bad heart, but was merely the effect
of vanity, or an unbridled imagination. I do not mean to censure that lively
embelishment of a humorous story which is only intended to promote innocent
mirth.

THERE is a certain gentleness of spirit and manners extremely engaging in your
sex; not that indiscriminate attention, that unmeaning simper which smiles on
all alike. This arises, either from an affectation of softness, or from perfect
insipidity.

THERE is a species of refinement in luxury, just beginning to prevail among
the gentlemen of this country, to which our ladies are yet as great strangers
as any women upon earth; I hope, for the honor of the sex, they may ever
continue to be so: I mean the luxury of eating. It is a despicable selfish vice
in men, but in your sex, it is beyond expression indelicate and disgusting.

EVERY one who remembers a few years back, is sensible of a very striking
change in the attention and respect formerly paid by the gentlemen to the
ladies. Their drawing rooms are deserted; and after dinner and supper, the
gentlemen are impatient till they retire. How they came to loose this respect,
which nature and politeness so well entitled them to, I shall not here
particularly enquire. The revolutions of manners in any country depend on
causes very various and complicated. I shall only observe, that the behavior of
the ladies in the last age was very reserved and stately. It would now be
reckoned ridiculous and formal. Whatever it was, it had certainly the effect of
making them more respected.

A FINE woman, like other fine things in nature, has her proper point of view,
from which she may be seen to most advantage. To fix this point, requires great
judgment, and an intimate knowledge of the human heart. By the present mode of
female manners, the ladies seem to expect that they shall regain their
ascendency over us, by the fullest display of their personal charms, by being
always in our eye at public places, by conversing with us with the same
unreserved freedom as we do with one another; in short, by resembling us as
nearly as they possibly can. But a little time and experience will show the
folly of this expectation and conduct.

THE power of a fine woman over the hearts of men, of men of the finest parts,
is even beyond what she conceives. They are sensible of the pleasing illusions,
but they cannot, nor do they wish to dissolve it. But if she is determined to
dispel the charm, it certainly is in her power; she may soon reduce the angel
to a very ordinary girl.

THERE is a native dignity in ingenuous modesty to be expected in your sex,
which is your natural protection from the familiarities of the men, and which
you should feel previous to the reflections that it is your interest to keep
yourselves sacred from all personal freedoms. The many nameless charms and
endearments of beauty should be reserved to bless the arms of the happy man to
whom you give your heart, but who, if he has the least delicacy, will despise
them if he knows that they have been prostituted to fifty men before him. The
sentiment, that a woman may allow all innocent freedoms, provided her virtue is
secure* is both grossly indelicate and dangerous, and has proved fatal to many
of your sex.

LET me now recommend to your attention that elegance, which is not so much a
quality itself, as the high polish of every other. It is what diffuses an
ineffable grace over every look, every motion, every sentence you utter. It
gives that charm to beauty, without which it generally fails to please. It is
partly a personal quality, in which respect, it is the gift of nature; but I
speak of it principally as a quality of the mind. In a word, it is the
perfection of taste in life and manners; every virtue and every excellency in
their most graceful and amiable forms.

YOU may perhaps think that I want to throw every spark of nature out of your
composition, and to make you entirely artificial. Far from it. I wish you to
possess the most perfect simplicity of heart and manners. I think you may
possess dignity without pride, affability without meanness, and simple elegance
without affectation. Milton had my idea, when he says of Eve, "Grace was in all
her steps, Heaven in her eye,
"In every gesture, dignity and love."


AMUSEMENTS.
EVERY period of life has amusements which are natural and proper to it. You
may indulge the variety of your tastes in these, while you keep within the
bounds of that propriety which is suitable to your sex.

SOME amusements are conducive to health, as various kinds of exercise: Some
are connected with qualities really useful, as different kinds of women's work,
and all the domestic concerns of a family; some are elegant accomplishments, as
dress, dancing, music and drawing. Such books as improve your understanding,
enlarge your knowledge, and cultivate your taste, may be considered in a higher
point of view than mere amusements. There are a variety of others, which are
neither useful nor ornamental, such as play of different kinds.

I WOULD particularly recommend to you those exercises, that oblige you to be
much abroad in the open air, such as walking, and riding on horseback. This
will give vigor to your constitutions and a bloom to your complexions. If you
accustom yourselves to go abroad always in chairs and carriages, you will soon
become so enervated, as to be unable to go out of doors without them. -- They
are like most articles of luxury, useful and agreeable when judiciously used;
but when made habitual, they become both insipid and pernicious.

AN attention to your health is a duty you owe to yourselves and to your
friends. Bad health seldom fails to have an influence on the spirits and
temper. The finest geniuses, the most delicate minds, have very frequently a
correspondent delicacy of bodily constitution, which they are too apt to
neglect. Their luxury lies in reading and late hours, equal enemies to health
and beauty.

BUT though good health be one of the greatest blessings of life, never boast
of it, but enjoy it in grateful silence. We so naturally associate the idea of
female softness and delicacy, with a correspondent delicacy of constitution,
that when a woman speaks of her great strength, her extraordinary appetite, her
ability to bear excessive fatigue, we recoil at the description in a way she is
little aware of.

THE intention of your being taught needle work, knitting, and such like, is
not on account of the intrinsic value of all you can do with your hands, which
is trifling, but to enable you to judge more perfectly of that kind of work,
and to direct the execution of it in others. Another principal end is to enable
you to fill up in a tolerable way, some of the many solitary hours you must
necessarily pass at home. It is a great article in the happiness of life* to
have your pleasures as independent of others as possible. By continually
gadding abroad in search of amusement, you lose the respect of your
acquaintances, whom you oppress with those visits* which, by a more discreet
management, might have been courted.

THE domestic economy of a family is entirely a woman's province, and furnishes
a variety of subjects for the exertion both of good sense and good taste. If
you ever come to have the charge of a family, it ought to engage much of your
time and attention; nor can you be excused from this by any extent of fortune,
though with a narrow one the ruin that follows the neglect of it may be more
immediate.

I AM at the greatest loss what to advise you in regard to books; there is no
impropriety in your reading history or cultivating any art or science to which
genius or accident lead you. The whole volume of Nature lies open to your eye,
and furnishes an infinite variety of entertainment. If I was sure that Nature
had given you such strong principles of taste and sentiment* as would remain
with you, and influence your future conduct, with the utmost pleasure would I
endeavor to direct your reading in such a way as might form that taste to the
utmost perfection of truth and elegance -- "But when I reflect how easy it is
to warm a girl's imagination, and how difficult deeply and permanently to
affect her heart; how readily she enters into every refinement of sentiment,
and how easy she can sacrifice them to vanity or convenience; I think I may
very probably do you an injury by artificially creating a taste, which, if
Nature never gave it you, would only serve to embarrass your future conduct. I
do not want to make you any thing; I want to know what Nature has made you, and
to perfect you on her plan. I do not wish you to have sentiments that might
perplex you: I wish you to have sentiments that may uniformly and steadily
guide you, and such as your hearts so thoroughly approve* that you would not
forego them for any consideration this world may offer.

DRESS is an important article in female life -- The love of dress is natural
to you, and therefore it is proper and reasonable. Good sense will regulate
your expense in it; and good taste will direct you to dress in such a way, as
to conceal any blemishes, and set off your beauties, if you have any, to the
greatest advantage. But much delicacy and judgment are required in the
application of this rule. A fine woman shows her charms to most advantage, when
she seems most to conceal them. The finest bosom in nature is not so fine as
what imagination forms. The most perfect elegance of dress appears always the
most easy, and the least studied.

DO not confine your attention to dress* to your public appearance. Accustom
yourselves to an habitual neatness, so that in the most careless undress, in
your most unguarded hours, you may have no reason to be ashamed of your
appearance. You will not easily believe how much we consider your dress as
expressive of your characters. Vanity, levity* slovenliness* folly, appear
through it. And an elegant simplicity is an equal proof of taste and delicacy.

IN dancing* the principal points you are to attend to are ease and grace. I
would have you dance with spirit; but never allow yourselves to be so far
transported with mirth, as to forget the delicacy of your sex. Many a girl
dancing in the gaiety and innocence of her heart, is thought to discover a
spirit she little dreams of.

I KNOW no entertainment that gives such pleasure to any person of sentiment
and humor, as the theater. But I am sorry to say there are few English
comedies a lady can see, without a shock to delicacy. You will not readily
suspect the comments gentlemen make on your behavior on such occasions. Men are
often best acquainted with the most worthless of your sex* and from them too
readily form their judgment of the rest. A virtuous girl often hears very
indelicate things with a countenance no wise embarrassed* because in truth she
does not understand them. Yet this is most ungenerously ascribed to that
command of features, and that ready presence of mind, which you are thought to
possess in a degree far beyond us; or, by still more malignant observers, it is
ascribed to hardened effrontery.

SOMETIMES a girl laughs with all the simplicity of unsuspecting innocence, for
no other reason but being infected with other people's laughing; she is then
believed to know more than she should do. If she does happen to understand an
improper thing, she suffers a very complicated distress; she feels her modesty
hurt in the most sensible manner, and at the same time is ashamed of appearing
conscious of the injury. The only way to avoid these inconveniences, is never
to go to a play that is particularly offensive to delicacy. -- Tragedy subjects
you to such distress. -- Its sorrows will soften and ennoble your hearts.

I NEED say little about gaming, the ladies in this country being as yet almost
strangers to it. -- It is a ruinous and incurable vice; and as it leads to all
the selfish and turbulent passions, is peculiarly odious in your sex. I have no
objection to your playing a little at any kind of game, as a variety in your
amusements, provided that what you can possibly lose is such a trifle as can
neither interest you, nor hurt you.

IN this, as well as in all important points of conduct, show a determined
resolution and steadiness. This is not in the least inconsistent with that
softness and gentleness so amiable in your sex. On the contrary, it gives that
spirit to a mild and sweet disposition, without which it is apt to degenerate
into insipidity! It makes you respectable in your own eyes, and dignifies you
in ours.

FRIENDSHIP, LOVE, MARRIAGE.
THE luxury and dissipation that prevails in genteel life, as it corrupts the
heart in many respects, so it renders it incapable of warm, sincere, and steady
friendship. A happy choice of friends will be of the utmost consequence to you*
as they may assist you by their advice and good offices. But the immediate
gratification which friendship affords to a warm* open, and ingenuous heart, is
of itself a sufficient motive to court it.

IN the choice of your friends, have your principal regard to goodness of heart
and fidelity. If they also possess taste and genius, that will still make them
more agreeable and useful companions. You have particular reason to place
confidence in those who have shown affection for you in your early days, when
you were incapable of making them any return. This is an obligation for which
you cannot be too grateful. When you read this, you will naturally think of
your mother's friend, to whom you owe so much.

IF you have the good fortune to meet with any who deserve the name of friends,
unbosom yourselves to them with the most unsuspicious confidence. It is one of
the world's maxims, never to trust any person with a secret, the discovery of
which could give you any pain; but it is the maxim of a little mind and a cold
heart, unless where it is the effect of frequent disappointments and bad usage.
An open temper, if restrained by tolerable prudence, will make you, on the
whole, much happier than a reserved, suspicious one, although you may sometimes
suffer by it. Coldness and distrust are but two certain consequences of age and
experience; but they are unpleasant feelings and need not be anticipated before
their time.

BUT however open you may be in talking of your own affairs, never disclose the
secrets of one friend to another. These are sacred deposits, which do not
belong to you, nor have you any right to make use of them.

THERE is another case in which I suspect it is proper to be secret, not so
much from motives of prudence as delicacy; I mean in love matters. Though a
woman has no reason to be ashamed of an attachment to a man of merit, yet
Nature, whose authority is superior to philosophy, has annexed a sense of shame
to it. It is even long before a woman of delicacy dares avow to her own heart
that she loves; and when all the subterfuges of ingenuity to conceal it from
herself fail, she feels a violence done both to her pride and to her modesty.
This I should imagine, must always be the case when she is not sure of a return
to her attachment.

IN such a situation, to lay the heart open to any person whatever, does not
appear to me consistent with the perfection of female delicacy. But perhaps I
am wrong. At the same time I must tell you, that in point of prudence it
concerns you to attend well to the consequences of such a discovery. These
secrets, however important in your own estimation, may appear very trifling to
your friend, who possibly will not enter into your feelings, but may rather
consider them as a subject of pleasantry. for this reason, love secrets are of
all others the worst kept. But the consequences to you may be very serious, as
no man of spirit and delicacy ever valued a heart much hackneyed in the ways of
love.

IF, therefore, you must have a friend to pour out your heart to, be sure of
her honor and secrecy. Let her not be a married woman, especially if she lives
happily with her husband. There are certain unguarded moments, in which such a
woman, though the best and worthiest of her sex, may let hints escape, which at
other times, or to any other person than her husband, she would be incapable
of; nor will a husband in this case feel himself under the same obligation of
secrecy and honor, as if you had put your confidence originally in himself,
especially on a subject which the world is apt to treat so lightly.

IF all other circumstances are equal, there are obvious advantages in your
making friends of one another. The ties of blood, and your being so much united
in one common interest, form an additional bond of union to your friendship. If
your brothers should have the good fortune to have hearts susceptible of
friendship, to possess truth, honor, sense and delicacy of sentiment, they are
of the fittest and most unexceptionable confidants. By placing confidence in
them, you will receive every advantage which you could hope for from the
friendship of men, without any of the inconveniences that attend such
connexions with our sex.

BEWARE of making confidants of your servants. Dignity not properly understood
very readily degenerates into pride, which enters into no friendships, because
it cannot bear an equal, and is so fond of flattery as to grasp at it even from
servants and dependants. The most intimate confidants, therefore, of proud
people, are valets de chamber and waiting women. Show the utmost humanity to
your servants; make their situation as comfortable to them as possible; but if
you make them your confidants, you spoil them, and debase yourselves.

NEVER allow any person, under the pretended sanction of friendship, to be so
familiar as to lose a proper respect to you. Never allow them to teaze you on
any subject that is disagreeable, or where you have once taken your resolution.
Many will tell you, that this reserve is inconsistent with the freedom which
friendship allows. But a certain respect is as necessary in friendship as in
love. -- Without it, you may be liked as a child, but you will never be beloved
as an equal.

THE temper and dispositions of the heart in your sex make you enter more
readily and warmly into friendships than men. -- Your natural propensity to it
is so strong, that you often run into intimacies which you soon have sufficient
cause to repent of; and this makes your friendships so very fluctuating.

ANOTHER great obstacle to the sincerity as well as steadiness of your
friendship, is the great clashing of your interests in the pursuits of love,
ambition or vanity. For these reasons, it would appear at first view more
eligible for you to contract your friendships with the men. Among other obvious
advantages of an easy intercourse between the two sexes, it occasions an
emulation and exertion in each to excel and be agreeable: Hence their
respective excellences are mutually communicated and blended. As their
interests in no degree interfere, there can be no foundation for jealousy or
superstition of rivalship. The friendship of a man for a woman is always
blended with a tenderness, which he never feels for one of his own sex* even
where love is in no degree concerned. Besides, we are conscious of a natural
title you have to our protection and good offices, and therefore we feel an
additional obligation of honor to serve you, and to observe an inviolable
secrecy, whenever you confide in us.

BUT apply these observations with great caution. Thousands of women of the
best hearts and finest parts, have been ruined by men who approach them under
the specious name of friendship. But supposing a man to have the most undoubted
honor, yet his friendship to a woman is so near akin to love, that if she be
very agreeable in her person, she will probably very soon find a lover, where
she only wished to meet a friend. Let me here, however, warn you against that
weakness so common among vain women, the imagination that every man who takes
particular notice of them is a lover. Nothing can expose you more to ridicule
than the taking up a man on the suspicion of being your lover, who perhaps
never once thought of you in that view, and giving yourselves those airs so
common among silly women on such occasions.

THERE is a kind of unmeaning gallantry, much practiced by some men, which, if
you have any discernment, you will find really very harmless. Men of this sort
will attend you to public places, and be useful to you by a number of little
observations, which those of a superior class do not so well understand, or
have no leisure to regard, or perhaps are too proud to submit to. Look on the
compliments of such men, as words of course, which they repeat to every
agreeable woman of their acquaintance. There is a familiarity they are apt to
assume* which a proper dignity in your behavior will be easily able to check.

THERE is a different species of men, whom you may like as agreeable
companions, men of worth, taste, and genius, whose conversation, in some
respects, may be superior to what you generally meet with among your own sex.
It will be foolish in you to deprive yourselves of an useful and agreeable
acquaintance, merely because idle people say he is your lover. Such a man may
like your company, without having any design on your person.

PEOPLE, whose sentiments, and particularly whose tastes correspond, naturally
like to associate together, although neither of them have the most distant view
of any farther connection. But as this similarity of minds often gives rise to a
more tender attachment than friendship, it will be prudent to keep a watchful
eye over yourselves, lest your hearts become too far engaged before you are
aware of it. At the same time, I do not think, that your sex, at least in this
part of the world, have much of that sensibility which disposes to such
attachments. What is commonly called love among you, is rather gratitude, and a
partiality to the man who prefers you to the rest of your sex, and such a man
you often marry, with little of either personal esteem or affection. Indeed,
without an unusual share of natural sensibility, and very peculiar good
fortune, a woman in this country has very little probability of marrying for
love.

IT is a maxim laid down among you, and a very prudent one it is, that love is
not to begin on your part, but is entirely to be the consequence of our
attachment to you. Now, supposing a woman to have sense and taste, she will not
find many men to whom she can possibly be supposed to bear any considerable
share of esteem. Among these few it is a very great chance if any of them
distinguishes her particularly. Love, at least with us, is exceedingly
capricious, and will not always six where reason says it should. But supposing
one of them should become particularly attached to her, it is extremely
improbable that he should be the man in the world her heart most approved of.

AS, therefore, Nature has not given that unlimited range in your choice, which
we enjoy, she has wisely and benevolently assigned to you a greater flexibility
of taste on this subject. Some agreeable qualities recommend a gentleman to
your common good liking and friendship. In the course of his acquaintance, he
contracts an attachment to you. When you perceive it, it excites your
gratitude; this gratitude rises into a preference, and this preference perhaps
at last advances to some degree of attachment; especially if it meets with
crosses and difficulties; for these, and a state of suspense, are very great
incitements to attachment, and are the food of love, in both sexes. If
attachment was not excited in your sex in this manner, there is not one of a
million of you that could ever marry with any degree of love.

A MAN of taste and delicacy marries a woman because he loves her more than any
other. A woman of equal taste and delicacy marries him because she esteems him,
and because he gives her that preference. But if a man unfortunately becomes
attached to a woman whose heart is secretly preengaged, his attachment, instead
of obtaining a suitable return, is particularly offensive; and if he persists
to tease her, he makes himself equally the object of her scorn and aversion.

THE effects of love among men are diversified by their different tempers. An
artful man may counterfeit every one of them so as easily to impose on a young
girl, of an open* generous and feeling heart, if she is not extremely on her
guard. The finest parts in such a girl may not always prove sufficient for her
security. The dark and crooked paths of cunning are unsearchable and
inconceivable to an honorable and elevated mind.

THE following, I apprehend, are the most genuine effects of an honorable
passion among the men, and the most difficult to counterfeit. A man of delicacy
often betrays his passions by his too great anxiety to conceal it, especially
if he has little hopes of success. True love in all its stages seeks
concealment, and never expects success. It renders a man not only respectful
but timid to the highest degree in his behavior to the woman he loves. To
conceal the awe he stands in of her, he may sometimes affect pleasantry, but it
sits awkwardly on him, and he quickly relapses into seriousness, if not into
dullness. He magnifies all her real perfections in his imagination, and is
either blind to her failings, or converts them into beauties. Like a person
conscious of guilt; he is jealous that every eye observes him* and to avoid
this, he shuns all the little observances of common gallantry.

HIS heart and his character will be improved in every respect by his
attachment. His manners will become more gentle, and his conversation more
agreeable; but diffidence and embarassment will always make him appear to
disadvantage in the company of his mistress. If the fascination continue long,
it will totally depress his spirits, and extinguish every active, vigorous, and
manly principle of his mind. You will find this subject beautifully and
pathetically painted in Thompson's Spring.

WHEN you observe in a gentleman's behavior these marks which I have described
above, reflect seriously what you are to do. If his attachment is agreeable to
you, I leave you to do as nature, good sense, and delicacy shall direct you. If
you love him, let me advise you never to discover to him the full extent of
your love, no not although you marry him. That sufficiently shows your
preference, which is all he is entitled to know. If he has delicacy, he will
ask no stronger proof of your affection for your sake; if he has sense he will
not ask it for his own. This is an unpleasant truth, but it is my duty to let
you know it. Violent love cannot subsist, at least cannot be expressed, for any
time together on both sides; otherwise the certain consequence, however
concealed, is satiety and disgust. Nature in this case, has laid the reserve on
you.

IF you see evident proofs of a gentleman's attachment, and are determined to
shut your heart against him, as you ever hope to be used with generosity by the
person who may engage your own heart, treat him honorably and humanely. Do not
let him linger in a miserable suspense, but be anxious to let him know your
sentiments with regard to him.

HOWEVER people's hearts may deceive them, there is scarcely a person that can
love for any time without at least some distant hope of success. If you really
wish to undeceive a lover, you may do it in a variety of ways. There is a
certain species of easy familiarity in your behavior, which may satisfy him, if
he has any discernment left, that he has nothing to hope for. But perhaps your
particular temper may not admit of this. You may easily show that you want to
avoid his company; but if he is a man whose friendship you wish to preserve,
you may not choose this method, because then you lose him in every capacity.
You may get a common friend to explain matters to him, or fall on many other
devices, if you are seriously anxious to put him out of suspense.

BUT if you are resolved against every such method, at least do not shun
opportunities of letting him explain himself. If you do this, you act
barbarously and unjustly. If he brings you to an explanation, give him a
polite, but a resolute and decisive answer. In whatever way you convey your
sentiments to him, if he is a man of spirit and delicacy, he will give you no
farther trouble, nor apply to your friends for their intercession. This last is
a method of courtship which every man of spirit will disdain. He will never
whine nor sue for your pity. That would mortify him almost as much as your
scorn. In short, you may possibly break such a heart, but you can never bend
it. -- Great pride always accompanies delicate minds, however concealed under
the appearance of the utmost gentleness and modesty, and is the passion of all
others the most difficult to conquer.

THERE is a case where a woman may coquet justifiably to the utmost verge which
her conscience will allow. It is where a gentleman purposely declines to make
his addresses, till such time as he thinks himself perfectly sure of her
consent. This at the bottom is intended to force a woman to give up the
undoubted privilege of her sex, the privilege of refusing; it is intended to
force her to explain herself, in effect, before the gentleman deigns to do it,
and by this means oblige her to violate the modesty and delicacy of her sex,
and to invert the clearest order of nature.

ALL this sacrifice is proposed to be made, merely to gratify a most despicable
vanity, in a man who would degrade the very woman whom he wishes to make his
wife.

IT is of great importance to distinguish, whether a gentleman who has the
appearance of being your lover, delays to speak explicitly, from the motive I
have mentioned, or from a diffidence inseparable from true attachment. In the
one case you can scarcely use him too ill; in the other you ought to use him
with great kindness; and the greatest kindness you can show him, if you are
determined not to listen to his addresses* is to let him know it as soon as
possible.

I KNOW the many excuses with which women endeavor to justify themselves to
the world, and to their own consciences, when they act otherwise. Sometimes
they plead ignorance, or at least uncertainty, of the gentleman's real
sentiments. That may sometimes be the case. -- Sometimes they plead the decorum
of their sex, which enjoins an equal behavior to all men, and forbids them to
consider any man as a lover till he has directly told them so. Perhaps few
women carry their ideas of female delicacy and decorum so far as I do. But I
must say you are not entitled to plead the obligation of these virtues, in
opposition to the superior ones of gratitude, justice and humanity. The man is
entitled to all these, who press you to the rest of your sex, and perhaps whose
greatest weakness is this very preference. The truth of the matter is, vanity
and the love of admiration is so prevailing a passion among you* that you may
be considered to make a very great sacrifice, till you give up a lover,
whenever every art of coquetry fails to keep him, or till he forces you to an
explanation. You can be fond of love, when you are indifferent to, or even when
you despise the lover.

BUT the deepest and most artful coquetry is employed by women of superior
taste and sense, to engage and fix the heart of a man whom the world and whom
they themselves esteem* although they are firmly determined never to marry him.
But his conversation amuses them, and his attachment is the highest
gratification to their vanity; nay, they can sometimes be gratified with the
utter ruin of his fortune, same and happiness. God forbid I should ever think
so of all your sex! I know many of them have principles, have generosity and
dignity of soul that elevates them above the worthless vanity I have been
speaking of.

SUCH a woman, I am persuaded, may always convert a lover, if she cannot give
him her affections, into a warm and steady friend, provided he is a man of
sense, resolution and candor. If she explains herself to him with a generous
openness and freedom, he must feel the stroke as a man; but he will likewise
bear it as a man! what he suffers, he will suffer in silence. Every sentiment
of esteem will remain; but love, though it requires very little food, and is
easily surfeited with too much, yet it requires some. He will view her in the
light of a married woman and though passion subsides, yet a man of a candid and
generous heart, always retains a tenderness for a woman he has once loved, and
who has used him well, beyond what he feels for any other of her sex.

IF he has not confined his own secrets to any body, he has an undoubted title
to ask you not to divulge it. If a woman chooses to trust any of her companions
with her own unfortunate attachments, she may, as it is her own affair alone;
but if she has any generosity or gratitude, she will not betray a secret which
does not belong to her.

MALE coquetry is much less inexcusable than female, as well as more
pernicious; but it is rare in this country. Very few men will give themselves
the trouble to gain or retain any woman's affections, unless they have views on
them, either of an honorable or dishonorable kind. Men employed in the pursuit
of business, ambition, or pleasure, will not give themselves the trouble to
engage a woman's affections merely from the vanity of conquest, and of
triumphing over the heart of an innocent and defenseless girl. Besides people
never value much what is entirely in their power. A man of parts, sentiment,
and address, if he lays aside all regard to truth and humanity, may engage the
hearts of fifty women at the same time, and may likewise conduct his coquetry
with so much art, as to put it out of the power of any of them to specify a
single expression which could be said to be directly expressive of love. This
ambiguity of behavior, this art of keeping one in suspense, is the greatest
secret of coquetry in both sexes. It is the more cruel in us, because we can
carry it to what length we please, without your being so much at liberty to
complain or expostulate; whereas we can break our chain, and force you to
explain, whenever we become impatient of our situation.

I HAVE insisted the more particularly on this subject of courtship* because it
may most readily happen to you, at that early period of life, when you can have
little experience or knowledge of the world; when your passions are warm* and
your judgments not arrived at such full maturity as to be able to correct them;
-- I wish you to possess such high principles of honor and generosity, as will
render you incapable of deceiving, and at the same time to possess that acute
discernment which may secure you against being deceived.

A WOMAN, in this country, may easily prevent the first impressions of love;
and every motive of prudence and delicacy should make her guard her heart
against them, till such time as she has received the most convincing proofs of
the attachment of a man of such merit, as will justify a reciprocal regard.
Your hearts, indeed, may be shut inflexibly and permanently, against all the
merit a man can possess. That may be your misfortune, but cannot be your fault.
In such a situation, you would be equally unjust to yourself and your lover, if
you gave him your hand when your heart revolted against him. But miserable will
be your fate, if you allow an attachment to steal on you before you are sure of
return; or, what is infinitely worse, where there are wanting those qualities
which alone can ensure happiness in a married state.

I KNOW nothing that renders a woman more despicable than her thinking it
essential to happiness to be married. Besides the gross indelicacy of the
sentiment, it is a false one, as thousands of women have experienced. But if it
was true, the belief that it is so, and the consequent impatience to be
married, is the most effectual way to prevent it.

YOU must not think from this, that I do not wish you to marry. On the
contrary, I am of opinion, that you may attain a superior degree of happiness
in a married state, to what you can possibly find in any other. I know the
forlorn and unprotected situation of an old maid* the chagrin and peevishness
which are apt to infect their tempers, and the great difficulty of making a
transition with dignity and cheerfulness, from the period of youth, beauty,
admiration and respect, into the calm, silent, unnoticed retreat of declining
years.

I SEE some unmarried women of active vigorous minds, and great vivacity of
spirits, degrading themselves; sometimes by entering into a dissipated course
of life, unsuitable to their years, and exposing themselves to the ridicule of
girls, who might have been their grandchildren; sometimes by oppressing their
acquaintances by impertinent intrusions into their private affairs; and
sometimes by being propagators of scandal and defamation. All this is owing to
an exuberant activity of spirit, which if it had found employment at home,
would have rendered them respectable and useful members of society.

I SEE other women, in the same situation, gentle, modest, blessed with sense,
taste, delicacy and every milder feminine virtue of the heart, but of weak
spirits, bashful and timid; I see such women sinking into obscurity and
insignificance, and gradually losing every elegant accomplishment; for this
evident reason, that they are not united to a partner who has sense, and worth,
and taste to know their value; one who is not able to draw forth their
concealed qualities, and show them to advantage; who can give that support to
their feeble spirits which they stand so much in need of; and who, by his
affection and tenderness, might make such a woman happy in exerting every
talent and accomplishing herself in every elegant art that could contribute to
his amusement.

IN short, I am of opinion, that a married state, if entered into from proper
motives of esteem and affection, will be the happiest for yourselves, make you
most respectable in the eyes of the world, and the most useful members of
society. But I confess I am not enough of a patriot to wish you to marry for
the good of the public. I wish you to marry for no other reason but to make
yourselves happy. When I am so particular in my advices about your conduct, I
own my heart beats with the fond hope of making you worthy the attachment of
men who will deserve you, and be sensible of your merit. But Heaven forbid you
should ever relinquish the ease and independence of a single life, to become
the slaves of a fool or a tyrant's caprice.

AS these have always been my sentiments, I shall do but justice, when I leave
you in such independent circumstances as may lay you under no temptation to do
from necessity what you would never do from choice. -- This will likewise save
you from that cruel mortification to a woman of spirit, the suspicion that a
gentleman thinks he does you an honor or a favor when he asks you for his wife.

IF I live till you arrive at that age when you shall be capable to judge for
yourselves, and do not strangely alter my sentiments* I shall act toward you
in a very different manner from what most parents do. My opinion has always
been, that when that period arrives, the parental authority ceases.

I HOPE I shall always treat you with that affection and easy confidence which
may dispose you to look on me as your friend. In that capacity alone I shall
think myself entitled to give you my opinion; in the doing of which, I should
think myself highly criminal, if I did not to the utmost of my power endeavor
to divest myself of all personal vanity, and all prejudices in savor of my
particular taste. If you did not choose to follow my advice, I should not on
that account cease to love you as my children. Though my right to your
obedience was expired, yet I should think nothing could release me from the
ties of nature and humanity.

YOU may perhaps imagine, that the reserved behavior which I recommend to you,
and your appearing seldom at public places, must cut off all opportunities of
your being acquainted with gentlemen. I am very far from intending this. I
advise you to no reserve, but what will render you more respected and beloved
by our sex. I do not think public places suited to make people acquainted
together. They can only be distinguished there by their looks and external
behavior. But it is in private companies alone where you can expect easy and
agreeable conversation, which I should never wish you to decline. If you do not
allow gentlemen to become acquainted with you, you can never expect to marry
with attachment on either side. -- Love is very seldom produced at first sight;
at least it must have, in that case, a very unjustifiable foundation. True love
is founded on esteem, in a correspondence of tastes and sentiments, and steals
on the heart imperceptibly.

THERE is one advice I shall leave you, to which I beg your particular
attention. Before your affections come to be in the least engaged to any man,
examine your tempers, your tastes and your hearts, very severely, and settle in
your own minds what are the requisites to your happiness in a married state;
and as it is almost impossible that you should get every thing you wish, come
to a steady determination what you are to consider as essential, and what may
be sacrificed.

IF you have hearts disposed by Nature for love and friendship, and possess
those feelings which enable you to enter into all the refinements and
delicacies of these attachments, consider well, for Heaven's sake, and as you
value your future happiness, before you give them any indulgence. If you have
the misfortune (for a very great misfortune it commonly is to your sex) to have
such a temper and such sentiments deeply rooted in you -- if you have spirit
and resolution to resist the solicitations of vanity, the persecutions of
friends, (for you will have lost the only friend that would never persecute
you) and can support the prospect of the many inconveniences attending the
state of an old maid, which I formerly pointed out, then you may indulge
yourselves in that kind of sentimental reading and conversation, which is most
corespondent to your feelings.

BUT if you find on a strict self examination, that marriage is absolutely
essential to your happiness, keep the secret inviolable in your own bosoms, for
the reason I formerly mentioned; but shun* as you would do the most fatal
poison, all that species of reading and conversation which warms the
imagination, which engages and softens the heart, and raises the taste above
the level of common life. If you do otherwise, consider the terrible conflict
of passions this may afterward raise in your breasts.

IF this refinement once takes deep root in your minds, and you do not obey its
dictates, but marry from vulgar and mercenary views, you may never be able to
eradicate it entirely, and then it will embitter all your married days. Instead
of meeting with sense, delicacy, tenderness, a lover, a friend, an equal
companion, in a husband, you may be tired with insipidity and dullness; shocked
with indelicacy, or mortified by indifference. You will find none to
compassionate, or even understand your sufferings; for your husbands may not
use you cruelly, and may give you as much money for your clothes, personal
expense and domestic necessaries, as is suitable to their fortunes. The world
would therefore look on you as unreasonable women, and who did not deserve to
be happy, if you were not so. -- To avoid these complicated evils, if you are
determined at all events to marry, I would advise you to make all your reading
and amusements of such a kind as do not affect the heart, nor the imagination,
except in the way of wit and humor.

I HAVE no view by these advices to lead your tastes; I only want to persuade
you of the necessity of knowing your own minds, which, though seemingly very
easy, is what your sex seldom attain on many important occasions in life, but
particularly on this of which I am speaking. There is not a quality I more
anxiously wish you to possess, than that collected decisive spirit which rests
on itself, which enables you to see where your true happiness lies, and to
pursue it with the most determined resolution. In matters of business, follow
the advice of those who know them better than yourselves, and in whose
integrity you can confide; but in matters of taste, that depend on your own
feelings, consult no one friend whatever, but consult your own hearts.

IF a gentleman makes his addresses to you, or gives you reason to believe he
will do so, before you allow your affections to be engaged, endeavor, in the
most prudent and secret manner, to procure from your friends every necessary
piece of information concerning him; such as his character for sense, his
morals, his temper, fortune and family; whether it is distinguished for parts
and worth, or folly knavery, and lothesome hereditary diseases. When your
friends inform you of these they have fulfilled their duty. If they go farther,
they have not that deference for you which a becoming dignity on your part
would effectually command.

WHATEVER your views are in marrying, take every possible precaution to prevent
their being disappointed. If fortune, and the pleasures it brings, are your
aim, it is not sufficient that the settlements of a jointure and children's
provisions be ample, and properly secured; it is neeessary you should enjoy the
fortune during your own life. The principal security you can have for this will
depend on your marrying a good natured generous man, who despises money, and
who will let you live where you can best enjoy that pleasure* that pomp and
parade of life for which you married him.

FROM what I have said, you will easily see, that I could never pretend to
advise whom you should marry; but I can with great confidence advise whom you
should not marry.

AVOID a companion that may entail any hereditary disease on your posterity,
particularly (that most dreadful of all human calamities) madness. It is the
height of imprudence to run into such a danger, and, in my opinion, highly
criminal.

DO not marry a fool; he is the most untractable of all animals; he is led by
his passions and caprices* and is incapable of hearing the voice of reason. It
may probably, too, hurt your vanity to have husbands for whom you have reason
to blush and tremble every time they open their lips in company. But the worst
circumstance that attends a fool* is, his constant jealousy of his wife being
the thought to govern him. This renders it impossible to lead him; and he is
continually doing absurd and disagreeable things, for no other reason but to
show he dares to do them.

A RAKE is always a suspicious husband* because he has only known the most
worthless of your sex. He likewise entails the worst of diseases on his wife
and children, if he has the misfortune to have any.

If you have a sense of religion yourselves, do not think of husbands who have
none. If they have tolerable understandings they will be glad that you have
religion, for their own sakes, and for the sakes of their families; but it will
sink you in their esteem. If they are weak men, they will be continually
teazing and shocking you about your principles. -- If you have children, you
will suffer the most bitter distress, in seeing all your endeavors to form
their minds to virtue and piety, all your endeavors to secure their present
and eternal happiness frustrated, and turned into ridicule.

AS I look on your choice of a husband to be of the greatest consequence to
your happiness, I hope you will make it with the utmost circumspection. Do not
give way to a sudden sally of passion, and dignify it with the name of love. --
Genuine love is not founded in caprice; it is sounded in nature, on honorable
views, on virtue, on similarity of tastes and sympathy of souls.

IF you have these sentiments, you will never marry any one, when you are not
in that situation, in point of fortune, which is necessary to the happiness of
either of you.

What that competency may be, can only be determined by your own tastes. It
would be ungenerous in you to take advantage of a lover's attachment, to plunge
him into distress; and if he has any honor, no personal gratification will ever
tempt him to enter into any connection which will render you unhappy. If you
have as much between you as to satisfy all your demands, it is sufficient.

I SHALL conclude with endeavoring to remove a difficulty which must naturally
occur to any woman of reflection on the subject of marriage. What is to become
of all these refinements of delicacy, that dignity of manners, which checked
all familiarities, and suspended desire in respectful and awful admiration? In
answer to this, I shall only observe, that if motives of interest or vanity
have had any share in your resolutions to marry, none of these chimerical
notions will give you any pain; nay, they will very quickly appear as
ridiculous in your own eyes, as they probably always did in the eyes of your
husbands. They have been sentiments which have floated in your imaginations,
but have never reached your hearts. But if these sentiments have been truly
genuine, and if you have had the singular happy fate to attach those who
understood them, you have no reason to be afraid.

MARRIAGE, indeed, will at once dispel the enchantment raised by external
beauty; but the virtues and graces that first warmed the heart, that reserve
and delicacy which always left the lover something farther to wish, and often
made him doubtful of your sensibility or attachment, may and ought ever to
remain. The tumult of passion will necessarily subside; but it will be
succeeded by an endearment that affects the heart in a more equal, more
sensible, and tender manner. -- But I must check myself, and not indulge in
descriptions that may mislead you, and that too sensibly awake the remembrance
of my happier days, which, perhaps, it were better for me to forget forever.

I HAVE thus given you my opinion on some of the most important articles of
your future life, chiefly calculated for that period when you are just entering
the world. I have endeavored to avoid some peculiarities of opinion, which,
from their contradiction to the general practice of the world, I might
reasonably have suspected were not so well founded. But in writing to you, I am
afraid my heart has been too full, and too warmly interested, to allow me to
keep this resolution. This may have procuced some embarrassment, and some
seeming contradiction. What I have written has been the amusement of some
solitary hours, and has served to divert some melancholy reflections. -- I am
conscious I undertook a task to which I was very unequal; but I have discharged
a part of my duty. -- You will at least be pleased with it, as the least mark
of your father's love and attention.

END OF FATHER's LEGACY.
A COLLECTION OF THOUGHTS. [EXTRACTED FROM THE HIVE.]
CHASTITY.
THAT chastity is not the only virtue of woman is most certain; but still it is
so essential to the perfection of every other virtue in her, that the loss or
want of it, like the sin of idolatry among the Israelites, weakens the force
and takes of the merit of them, imprinting such a stain upon the soul, as
sullies every emanation of it.

THIS virtue of chastity has ever been esteemed so inseparably necessary to
every character, particularly the female character, that every civilized people
in the world have guuaded it with the greatest care.

(...) heaven is saintly chastity,
That when a soul is found sincerely so,
A thousand liveried angels lacquey her;
Driving far off each sign of sin and guilt;
And in clear dreams and solomn vision,
Tell her of things that no gross ear can hear,
Till often converse with heavenly visitants,
Begin to cast and (...) on the outward shape
The unpoluted temple of the mind,
And turned it by degrees to the soul's essence,
Till all be made immortal.
THE chaste mind, like a polished plane, may admit foul thoughts, without
receiving their tincture.

CHASTITY is a purity of thought, word and action.

CHEERFULNESS.
I LOOK on cheerfulness as on the health of virtue.

Fair as the dawn of light! auspicious guest;
Source of all comfort to the human breast!
Deprived of thee, in sad despair we moan,
And tedious roll the heavy moments on.
CHEERFULNESS, even to gaiety, is consistent with every species of virtue and
practice of religion. -- I think it inconsistent only with impiety or vice. --
The ways of heaven are pleasantness. We adore, we praise, we thank the
Almighty, in hymns, in songs, in anthems -- and those set to music too. Let "O!
be joyful," be the christian's psalm -- and leave the sad Indian to incant the
devil with tears and screeches. It is this true sense of religion that has
rendered my whole life so cheerful as it has ever so remarkably been -- to the
great offense of your religionists. Though why prithee, should priests be
always so grave? Is it so sad a thing to be a parson?

BE ye as one of these, says the Lord -- that is, as merry little children.
The Lord loves a cheerful giver -- and, Why not a cheerful taker also? Plato
and Seneca -- and surely they were wise enough to have been consecrated --
though that a sense of cheerfulness and joy should ever be encouraged in
children, from their infancy -- not only on account of their healths, but as
productive of true virtue.

COMPANY. (VIDE CONVERSATION.)
BE very circumspect in the choice of your company; in the society of your
equals you may enjoy pleasure; in the society of your superiors, you may find
profit; but to be the best in company, is to be in the way of growing worse;
the best means to improve, is, to be the least there. But above all, be the
companion of those who fear the Lord and keep his precepts.

CONVERSATION can only subsist in good company; to explain the word: --
Substract the impertinently talkative, the contemptuously silent, the
illiterate and the ill bred; banish pedantry, affectation and rudeness, the
remainder is good company: A set of people of liberal sentiments, solid sense
and just imagination, whose wit is untinctured with indelicacy, and their
politeness clear of flattery. That person alone is fit for conversation, who is
free of the extremes of pride and of meanness; never unseasonably talkative or
mute, and has the faculty ever to entertain, or, at least, never to offend his
company.

CONTENTMENT.
OUR pains should be to moderate our hopes and fears, to direct and regulate
our passions, to bear all injuries of fortune or men, and to attain the art of
contentment.

TO be in a low condition, and contented, affords the mind an exquisite
enjoyment of what the senses are robbed of. If therefore thou would be
happy, bring thy mind to thy condition.

WHAT can he want who is already content; who lives within the limits of his
circumstances, and who has said to his desires, "Thus far shall ye go and no
farther." This is the end of all philosophy, and poor is the philosopher who
has not gained that end.

We need not travel seeking ways of bliss;
He that desires contentment cannot miss.
CHARITY.
CHARITY makes the best construction of things and persons, excuses weakness,
extenuates miscarriages, makes the best of every thing, forgives every one, and
serves all.

ARE we not citizens of the world? Are we not all fellow subjects of the
universal monarch? Is not the universe our home? And is not every man a
brother? Poor and illiberal is that charity, which is confined to any
particular nation or society. -- Should we not feel for the stranger, and him
that has no helper?

HE who is charitable from motives of ostentation will never relieve distress
in secret.

FOR farther thoughts on, or inducements to his virtue. I refer my readers to
Spectator, 3d vol. No. 177.

CONVERSATION.
OUR conversation should be such that youth may therein find improvement, women
modesty, the aged respect and all men civility.

TALKATIVENESS is usually called a feminine vice, but it is possible to go into
masculine company, where it will be as hard to wedge in a word as at a female
gossiping.

IN your discourse be cautious what you speak and to whom you speak; how you
speak and when you speak; and what you speak, speak wisely, speak truly. A
fool's heart is in his tongue, but a wise man's tongue is in his heart.

MODESTY in your discourse will give a luster to truth, and an excuse to your
errors.

DEATH.
DEATH is no more than turning us over from time to eternity. It leads to
immortality, and that is recompense enough for suffering it.

Death is the crown of life, was death denied
Poor man had lived in vain.
As the tree falls so must it lie, as death leaves us so judgment will find us.
If so, how importunate should every one of us be to secure the favor of the
Almighty Judge, to be interested in the Redeemer's love, and among the number
of his chosen people before it is too late.

Be like a sentinel, keep on your guard,
All eye, all ear, all expectation of
The coming foe.
DEATH is the end of fear and beginning of felicity. Death is the law of
nature, the tribute of the flesh, the remedy of evils, and the path either to
heavenly felicity, or eternal misery.

Eternity, that boundless race,
Which time himself can never run --
(Swift as he flies with an unwearied pace;)
Which when ten thousand thousand years are done
Is still the same, and still to be begun.
FRIENDSHIP.
Friendship's a name to few confined
The offspring of a noble mind;
A generous warmth which fills the breast,
And better felt than ever expressed.

FRIENDSHIP is a sweet attraction of the heart toward the merit we esteem, or
the perfections we admire; and produces a mutual inclination between two
persons, to promote each other's interest, knowledge, virtue and happiness.

THERE is nothing so common as pretenses to friendship; though few know what it
means, and fewer yet come up to its demands. By talking of it, we set ourselves
off; but when we enquire into it, we see our defects; and when we engage in it,
we must charge through abundance of difficulty. The veneration it has
challenged in every age, (the most barbarous not excepted) is a standing
testimony of its excellence: And the more valuable it is, the more are we
concerned to be instructed in it.

MONSIEUR DE SACY in his essay upon friendship, treats to this effect: The
friendship which is to be recommended, is union of affections, springing from a
generous respect to virtue, and is maintained by a harmony of manners. It is a
great mistake to call every trifling commerce by this serious name; or to
suppose that empty compliments and visits of ceremony, when no more is intended
than to pass the time, and show the equipage, should pass for a real and well
established friendship. The frequency of the practice will not wipe off the
absurdity. -- There is as wide a difference between a bully and a man of honor.

Friendship's the chiefest good, the balm of life,
The bane of faction, antidote of strife,
The gem that virtue's breast alone can grace,
The sign of patience, and the seal of peace.
GRATITUDE.
IF gratitude is due from man to man, how much more from man to his Maker? The
Supreme Being does not only confer upon us those bounties which proceed more
immediately from his hand, but ever those benefits which are conveyed to us by
others. Every blessing we enjoy, by what means soever it may be derived upon
us, is the gift of Him who is the great author of good, and Father of mercies.

GRATITUDE, when exerted toward one another, naturally produces a very
pleasing sensation in the mind of a grateful man; it exalts the soul into
rapture, when it is employed in this great object of gratitude; on this
beneficent Being who has given us every thing we already possess, and from whom
we expect every thing we hope for.

Ungenerous the man and base the heart,
Who takes the kind, and pays the ungrateful part.
HONESTY.
HE only is worthy of esteem, that knows what is just and honest, and dares to
do it; that is master of his own passions, and scorns to be slave to another's.
Such an one in the lowest poverty, is a far better man, and merits more
respect, than those gay things, who owe all their greatness and reputation to
their rentals and revenues.

THE difference there is between honor and honesty, seems to be chiefly in the
motive, the mere honest man does that from duty, which the man of honor does
for the sake of character.

To others do, what you from them expect,
Nor ever this, the sum of law neglect.
THE more honesty a man has, the less he affects the air of a saint -- the
affectation of sanctity is a blotch on the face of piety.

HONOR.
THE man of honor is an internal, the person of honor an external; the one a
real, the other a fictitious character. I am therefore never surprised to see
or hear such things attempted, said and done by a person of honor, which a man
of honor would blush to think of.

THE bulk of mankind are caught by show. The pompous sound of titles, and
glitter of ornaments strike their senses, attract their attention, raise their
admiration, and extort from them all that reverence which is due only to
eminent and distinguished merit; while real virtue and true honor pass silently
through the world, unheeded and unregarded, but by the happy and discerning
few, who are sensible of its merit, or enjoy the blessed communication of its
influence.

HONORS are in this world under no regulation; true quality is neglected,
virtue is oppressed, and vice triumphant. The last day will rectify this
disorder, and assign to every one a station suitable to the dignity of his
character: Ranks will then be adjusted, and precedence set right.

LOVE.
WITHOUT constancy there is neither love, friendship, nor virtue in the world.

HE that loves on the account of virtue, can never be weary; because there are
ever fresh charms to attract him, and entertain him.

OUR affections are the links which form society; and though, by being
stretched or broken, they may give us pain, yet certainly we could have no
pleasure without them.

Would you then knew or peace or joy?
Let love your fleeting hours employ;
What'er can bless your mortal span,
Is love of God -- and love of man.
MARRIAGE.
MARRIAGES founded on assection are the most happy. Love (says Addison) ought
to have shot its roots deep, and to be well grown before we enter into that
state. There is nothing which more nearly concerns the peace of mankind -- it
is his choice in this respect on which his happiness or misery for life depends.

THE best dowry to advance the marriage of a young lady is, when she has in her
countenance, mildness; in her speech, wisdom; in her behavior, modesty; and in
her life, virtue.

BETTER is a portion in a wife, than with a wife.

AN inviolable fidelity, good humor, and complacency of temper in a wise,
outlive all the charms of a fine face, and make the decays of it invisible.

OBLIGATIONS.
HAVE I obliged any body, or done the world any service? If so, the action has
rewarded me; this answer will encourage good nature, therefore let it always be
at hand.

A man cannot be bound by one benefit to suffer all sorts of injuries, for
there are some cases wherein we lie under no obligation for a benefit, because
a greater injury absolves it. As for example, a man helps me out of a law suit,
and afterward commits a rape upon my daughter; where the following impiety
cancels the antecedent obligation. A man lends me a little money, then sets my
house on fire; the debtor is here turning creditor, because the injury out
weighs the benefit; nay, if he does but so much as repent the good office done,
and grow sour and insolent upon it, and upbraid me with it. If he did it only
for his own sake, or for any other reason, than for mine, I am in some degree,
more or less acquitted of the obligation.

OATHS.
THE infamous, though common practice of cursing and swearing, upon the most
trivial occasions, and of using the name of God irreverently, prevails
shamefully with many who are pleased to call themselves Christians; nor is this
custom less ridiculous than impious, as it is the only crime which human nature
is capable of committing, that neither proposes pleasure nor profit for its end.

Of all the nauseous complicated crimes,
Which most infest and stigmatize the times,
There Is none that can with impious oaths compare,
Where vice and folly have an equal share.
POVERTY.
IN seeking virtue, if you find poverty, be not ashamed, the fault is not
yours. Your honor or dishonor is purchased by your own actions; though virtue
gives a ragged livery, she gives a golden cognizance. If her service make you
poor, blush not; your poverty may prove disadvantageous to you, but cannot
dishonor you.

TO feel the extremity of want, and be always under discipline and
mortification, must be very uncomfortable: But then we are to consider, that
the world will either mend or wear off, and that the discharge will come
shortly, and the hardship turn to advantage; that the contest is commendable
and brave, and that it is dangerous and dishonorable to surrender.

PLEASURE.
THERE is but one solid pleasure in life, and that is, our duty. How miserable
then, how unwise, how unpardonable are they, who make that a pain.

HE that resigns the world, is in a constant possession of a serene mind* but
he who follows the pleasures of it, meets with nothing but remorse and
confusion.

Would you -- or would you not with pleasure live;
It Is virtue can alone the blessing give:
With ardent spirit her alone pursue,
And with content all other pleasures view.
PRIDE.
EVERY man, however little, makes a figure in his own eyes.

HE who thinks no man above him but for his virtue, none below him but for his
vice, can never be obsequious in a wrong place.

THAT is a mean and despicable kind of pride, that measures worth by the gifts
of fortune, the greatest portion of which, is too often in the hands of the
least deserving.

PROUD men never have friends; neither in prosperity, because they know no
body; nor in adversity, because then no body knows them.

By ignorance is pride increased,
Those most assume who know the least;
Their own false balances give them weight,
But every other finds them light.
RICHES.
RICHES cover a greater number of faults, than ever charity has done.

A great fortune in the hands of a fool, is a great misfortune. The more riches
a fool has, the greater fool he is. All the treasures of the earth, are not to
be compared to the least virtue of the soul.

Think not, O man! that thou art truly great,
Because thou have, perhaps, a large estate,
Or may the greatest earthly honors bear,
For too -- too many thus mistaken are;
But let your virtuous actions daily prove,
You truly merit universal love.
Greatness alone in virtue's understood,
None's truly great but he who is truly good.
SENSIBILITY.
O Sensibility! thou parent of virtue -- thou ornament of human nature! unhappy
must that man be, who is void of thee. He must be a monster in the human form
-- he must forever be a stranger to those dispositions and affections of mind
which exalt our species, and which are the sources of the most refined
pleasures.

SECRECY.
-- Secrets are edged tools,
And must be kept from children and from fools,

A PROPER secrecy is the only mystery of able men, mystery is the only secrecy
of weak and cunning ones. The man who tells nothing, or who tells all, will
equally have nothing told him. If a fool knows a secret, he tells it because he
is a fool; if a knave knows one, he tells it wherever it will be his interest
to tell it. There are some occasions in which a man must tell half his secret,
in order to conceal the rest; but there is seldom one in which a man must tell
all. Great skill is necessary, to know how far to go, and where to stop.

SLANDER.
TEN thousand are the vehicles in which the deadly poison of slander is
prepared and communicated to the world -- and by some artful hands, it is done
by so subtle and nice an infusion, that it is not to be tasted or discovered
but by its effects. How frequently is the honesty and integrity of a man
disposed of, by a smile or a shrug. -- How many good, generous actions have
been sunk into oblivion, by a distrustful look -- or stamped with the imputation
of proceeding from bad motives, by a mysterious and seasonable whisper. Look
into the companies of those whose gentle natures should disarm them, we shall
find little better account. -- How large a portion of chastity is sent out of
the world by distant hints -- nodded away, and cruelly winked into suspicion by
envy. How often does the reputation of a helpless creature, bleed from report
-- which the party who is at the pains to propagate it -- hopes in God it is
not true, but in the mean time is resolved to give the report her pass, etc.

LET it be your first object to do your duty, and not to be very anxious about
any censure, but that of conscience.

TIME.
HOW speedily will the consummation of all things commence! for yet a very
little while, and the commissioned Archangel lifts up his hand to heaven, and
swears by the Almighty name, that " Time shall be no longer." Then abused
opportunities will never return, and new opportunities will never more be
offered. Then should negligent mortals wish ever so passionately for a few
hours -- a few moments only -- to be thrown back from the opening eternity;
thousands of worlds would not be able to procure the grant.

A wise man counts his minutes. He lets no time slip, for time is life; which
he makes long, by the good husbandry, of a right use and application of it.

MAKE the most of your minutes, says Aurelius, and be good for something while
you can.

WE should read over our lives as well as books, take a survey of our actions,
and make an inspection into the division of our time. King Alfred (that truly
great and wise monarch) is recorded to have divided the day and night into
three parts: Eight hours he allotted to eat and sleep in, eight for business
and recreation, and eight he dedicated to study and prayer.

TIME is what we want most, but what we use worst; for which we must all
account, when time shall be no more.

SHOULD the greatest part of people sit down, and draw a particular account of
their time, what a shameful bill would it be? So much extraordinary for eating,
drinking and sleeping, beyond what nature requires; so much in revelling and
wantonness; so much for the recovery of last night's intemperance; so much for
gaming, plays and masquerades; so much in paying and receiving formal and
impertinent visits, in idle and foolish prating, in censuring and reviling our
neighbors; so much in dressing, and talking of fashions; and so much lost and
wasted in doing nothing.

IT was a memorable practice of Vespasian, through the whole course of his
life; he called himself to an account every night for the actions of the past
day, and so often as he found he had skipped any one day without doing some
good, he entered upon his diary this memorial, " I have lost a day."

THE time we live ought not to be computed by the number of years, but by the
use which has been made of it: It is not the extent of ground, but the yearly
rent which gives the value to the estate. Wretched and thoughtless creatures!
in the only place where covetousness were a virtue, we turn prodigals! nothing
lies upon our hands with such uneasiness, nor has there been so many devices
for any one thing, as to make time glide away imperceptibly and to no purpose.
A shilling shall be hoarded up with care whilst that which is above the price
of an estate, is flung away with disregard and contempt.

Finis.

