A SERMON, PREACHED AT THE EXECUTION OF MATTHIAS GOTLEIB, FOR MURDER; AT
NEWTON, October 28, 1796. By HOLLOWAY WHITFIELD HUNT, A. B. and V. D. M.

PRINTED IN NEWTON, NEW JERSEY: Nov. 11, 1796

PREFACE.
MATTHIAS GOTLEIB was born in Prussia, and early in life engaged as a Soldier,
and went through various scenes common to that calling, which we think not
worth relating here: One thing however, he was remarkable for deserting his
post and army, and listing again from time to time, 'till he came to America,
during the late war with Britain. After settling and moving several times, he
came to Newton, in New Jersey, where he perpetrated the following act, of
murdering his wife.

"On the 19th day of December, 1795, he was about the village as usual, and
returned home intoxicated; his wife being displeased to see him in that
situation, began to find fault with his conduct -- he immediately got his
butcher-knife, and asked his son for a whet-stone, but the boy's mother ordered
him to his work, which he obeyed. Gotleib then whet his knife on a board, and
proceeded to stab his wife; he gave her three separate stabs, one of which
proved to be mortal, by passing through one of her intestines. He then
attempted to make his escape, but was apprehended and confined in prison. The
unfortunate woman died the fifth day following, and a Coroner's inquest sat
over her body, of twenty-three good and lawful men; four surgeons were called
to dissect and examine the body, and gave their opinion thereon -- after the
jurors had heard the testimony of the surgeons and witnesses, they found a
verdict of wilful murder, committed by the hand of Matthias Gotleib. He
continued in Jail 'till October 1796, when he was tried and convicted, by the
most positive evidence, and executed accordingly.

THE words that I have chosed on this occasion, as the foundation of the
following discourse, are recorded in Genesis, IX, 6. "Whosoever sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man.

IT appears from the latter clause of our text, that man was in his original
formation, like his Maker, in some good degree; his being in the image of God,
must denote his bearing some resemblance to God, is his perfections -- as we
find some traces in man's paradisiacal state of holiness, rectitude and
happiness.

THUS man was a noble creature, when he came from the hands of his Creator --
endowed with superior faculties of mind and traquility of disposition. Thus by
creation all men are brethren and all nations of one blood; and indeed there
are many considerations which should make us protect and love each other, as
belonging to one great family -- this appears not only from creation, but by
Providence, which provides abundantly for us all; especially, considering
ourselves as christians, our obligations are still stronger, to love and
protect each other. But these considerations have not been kept in view, nor
attended to -- and many of the human species have given themselves up to
bloodshed and murder, ever since the seduction of our first parents. Soon
after the fall, we find wicked Cain murdering his righteous brother Abel. A
bare catalogue of those individuals that have murdered each other, from that
period to this, would form a large volume. But God has declared, whosoever sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.

IN farther prosecuting this subject, I shall I. STATE a number of those sins
which ends in death, either temporal or eternal, except repentance takes place
in the heart. II. ENDEAVOR to show the propriety of that law of God and man,
that annexes death to murder. III. MAKE an improvement suitable to the present
occasion.


AND first of those sins that end in death without repentance.

BLASPHEMY against God and profane swearing, although disregarded by many, not
being punished generally by the laws of man; but God who is jealous of his
glory, has strictly forbidden it, those who are guilty of this vile practice,
may remember that they are accountable to the great legislator of the universe,
under whose government, without repentance, they must be punished with eternal
death. Neglecting or despising of the Sabbath, subjects every ridiculer of that
sacred day, to the just indignation of God, who is despised by these profane
scoffers.

THE despising of relative duties, come under the penalty of the divine law; as
disobedience to parents, turbulence to superiors, faction and discord in
society without just cause; to which we may add, stealing, which is punishable
by our laws, together with adultery, which tends to destroy the good order of
society, and was by the Jews punished with stoneing to death, by the
Congregation: Although now despised by the vicious, will tend to their final
ruin, unless sincere repentance takes place in the heart.

IN this catalogue of sins, lying and drunkenness, should not be considered as
the least criminal; lying is not only odious, but tends to deface all truth,
and the ascertaining of facts; drunkenness gradually undermines and ruins the
best constitution, it expends what Providence has allowed us, and frequently
causes poor families to suffer.

AND here murder comes in a strong point of light. Murder is base and
unnatural, it is invading the prerogative of God's government; right of human
society, the perpetrators ought to be considered as the enemies of God and man.

WE learn from the holy scriptures, how a just God, will deal with those
abominable sinners.

MURDERERS, whoremongers, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Rev. 21.8.


ALL wilful sin, of whatever kind, leads to misery here, and misery hereafter,
banishment from all good, and confinement to all evil.

THIS brings us to the second proposition.

II. WHICH was to show the propriety of that law of God and man, that annexes
death to murder.

1. SEVERITY is indispensibly necessary, from the heinousness and nature of
this crime. It is a^^^ys considered among the blackest of crimes, to murder a
fellow creature; to mark it with the greatest disgrace and shame, to deter
others from the like offense. If this was not the case, massacres would become
more frequent, and no man's life would be in any degree of safety.

2. IT must be right and proper; as it comes from God, who is all perfection,
wisdom, power, justice, and mercy: His wisdom has fired upon this punishment,
who knows the whole nature of man.

THE power of that God, who made all worlds, is able to discover and have it
punished; hence murder, by some mean or other, is generally found out; yes
always, for if not in this world, it will surely be in the next. For justice
must be executed, and mercy itself does not forbid it; for the same God that
has declared, that, he that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed, is all mercy as well as justice.

3. THE propriety of this, appears from its having been so general, in most of
the nations of the earth, publicly execute murderers; yes, many that are
unacquainted with the scriptures. To confirm our opinion, we have the sense of
ancient and modern nations; of so many millions of wise Legislators and great
Philosophers. The wise king of Israel, says, in the multitude of counselors,
there is safety -- and indeed it appears so, from the reason and nature of
things; that he who takes the life of another unjustly, shall loose or forfeit
his own in consequence of it. It is necessary for the preservation of the
unalienable rights of society, that every man should be protected by the laws
of his county; and if any body of lawgivers, should alleviate this punishment,
who would be willing to be a citizen of that community.

3. AS we are fully convinced, of the propriety and justice of this law, as it
has its sanction from God and man; we should not hesitate to do our duty in our
several departments, to see the law put in full execution, notwithstanding our
feelings of sympathy -- for a law, however just and righteous, if not put in
force, proves no avail, but hardens and increases the offenders.

THIS brings us to make an improvement, suitable to the present occasion.

1. WE may learn from this subject, the danger of all sin, as it leads to death
temporal or eternal -- God is holy, and all sin is detestable in his sight, and
must be punished here or hereafter; and if repentance is not exercised, both in
some instances.

2. WE may learn from this subject, the danger of smaller sins, as they lead to
greater, till the conscience becomes feared, and no crime is too great to
perpetrate.

PERHAPS few, who are brought to the gallows, for wilful murder, but what
advance from stealing, lying, drunkenness, and various wicked practices, till
at last they imbrue their hands in human blood.

3. WE might take notice, from the circumstances before us, the degrees of
wickedness, in murder itself. Is it sinful to murder a stranger? A distant
relation? It is still more so to murder a brother, a sister, a child! In a
higher degree, it is abominable to murder a Father or Mother; but above all, a
bosom companion -- a wife -- the partner of our joys -- the soother of our
miseries! Especially the husband, the protector, turning into the butcher, is
horrible in every point of view.

4. AND to you poor criminal, do not think that we wish to insult you -- no, we
only wish to impress you with a feeling sense of your crime, and the aggravated
nature of your sins. You have robbed your poor children of their Mother, and
now the law of God and man, must take your life also, so that they are stripped
of their Father and Mother. May God in his mercy take care of the orphans. I
hope, yes believe, you feel sorry for what you have done. Give yourself up to
sincere repentance and brokenness of heart, for your offenses. Pardon may be
possible -- God is gracious to the true penitent -- plead for his mercy, in and
through the merits and atonement of Jesus Christ -- strip yourself of all
self-righteousness and creature performance.

8. YOU have justly forfeited your life to the state and laws of our land --
you have but a few moments to live -- your glass is almost run -- you are
forbiden to behold the rising of yonder fun again -- to you it will set with
eternal night -- you must soon appear at the awful bar of Almighty God. -- God
pity and have mercy upon you. -- Farewell.

9. SHALL we close this memorable scene, without a word to the spectators.

YOU see that this man must now die -- do not ridicule him -- but pray to God
to keep you from those sins which led him to this horrid act -- remember all
sin is detestable to God and Christ, and will come upon sinners in an
unexpected hour, when ye think not -- be ye therefore also ready. -- Avoid all
sin, especially drunkenness, which urged on this man to murder his wife and
companion. -- Remember an intoxicated man looses much of his reason, and turns
into the scale of the inferior animals; avoid particularly, the rising of your
passions -- an angry man is an outrageous and desperate creature. May the
example before us, serve as a warning to us all. -- May God give us sincere
contrition of soul, for all our sins, and accept of us through Jesus Christ.

AMEN.

