THE LIFE AND CHARACTER OF MISS SUSANNA ANTHONY, WHO DIED, IN NEWPORT, (R. I.)
JUNE 23, MDCCX^^, IN THE SIXTY FIFTH YEAR OF HER AGE.

CONSISTING CHIEFLY IN EXTRACTS FROM HER WRITINGS, WITH SOME BRIEF OBSERVATIONS
ON THEM.

COMPILED BY SAMUEL HOPKINS, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH IN
NEWPORT.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS, BY LEONARD WORCESTER.

MDCCXCVI.

THE LIFE AND CHARACTER OF MISS SUSANNA ANTHONY.
SECTION I.
A general sketch of her life and character; as an introduction to a more
particular account taken from her own writings.
MISS Susanna Anthony, was born at Newport, on Rhodeisland, on the 25th day of
October, 1726. Mr. Isaac Anthony, her father, was a native of Rhodeisland. When
he was young, he went to Boston to learn the trade of a goldsmith. There he
became acquainted with Miss Mercy Chamberlin, whom he afterward married, and
settled in Newport, where they lived about sixty years together. They had seven
daughters, five of whom survived their parents, but no son. Susanna, who was
their youngest daughter except one, lived with her parents until they died,
which was between forty and fifty years: She was never married. Her parents
were of the denomination called Friends, or Quakers, in which way she was
educated, until she was about fifteen years old, when she was the subject of a
series of remarkable exercises, of which she has given a particular account;
which will be inserted in the next section, together with her making a public
profession of religion, and joining to the first congregational church in
Newport, of which the Rev, Nathaniel Clap was then pastor; where she continued
a member, until her death, which was nearly fifty years; and was a
distinguished and eminent instance of piety and strict religion, in every
branch of the duties of Christianity, so far as they could be exercised, acted
out, and discovered, in her situation and circumstances in life. She appeared
wholly, and in a distinguished degree, devoted to the cause of Christ and pure
religion; and was a remarkable example of devotion, benevolence, and christian
friendship; of self-denial, sobriety, modesty, humility, industry, and of a
careful circumspection and conscientiousness in all her concerns and conduct.
She being greatly attentive to her Bible, and all other means of instruction,
which she enjoyed, attained an eminent degree of discerning and knowledge of
the distinguishing doctrines and duties of Christianity. And, as she was
greatly attentive to practical religion, and constantly studied the Bible in
this view, always exercising herself to have a conscience void of offense, both
toward God and man, she was remarkably judicious, as a casuist, and greatly
helpful to her friends, who applied to her in doubtful and difficult cases of
conscience. All this will be better and more particularly exhibited by the
extracts from her writings, which will be produced in the following sections:
But cannot, even in this way, be fully expressed, or set in that clear,
affecting, and amiable light, before the public, in which she was seen, loved,
and admired, by her particular and intimate to friends.

Her bodily frame and constitution was so feeble and delicate, from her youth,
that she was not equal to any business, which required a considerable degree of
strength and exertion. She was, therefore, chiefly employed in the use of her
needle, in which she was expert and skilful, and by which she was able to
support herself, when she enjoyed her health* of which she was deprived for a
number of years, from about the twentieth year of her age, and fell into very
painful and distressing disorders of body; so that she appeared to herself and
others, many times, to be dying, or near to death; and her physician and
friends thought she could not survive her disorders, which attended her several
years, excepting some short intervals of respite. This is mentioned here, as it
may render some part of her diary, which will be transcribed, more intelligible
to the reader. But she was, in a great measure, relieved from these distressing
disorders, and enjoyed a degree of ease and health in the latter part of her
life; though she was always feeble, and subject to turns of painful maladies.

When the war, between Britain and America, commenced, she left Newport, and
went into the country, where she spent great part of her time until that war
was nearly closed; part of which time she spent in teaching the children in the
families in which she lived, and in keeping a small school; in which she
appeared to be greatly serviceable, and obtained the approbation, gratitude,
and esteem, of those who employed her.

After the war, she lived at Newport to the time of her decease, a comfort, and
greatly useful to her friends, earnestly endeavoring* in her sphere, to
promote the cause of truth and Christianity in the world, and more especially
in the religious society with which she was connected: to whom her death is
justly considered as an unspeakable loss. But, with respect to the people in
general, the words of the Prophet may be applied, in this instance: "The
righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; the merciful are taken away
none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come."

In the month of June, 1791, her youngest sister was taken sick with a
peripneumony: And as she had but one more sister then living, who was out of
town, she (...) and (...) her in her sickness, which proved (...) she died in
about a week. On the day in which her sister died, she was seized with the same
disorder, which put an end to her life also in one week. The disorder, with
which she died, was violent, from first to last, and uncommonly distressing; so
that she was not able to say much in this her last sickness. She, however, said
to her christain friends, that she desired to bless God, that she had nothing
of those conflicts, which she had before sometimes feared; but her soul did,
with a sweet calm and confidence* rest on Jesus Christ, without the least doubt
of her union to him, and of her happiness in his kingdom forever. Thus she
died, on the 23d of June, 1791.

AFTER she had made a public profession of religion, she felt a strong desire
to serve Christ, in an entire and constant devotedness to him, in promoting his
interest and kingdom, the good of his people, and the salvation of men. This
led her seriously to consider in what way, and by what means, she, in her
situation, and circumstances, could best answer these ends. She was a poor,
obscure person, and had no prospect of obtaining much of the things of this
world, so as to do much good by supporting the gospel or distributing to the
relief of the indigent. She did not expect to rise into general repute, or to
any public station, by which she could have opportunity of extensive
influence: And her natural capacity she considered as small, and she was
destitute of the advantages of education, which many had.

After a careful and conscientious attention to this subject, and much earnest
prayer for direction, daily crying to God, in the language of Saul, when he was
converted, "Lord, what will thou have me to do?" she was led to conclude that
she could serve the interest of Christ, and of his church, and promote the good
of her fellow men, more, by devoting herself to prayer, than in any other way,
of which she was capable. And as, in her circumstances, she was in a great
measure free from domestic cares, and had opportunity to spend much time in
retirement, she thought it was her duty to devote as much time as could be
spared from her particular employment, and necessary avocations, in prayer not
only for herself, and all her particular friends and near connections; but more
especially for the prosperity of the church of Christ, and the advancement of
his kingdom in the world, until all nations, Jews and Gentiles, should be
converted, and brought into it; in which, prayer for the ministers of the
gospel was included, that they might be filled with the spirit of Christ, and
abundantly assisted and succeeded; and that the head of the church, and Lord of
the harvest, would raise up and send forth faithful laborers into his
harvest,etc.

For this exercise, she frequently set a part whole days, when her
circumstances would admit of it, and especially when there appeared to her to
be a particuular call for prayer; and spent them in secret fasting and prayer.
And she used to spend the afternoon and evening of the last day of the week in
this exercise, when not prevented by some uncommon circumstance; also the
morning of the Sabbath.

Before she was sixteen years old, she joined a society of women, who met once
every week, for prayer, reading, and religious conversation; and who devoted
the afternoon, once in a month, to this exercise; and spent at least, four
whole days in a year, in fasting and prayer together. Of this society she was a
distinguished member, as long as she lived; by whom she was greatly beloved and
esteemed; and they received much comfort and edification from her conversation
and prayers. In the latter, especially, she was distinguishedly eminent; and,
at particular times* had such enlargement and access to the throne of grace,
that she would pray an hour and an half, or more, with such engagedness and
fervency, without any repetition, with a flow of words expressing the most
pertinent and affecting ideas, and with such a natural connection, and
progression from one to another, that none who joined with her would appear to
be tired, but all pleased, affected and edified; And felt a consciousness that
none could have an adequate idea of what passed at such times, who were not
present, as a full description of the holy fervor, the clear view of invisible
things, and that nearness to God, while she poured out her heart before him,
which she discovered, cannot he made by any narration of them.

In the practice of this important duty, she excelled most christains, and in
an eminent degree conformed to the following apostolic injunction: "Praying
always with all prayer, and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto
with all perseverance, and supplication for all saints; and for me." for the
ministers of the gospel, in particular. And she had many remarkable answers to
her prayers; many instances of which she has recorded in her diary. Some of
which will be transcribed from her private writings; and the whole that has
been mentioned under this head will be thereby in some measure illustrated.
Particularly by the following, which may most properly be inserted here.

The first is dated June 27, 1749, which was in the twenty third year of her
age.

"Now would I adore God. Mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty! I have
renewed occasion to praise thee, and to live devoted to thy service and glory.
And now determine, the few remaining days of my life, through thy grace
assisting, shall be renewedly devoted to thee.

"In the year 1744, in September, In the 17th year of her age.
I came to a fixed resolution to spend some days in a year to seek God's favor
to a miserable world; for the bringing in of the Jews and Gentiles, and the
advancement of the kingdom of Christ in the world. And likewise some time of
one day in every week, to pray for the ministers of the gospel, and the whole
church of God, militant. Besides other days of fasting and prayer, which I kept
more especially for my own soul, I determined not to forget them.

"And I remember my soul followed hard after God, day and night, that the
gospel might reach the utmost ends of the earth, in its saving power and
efficacy on the souls of men; entreating that God would stir up bowels of
compassion in his ministers and children, to unite their address to him, on
this account. Nor can I ever forget what access God condescended to grant me,
in pleading that the Holy Spirit might be poured out on his children, that they
might not cease to wrestle and cry mightily to God, until he make Jerusalem a
praise in the whole earth.

"And I have now met with an account, which came from Scotland, that in the
same year, in November, they came to a united agreement to spend the first
Tuesday in each quarter of the year; and some part of Saturday night, and
Sabbath day morning, in this exercise. Which account or desire, I never met
with until very lately: Nor had I ever heard of such a thing being thought of.
Which makes me conclude the motion came from the Spirit of God; and the
agreement was in answer to prayer."

The following, which is found in her diary, dated March 28, 1754, relates to
the same subject; and shows that she continued in this resolution and practice.

"Lord, thou have the residue of the spirit. O, pour it out upon a sinking
world. Where, O, where is the Lord God of Elijah? And where his promises? Art
not thou he? And will thou not arise? O strengthen my faith, and enable me to
wrestle, day and night, for the good of thy chosen. O Lord, Jehovah, pour out
thy Spirit on me, and on all thy people. Let thy Spirit fit me for the work,
and I will devote my life to the duty of prayer and supplication for all men.
O, accept of this recovery of health, which I devote to this exercise. Only do
thou, Lord, qualify me for the sacred, solemn exercise, and I disiniss every
other scheme or project, and make this the grand pursuit of my life* O assist
me, or I retract. For I cannot persist without thee. For I should surely bring
on myself a tiresome burden. I should either faint, and drop the purpose; or
lengthen out a formal, lifeless duty, neither pleasing to myself, nor for the
glory of God, or the good of others.

"But, if this purpose be good in thy sight, O, pour out thy spirit and grace
for this end: And then, Lord, behold, here I am* I allow no reserse. Furnish my
mind with arguments; raise my soul with desire; and let faith and hope animate
my heart. O God, if thou will accept me, in this way, by thus qualifying me for
it, thou, Lord, shall have the glory. But, O, suffer me not to attempt in my
own strength. Lord, empty me of self. I desire to seek and serve thee; yet I
fear offering strange fire; or, with hastly Uzzah, unpreparedly, or
uncommissioned, to touch the sacred ark. I know thou call upon thy saints to
cry mightily to thee, until thou make Zion the praise of the whole earth: And
throughout thy word art encouraging and exciting thy people to wrestle with
thee, in prayer, for the glorious day of thy power, when all iniquity shall
stop her mouth, and the dear Redeemer's kingdom shall spread far and wide. O,
do thou prepare thyself a sacrifice, and accept it, through thy dear Son.

"Blessed be God for any assistance. Lord, my soul longs for thy salvation.
O, when shall I see the good of thy chosen! O, how sweet, to think of being at
one and the same instant united in spirit, lifting up holy hands without wrath
or doubting, for one and the same cause and interest, with many of thy dear
saints: And the divine Spirit cementing us together, in the love of Chirst and
one another!"

The following is an extract from a letter, dated Nov. 27, 1769, written above
twenty years after the foregoing, on the same subject, to a particular friend
of hers. By which it will appear how conscientious she was in this matter; and
what fears she sometimes had, that she had engaged in this business, and
prosecuted it with so much labor and so many conflicts, from pride, or
something wrong in her, which brought great perplexity and distress on her
mind, in which the accuser of the brethren, the temper, no doubt, had a great
hand.

"I had a very strong inclination to write to you last week: But I dare not. I
was even ashamed to see you, or open my mouth before you, under my pressures of
mind. The case is this, dear Sir, which I now take the liberty to mention.

"After I had publicly given myself up to God, and commenced a member of Zion,
I felt some disposition to study what I should render to the Lord for all his
benefits; and how I could, in my low and private capacity, best promote his
interest, and serve the church of Christ. Prayer and supplication appeared the
only, or chief way; as good in that way might come more pure and unsullied.
Accordingly, I devoted myself to the service of the sanctuary, in this way, if
God would but accept and assist me herein; though I should be but as a
burdenbearer. And herein; though I should be but as a burdenbearer. And herein
I thought my eyes were not lofty, or my heart haughty; neither would it be to
exercise myself in things too high for me; encouraged by the gracious
acceptance of the offerings of women in the tabernacle service.

"And herein, I thought, God did graciously condescend to assist and bless me,
and repeatedly dispose me to devote myself to the cause, in this way; making it
a powerful motive to cleanse myself from all filthiness of flesh and spirit.
But I soon found great conflicts; and it has often been suggested to my mind,
that I should never have any rest, so long as I persisted in this way. However,
I though, from a sincere desire for the glory of God, and the good of his
church and people, I could cheerfully submit to an afflicted and conflicting
life, if I might be assisted and accepted herein. But sometimes, last week in
particular, under a sense of the violent efforts of the powers of darkness, my
own extreme vileness and weakness, as tow before the flames, or as a leaf
shaken by the wind, I am fearing whether it was not from the pride and
naughtinness of my heart, that I submitted to conflicts. Whether it was not
like the aspiring disciples, when Christ asked them, Are ye able to drink of
the cup, etc.? I had, through pride and arrogance, been saying, I am able.

"Under these views of myself, I have been much dejected, afraid to move or
stir. And now, my dear Sir, if you have the least suspicion, at any time, of my
acting from this hateful, detestable principle, pray speak freely and plainly.
For, though I think my heart does not condemn me, as being wholly under its
reigning power; yet I find it still works, to bring forth fruit unto death. I
think, if I know any thing about myself, I have been, and am devoted to God;
all I am, have, or can be, and do, to his glory: And that my own comfort and
happiness, is no farther so to me, than as it promotes that: And that to be a
consecrated vessel, though of the meanest use, is my highest with, prayer and
pursuit. I think I know no interest, but his. Yet, I am not with a proud
presumption to touch the sacred ark, left I do it to my own confusion. I know I
am to pray for the peace and prosperity of Zion; but the doubt is, whether I am
called, in that particular manner, to take it is concerns on me, so as to make
it the business of my life; or whether to endeavor to escape with my own life,
or to work out my own salvation, etc. is not the province God has called me to
act in; so poor, so weak and polluted a worm as I am. Yet, I know I feel,
whatever I am called to, I must love this Mount Zion, and must prefer the
prosperity thereof above my chief joy."

The attentive, judicious reader of this, will not be at loss, it is presumed,
about the answer, which she received from her friend. The invisible tempter,
who hates prayer; and especially those who live most in the sincere, engaged
practice of it, took advantage of her sense of her own meanness, weakness,
unworthiness and depravity, to suggest that she had, in all her engagedness in
this duty, and in the manner in which she had devoted herself to it, aspired to
that which did not become her, from the pride of her heart, aiming, hereby, to
distress her, and discourage her from proceeding in this way. His hand was very
apparent in these exercises of hers.

It will be observed, by those who shall peruse her writings, which are to be
transcribed, that she considered the hand of Satan to be apparent in many
suggestions, which were made to her mind; and while she ascribed many things of
this kind to him, she considered herself to be wholly to blame for every wrong
voluntary exercise of her heart, or the least compliance with such suggestions,
and as much so, as if the tempter had no hand in them. And that this was not
owing to mere fancy and superstition, or was in the least unreasonable, or
inconsistent with the Bible, all must be sensible, who properly attend to the
matter, and observe that the scriptures represent Satan as an adversary to all
christians, a roaring lion, walking about seeking whom he may devour. And they
are said, in their christian warfare, to "wrestle against principalities,
against powers, against the rules of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickedness in high places." And are called upon to put on the whole
armor of God, in order to withstand the wiles of the devil. And David and
Peter, and many others, were assaulted and tempted by this adversary. No
wonder, then, that, when this person, in her youth, was disposed to renounce
the devil and his service, and turn to the Lord, and seek him with engagedness
of mind, Satan should bestir himself, and exert all his power and cunning, to
deceive and destroy her, and take all the advantage he could of her youth, want
of experience, and small degree of doctrinal knowledge. And it is reasonable to
suppose that a person so eminently devoted to religion and prayer, in
opposition to Satan and his interest, as she was in the after part of life,
should be, in a peculiar manner and degree, assaulted by the wiles of the
devil; especially, considering her situation and circumstances, of body and
mind. They, who are most eminent in christian exercises, and constant and
engaged in watching and praying, are not only exposed to opposition from Satan,
in a peculiar manner; but doubtless are commonly discerning and sensible of his
suggestions and assaults.

These observations have been made, supposing they may be of use to some, who
may read the following sections, especially that which now offers itself to the
candid reader.

SECTION II.
Containing an account of the first part of her life, written by herself, in
the 28th year of her age.
"SOME observable passages in my life, especially the first seventeen years of
it; which I have collected from some memorandums, and by the help of my memory;
and now set them down, that I may with more ease peruse them. And as they are
designed for my own use, I am no ways solicitous to omit any thing that may
look trifling, if I think the recording it may serve to animate me, and excite
that praise in my soul, which is everlastingly due to the great Author and
Finisher of my faith. A desire to revive a sense of this in my soul has led me
to review what I had formerly written; and to recollect what my memory did
retain; and now to put them together, in the order of their dates, so that
being in this compass, I might readily look over them, when I inclined, or
needed it. And here I have begun from my early days. O, may that same Divine
Spirit, which has worked all my works in me, ever excite the warmest sentiments
of gratitude, love and wonder, whenever I review these records of the divine,
unmerited displays of his grace!"

I WAS early taught to love, fear and serve the Lord. My dear mother took great
pains to form my mind for God. And, blessed be God, who, by his Spirit,
followed the good advice, counsels and warnings; early convincing me of my
sinful state, of the corrupt fountain in my soul. The first sin that I remember
to have been convinced of, was pride: And this I saw to be in my heart, and
from thence it had proceeded into act. I think I was then between five and six
years old. And I remember I was very anxious to know whether, if I grew good
then, God would forgive me: And inquired of some of my friends, as to this
matter. In the general they resolved my question, and read the eighteenth
chapter of Ezekiel to me. This put me working with all my might; and keeping up
good resolutions. But conviction wore off, and I remember but little of these
concerns, until I was about seven or eight years old. Then conviction did
revive. I saw more of the sinfulness of my heart; but had no clear knowledge of
the way of salvation by Jesus Christ. I knew Christ died for sinners; but how
we became interested in his death, I was confused. I had, though young, a set
of notions of my own, and was excessively superstitious. I worked hard. I
quarrelled with the sovereignty of God. I remember, I felt my heart rise, and
my enmity worked violently, to find there was more joy over one sinner that
repents, than over ninety and nine just persons; for I had worked up myself
into such a good conceit of myself, that I really thought I was one of the just
persons. O shocking ignorance and presumption! But God, who, I trust, was
determined to bring me home, would not suffer me finally to persist in this
scheme; but did multiply conviction. I forsook God, and fell into sins, and was
roused again by convictions.

But, as to the particular circumstances of a change which I suppose to be
about this time, I cannot remember them. The most that I can remember is, that
I was in great distress about my soul; that I saw the insufficiency of any
thing I could do to save me. And, about this time, had my heart much carried
out after Christ, and the way of salvation by him. And I remember to have been
filled with comfort and joy in religion. I should not think these things
sufficient evidences that I had experienced a work of grace in my soul, had I
experienced nothing more since that time: But what I trust I have since known
of a work of God in my soul inclines me to think my soul was then brought home
to God; that I then had true faith in God, if I now have. I can much better
remember the effects, than the circumstances of these things. And they were
such as these: Knowledge, faith and love, and hatred of sin.

As to my knowledge, though to this day I have reason to be humbled to the dust
that I know no more; and am often ready to cry out of my ignorance, that I am
ignorant as a beast before the Lord. Ah! woe is me, that I know no more of God,
and divine, spiritual things. Yet my knowledge, however weak, is an evidence to
me, that God did then work a work of grace in my soul. For now I began more
clearly to see my wretched state by nature and practice; my need of a Savior,
and the way of salvation by him. My mind was enlightened, and drank in many of
the precious truths of the gospel, about this time. And from this time I had a
clearer Knowledge of Christ as mediator* one chosen by the Father for sinners,
than before.

As to my faith, which is an evidence of my change. After this time, which I
suppose to be about the eighth or ninth year of my age, I did frequently
endeavor to give myself up to God, casting all my concerns on him; embracing
Christ as my only Redeemer; resting on him as my only high priest before God
the Father. And though, at this age, and under some disadvantages, I had not a
thorough doctrinal knowledge, which renders my experiences, at this time, far
less clear, than otherwise they might have been, yet the actings of my (...)
toward God then, appear since to me, as far as I can discern, to be the real
actings of true faith.

Again, as to my love. Now was my soul taken up in admiring the glorious way of
salvation by Christ. He appeared truly amiable, as the Redeemer of lost man.
Nor was the Father's love less wonderful, in giving his Son to die. I can
remember to have been even wrapped up in ecstasy of love and wonder. For some
time my thoughts seemed only to dwell and live on the admirable views of these
things. I wondered they were no more admired and spoken of by others. I loved
the word of God, took great delight in reading it, and in all the exercises of
religion. My greatest delight was to pour out my soul before God. I brought
before him the minutest concerns of my life, and sought his direction and
blessing. It was sweet to me to eye God in all I did. And God did graciously
indulge my love and sincerity, (though attended with many childish weaknesses)
and witnessed that he heard my prayers. O! what enlargement did I now receive
from a kind and gracious God! And how was my soul taken up in love to God and
religion! And in hatred of sin! Which is another evidence. I found a hatred of
all sin, as sin, as contrary to a holy God. And remember to have examined
myself by that mark, and found it was so, as far as I could find out; that I
did hate sin, for sin's sake, and love holiness, for holiness' sake.

Thus I went on for some time, in the comforts of religion, and in the practice
of the duties of it, weary of the world, and longing after God; desirous of the
salvation of others. In particular, I remember to have the soul of my youngest
sister much on my heart. She was about six years and half younger than I was;
and I used to put her to bed. And I made it my practice, when I had done, to
kneel down, undiscovered, and seek God's special blessing, and constant
protection for her. O that God may fulfill my earnest requests for her.

But after some time I began to lose these good impressions, and get in love
with childish vanities and plays. And thus my heart declined from God and duty.
Yet, forever blessed be God, who did not suffer me wholly to lose these
religious impressions: But followed me with his Spirit, though I strove to
disregard him, and follow my sports and plays, for which my mother reproved me;
and I resolved against them; yet fell again. And thus I continued, often afraid
and ashamed to pray, until forced to it by some distressing providence: And
then I would continue steady for a while; as when by a sudden stroke God took
from me my eldest sister, whom I greatly loved. I then flew to God for relief
and support; and that the blow might be sanctified to the whole family. Thus,
when trouble was near, I poured out my prayer to God. But, alas! I was not
steady and constant with God. My heart, after all that God had done for me, and
all I had engaged for God, was now bent to back slide from God, and would have
fatally apostatized from him, had he not kept me by his mighty power, from
which none shall be ever able to pluck his children; he having engaged to carry
on the work he has begun, will assureded fulfill his purpose. This I verily
believe; for otherwise I had never been recovered from such foul, ungrateful
wanderings. O, how long did God wait to be gracious! How many mercies did he
bestow on me! How many gentle reproofs; how many kind calls and entreaties did
he use! But still I forsook the Lord my Redeemer.

And now he began to hide his face from me, and suffer Satan to beset me. My
sins appeared great, and I was covered with darkness and confusion. I appeared
to myself amazingly ignorant. And here Satan strove to persuade me that I had
better let religion alone, until I was older. Then I should know how to engage
in it. And I was tempted to believe all the darkness and trouble I found was
owing to my being so young, that I had not sufficient knowledge to engage in
any thing of religion. O, what distress was I now in! I found I could not now
cast off God, and the concerns of my soul; nor could I seem to pursue them to
any purpose. I had set my hand to the plough, and dare not resolvedly look
back, and cast off all thoughts of God and my soul; nor would God suffer me
thus to do* No, adored be the blessed God, who was now about to bring me near
himself. Satan had often suited his temptation to my childish thoughts, and
suggested that I could not be contented if I went to heaven; for I could not be
contented here always in one place. I returned the question, how I should be
contented in hell? But here he suggested the variety of company, I remember.
This temptation followed me closely. But the other, concerning my being too
young to engage in religion, was now very powerful. I found myself entangled in
a labyrinth of darkness and confusion. God had justly hid himself from me. The
teachings of his Spirit seemed to be gone, and I groped in the dark. I found
not a fixed reliance on Christ, to carry on his work in my soul; but often
engaged in my own strength; and then was foiled. I was often ready to think, I
never would advise one so young as I was, to set about religion; for I greatly
feared I never should obtain the favor of God; but should make shipwreck of
faith: Not considering Christ's care of his young, unexperienced disciples;
that these have a peculiar interest in his most tender care; and that his
promise is to such as seek him early, that they shall find him. Nor was I
sufficiently humbled under my wicked departure from God.

O, had God now left me, what had I done, but joined with Satan, and utterly
forsook the Lord? But thus he followed me with the convictions of his Spirit,
sometimes reproving; sometimes enlightening and encouraging me; sometimes
suffering Satan to assault me, until the year 1740, She was then in her
fourteenth year,
when the Rev. Mr. Whitefield came here. I attended his preaching, and was
quickened to give more diligence to make my calling and election sure. I read
more, and listened more attentively to the truths of the gospel. And there
being more talk of religion now* I got more acquaintance with the work of God
in the souls of his people, and resolved more diligently to labor after a life
of holiness, and inward conformity to God.

But here Satan, as a lion roused, roared after his prey, and beset me, to
persuade me my day of grace was over; that all my strivings would not signify
any thing; that God had cast me off. And now, as I had forsook God, he justly
poured anguish and terror into my soul: And I cried out with Heman, "I am ready
to die; while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted. Deep calls unto deep at
the noise of thy water spouts. All thy waves and thy billows are gone over me!"
Satan was permitted to fill my mind with the most horrid blasphemies. He that
had, but just before, tried to persuade me I was too young to be religious, now
turned his temptation to persuade me it was too late; that I should never
obtain mercy; that there was no hope for me; that I had better curse God and
die! And again he would persuade me there was no God, nor any thing in
religion. But, I felt the arrows of God within me. I roared, by reason of the
disquietude of my soul; I roared, by reason of the disquietude of my soul; and
was strongly beset to lay violent hands on myself, verily fearing, if I lived,
I should be a most blasphemous wretch; being strongly and violently urged to
utter some shocking imprecations on God, and my own soul, and every thing
sacred. O! how many hours have I spent bewailing a lost God, and a lost heaven;
crying out, *I am undone! I am undone! condemned already, and shall be damned!"
Pleading with God to stop my impious breath, before it uttered those dreadful
blasphemies. And I believe a bloody inhuman butcher would have been more
welcome to my tortured breast, than a reprieve to a condemned criminal* For
Satan began to persuade me that I was a devil incarnate; that God had raised
and set me up as a monument of his wrath and vengeance; and that, if I lived, I
should but show the enmity, rage and language of hell. Then he would persuade
me to call God's justice into question, and impiously charge him with
injustice, in suffering me to live.

That threatening was come upon me, "In the morning thou shall say, Would God
it were evening! And at evening thou shall say, Would God it were morning!" I
was now on the brink of despair; but never had opened my case to any person. My
friends, as I afterward found, were much distressed about me; and some feared
I was going into despair. I had cast off all regard for my body. One of my
hands, I had so long neglected, only when I wrung it in distress, that it began
to wither and perish. I had scarce any command or use of it. This, with the
horror of my mind, made me appear awkward and singular, to those who knew not
my case. And one sharply reproved me for it, telling me, she was ashamed of me,
before company; though this I shunned, and never would be seen, if I could help
it. This usage, with Satan's violent assaults, had been too hard for me, had
not God graciously interposed, and brought good out of it. For this Satan took
the advantage of, to worry and distract my soul. But I over heard my dear
parents lamenting my case, with the utmost tenderness. And one repeated to them
the treatment I had before met with. They sharply reproved the person, and
expressed their distress for me, charging all to treat me with the utmost
tenderness. This worked powerfully on my affections. I took the Bible and sat
down to read. The first words I met with were these, psalm. cv. 13. "Like as a
father pitieth his children; so the Lord pitieth them that fear him." They
appeared quite new to me. I was filled with a sense of the compassion and love
of God, who before appeared as a terrible Being. And now I entertained some
little encouragement.

But, though the least gleam of hope was like life to the dead, yet it did not
last long. Satan had not gone to the utmost of his permission. Though God
mercifully afforded some supports, that I might not be quite out done; yet, he
wisely foresaw I needed more pruning, before I should bring forth fruit: And,
therefore, suffered Satan still to vex my soul. Which liberty he improved in
the most shocking and blasphemous suggestions, that a cursed fiend could throw
into my mind. Every mercy was an occasion to dart them into my mind; and I was
even weary of my life. The thoughts of hell were not so terrible to me, as
those blasphemies of God, But, what added to my distress was, that I thought
these were the produce of my own heart; that it was from the enmity of my
nature against God, and not from Satan, that they did proceed. This added
vastly to my distress: For I thought myself one of the worst of monsters; and
often wished that I might be annihilated, that I might never show forth this
accursed enmity of my heart in hell. O, it was a most shocking, tormenting
thought to me, of joining with devils in blaspheming God and Jesus Christ; and
I thought, if I was damned, I wished I might bear my torment, without an
impious reproach on the blessed God. Yea, I made this the matter of my prayer
to God and acknowledged his justice.

Thus I continued* in the year 1741, the Rev. Mr. Gilbert Tennent came here. He
had been here before; but I had never heard him. But now I went. And some of my
friends, being much affected under the word, expressed their concern to me,
telling me, they wished they had been as much concerned for their souls, as
they thought I was. This roused me. I burst into tears, and told them they did
not know what a dreadful creature I was; what dreadful thoughts I had. And
exclaimed against my self most terribly; assuring them they could not once
think how had I was. But, O, how was I harassed and worried, after I had told
this to them! Satan worked on my pride, to make me ashamed that I had let any
body know how bad I was. I thought they would not think me fit to live. I was
ready to think every one would look on me to be such a monster, as was never
heard of before. With many entreaties I was prevailed on, in the evening, to
visit Mr. Tennent* But my mouth was shut. I dare not speak a word, only yes, or
no. But I gained light by this worthy minister's preaching and conversation.
Forever blessed be God that I saw him.

But, after this, I was terribly distressed by these words, "He that made you,
will not have mercy on you; and he that formed you, will show you no favor."
O, the terrors of these words were like fire in my soul! Again, Satan persuaded
me not to pray for grace; for if I had grace, I should be under such infinite
obligations to God for it, end I should never live up to them, that I should be
worse off then than now. I could not then see through the fallacy of this
temptation. O, how subtle is Satan in managing his temptations! First darkening
our minds, as to some powerful truths; and then he suits his temptations so
artfully that the most judicious are sometimes nonplused. And no wonder then,
that a poor, ignorant babe, who knew hut very little of the doctrinal or
experimental part of religion, was so overpowered. And surely I had been
utterly confounded, had not the Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in
battle, engaged for me, supported and sustained my soul. An instance of this I
am now come to. One night I was worn out with conflicts and combats. Despairing
of help, I went into my chamber, and threw myself on the bed, unable to resist
any longer; there to give up all hopes of mercy. But I fell asleep, so that I
remembered no more, until the next morning. I awaked with all my clothes on, as
I was the day before: But my mind was more composed. I was at first startled,
that one under such distress could sleep thus. But I recollected that the
disciples of our Lord were said to sleep for sorrow of heart. Though my inward
trials were great now; yet God graciously afforded me timely relief and
succor, more than I had heretofore, or perhaps I had failed under so long a
pressure of soul.

Again, I was distressed, and almost ready to despair, because my trials were
of so long continuance; and my heart began to faint. Satan set in to persuade
me there was no hope for me, seeing I had been in this condition so long, and
was no nearer deliverance than at first. Now my soul was racked with tormenting
agony; in which I took up the Bible, not knowing what to do, or scarce what I
did do. But, to my surprise, I lit on those words, John v. 6. "When Jesus saw
him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time in that case, he faith unto
him, Will thou be made whole?" Here I saw the compassionate Redeemer showing
his compassion to one long distressed; that this was no obstacle in his way;
that, as his power was not limited, neither was his goodness: But even this,
that was an objection against my hope, seemed to be given here, for some reason
or motive that excited Christ's pity.

"When Jesus saw him lie, and knew he had been now a long time in that case,"
etc. This was my case. I had been now a long time in a very destressed
condition. And if Jesus had compassion on him, why might he not on me. From
this I took encouragement: The power and goodness of the kind Savior. My
darkness vanished; my distress fled; and I cast myself on this gracious God for
help, believing he would appear for me, and show mercy, and bruise Satan under
my feet. O, how did this revive my drooping soul, and cause me to rejoice!

But I was soon again plunged into terrible distress. For, though Satan was
forced to slay, he soon returned with redoubled sury on me. Yet, by these
conquests of my Savior over him, I was kept from utter despair. I was again
assaulted, so that I seemed as one really possessed of the devil. For, when at
secret prayer, I should be so surprised, hurried and distracted, as to start
right up, and run about, not knowing what I did, or why I did it; only that
Satan seemed to have the full power of me. And sometimes some outward things
have been so managed, that I could not but think Satan worked powerfully by
these to affright and terrify me: Because, at the very instant that my mind has
been thrown into the most amazing disorder and confusion, some outward
surprisals have rushed on me, which could not be otherwise well accounted for.
Yet, blessed be God, Satan was never permitted to present any thing to my
bodily eyes, or ears; not did I ever think I heard any voice, or saw any
vision, either from heaven or hell. My fancy, or imagination, was never carried
away, and so imposed on me, as to think I heard any thing, that had a peculiar
respect to me, beyond what the word of God has revealed. And this I have often
thought of, with gratitude to God; especially when I consider how prone my
constitution is to the lively workings of fancy. Nor did the sweet comforts of
the gospel, and the joys I have since felt, proceed from any such imaginary
transports; but, I trust, have been agreeable to divine revelation in the
scriptures, and to reason. I think I have abundant cause to adore and bless
that God who has preserved me from such sordid notions of vital religion, on
which some persons of wild imagination have laid great stress. viz. hearing
voices, seeing visions, being in trances, and seeing their names written in
heaven, etc.

But though this, through the grace of God, was not my case; yet Satan had
great power to fright and distress me; especially after I had been engaging in
the worship of God. And I should be filled with such horror, that I could rest
in no one posture; but rolling from place to place; wringing my hands:
expostulating with God to take me out of the world: For what profit could it be
to him, that I should live to dishonor his great and dreadful name. And here
all former temptations seemed to redouble their force. I was ready to wish I
never had been: And that I was any thing but a living soul. It is impossible
for the tongue or pen of mortals to describe the agony of my soul; the amazing
load that pressed on me. I seemed as though I should have twisted every bone
out of its place: And have often since wondered that I never disjointed a bone,
when, through the violence of my distress, I wrung my hands, twisted every
joint, and strained every nerve; biting my flesh; gnashing my teeth; throwing
myself on the floor. But, O, how did the supporting hand of God still uphold
me, though I saw it not, but thought myself abandoned and given over of God.
Yet, now I see infinite wisdom, grace and love, accompanying all these
dispensations toward me. And must adore thy forever adorable goodness, Lord,
for thou have done all things well. These afflictions, which were, indeed, not
joyous, but grievous, now yield the peaceable fruits of righteousness. Here I
see the wisdom, power and goodness of my glorious Redeemer. Verily, he is
infinitely worthy my steadfast trust, and everlasting confidence. From hence I
find powerful motives and vast encouragement for future trust and reliance.

But to return. My distress increased on me, until the necessaries of life grew
tasteless. And here Satan set in to persuade me I had sinfully indulged my
appetite. And when I attempted to eat, it would be suggested, that I was then
increasing my condemnation. And while I was under this temptation I met with
those words, Romans xiv. 23, "He that doubts is damned, if he eat." I did not
consider it had no reference to our common, daily food; but to what was offered
to idols. But the tempter would persuade me it was just my case; for I was
convinced it was a sin; and yet went on. This threw me into great horror, and I
resolved to deny myself. Had Satan tempted me wholly to refrain, and starve
myself, I should have seen it to be a temptation of his. But I was only tempted
to mortify and cross my appetite. Every meal I was tempted to refrain from
that, and so on. This the family soon began to perceive, that I withdrew at
meal times, not knowing the occasion of it. But, one day, having sat until
dinner was brought in, I then retired. I was sent for; but made an excuse. My
mother, being very uneasy, came once and again to my chamber door; and at last
desired to come in. I dare not refuse; but wished I might have been excused
from opening my door. When she came in, she affectionately asked me, What was
the matter? And whether I could not tell a mother my troubles? After many
struggles with myself, I told her. She cautioned and warned me; and endeavored
to comfort me by her own experiences. But the temptation and fear in some
measure remained, though I had not such opportunity to yield; and that crossed
Satan's desire. Before this, I had been so long harassed and terrified with the
dismal apprehensions of certain, unavoidable damnation, that though I took only
enough to preserve life, yet every mouthful seemed to seal up my condemnation.
And therefore I seemed ready to give up, and wholly abstain, rather than endure
the distress of mind that every morsel I took filled me with. Forever blessed
be God, that this temptation was discovered. For, though I had been most
furiously beset to lay violent hands on myself, through all my temptation; yet,
blessed be God! I never was left to make any attempt on my life. But in this
Satan worked more subtly, and I could not see any conspiracy against my life:
But my design was to mortify myself. O, how hard is it to see through the wiles
of Satan, when he appears as an angel of light, as he now did!

But soon after this, being alone in my chamber, Satan assaulted me most
fiercely to put an end to my life: For never was any one in such a condition
before; that I was an outcast, rejected of God; that I had better put an end to
my life, than live to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. The cruel
instrument was present to accomplish the hellish design. This temptation rushed
on me with such impetuous force, that I found it would be highly dangerous to
stay there. The family being gone to bed, I thought I would go too, rather than
stay alone, left I should be quite overpowered. But now Satan shifted, and
filled me with distressing apprehensions of awaking in hell, to frighten me
from going to bed. He that would have brought me quick there, in a dreadful
plunge, now opened the terrors of it, to affrighten me from my sleep. But I
found, as soon as I began to decline going to bed, or leaving the room, the
temptation to destroy myself revived with greater force. This was a most
violent conflict; and I ran out of the room. And, as I passed another chamber,
I saw a book lie, in which my sister had a little before been reading. It
happened to be Mr. Corban's Advice to Sinners under Conviction, etc. with some
Scruples of the Tempted resolved. I had never seen or heard of the book before;
nor knew that there was any such book in the house. But, in the distress of my
mind, I took it up; and the first words I saw in it, were these:

1. "Although thy present condition be deplorable; yet be not thy own
executioner, if God will give thee a reprieve in the world. When thou art
tempted to it, I solemnly charge thee to remember, that God has forbidden it,
saying, Thou shall not kill.

2. "In the hour of temptation go not out in thy own strength. Look to Christ,
and keep thy hold of him, who is able to keep thee from falling. The Lord has
laid help on one that is mighty. Psalm. lxxxix. 19.

3. "Give no place to the devil. Be not affrighted from continuing in thy
calling; for the Lord has promised to keep thee in all thy ways; and his
angels shall have change over thee. Psalm. xci 11, 12.

4. "Thou art grossly mistaken in thinking no case like thine. For no
temptation has taken you, but such as is common to men. 1 Cor. 10. 13. Many of
God's dear children have been as vehemently assaulted with such hellish
temptations, though thou think thy case cannot be paralleled, and have been
recovered; and their unbelief and all their sad conclusions confuted.

5. "When thou art tempted to sin, flee to that promise, Isai live. 17, No
weapon formed against thee shall prosper. The God of peace shall bruise Satan
under thy feet shortly. Romans xvi. 20. God is faithful, who will not suffer thee
to be tempted above that thou art able to bear."

But, O, with what wonder and astonishment did I read these lines, so
peculiarly adapted to my case! Was I tempted to that soul shuddering sin, self
murder? Here is a caution, command and promise, to the contrary, from the word
of God. Or am I tempted to think there never was any one in such a case as that
in which I am? Here Satan is proved a liar from the word of God. Or am I
affrighted from sleep, which is my calling, in the proper season of it? I have
a caution not to give way to it, and a promise to rely upon. Thus, with an
uncommon power, were the words applied to my present case. What a sudden,
unexpected providence was here! And at once Satan felt the force of these
commissioned lines, and fled the field. The seed of the woman bruised the
serpent's head, while he was bruising but his heel. For now I saw the power,
wisdom and goodness of that Being, whom I was tempted to disbelieve. I saw the
truth of that word, which Satan had told me there was no truth in; and I saw
Satan to be a liar. The darkness and horror disappeared. This was the Lord's
doing, and it was mavelous in mine eyes. There was no human contrivance in
it. I saw the power and grace of Christ. He manifested himself to be the Lord
strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle, and worthy my confidence. O, how
unutterable my joy! I sang of free surprising grace; and, with the leper, was
constrained, by gratitude and love, to return and give glory to God.

Now I felt but little disposition for sleep. My whole soul was carried out in
praise and admiration, while I lay in the dust, crying out, Why me! Lord, why
me? Why have thou stooped to regard so unworthy a worm as I? O, how free and
sovereign did this grace appear! How did I triumph in God, casting my whole
soul and body on him! And when I lay down to rest, how sweet to commit myself
into it is hands, saying, "I will fear no evil, for thou art with me." Now I saw
the wisdom of God, in all his dealings with me; and did rejoice in hope that I
was one of his called according to his purpose; since those very temptations,
which I feared were against me, now worked together for my good; displaying to
me the power, wisdom and grace of God; exciting my faith and love to more
sensible exercise; and confirming in my mind many scriptures, the truth of
which I had been long ready to doubt of. For in my haste I had said, "All men
are liars. Where are his promises? Do they fail?" But now I said, "True and
faithful is the word of the Lord," etc. O who can set bounds to the infinite
grace and love of God!

I wonder at, and adore the love of God in regarding any of the fallen apostate
race of rebelling man. I am surprised at his condescensions, when I read of his
dealings with his eminent servants, who are as pillars in his house, and such
from whom may reasonably be expected some suitable returns, though none can
compensate she least act of his grace. But, O, how does my wonder rise, even to
astonishment, when I review but what my treacherous memory yet retains of his
dealing with unworthty me! O, my soul, God knew thee to be a helpless,
worthless, depraved worm. He knew thy station and capacity were low and mean,
and thy ingratitude, sloth and negligence great, and unbecoming thee. He knew
what poor returns thou would make. And yet, O surprising grace! I believe
there are many of the former to whom he never afforded more speedy succor and
relief, than to me. Verily, O God, it is like thy nature, immense and
boundless. For thou have chosen the base things of this world, babes and
sucklings; yea, things that are not, to show forth thy power and grace. O, the
height and depth of unsearchable grace and love!

But to return. Now I engaged to be the Lord's, and bound myself to him in a
short written covenant, which I find dated Oct. 19, 1741. She then wanted six
days of being 15 years old.
And I enjoyed some more freedom from those violent distress, which I had
suffered; but was not wholly delivered. For my fear and temptation returned at
times, though not so constant as formerly. And God graciously allowed me some
near access to him in prayer. A very little after this I was seeking God for a
particular temporal mercy: and was powerfully quieted by those words, Matthew.
vi. 33, "Seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you." This gave my mind a calm turn. And though I
had no prospect of the speedy accomplishment of my request; yet I believed in
the promise, and left it with God, and was as well satisfied as if I had seen
it done. And, before night, to the wonder of many, it was accomplished. I was
filled with such a humbling sense of the goodness of God, and my own vileness,
that I sat as one not concerned in the matter; while others were rejoicing, and
calling on me, to know if I was sorry. But my soul was engaged in adoring God
as the author of all my mercies, and in sealing to the truth of his word, that
he was a God hearing prayer.

I now began more strictly to examine those principles of religion in which I
had been educated. But to find Christ, and be found in him, was the prevailing
concern of my life. For I was so often plunged into new distresses, that I
could not pursue any thing steadily. Yet I embraced those principles, which I
thought most agreeable to divine revelation, without changing my profession.
She was educated in the profession of the Quakers, as her parents were of that
denomination.
But, when I had light and hope about my own state, I was disposed to look into
these matters. But I feared to be too much engaged in any thing that did not
immediately concern my getting into Christ, by a true and vital union to him.
Now my soul longed after him, and the language of my whole heart was for a
Christ, a whole Christ, in all his offices, on his own terms; and that he would
manifest himself to me: Giving up myself to him; engaging to be his; afraid of
every thing that might offend him. I had some discovery of Christ as a complete
Savior. Yet there was much of a legal spirit in me, which often filled me with
great terror, and hideous fears of condemnation. And Satan set in with it, and
would tempt me to many things, indifferent in themselves; yet very inconvenient
and burdensome to me. But if I refused or objected, hell and unavoidable
damnation to the disobedient, was the doleful peal rung in my ears. Yea, he
persuaded me every refusal was a seal on my condemnation. And therefore, for
the sake of quietness, I yielded, and so brought myself under such a yoke of
bondage to Satan, as gave him vast power over me. I kept many days of fasting
and prayer; and often denied myself almost all the comforts of life. I used
great severity with myself, even to cruelty; often taking for food that which
was most disagreeable, to mortify myself. I mortified a grateful disposition of
soul, by embittering my mercies. In all which I was very private. Numberless
were the mistakes and errors, into which I ran at this time. However, though
Satan urged me on to things, to an extreme, yet, I trust, God brought good out
of it, and taught me much of a gospel self denying spirit.

About this time the Rev. Mr. Wheelock came here, and preached from those
words, 2 Cor. xiii. 5* "Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith," etc.
This put me on a serious inquiry into the state of my soul; which I had scarce
allowed myself to do before: But rather inclined to fix in my mind that I had
no true faith, than to admit a thought that possibly I had. But now I made some
inquiry; and dare not deny those evidences, which were mentioned from the
scriptures. And, by a sermon of the Rev. Mr. Dickinson on the witness of the
Spirit, I found, as I thought, farther ground to hope I had experienced a work
of grace in my soul. But had greater discoveries of the corruption of my heart:
And was often amazed and confounded; especially under Mr. Wheelock's preaching:
But not so as to lose my hope; though it was often very low.

But now, as I had some hope and relief, I set myself to pursue the inquiry
into the principles of religion. I read Barclay's Apology; Mr. Vincent's
Exposition of the Assembly's Catechism; and several other authors on the same
subjects; with some treatises on the ordinances. And especially comparing them
with scripture. And, upon the whole, after prayer and supplication to God for
direction, according to the best light I could get, without applying to any
person, on one side or the other, I was convinced that the ordinances of
Baptism and the Lord's Supper were of divine appointment at first. And I found
they had been kept up in the church by the apostles; and could find no proof
from scripture that they were ever abolished, as the ceremonial law was: And
therefore still were in force, and ought to be practiced by christians. I was
now convinced they were the positive commands of Christ, and not to be slighted
or neglected.

As to the doctrines of grace, the imputation of Adam's sin; the corruption of
our nature; Justification by the imputation of the righteousness of Christ,
through faith in him; the divine sovereignty, that grace was absolutely free
and sovereign, without any foreseen merit or worth in the creature, according
to Romans ix. 1 Pet. i. and many other passages of the scripture to the same
purpose; and the other doctrines of the gospel, as set forth by the assembly of
divines at Westminster, I did verily believe them to be most agreeable to the
word of God; which I believe to be the only rule of a faith and practice; by
which the Spirit of God does lead us into all truth. I did embrace these
doctrines, according to the best light I had, (after a diligent inquiry after
the truth) as most worthy of God, and warranted by his word, for me to receive
and walk in; not condemning others, who did not see as I did. Yet I still
continued in the way in which I had been educated* waiting on God for farther
light and establishment. This was in the beginning of the year 1742. When she
had covered on the 16th year of her age.


But to return to the inward exercises of my mind, in respect to the state of
my soul. God saw I needed farther humbling, before I might enjoy the abundant
consolations of the gospel: And therefore he suffered me frequently to be
plunged into the depths of distress. And indeed as soon as my distress was a
little abated, I began to think myself secure and hardened, and feared that God
was about to leave me; and so covered my former distress again. And God was
pleased again to lot Satan loose, as it were upon me; until I became a very
terror to myself choosing strangling and death, rather than life. I must fetch
language from hell, would I express the horrid suggestions which were
continually injected into my dark, confused mind. All the temptations I ever
read of were mine; and many which I never heard of; with the most amazing
horror; so that I thought I anticipated the terrors of the damned, and was on
the very brink of despair. O, let me never forget these awful days! What tongue
can express such distress, or heart conceive such terror! My heart was laid
open into he most shocking colors. I had often prayed that I might be led into
its horrid deeps; but how dreadful the sight! I had utterly fainted under it,
had not the unseen arm of Jehovah sustained me. What pride! What enmity! What
hypocrisy! What carnality and self confidence, were here discovered! O! what a
monster did I appear! I wondered that a holy God would suffer me to tread on
his earth, or breathe in his air.

And thus I continued until about June or July; when the Rev. Mr. Fish of
Stonington came here. He preached from these words, "Wherefore, he is able also
to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him." He observed, that
here none were excluded; but such as bad committed the unpardonable sin. It was
sermon full of encouragement. But Satan set in to persuade me that was my case;
and therefore there was no hope for me; for I had, under these violent
temptations, certainly done it. O, how was my distress now increased! I seemed
now as one shut up in despair. However, I went in the evening to hear him
again: But seemed hardened, as one given over of God. Whatever he said of
terror, I seemed to disregard, as so far below what I should soon feel, in its
full weight and measure, that it was but trifling. And what he said of comfort
was not worth my regarding; for I had no lot or portion in that matter. Never
did I before sit under a sermon, in such wild distraction and horror; yet so
hardened, as I now appeared to myself, in absolute despair. It is shocking to
me now to reflect on the abandoned frame I then seemed to be in. I thought I
feared nothing. No expressions of terror moved me to bewail my misery; but was
ready to wish to know the utmost of it. In this situation of mind I remained
most of the night. But toward morning, falling asleep, I awaked speaking these
words, O, when shall this mortal put on immortality! And my mind was much more
calm. I had some impressions of a religious dream. But the dream soon entirely
vanished from my mind. However, I felt so much encouragement, as prevailed on
me to go again to hear Mr. Fish give a word of exhortation, notwithstanding all
my dreadful conclusions on the night past. And be spoke from these words, Col.
iii. 11, "Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor
uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: But Christ is all, and in
all." I cannot remember exactly the method he took: But he spoke of Christ as
the Alpha and Omega, as the author and finisher of the believer's faith; and,
as such, the true christian did esteem and prize him.

And now, I trust, the Spirit of God did powerfully apply these truths to my
soul. Thus, thus, infinitely lovely did Christ appear to me. And now I was
enabled to choose him for my almighty Savior. And while I acted faith in him,
the blessed Spirit, I trust, did witness with my spirit, than thus and thus I
had before beheld and embraced him; and that he was precious to me, as he is to
all those who believe. Much of the day I spent in the company of Mr. Fish, and
some other christian friends. But I said little. My soul was taken up in
admiring the glorious Redeemer, and the riches of divine grace; renewing my
choice of him. Setting the crown on his head. Proclaiming Jesus King in and
over my whole soul. I sat calm and serene; and every act of my soul was
rational and solid: But not in any transport or ecstasy of joy all the day. But
in the evening God was pleased to fill my soul with unspeakable consolation and
joy. The great Redeemer appeared transcendently amiable; and my interest in him
clear and undoubted. Such were the surprising alterations in me, that some did
conclude that was the time of my first espousals; that was the happy moment of
my conversion. But I could not find any difference in kind, though there was in
degree, between this, and what I had before experienced. From this time I was
never in such deep distress. My temptations fled at the rebuke of the Almighty;
and my hope was, in the general, above my fears.

And, as my hope now prevailed that I had true faith, however weak, my desires
after universal obedience to the commands of Christ were strong. And firmly
believing the ordinances of baptism and the Lord's supper were appointed by
Christ, and all believers commanded to attend on them, I applied myself to a
minister, who gave me some light, as to their nature and design. The only
person to whom I had revealed my mind. For I was determined to be fully
persuaded in my own mind and conscience; and not to be persuaded thereto by
others. Some of my most intimate friends, as they have since told me, really
thought me settled in the way in which I had been educated. Nor did they
attempt to persuade me to change; leaving me to my own reason, or rather to the
word and Spirit of God, for direction. This has often since been a great
satisfaction to me. For by this means I was the better able to see into these
matters, and have my judgment established.

And now I resolved directly to acquaint my dear mother with my design. But, O,
the struggle I had here with my affections! I feared it would grieve my tender
parents. I knew their tender affection for me: And certainly, if they loved
their children, they must desire to see them walk in their way, which they
thought most right. Here I found indeed a hard trail. It grieved me to my
inmost soul to think of grieving them: Yet I dare not neglect my duty. I have
often thought the trail would not have been so great, to have to struggle with
their anger, as their love. But, blessed be God, I had not that to fear, as to
any severity in matters of religion. It is impossible to express how my heart
bled at the thought of wounding them. And nothing but the fear of incurring the
divine displeasure, could have prevailed on me to have done this violence to my
affection. But this prevailed; the fear of offending God. I poured out my soul
to him for them, that they might be comfortably supported under it. And then
told my mother my concern and intent. She, with the utmost tenderness, assured
me, that neither my father, nor she, would force my conscience. Only she
entreated me not to be rash or hasty in what I did; but consider well of it.
Which I told her I had done, etc. Once or twice after this, I discoursed with
her upon it. She reasoned with me a little upon the subject; but I was now so
fully established, that it did not move me from my purpose.

After I had discoursed with my mother, being in secret, pleading with God for
grace and strength to carry me through, if it was agreeable to his will; if
not, that I might never engage; I had a scruple arise concerning my faith, lest
is should not be true and saving: And then perhaps I should fall away; and so
bring great dishonor on God and religion. And it was suggested to my mind,
that it was a great thing to forsake father and mother for Christ, and not have
an interest in him at last. And that it was indeed a great thing for one so
young to engage in such an affair; to forsake the profession in which I had
been educated, and make such a high one, as none in the family had ever
ventured to do. This put me upon wrestling with strong cries to the Father of
mercies for direction and assistance. And I was quieted by the following words
of scripture, which were very powerfully set home on my soul. "Verily, there is
no man, that has left father or mother, brethren or sisters, etc. for my sake,
but he shall receive an hundred fold here; and in the world to come eternal
life." And again, "My grace is sufficient for thee. My strength is made perfect
in weakness." Again, "Lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest,
any of you should seem to come short of it. O. thou of little faith, wherefore
did thou doubt?" These words were impressed on my mind with such power, that
had all the world stood up to oppose, I thought I could fearless venture to go
on, against them all, in the strength of my Redeemer. O, how powerfully did
they establish and invigorate my soul, in the pursuit of my duty!

I was then determined to proceed, relying on Christ, in the promises. If his
grace was sufficient for me; and his strength might be made perfect in my
weakness, it was enough; which I then believed it would be, according to his
word. It was ground sufficient for me to engage in this concern, however
difficult, great and singular it might appear, for one of my age. Not quite 16
years old.
O, how did Christ now appear for me! At once, dispelling all my doubts and
fears, confirming and establishing me, both as to my own good state, and his
certain presence and assistance in my following him in the way of his
appointment, to which he had called me. I saw the call was his, and the promise
his, and the duty mine to comply. I now believed him commanding me to seek his
face in this way, and my heart returned, Thy face, O Lord, will I seek.

And having made some search into the scriptural mode of baptism, I was well
satisfied as to sprinkling. It appeared from scripture and reason to be right.
I then went to the Rev. Mr. Clap; and, after discoursing with him, gave up my
name to be taken into his church. The day before this was to be completed, I
was under some darkness and fears: And therefore was afraid lest God should
hide his face from me, in the advantage to make me question whether I had done
right, in what I had done. I knew the subtilty of Satan to perplex, my soul,
and make me fear all was wrong, when God did not afford light and evidence. I
was now ready to conclude to send the minister word, that I should not go out
the next day. But now, even now, was God pleased to speak to my soul by his
Spirit, in those words, "I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in
vain!" Here I was led to review my calls to these ordinances; and was
powerfully convinced they were from God. That it was God, and only he, who had
bid me seek his face in these duties; and then the blessed Spirit assured me,
from the word of God, that he had not bid me seek his face here, in vain. I
then determined to do my duty, and leave the event with God: If he saw best to
own his own institutions, by affording his sensible presence and grace, well:
But if he saw best to deny his sensible comfort, it was my duty to submit; but
not to omit my duty by not going. Thus I cast my burden on God, pleading, if it
was his will, that he would welcome me there, by the light of his countenance,
and the joy of his salvation. But, above all, that I might approve myself to
him in the devout, solemn, humble and faithful discharge of my duty, though I
felt not that joy which was sweet to my soul.

And thus, on October 24, 1742, The day before she was 16 years old.
I was baptized, and taken into the church. My soul was, in a most solemn
manner, engaged to approve myself to God. And never had I more sensibly
exercised faith, than now. While the covenant was read, I was enabled to give
up my whole soul and body to God, taking him for my own, only covenant God.
And, indeed, the whole time was taken up in the most solemn transactions
between God and my soul, and in this so solemn engagement, sealed on both
sides. I sealed to be the Lord's; and here God sealed to be mine, my Father, my
Redeemer, and my Sanctifier; my only, everlasting refuge and hope. O, how happy
did I now appear to be, under these solemn vows, calling on saints and angels
to witness the solemn transaction!

"Here in thy courts I leave my vow,
And thy rich grace record;
Witness, ye saints, who hear me now,
If I forsake the Lord."
The cxxist Psalm was sung in Dr. Watts's version. The title, "Divine
protection." Which did then, and ever since, appear very precious to me;
especially the two first, and two last verses. The two last are these:

"Should earth and hell with malice burn,
Still thou shall go, and still return,
Safe in the Lord; his heavenly care
Defends thy life from every snare.
"On thee foul spirits have no power,
And in thy last departing hour,
Angels, that trace the airy road,
Shall bear thee homeward to thy God."
I was now fully satisfied in what I had done; and never since, so far as I can
remember, have had one doubt or scruple about the doctrines or ordinances which
I then embraced; which is now above eleven years ago. Hence it appears that she
was 27 years old, when she wrote this.
I have often found cause to bless God for the many trails I had concerning the
changing my religion, as to these things. For by this my judgment was more
enlightened, and more fully confirmed, that I was right in what I then did. It
was with deliberation and solid determination of my judgment; free from
constraint, persuasion or prejudice, that I proceeded in these matters, as
what, from the best light I then had, or now have, in the word of God, I think
to be most clearly revealed. Yet, I still love and honor those who I hope, are
truly pious, among that people, though differing from me in some sentiments;
and I firmly believe God has his chosen ones among them. My acquaintance with
some, of exemplary lives and conversation, and christian experiences, so
agreeable to the word of God, forbids my censuring them, merely because they do
not see or profess just as I do.

But to go on with my own experiences. My faith began evidently to increase
under these means and ordinances. And for some weeks after this solemn
transaction, I enjoyed more solid steady peace in my soul, than ever I had done
before; And was often melted down before God, to see those who had been
educated in these principles, and had all outward helps to forward them in
coming up to these sacred institutions of Christ; yet fearing to take he vows
of God upon them: And I, who was called to engage with so many difficulties,
compelled to come in to this marriage supper. It was truly affecting, and often
caused me to cry out, Why me, Lord, why me? O, blessed be God, that I was thus
young brought to an open, public profession of him; and had the seals of the
covenant set on me! It was a day of the gladness of my heart. A day forever to
be remembered with joy. A day, in which God took me near himself. And I trust I
shall ever find a solid satisfaction in what I then did. Nothing should have
tempted me to have wished myself from under these bonds and seals.

However fully satisfied I was, as to these things; yet I was sometimes
exercised with great fears about my spiritual estate. And one day, the winter
following, having been, for some days before, under great doubts and my
evidences very much clouded, so that I could not see any of the conditions of
the promises wrought in my soul. I feared I had no interest in Christ, or the
promises, and dare not plead them. But I determined to set upon pleading the
absolute promises, seeing I dare not plead the conditional ones; and set apart
some time for this purpose. I found great freedom and fervency in my soul, on
this occasion; and had my mouth filled with arguments taken from the freeness
of grace; the sovereignty of God. For his own name's sake, he had promised to
give a new heart and a new spirit: And why might not these promises be
fulfilled in me? Why might not God glorify his absolutely free and sovereign
grace in me? I acknowledged my unworthiness and vileness: But pleaded that this
never hindered the current of sovereign grace. Thus I continued most of the
remaining part of the day, with a much greater variety of promises and
scriptures, than I ever before or since had in my mind at one time. I am very
certain I never could collect so many texts at once, all so agreeable to my
present concern, if I took the utmost pains for it. And here I hung, and felt
strength, though no sensible comfort.

The next day I proceeded in the same manner, and humbly resolved, if I
perished, I would perish at the feet of sovereign mercy. And now was God
pleased, in the most distinct and clear manner, to manifest himself to me.
There has always appeared to me something peculiar in this, beyond any thing I
can remember before. I cannot but think I had a work of grace wrought in my
soul before this. The actings of my soul toward God before this, appear to me
to be as really true faith, as those since. Yet this seems the nearest like the
soul's being first brought home to God, of any thing I ever had experienced, or
could distinctly remember. But I am inclined to think that, as there were some
things in this, the want of a distinct discovery of which before, had caused
many doubts in may mind about my whole experience; so now God graciously
renewed or revived them in my soul, for the more settled confirmation and
establishment of my hope, as it since has been. It was as follows.

I was, as before observed, brought to the feet of sovereign grace. I saw
myself, as in myself, to be infinitely vile and wretched, utterly unable to
help myself; most unworthy that God should help me; and that it would be
infinitely just, if God should east me off forever: And I thought I must
forever own it, though I were cast into hell. I cast myself at his feet, crying
out, Lord save me, or I perish. I saw every refuge fail, and God an absolute
sovereign. And here I had a powerful discovery of Christ made to my soul. He
was now revealed as a complete, almighty Savior; altogether excellent and
lovely in himself, and infinitely suitable for me. And not only so; but he whom
the glorious God had appointed as Mediator; and had declared himself well
pleased with him. Now, O, now, I embraced him; I received him as my prophet,
priest and king. As one through whom I might boldly come to God. Nor can I tell
which my soul was most engaged in admiring, the love of the Son, or the wisdom
of the Father in contriving this method of salvation. I saw it to be the safest
and best way. My whole soul did acquiesce in it. O! I thought, if I had ten
thousand souls, and each of them were of unspeakably greater worth than mine
was, I could venture them all here. And since I had but one, and it was my all,
I freely cast it here. How infinitely reasonable did the terms of salvation
appear! So that I freely justified God in the eternal damnation of those who
would not submit to them.

O, it is utterly impossible to describe the views I then had. Words cannot
come near it. All the powers of my soul were engaged and inflamed. It was the
most rational discovery, and produced the most rational effects and acts, that
ever my soul was able to perform. It appeared so infinitely reasonable, that it
is, I think, impossible for a reasonable person, under such a discovery, not to
choose it. I longed for every one to see it just as I did: And subscribed to
these words of the Psalmist, "They who know thy name, will put their trust in
thee." But what shall I say! Language fails, and I must cease to attempt to
express, and only reflect with unutterable wonder and love.

The views I then had, did powerfully raise my faith above any former acts of
it. I had before been chiefly revived by the evidences of a work of grace in my
soul. But now I do not remember I had any thoughts of former experiences. The
glory of God and the method of salvation through Christ filled my soul with the
most solid, substantial joy, wonder and love. It continued all that day, and
the next, rather increasing than abating. But a few days after, as my view of
these things was not so clear and powerful, and the joy not gone, I was in some
danger of depending on my sweet frame, in opposition to relying wholly on
Christ. At this instant, I received a letter from the Rev. Mr. Wheelock, in
answer to one I had written to him some time before. But his came at this time,
I never could learn how, though it had been written, I think, some months
before: But now it came at the instant when I most needed it. And, I think, of
all the means I ever had improved, none were ever more blessed for my
establishment, than this letter. I have ever found it a powerful instrument in
the hand of God of convincing and confirming my soul: And must ever adore the
wisdom of God, who directed him to write it, and did so powerfully apply it to
my heart.

This letter laid me in the dust. I saw my past folly and sin, and my present
danger. I was humbled before God; and my ingratitude and sin appeared highly
aggravated. Yet my soul was not filled with fears about my state. It rather put
me upon renewing my faith in Christ. And as it convinced me of what was wrong;
so it put me on a more critical watch over my heart. In short, it was blessed
to regulate much of my inward conduct, both under comfort, and in darkness. And
for some months after, it seemed to be copied out in my experiences. Mr.
Stoddard on the safety of appearing in the righteousness of Christ; Mr. Flavel,
and some others, on the covenant of redemption, were greatly blessed to
establish my soul.

And now the holy Spirit of God did work to strengthen my faith. My mouth was
filled with arguments in prayer. I had enlarged and affecting views of the
infinite, unlimited Being, with whom I had to do; and that the blessings* I was
seeking were absolutely free and sovereign; and of my interest in the dear,
divine Mediator, whom the Father always hears. This filled me with the utmost
boldness of access. My views of spiritual things were vastly higher than ever
before; and my sense of sin more evangelical. O, may I record these seasons,
with the deepest humility and greatest wonder! I have thought some of these
discoveries have left written on my heart, Holiness to the Lord. While I beheld
the divine glory, by faith, my whole soul seemed to be transformed into the
divine image.

But I forbear to attempt to relate some of those unutterable views of the
divine perfections, which I have had by faith. Yet the effect, I trust, shall
still abide, until heaven allow language bright enough to express those
glories, which I then by faith beheld in Jesus Christ, who is the brightness of
the Father's glory, and the express image of his person, and the fullness of the
Godhead. Now, O my soul, perhaps it will better become thee, in solemn silence,
humbly to adore the divine condescension, than here to relate particulars.

Let me only record some of the kind effects of these things on my soul, which
may serve to awaken me to see from whence I am fallen, and to convince me that
the Lord is true and faithful; and though sorrow may endure for a night, yet
joy comes in the morning* And they who sow in tears, shall reap in joy. My
consolation was sow in tears, shall reap in joy. My consolation was not less,
or inferior to the amazing terrors I had before been exercised with. No!
blessed be God! I now enjoyed a mere heaven on earth. The views I had of the
divine perfections enlarged all my conceptions of the divine power and
goodness; the unlimited, infinite fullness of God; the sovereign freeness of
grace and love. The glorious, all sufficient, powerful advocate I had with the
Father, raised my faith. I did not fear to ask for any thing that was not
forbidden by the word of God, however great and good; and however unworthy I
was.

I reflected on the several excellencies of the saints, recorded in scripture:
The faith of Abraham; the holy confidence of Jacob; the meekness of Moses; the
uprightness of David. Yea, the humility, patience, love, fortitude, zeal,
resolution, prudence, strength, wisdom and constancy of the people of God, in
all ages: Who all derived their grace from this unbounded fullness, through this
dear divine Mediator. They had nothing but what they had received: Not even
Paul, with all his great seize. And they received them for the sake of
this glorious High Priest, in whose name I had boldness of access. These were
by nature children of wrath; blind, ignorant, depraved, corrupt, base, sordid
souls, as to God, and spiritual things. It was not for any merit in them; but
for the glory of the riches of his sovereign grace in Jesus Christ, that they
were thus chosen and blessed. And the least babe in this family, who had an
interest in him, had as real a right to plead for grace, and might do it with
as much boldness, as the greatest faint living; since we are all one in Christ
Jesus, all have one and the same right in him, as Mediator, if we have any true
interest in him by faith.

O, how did these views often fill my soul with a holy boldness, and my mouth
with arguments. O my soul, remember, with holy, humble wonder and love, how God
did then, as it were, lead thee into his secret chambers; held up thy weak
tabernacle of clay; encompassing thee with his glorious fullness, and
strengthening thee with might, by his Spirit, to wrestle with him; O, the
confidence of faith!

From whence art thou fallen, O my soul. Where are those soul quickening, soul
humbling, soul transforming views I then had? Where the devout ardour, the
unsatiable thirst, the unwearied importunity, when thou refused to let the
angel of the covenant go, without a blessing? Where that life and fervor, that
neither the darkness of the night, nor the light of the day could prevent; but
both were witnesses of it? Where that breaking of soul, that God would show me
his glory? And where that zeal and activity in the service of God? O my soul,
where that holy violence; that pressing into the kingdom of heaven; that new
obedience; that unwearied diligence in the duties of religion; that self
diffidence, and humbling sense of my wretched depravity, barrenness and
hypocrisy? O, how did these views of the divine perfection give me the most
humbling sense of sin! O, how infinitely evil did sin appear! As the only evil
that my soul had reason to fear. O, my soul, where that godly fear; that holy
care and watchfulness, lest thou should offend this most pure and holy Being,
with whom thou had to do? Where that quick sense of the least departure from
this God; and that alarm sounded in the whole soul at it? O, how did the least
apprehension of an indifferent, careless frame rouse my soul, lest some
temptaation should meet me ungarded! I knew I was then most in danger, when
least watchful.

Never did I work with more diligence, than now. When I was most powerfully
impressed with a believing view, that my whole salvation must be forever
ascribed to the riches of free, sovereign grace; that there was no merit in my
works; it was then I found the most powerful motives from faith, love and
gratitude, to study what I should render to the Lord for all his benefits
toward unworthy, unprofitable me.

Now I frequently examined my state, summoning conscience to the bar of God;
adjuring it, in the name of the great God, to do its office, and bring in a
true verdict. Yea, calling upon every thing, above and below, within and
without, to witness for God, in the most solemn and awful manner; in a deep
sense of the divine attributes, God's impartial justice, and infinite purity,
in whose sight the wicked could not stand. Solemnly querying with my conscience
to speak for God; and, if I was deceived, to cry aloud, and be a faithful
witness for God, though against me. Thus did I examine myself; and again
examine my examination, in the most strict and solemn manner that I was capable
of; with earnest prayer to God, that he would not suffer me to be deceived:
Laying open my heart to the conviction of his word and Spirit. And the effect
of all was greater peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

Thus was my soul daily established in God. Every outward reproach that was
cast on me, was improved, either to put me on seeing that my foundation was
right, or studying how I might more glorify God, and honor the sacred
profession I had made. My soul was built up under the word and ordinances of
God, on which he had taught me to set a high value, as being his own
institutions.

And though God has since sometimes corrected my backslidings, and hid his face
for a small moment; yet his loving kindness has he not taken from me, nor
suffered his faithfulness to fail: But has graciously led me along by still
waters; and in green pastures has he caused me to feed. His rod and his staff
have comforted me. In and by every affection, he has taught me his tender care
over me. In every cross and disappointment, he has, sooner or later, made me to
adore his wisdom, and see his kind designs of love and mercy. And though he has
sometimes called me into the field of battle; yet has he harnessed me for the
battle, and fought for me. Innumerable evils have compassed me around. Satan,
the world, and my own wicked, deceitful heart, all combined to devour me quick;
yet his arm alone has sustained me. Even when every refuge failed, and my faith
was ready to stagger, my extremity has been his opportunity, He has never left
me unsuccoured or without relief.

After I had enjoyed great peace in my soul, and had sat under the droppings of
the sanctuary of God with vast delight, he was pleased awfully to bereave me of
both my ever dear and Rev. Pastors: Which was a very sore affliction: Yet,
under this trial, he taught me much by what I experienced.

Then was he pleased to visit me with many and great bodily disorders, whereby
I have been often brought, to appearance, to the gates of the grave; and every
outward comfort of food or physic rendered a terror, and an aggravation of my
pain. Yet by all these things have I been taught the riches of his grace and
love; and in all has he been my comforter, and my only allsufficient refuge.
How has he borne me, and my burdens! And it is with pleasure that I now
recount the most distressing trials of my life: For by these has God bound me
faster to himself; laid me under renewed obligations to live devoted to him,
and his glory.

And when Satan has been permitted, as he has been in later years, most
furiously to rally all his forces against the foundation of my hope, as to all
religion: By which I have been led into the most terrible conflicts and
combats, with the united powers of hell, so that I have even chosen strangling
and death, rather than an encounter with these legions of soul spirits. O, how
dreadful the war! Yet, O yet, how glorious the victory, which my Redeemer has
gained! How wisely has he defeated Satan, and put him to flight, and filled my
soul with songs of deliverance! O, how has he defeated every hellish plot,
that has been laid for my entire destruction.

I am surely bound by the most sacred obligation to live to his glory. His
right in me is indisputable. The flesh, the world, and the devil, must all give
back, and own his sovereign right in and over me. His arm alone has rescued my
soul from hell; and his shall be the glory. O my soul, remember the victories
and triumphs of thy most kind and gracious Redeemer, over sin, Satan and the
world, when they have all united for thy utter ruin. What infinite wisdom, what
almighty power, what irresistible grace, what glorious goodness, what
uncontrollable sovereignty, and what amazing condescension, have been displayed
toward thee! Can I, O, can I, ever forget the loving kindness of the Lord, and
slight his tender mercies! How had my faith utterly failed, had not the unseen
arm of Jehovah sustained it! How often have my hopes been at the lowest ebb,
when speedy relief has been brought to me!

And how often, when my sin and folly has exposed me to the rage of hell and
the malice of men; yea, to my Savior's severe rebukes, as well as to my own
accusing conscience, has Jesus engaged for me, and delivered me from all my
fears! How slow has his anger moved! How swift his grace! How innumerable are
these instances!

How tenderly has he been untwisting my heart from the world, to which it has
clinged! How much wisdom has he ever manifested in all the methods he has taken
with my rebellious heart; and made me to adore it, in some of the forest
trials. How has he condescended to instruct and teach me; kindly showing me,
wherefore he did correct me; as though he would not suffer me to suspect his
kindness. O unparalleled goodness! Thou, Lord, have been my refuge, my support
and comforter, in every time of trouble. And in almost every trial and
affliction have I vowed to the Lord, that if he would then deliver me out of my
distress, I would use my most studious endeavor to trust more firmly in him.
And he has, sooner or later, brought me to cast my cares and burdens on him;
giving up every, even the most minute concern of mine, to his allwise disposal.
And on every deliverance have I been led to renew the sacred engagements which
I have made in distress.

And now I am no more my own. I am the Lord's by all the bonds and obligations
of a rational, redeemed, devoted creature. God has been long teaching me his
absolute right in me, and all my services and enjoyments; that I can call
nothing my own; that he has a sovereign right to these, as the creator and
bestower of all; and by my own most voluntary surrender of all to him;
renouncing, in the most solemn manner, all hope, expectation, and desire, from
the creature, and choosing him alone for my portion, desire and delight.

And as it has been the ardent desire, the importunate request, and the grand
pursuit of my life, to lay up all my good in God, and receive all from him; so
I now find an habitual disposition of soul to rest, in a measure, satisfied
with all his dispensations toward me. And, through grace, believing I am his;
that I have a covenant right to that most gracious Being, who does all things
according to the counsel of his own will, which are for his own glory: And in
full agreement with this is the highest good of his chosen people: And having a
thousand, and a thousand times solemnly subscribed to these terms: That his
will and his glory may have the governing influence and disposal of me, and all
that relates to me: I have esteemed it my highest felicity thus to have myself,
and all my actions and concerns disposed of. And, now it is my joy and crown of
rejoicing, that it is and shall be so, by the firm and unalterable decree of
him who cannot change.

And this belief I find powerfully prevailing to reconcile me to all the divine
dispensations of providence. For, when the glory of God is my highest end and
desire; and I firmly believe that God, who has the ordering of all my affairs,
has this in view; namely, his own glory, well may I rejoice: For I have nothing
to fear. He has infinite wisdom to direct, and almighty power to effect what he
pleases: And therefore can never fail of his purposes. All his dispensations
toward me, I would always realize, as the result of infinite wisdom and
eternal counsel; and therefore most perfect. And, though my proud rebellious
heart dare rise up in opposition, and impiously call in question his ways; yet,
through grace, I never leave struggling, until the conquest is gained, and my
soul submits to the scepter of Jesus, and signs its former engagements.

And this conquest is his. It is he who exerts his almighty power, and subdues
my remaining corruptions; or I should never overcome. All the glory is his,
forever his: For, without him, I cannot do any thing. I still find such remains
of sin in this depraved heart, that were it not for the prevailing
intercession, and daily interposition of the great God-Man-Mediator, with the
Father, and against Satan and my own wicked heart, I should despair of ever
gaining the victory. But, thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ, who gives
the victory. And through him I hope ere long to receive the end of my faith,
the salvation of my soul; the open vision and full fruition of this best of
Beings. When sin and Satan shall no more defile and vex my weary soul. All
these fiery conflicts shall then be remembered with endless acclamations to
Jesus, my only almighty Savior. To him, to him alone, shall all the redeemed
ascribe the glory of their salvation. Thine, O my eternal, incarnate God, shall
be the praise. And now, what wait I for? All my expectations are from thee, and
all my hopes are in thee. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen and Amen.

SECTION III.
Containing extracts from her Dairy, of different dates.
THE following paper is transcribed and inserted here, as it was written in her
youth, when she was but seventeen years old, and expresses the views and
exercises which she then had; and affords admonition and instruction,
especially to those young persons who shall read it.

Oct. 25, 1748. I am just now entering into the eighteenth year of my age. And
does the tempter tell me, that I chose religion when I was a child, and knew no
better; when I knew nothing of the pleasures of this world: And that it may be,
when these enjoyments and pleasures appear delightful, I shall forsake strict
and solid religion, and run with the young giddy multitude, into the excesses
of vanity? Then, O my soul, sit down again, and make another deliberate choice;
even now I am entering the prime of all my days: And let me picture the world
with its brightest side outmost; and religion in a solitary dress; and then
choose my portion. If my former choice has not been free and noble enough; come
now, my soul, and make one. Let there be nothing in it mean and low; but let it
be great, noble and free.

As to religion: Can I sacrifice my name, and all that the world calls
delightful, now in the prime of my age; and be accounted a fool and mad, by the
wise, rich and polite world? Can I withstand a thousand temptations to mirth
and pleasure; and be a despised outcast among men? Now, if I conform to the
world, I shall be a pleasing object to many, and a delight to them, who now
despise me. What pleasure that the world can afford shall be withheld from me,
if I once give myself up to sensual pleasure, and the gratification of my whole
inclination; allowing myself all that mirth and jollity, that my youthful age
will now admit of? If I now give a loose to my youthful appetites, and satisfy
my carnal desires; what can then deprive me of pleasure, now I am free from
pain and the infirmities of old age, which might give a disgust to these
pleasures. Now I have life, health and liberty. If I yield to these desires,
and seek to satisfy them by a thousand new and fresh delights; take my swing in
the world; cast away sorrow, and indulge self in ten thousand new pleasures;
what then can cross me?

And, on the other hand, if I choose strict religion now, I may expect
reproach, disdain and contempt, from the world, as not fit for common society,
or scarce to live. I shall be accounted a poor, mean, ignorant, despicable
creature, unworthy the notice of mortals: And, it may be, despised by formal
professors, as being religious overmuch: They watching for my halting, and
rejoicing at my falls. And besides, I must expect many dark and doubting hours,
filled with bitter sighs and groans; denying myself, and taking up my cross;
plucking out a right eye, and cutting off a right hand; daily meeting with
crosses, and losses, and afflictions; and, it may be, with persecutions,
imprisonment and death, with the utmost distress. While the sensual libertine
lives in pleasure, flourishing like a green bay tree, and has no bands in his
death.

What a wide difference is here, between the strictly religious, and the
sensual worlding! Come, then, my soul, and view them both as far as death; and
now make a solemn and deliberate choice, either religion, or carnal pleasure.
Come, my soul, and choose for Eternity.

Soul. Upon considering the nature and properties of each, I am brought to free
and full choice. I see nothing in this pleasure that an satisfy an immortal
soul; nothing worthy my notice; nothing but an empty sound. Nor can it have any
part in my affections, for a portion. They are but mean trifles, unfit to
attract and busy an immortal soul. But religion, though it have its troubles
with it; yet it has a sacred sweetness in all. I feel an inward pleasure and
satisfaction, which gives a relish, as it were, to this kind of religious pain
and sorrow.

Objector. Come, Soul, lay aside prejudice. What! Nothing in all this pleasure,
to delight thee. Search a little deeper. Or what can be in this melancholy
religion, to allure thee to choose its ways?

Soul. I have found what it is. For in all those pleasures, the soul has no
God, and no happiness, suited to its immortal nature; without which, all is but
a sickening trifle. Wherefore, the soul which has God for its portion,
attended with ever so much sorrow, is unspeakably more happy.

Objector. But if you indulge yourself in pleasures, and strive to divert your
company with mirth and jollity, you will gain the esteem of many, and they will
greatly prize you, and seek your company.

Soul. I value the approbation of the most high God, before all the esteem of
poor mortals; and deliberately make choice of him, and his way of strict
religion, for my portion, pleasure and happiness.

I do now, with my whole soul and all my powers, choose God for my portion;
taking his cross as well as his crown; esteeming the sorrows of religion
greater riches than the pleasures of sin; looking on it a pleasure to be
crucified with Christ. I despise every worldly enjoyment, compared with one
smile from the lovely Jesus. I do, with my whole heart and soul, choose God and
religion, though it may be through a sea of sorrow and distress, rather than
the world in all its pomp and splendour, with ten thousand enjoyments. O most
great and glorious God, I now choose thee as my sufficient, and every way
suitable portion. I solemnly take God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for my
all, in life, death and eternity; and resign myself, soul and body, into thy
hands. And I take all the holy angels in heaven; and even the Most High God,
the possessor of heaven and earth, himself, to witness that I DO.

And now, Lord, I am thine. Do with me as thou will. I am thy clay, feeble,
helpless, and hopeless. I throw myself, soul and body, life and health, liberty
and pleasure, on thee, the boundless, infinite fullness of heaven, the immutable
God. Lord, God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, I this day and minute subscribe
with my heart and hand, to be the Lord's. Even so, Lord Jesus, Amen and Amen.

SUSANNA ANTHONY.

Now I have again made my choice. A choice which, I trust, I shall stand by
throughout eternity. And amidst ten thousand flattering temptations, I refuse
them all, and esteem it greater pleasure to mourn for sin, and mortify one
lust, than to indulge a thousand. I now despise all youthful vanities, and
sensual gratifications; and choose a life of self denial, resolving henceforth
to take up my whole and entire delight and happiness in God, in the way of
holiness; at whose right hand are rivers of pleasure, and that forevermore.

And now, let me consider those objections against religion. What is that
applause, which a carnal world can give? Nothing but what is too mean to
influence and actuate a truly noble mind. Mortal flatteries die with mortal
worms; and cannot live beyond this dunghill earth. Besides, Truth has said,
"The friendship of the world is enmity with God." And it cannot be set in
competition with the approbation and favor of Jehovah, the great eternal
Sovereign of heaven and earth. And, should I indulge my carnal desires, what
peace and joy would tormenting conscience afford, amidst these vanities? How
often have I seen such persons, as soon as they had a moment to reflect, ready
to run wild; nor dare long to reflect. Surely their pains have been more than
their pleasures. But, suppose I could still the perpetual sting of conscience;
are all those vanities commensurate to the desires of an immortal soul? Can I
have such mean, such sordid, base, vile thoughts of that immortal spirit, with
which the great almighty Creator has invested me, as to think such mean
trifles can suffice a never dying soul, which must exist, as long as God
himself? Surely there is nothing but an infinite good that can satisfy its
boundless cravings. It is horrid barbarity to feed it on such insipid husks,
since it is capable of immortal boundless delights in God.

And what are these mighty frights in a life of religion, which should affright
a truly great and immortal soul, since the joys only are real, lasting and
perpetual? Who shall dare to inscribe Eternal on any of the sorrows of a
religious life? What is any sorrow, reproach or disdain, that admits of God to
be the portion of the soul? What if I be despised as poor, mean and ignorant,
not fit for society, if Christ be mine? He is rich, great, full of wisdom and
knowledge; and in him I may be complete, who is the head of influence. And what
greater honor can a mortal have, than to be a child of the King of kings and
Lord of lords. God shall honor the soul with his presence. He will condescend
to reside and dwell in the gracious soul: A guest infinitely preferable, as his
nature is transcendent.

And as to dark and doubting hours, some of these may proceed from my own sin
and folly. But, as far as they are sent from God, they shall only prepare me
for immortal joys, and make heaven the sweeter, when I arrive there. These
shall make my soul shine brighter, and add new luster to my glory. These shall
all be remembered with joy, and every tear be put into a bottle* and add to my
crown of joy and triumph.

As to denying myself, and taking up my cross; when it is to follow Jesus, it
should be most pleasant: For his yoke is most easy, and his burden light to the
soul that truly loves him. And will not such a soul most freely and cheerfully
pluck out, tear off, and crucify that which has wounded his Lord? I should
count nothing too dear to part with, for my Jesus, since he has not, for me.
Whatever I do out of love, is sweet; and he rewards it a thousand fold with the
consolations of his blessed Spirit.

In fine, as to all crosses, and losses, and afflictions; whatever I lose for
Jesus, is gain. If I meet with crosses, I know they come from a compassionate
God; and so will surely be for the best: And he cannot wrong me. If I give
myself to him, he has bound himself to be my God; which implies in it the
utmost blessedness: And had he not bound himself, I trust his love would do it.
The loss of all things, even life itself, shall be a happy gain, when the soul
finds God. Let afflictions, persecutions, imprisonment, and even death come, if
Jesus stand by, and strengthen, I am not afraid I shall suffer too much by or
for him. All my care is, that he may strengthen me to endure the last
extremity: For without him, I know the flesh will shrink back, and I shall
indulge that carnal principle of ease. But God has said, As thy days, so shall
thy strength be; and, My grace is sufficient for thee. How sweet is it for the
soul not to count the life dear, and to resist unto death, for Jesus and his
truth! O, what a truly noble soul does it discover in a christian, to wage war
with hell, earth and his own heart; and sight against all, rather than be
overcome by them, and made a slave to his base, sordid lusts!

And O what will be the result of these noble acts! Why, he has the promise of
eternal life. And he shall surely have his reward. The great Redeemer will
reward every pain and sorrow of his soul with eternal consolation. Not a reward
of merit: No; it shall be the soul's joy and crown to receive all of free
grace. The soul shall be caught up into immortality; O the amazing transport!
And filled with the fullness of God; O vast, unutterable joy and surprise!
Surrounded and swallowed up in God; O immense delight, admirable pleasure, and
unspeakable consolation! To swim (if I may so speak) in the unfathomable ocean
of the divine perfections. O high and exalted happiness! Boundless boundless
glory! This path of vital religion leads to the full enjoyment of the blessed
God. It is a path which shines brighter and brighter, to the perfect day.
Then, if I am truly religious, but a few struggles more, and I shall be
swallowed up in immortality, and satisfied in immensity.

O ye dear christian souls, who know me! but a few groans more, and I shall be
beyond your pity; all swallowed up in the embraces of my dear Redeemer; where
no sin shall ever vex my soul forever. You, my friends, who may know me here
sometimes in adversity, shall, after a few gasps more, and pantings for
strength against sin, know me so no more. For I shall be satisfied, when I
awake in his likeness; but never fully until then. There pleasures are ever
new; grasp as much as I will, it is God, infinite still. Let me be as full as I
can, or dive deep as I will: yet it will ever continue to be God
incomprehensible, God inconceivable, God unbounded, God full and unsearchable
yet, and yet, through eternity.

O let rolling time fly more swift. When shall I drop this clog; and this
mortal put on immortality! When shall I once see this God! Do children long
tosee a father; and may not I indulge the desire? O when shall I behold his
reconciled face; never to leave or grieve him more! When, O when shall it be! O
that I might glance a look toward him, the center of my soul, and find myself
loose and free from this clog of mortality! But heaven forbids complaints; and
demands my will, with all my powers and faculties. And here I resign the number
of my days to God. Yet humbly beg to be indulged in this desire to see my
Savior God, where, free from sin, and perfect in holiness, and filled with the
blessed vision and fruition of God, I shall have no want forever. O blessed
state!

But what, O what shall be the result, to the souls which have drank deep of
the pleasures of sin! They must drink deep of the cup of the fury of the
Almighty; even the dregs of the cup of his wrath shall be wrung out to
impenitent sinners. They must drink to their eternal confusion. They must have
devils for their companions; gnashing their teeth for very anguish and horror.
The mighty hand of Jehovah will crush their defenseless souls to all eternity.
O soul confounding thought! They shall be separated from the glorious God,
never to enjoy a smile from him. And I am sure there can be no rest; but
inconceivable horror. For the soul to be, and yet to be separated from God, the
center of fecility, is intolerable anguish. To be eternally excluded from God,
implies all that is miserable and dreadful. O the amazing anguish of such a
soul! O may it never be my case!

SEASONS of SELF EXAMINATION.
June 18 th, 1746. This day I devoted to God, in fasting and prayer, as far as
bodily weakness would allow; pleading for a degenerate world, and solemnly
searching my own heart, imploring the blessed influences of the Holy Spirit. I
endeavored to awe my foul with the possibility of being deceived, and the
amazing consequence of such deception! I first examined my state, by scripture
marks; and, I trust, the Spirit of God could witness to the truth of grace in
my soul. Then I examined my growth in grace, by marks drawn from the
scriptures; and think I have comfortable ground to conclude that I do make some
advances in the christian life, though I fall vastly short of what God may
justly expect, and what I long for.

I have had more of a public spirit this day, than at some times. O! it has
been a good day to my soul, though nature has often threatened to sink under
these duties. The body has been weak and sore broken, while agonizing in prayer
for myself and family, the church of God, the town, the land in which I live,
the nation, and whole WORLD, especially Heathens, and Jews. O, how sweet the
day while I spoke to JEHOVAH, as my most intimate friend! Adorable
condescension! Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee! Blessed be God for his rod; how dear the sweet scourges
that have quickened my too slothful pace! Welcome, my father, thy chastening
hand! Purged I must be; take what way thou see best.

April 3 d, 1748. And now that I have searched and researched my heart again,
and again, I can draw no other conclusion, but, that God has wrought a work of
grace on my soul, by the convictions of his Spirit, and the work of faith and
sanctification. I have had such conviction of sin as led me to loath and abhor
myself, utterly despairing of help from any other but God only; lying at the
feet of a sovereign God; willing to accept of mercy on any terms; and being
convinced of the worth, power, willingness and allsufficiency of the Divine
Redeemer, both in himself, and as appointed by the Father to save sinners: I
say, from a powerful discovery of this glorious, all amiable Savior, as
revealed in his word, I was brought to a free and full choice of him as my only
Lord and Savior; resting on him for life and salvation, believing there was
complete redemption in him. I believed him just such a Savior as I, a poor
fallen miserable creature, needed, every way suitable; and having made the
flight, of a most distressed burdened soul to Christ, I found, according to his
promise, rest. In this way, my daily peace is continued; and this faith works
by love, love to God, his ways, works, and word; also to his children,
esteeming them the only excellent of the earth.

And now the hope which I entertained, of eternal life, has been a most
prevailing motive with me to purify myself, conforming me to the divine will:
And thought to my shame and confusion I remain very unlike God, unholy,
ungrateful, covered with sin. yet holiness is the desire of my soul. I choose
any, even the most sharp afflictions, rather than sin; and more importunately
long for a release from this, than from the greatest affliction I can bear. My
soul does long for God, and the full enjoyment of him, more than for the
greatest, yea, more than for all temporal good; and while I am weak, feeble,
and faint all the day, yet I can rest rejoice in God, more than when at ease
and in health without him.

And now, the daily experiences of my foul, hope, desire, delight, rest,
satisfaction and center of my heart, do evidence to me that I have in deed and
truth, been born again, and that Christ is indeed my chosen Redeemer. Now,
surely, if I am deceived, it is a most awful deception; which abides the
strictest trial! But O, my God, I think it is no delusion; I must believe it a
real work of thy grace on my heart; I think thy word does warrant me to draw
this sweet conclusion! O, the freeness of sovereign grace to the most unworthy!
Well might I now stagger, were it not for the infinite merits of the great
Redeemer! It is this, gives me the utmost confidence, and assurance. It is
purchased redemption, and yet it is free; yea, the very purchase, exalts the
freeness. O, the adorable mystery of godliness!

Sept. I am called the ensuing day to sit down at the dear Redeemer's table;
but, O my soul, is this indeed thy Redeemer? Now I would be solemn. O, search
and try me, thou all knowing God! I know there is much amiss in my soul; much
darkness* deadness, carnality, hypocrisy and enmity, yet lurking in my depraved
soul; can this propensity in me to sin, be the spot of the child of God? O,
thou omniscient Jehovah, suffer me not to be deceived in this matter. I cannot
bear the thought of being deceived here, and stripped of God at last, as my
covenant God! I would try my title as long as life does remain, and as long
still strive that there be no flaw in it. O, do I not detest and abhor every
inclnation in my soul to sin? Lord, is it not the greatest burden of my life,
that I do not love, serve and enjoy thee more? Do I not long more, for the full
enjoyment of thee, and for perfect conformity to thee, than for all temporal
good? O, come thou beloved of my soul, for I desire none but thee: O, come and
meet me at thy table!

Now I have endeavored to examine my state, and trust I have, really,
scriptural evidences of my interest in Christ; and although the heavens look
black and cloudy, yet with sweet confidence and composure I can rest my soul on
thee, and call thee my God, my almighty friend, and father! O, glorious,
purchase; O, divine benefits, secured to me by the Holy Spirit, applying to me
the death and merits of my dearest Lord, and only Redeemer, in whom is all my
confidence, living and dying.

July, 1749. O, God, thou God of the spirits of all flesh; who searchest the
hearts, and triest the reins of the children of men; from whom nothing is hid,
no disguise can deceive thee; thou surveyest the most hidden and secret
recesses of my soul, and perfectly know all my aims and ends. I may deceive
myself, and others, but I cannot deceive thee. With thee, is infinite light and
knowledge. It can yield me no comfort that I have great and high hopes of my
safe estate, nor that many eminent christians have had the strongest confidence
of me, if thou do disown me!

O God, I tremble to hear of the high hopes, which many have of me. O, what an
aggravation must this be of my misery, if I should be rejected of God. What I
have now heard, shall put me on the strictest inquiry, for it is in the favor
of God, through Christ, my only happiness and security lies. Nor can I be
satisfied with the approbation of poor, imperfect, short sighted mortals; such
are the best of saints in this imperfect state. God only knows my heart, and to
him alone will I go for light. O thou impartial, heart searching God, I come to
thee for a clear discovery of the state of my soul. O Lord, my God, it can be
no profit to thee that I be deceived, and so perish with a lie in my right
hand. No, this is what thy soul abhors. Thou desire truth in the inward
part; and have commanded me, to examine myself, and to know myself. O then
assist me herein. Lord, I am utterly insufficient for so great a work, and
shall never attain to a clear, and true knowledge of this important point,
except divine light arise in my soul, and remove all prepossessions of
prejudice, for, and against myself.

O, eternal Jehovah, is my title to eternal life sure? Have I the certain marks
and temper of thy elect in Christ Jesus, who shall never be made ashamed of
their hope? Upon the strictest searching, and researching, that I can make, by
thy word, I still conclude it is thus with me, in some good measure; but
methinks I want the further fealings of the blessed Spirit; and I want to be
bound yet faster, on my part, to God; I want to be so wholly and entirely
thine, that I may never swerve from thy law.

I have a comfortable hope, yea, at some times, a triumphing one, or full
assurance; yet, I seem to long for an absolute certainty, which will not admit
a possibility of being deceived! But, if this is unattainable, in this
imperfect state, I thirst and long for that open vision of thy face, when
clasped in the arms of an almighty, faithful God, I shall know, with a perfect
knowledge! Until then, I will not content myself with my own slender hopes,
without full assurance: Nor with the highest hopes, of the most eminent
christians for me, without the gracious witness of the Holy Spirit, with his
word.

O God, thou fountain of being and blessedness, in whom I live, move, and have
my being; from whom I receive every mercy; without thy favor, I am undone;
without thy loving kindness, through Christ, my very being is a burden and
terror to me. I enjoy myself only in the enjoyment of thee; and cannot look on
myself, or any of my enjoyments with delight, pleasure, or satisfaction, but in
relation to thee, as being in covenant with thee. Lord, may I not appeal to
thee, who art truth itself, and wilt judge me according to truth, that I have,
and do, abandon all the delights and enjoyments on earth, for thy favor; and
can, and do, rest satisfied in that alone, as a sufficient portion for my soul.
Witness my resolute discontent with all things here below, when thou refusest
to grant me satisfying rest in thyself! Witness my entire satisfaction and rest
in thy favor, through Christ, when thou condescendest to display thy
perfection to my soul, and my interest in Jesus, the Son of my thy love, in the
absence of all things else; yea, in the most distressing outward trials of
life. Methinks thou have sworn, according to my request, that nothing but
thyself shall satisfy me; even so, Lord Jesus, Amen and Amen!

Lord, let nothing delight me, without thee. I know no other good, but thee;
and will have no other rest, or delight, but God in Christ, as the center of my
soul. Let me never live to see the time, when any thing beside, and without
God, shall satisfy my soul.

Again: Witness my daily and constant desire to leave the dearest enjoyments on
earth, for the full fruition of thyself in glory! It is long since I have
utterly refused to entertain any pleasing prospects of worldly enjoyments, that
would not vanish at the call of my Redeemer, to leave the world, and go to be
with him. I think, the highest delights that earth can offer, cannot make me
desire life. It is thy will only, O my God, that makes me rejoice in living. O,
when shall I be holy. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly!

Sept. 10 th, 1749. Blessed be God for Jesus Christ, the means of grace,
sanctuary liberties in particular. I bless thee, O my God, who hatch called
home my wandering thoughts this day, while in thy house, and fixed them on
thyself! O, how sweet it is to have my soul engaged with God in holy duties!

I bless thee for those comfortable evidences I had of my being prepared to
meet Christ, at his coming, by a true faith in him, and conformity to him.
Lord, though I find great want of conformity to thee; yet, on the strictest
search this day, I find great reason to adore thee, for the great things thou
have done for me. My soul does bless and magnify thee, O my God, for the work
of thy grace; yet, Lord, I pray I may not be deceived herein. O search and try
me, thou best of beings; let me not be deceived, and so banished from thy
presence at last. This, I cannot bear! I entreat thee, by all the beneficence
of thy nature; yea, by thy very being, which is benevolence itself, "for God is
love," that thou suffer me not to wander from thee, but fill me with thyself.
O, if I should be cast away from thee at last, how inconceivably great must my
misery be; a misery, that nothing can equal. From the hope I have entertained,
of enjoying thee, I have endeavored to place all the affections of my soul on
thee, and aspire after the highest and noblest ideas of thy perfections: Should
I be banished at last, from this only desirable good, after all my raised
expectations, what, ah, what, could equal my irreparable loss! My God, I know
not how to bear the amazing shock of such a supposition! O, my soul, rouse up
and secure thy title to the favor to God, by faith in Jesus Christ his only
Son, and the only Savior! And now let me devote my whole soul to God, and
never rest, until I arrive at the full enjoyment of him!

April, 1751. I hope I have most solemnly entered into covenant with God, and
renewedly chosen him as my everlasting portion, devoting myself entirely and
unreservedly to him. And his I did, in the bloom of life, before the evil days
came, or the years drew nigh, in the which I should say, I have no pleasure in
them. I did it in the strength and vigor of life and health, the prime of my
age. This body was then young and active; this soul was lively in all its
intellects. I did it, not in a sudden fit of fear and distress; no, it was the
most deliberate and rational part I ever performed. With all the faculties and
powers of my soul, I freely, resolutely, cheerfully, and unreservedly, entered
into this covenant; and, now, though it be far otherwise with me, yet I stand
by my choice. Lord, I am fixed; THOU ART MY CHOSEN PORTION! And, now I find
myself greatly impaired, both in body and mind; my body is subjected to
disease, pain, and great weakness; my mind disordered, confused, shattered, and
weak; foreboding dark and dismal events, as though I should soon be deprived of
my reason, and rendered entirely useless, both to myself and others; yet, I am
the Lord's, body, soul, and spirit; and I rely on thee, O God, to take care of
thine own, in all circumstances and conditions of life. I know thou art able to
keep what I have committed to thy trust against that day.

I am, now, recollecting myself, and summoning up all the powers of my soul, to
a renewed choice and surrender. Possibly, this may be the only space I may have
granted me, for this work. O, then, ye scattered, confused thoughts, unite, be
fixed and solemn! And, O ye immortal powers and faculties of my soul, exert
your utmost strength and vigor, in the solemn transaction. Ye depressed
graces, break through these clogs; be lively and active. Flee, ye diseases, and
let me have a moment's rest and composure, for this delightful work. Come, thou
blessed Spirit, with thy needed influences, and prepare and assist my soul, in
this solemn dedication!

March, 1753. Came, O my soul, examine thy title to eternal life. Thou have
strong hopes; but, are they good? Will they stand in the day of trial? Will
they endure the amazing horrors of a death bed; or will they stand in the last
great decisive day, when God shall judge the secrets of men's hearts? It is one
thing, O my soul, to hope, when all things appear fair, and pleasant; and
another, to believe, and remain steadfast, when clouds and thick darkness
overspread me! Lord, it is thy Spirit alone that must undeceive me, if I am
deceived; for, I cannot find out the deception, after all my searchings. Unto
God will I look. O, do thou discover my state to me! Thou know how unshaken
my confidence remains, after all my examination; yet I will still inquire. And,
now, what choice have I made? O, Searcher of hearts, and Trier of reins, thou
know, that from the strictest search I am able to make, this is the answer:
God, his glory, and the enjoyment of him, as my only felicity! In this choice I
am fixed. I have chosen God the Father, for my covenant God and father: God the
Son, for my only Savior, Lord, and King: God the Holy Ghost, for my sanctifier
and comforter: God's law, word, and will, his people, his interest and cause,
and all that is his, to be my sweetest interest, dearer to me than life itself.

July 15 th, 1754. What means this depression of spirits? Have I not assuredly
anchored all my hopes of eternal life on the merits of Jesus Christ, the only
mediator of reconciliation between God and fallen, sinful, miserable man; in
whom the great Jehovah has declared himself well pleased, and accessible? Have
I not searched, and researched, with the utmost diligence, into this matter?
And, did I not always find sweet and comfortable evidence of faith and love
unfeigned? And, do I now find any sufficient ground to doubt? Verily, I do not;
unless it be matter for doubting, that I am longing and thirsting after God,
the living God; and that nothing can satisfy my soul, but light and life from
him; and my whole soul is reaching out after him. Surely, this is not ground
for doubts and fears. No: God is witness to the sincerity of my faith, and
love, and every grace, which he has been the author, and will be the finisher
of. Fear not, O my soul; God, the immutable God is thy refuge, thy confidence,
and will be thy eternal consolation! I have laid all my wishes, hopes, desires,
and expectations, on the perfections of his nature, the unchangeableness of his
being, and the truth of his word; and here will I confide forever!

After I had written the above, I was led to meditate on the importance of
being united to Christ, by a living and true faith, the worth of an immortal
soul, and the weight of my eternal concerns: And, after serious examination, I
prostrated myself before God, beseeching him, who surveyed the most secret
recesses of my soul, that, if I was (...), I might be convinced of it; that, if
I never (...) conviction of my sin and misery, never (...) at the sect of a
sovereign God, (...) renounced my own righteousness, (...) Christ on gospel
terms, believing the (...) of his Son, submitting to, relying (...) might then
be enabled to do it. (...) various descriptions of faith in God (...), brought
to a renewed experience (...) with the clear witness of the blessed Spirit
(...) so! Blessed be God, I trust I was brought (...), sweet, gospel frame of
soul, attended with a divine peace, satisfaction, joy, love gratitude, and
adoration!

August 18 th, 1754, I now prostrate soul and body before God, for his gracious
assistance, in the solemn, important trial of my state. O God, now, O now be
with me.

And what shall I now say? If faith be the flight of the convinced, distressed,
self despairing sinner, to Christ, for refuge and life; if it be cordial
choosing, receiving, embracing, and relying on him, as the only hope set before
us in the gospel; if it be a hearty surrender of the whole soul to him, as
Prophet, Priest and King; if it be a constant looking to him for assistance,
and a constant reliance on his righteousness, and God-Man-Mediator, for
acceptance with God, under the powerful conviction of guilt, depravity and
wretchedness, but universal corruption, inability to help ourselves,
unworthiness that God should help us; if it be a firm trust in him, as one
every way suitable for his work as Mediator, and one authorized by the Father;
if it be a full, entire credit to the record God has given of his Son: And if
love be that, which powerfully influences the soul to delight in the divine
will, his law, his word, his ordinances, his people, and all that is his; and
disposes the soul to submit, yea, acquiesce in all the dispensations of his
providence, even when most afflictive, as holy, wise, and good; if it love,
that animates the soul to the most ardent longings after full fruition, with
constant desires that Jesus may be exalted* that self, sin, and all things else
may be subdued (...) that he may reign triumphant over all those (...) formerly
were most dear to it; if it (...) strains the soul to examine and try her in
(...) when no inward fears or outward (...) but because she would not live a
(...) near and intimate relation (...) or enjoyed in this life; (...) love, to
look with indifference an (...) most desirable objects of time and (...) part
with all, and with life itself, for the (...) vision and fruition of him, whom
she esteems (...) amiable, the only desirable, object of love and admiration:
And if it be true repentance, to abhor even the least appearance of sin, and to
detest and hate every false way; to feel the most keen and sensible sorrow and
remorse for sin, because it is sin, and to abhor itself because it is no more
conformed to the pure and holy God, and is so ungrateful to the best of beings,
the kindest friend, and most bountiful benefactor; accounting sin the greatest
affliction in life, because of its own vile nature and hateful tendency, being
against God, and separating the soul from this holy: being, whom faith and love
justly esteems altogether lovely: If this faith exercises itself in new
obedience, powerfully leading the soul to study and pursue all that God has
commanded, in a constant, hearty, universal, practical endeavor to perform
every duty, though ever so difficult, because God has commanded it, esteeming
all God's precepts concerning all things to be right: And now, if these, though
hastily drawn, be the genuine marks and evidences of a sincere repentance and
obedience, which the gospel requires in all those who hope for salvation,
through, the perfect righteousness and atonement of Christ, the great Redeemer;
against whom, God has said, there is no condemnation, but they shall have
eternal life; those who believe shall be saved; those who love him, he will
love; those who repent shall find mercy; and to those, who by patient
continuance in well doing, etc. eternal life: If these things be so; and if I
can, by the most strict, impartial and renewed search, find out the state of my
soul; if this can be done, I must again conclude, that I have an interest in
Christ, and the promises eternal life; through him. For, I trust, and firmly
believe, God has, by his almighty power and rich grace, wrought these things in
my soul, and is daily carrying on the work of his grace, by which, I trust, I
have been enabled to make my calling and election sure. And I have obtained a
comfortable hope, or a firm persuasion, of my interest in Christ Jesus, the
only mediator and refuge of sinners, even by his spirit, which, I trust,
dwells in me. Notwithstanding this hope, which, through grace, remains
unshaken, I still daily renew the trial; though there is not a deception; that
I know of; but I have charged on my conscience, and put home to it in the most
solemn manner; nor an evidence of grace, whether of the habit or the exercise,
that I have not tried myself by, and have been aquitted of guile and approved
off sincerity. And now the trial appears but a repetition of what before was
put out of doubt; and a careful search after what, through grace, is not hid:
Yet, as I find the continual exercise of watchfulness and examination enjoined,
in the word of God, and seeing it tends to set my evidences of grace in open
light, and also tends to strengthen the habit of grace, I would, by repeated
trial, endeavor to obtain fresh strength against an hour of temptation.

Through the free, rich, sovereign grace of God, I have these evidences so
clear, that I can as well deny my own existence, or that my soul is immortal,
or that I ever performed a rational act or exercise; I may as well doubt of
these, as of the spiritual exercises of grace, which appear as real, and
constant, as the acting of my rational powers; and I think I am as fully
persuaded of the one, as of the other. But, as I know I am never out of danger,
and am daily liable to such darkness and temptations, as may cause me to
question all the experiences of my soul, I would guard against such an hour.
But, Lord, thou only know what trials now await me. Thou know how soon I
may be so plunged, as that all these things will prove insufficient to keep me
from sinking under the pressure. Yet, by thy blessing, these may be a witness
for me in a day of temptation; though nothing but thy presence can ever give me
comfort. O, let thy almighty grace be then, and always, sufficient for me!

*************** Having been brought to the gates of the grave, and really
thought myself to be dying; Death approaching me in all its terrors, as an
enemy to nature: And having lately seen a dear friend, who has received the
sentence of death in herself, under most terrible distress of body: I am now
resolving to enter upon a critical examination of my soul, to see what are my
evidences for heaven.

I have, indeed, made this my practice, in some measure, every day, and more
especially under every sermon, so far as I can recollect, for several years,
though many times with too much coldness and formality. Yet, blessed be God, I
hope, for the twelve past years, I have made it the grand concern of my life,
to know God and Jesus Christ, by the Spirit, and to know that I did so. I have
endeavored to get my heart awed, and solemnized, by the most powerful,
awakening, and important considerations, on which my eternal all depended, and,
in a solemn sense of eternal things, I have engaged in this affair. And, I
trust, I have had the powerful assistance of the Holy Spirit to excite me to
diligence, fervency, and close application in this work. And the result has
been, a sweet and comfortable hope, that God has, by his word and Spirit,
formed me anew in Christ Jesus: Which hope, I trust, has been raised in my soul
by the witness of the Spirit, with the word, that I had the sure mark and sign
of a child of God. Yet, still I have persevered in the solemn search, that, if
possible, I might not be at a loss about my state, when death approached me;
but that, in the solemn day, my evidences might be plain and clear.

And now, under a sense of the vast importance of having all things right in my
soul, when I know it is on the verge of eternity, ready to launch out into an
unknown world of spirits, knowing I can never have things too well cleared up
for a dying hour, I have set myself renewedly to search into my evidences.

And, first, in general, as to a work of grace in my soul; although I cannot
determine the very instant, in which a change was wrought in me; yet, from my
infancy, I believe the Spirit of God was working on my soul. The first that I
can remember of any thing, was, a concern for my soul, and this could not far
exceed the fifth year of my age: And from that time God has been working in me
to will, and to do, of his own good pleasure. I have seen sin to be the worst
of evils; myself the worst of sinners, a transgressor from the womb. I have
been convinced of the sinfulness of my nature, the corrupt fountain from whence
proceeded every sinful act. My iniquities have appeared many, and greatly
aggravated. My heart has looked like a sink of sin, more loathsome than the
most offensive carrion that swarms with hateful vermin! My understanding dark
and ignorant; my will stubborn; my affections carnal, corrupt and disordered;
every faculty depraved and vitiated; my whole soul deformed and polluted,
filled with pride, enmity, carnality, hypocrisy, self confidence, and all
manner of sins.

I have seen my utter inability to help myself; the absolute need I stood in
that God should work all my works in and for me; the infinite justice of God,
if he should cast me off forever; my dreadful exposedness to divine wrath: And,
by the powerful conviction of these things on my soul, I have been brought to
despair of help in myself, or from any created arm. Only in the Lord Jehovah,
was my help found. I trust, God did then bow my will, causing me to accept of
mercy on his own terms. I trust, my whole soul was then made willing to submit
to the most humbling, self denying terms of the gospel. Jesus was revealed to
me, as the all sufficient Mediator, as the most suitable Savior for guilty,
miserable sinners: He, whom the Father had appointed, and declared himself well
pleased with. O, how did infinite wisdom, grace, and love, now display
themselves, in the glorious scheme of redemption by Jesus Christ. O here, I
trust, my soul felt a divine power to lay hold on this hope set before me in
the gospel, and now revealed by the Holy Ghost in my heart. I saw God could be
just, and the justifier of him that believed in his Son. And how was my soul
swallowed up in adoring, admiring views of the divine perfections, displayed in
the wonders of Redemption! I trust, I was enabled to give up my whole soul,
entirely, and all my concerns into his hands, to rest upon him, and receive
him, as my Prophet, Priest, and King; utterly renouncing my own righteousness,
which I saw was but as filthy rags. I saw infinite security, in resting on
Jesus Christ. I think, I had the most rational, solid conviction of these
things on my soul; and, after all my searching, and researching, I must
conclude, that flesh and blood has not revealed these things unto me; but the
Father and the Son, by the Holy Ghost.

As to the fruits or effects of this faith, I find, so far as I can discern, by
continued, critical observation, an habitual disposition,

First, To rest and live upon God, as the only center of my soul. To trust all
the important concerns of time and eternity with the great Mediator; and to
look to him for grace and strength, to keep me near to himself, in a constant
dependence on him; renewing my choice of him for my only everlasting portion;
devoting myself to him, to be his only, and his eternally.

Secondly, To love him above all. If I love not God supremely, for himself, I
am under the most fatal mistake. And my judgment must be under the power of
gross darkness, unfit to be relied upon in the smallest matter, if my whole
soul does not go out after God, as the only suitable object of love and
delight. Here I find the most powerful attraction! Here I see all that is
worthy my regard! Hence arises my ardent desire after a perfect conformity to
him; esteeming his law to be holy, just, and good; his precepts concerning all
things to be right; constantly repairing to him as my only unerring counselor,
in every emergency of life; choosing he should rule, govern, and dispose of me,
and every concern of mine, forever. Hence, I trust, my love to his people: As I
love him, so I love all that is his, and all that appear in reality to love
him. His people are my people, the dear chosen companions of my life.

Thirdly, An habitual hatred to sin, as the worst, yea, the only evil; the
abominable thing, which my soul truly hates. I abhor myself, because of the in
being of sin! I am necessarily unhappy, because I am a sinner. Woe is me,
because of the leprosy of sin, by which I am so defiled, that I pollute all I
touch! I know no sorrow like this sorrow. O that my head were waters, and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep, day and night, for this grievous
hurt; this undoing sin, that so unlikens, and alienates the soul from the
blessed God!

Fourthly, Yet a more confirmed habitual judgment to be the Lord's, though
spiritual joys abate, and the tide of affection ebb. I find an unwavering
determination to pursue to choice I have made, as the most reasonable service;
conformity to God, the substance of all religion. The most necessary, rational,
and substantial good, that a creature can attain, is to be intentionally, and
designedly devoted to God, as the chief and proper good, and his glory as the
best and last end. This is true beauty, harmony, and importance!

Miscellaneous Extracts from her Diary, which she kept, and wrote in it almost
daily, until June 1769, to the 43d year of her age; and is contained in a
number of volumes. After that time she wrote but little in her Diary: Or if she
did, it appeared best to her not to preserve it.
Oct. 1744. O GOD, infinite in power, grace and holiness, I set apart this day
to thee, for the people. Thy providence calls for deep humiliation, and fervent
addresses to the throne of all grace. Pity to the poor Heathen and Jews calls
upon me* though but a worthless worm, to use all the interest I have at the
throne of grace, through my everlasting advocate, for such poor, blinded fools
as they. How shall I address thee, O God, suitably* and so as to prevail! O,
let my prayer be the prayer of faith; let me get near thee this day! Lord, I
beseech thee, let me engage in no duty this day, without thee. O, be with me of
a truth; and let me find acceptance with thee. Thy presence I must have, to
make my duties acceptable: For without thee I can do nothing.

O my God, I do not sue barely for fluency of words, or strong workings of
affections; but entirely for acceptance with thee; to be heard for poor Heathen
and Jews, and thy church, O God, I thus plead. Their case is truly lamentable,
without thy pity. Thou have awaked my compassion by their misery. Can I enjoy
the precious doctrines, ordinances and power of the gospel, and be insensible
of their wretchedness in their darkness and unbelief! Forbid it, O God. Let me
never show such ingratitude to thee, my bountiful benefactor; nor such inhuman,
unnatural, and cruel insensibility to the misery of my fellow creatures. O,
pity them, my God, who cannot pity themselves. And, O thou Fountain of
compassion, stir up bowels of compassion in thine own children, both ministers
and people, for both Jews and Gentiles, that they may come to the saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ. That we, being all united in that one mystical body
whereof he is the head* may rejoice together, and bring forth abundant fruit,
to the glory of thy free grace. And may thy church flourish: Thy Zion triumph
in her God: Thy ministers be as a flame of fire; clothed with zeal and success;
faithful and unwearied in thy service. Let thy saints shout aloud, and live
like thy redeemed, ashamed of ingratitude, and full of faith and love. Even so
come, Lord Jesus, in the day of thy power. Amen and Amen.

Oct. 26 th, 1744. I have now just finished the eighteenth year of my age. Good
God! to what little purpose have I lived these eighteen years! Ah, Lord, thou
have come these many years seeking fruit; but alas! how little have thou found!
How vilely have I requited thy care! and how incorrigible have I been, under
all thy cultivations! But, sure I am, these unparalleled instances of
ingratitude and rebellion have not stopped the current of thy unbounded
goodness. Was ever mortal so favored before! It is too bold an assertion to
say, infinite mercy could not go beyond, considered in itself; yet, when I look
on it, as relating to me, the most ungrateful, unworthy, illdeserving of all
the redeemed race, the chief of sinners, and most helpless of mortals, I am
ready to cry out, Never a greater instance of divine mercy! It is two years
since I gave myself up to God and his church; and publicly avouched the Lord,
for my God. And, though I would lament my vileness, that I have lived so
unbecoming one in covenant with a holy God; yet, O, Lord my God, what shall I
render to thee for thy preserving and sustaining grace; that I have been
enabled to resist most fierce and otherwise irresistible assaults?

Yea, I will praise him, who has been the health of my countenance, and my God.
It has been because thou have been the health of my countenance, that it has
been in any measure healthful, hitherto. Therefore will I still hope in thy
mercy. O God of my former revivals, leave me not now. How many months have I
passed without any sensible decline of the power of godliness in my soul? For
near these two years, more especially, I trust I have made sensible progress in
my christian course. (...) dare assert, to the honor of free, unmerited grace.
To thy name, eternal Jehovah, be the glory. Thy grace has been cultivated in
my soul, notwithstanding all my corruptions. I have been admitted to near
converse with thee. Thou have made such discoveries of thyself, that I have
seemed, as it were, to behold thee with open face; and, in some degree, to be
changed into thine image. These powerful discoveries have formed my soul to a
holy calm and serenity; a deep abasement; holy, solemn, humble awe of the great
Jehovah; with holiness to the Lord inscribed on all my powers; not only in holy
raptures of joy, with the gracious manifestation of thy most endearing love;
but sweetly swallowed up in the opening views and apprehensions of Deity. The
glories of Jehovah I cannot describe; or even the sensible transforming power
such discoveries of thyself have had on my soul.

And O, what a despicable worm did I appear to myself, when thou waft pleased
to pass before me in the glories of thy nature, and caused me to cry out, "Woe
is me! I am undone! I am unclean! I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
ear; but now mine eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor myself and repent in dust
and ashes."

Yet, since thou have been thus gracious, I entreat thee, O God, who are still
the same, my almighty and faithful God, to show me thy glory. Lord, give me
soul quickening, soul humbling, and soul reviving and transforming views of
thyself. O Lord God, arise for my help. Entreat me not to leave thee; but
suffer me, yea do thou strengthen me to a holy violence, to wrestle with thee,
and tell thee, I cannot let thee go, my Lord, and my God. O, now admit me to a
near converse with thee. Unveil thy perfections, so far as a mortal worm can
bear. Lord, fill a finite vapor. Break in on my soul with divine power. Show
me thy glory. I cannot withdraw my petition. Dear, ever gracious, all
condescending Savior, condescend to grant my request. Should thou now hold
forth thy scepter, and bid me ask what I would, this should be my immediate
request, O give me transforming discoveries of thyself: Show me thy glory.
Amen, even so, Lord Jesus. Amen and Amen.

Nov. 5. Lord, is early piety so admirable? Is a heart early given up to God
worthy the notice and approbation of the whole creation, as I have heard? Why
then have thou thus honored me? Is a heart early devoted to God peculiarly
acceptable to God? And do such generally receive the most endearing tokens of
thy love? Why then have thou conferred such great honor and grace on so vile a
worm as I am? Lord, it would have been great grace, and great honor, to have
been adopted into the number of thy children, at the last hour. But to me it
appears superlative grace and love to be a young disciple of my Lord, a beloved
John. How great an honor to be accepted, when a babe, by the King of kings!
And how great the privilege to be often, more often than later converts,
receiving grace and strength from God! My God, I count it an honor to be a
disciple; but peculiarly my honor, to be a young disciple. I think myself
happy, that I am a member of thy church; but peculiarly so, that I was admitted
the youngest member belonging to the communion; the youngest member of our
female society; as likewise the youngest of all my christian friends. Though
some do indeed despise my youth; yet, since I know the grace of God has
appeared more glorious by it, I will rejoice and glory in it, though it be an
infirmity, if thereby the power of God may be the more manifested, and he
ordain praise out of the mouth of a babe and suckling.

April 28 th 1745. Last night I watched with dear Mr. Helyer. Mr. Helyer had
been lately ordained colleague with the Rev. and aged Mr. Clap; and was now in
a consumption, of which he soon died.
I trust God was with me. O that God would spare his life, and restore him to
health! O God, my soul is pained for thy church. O that my own life might fend
off the stroke from him! How freely, for thy church's sake, could I cast myself
on the mercy of God in Christ Jesus my Lord, and take his place! Not with any
conceitedness of my being better prepared to die; but purely for the church's
sake, that she might be built up, and not pulled down. Lord, now in my distress
I have vowed, if thou will spare the life, and restore the health of thy
servant, then will I seek and serve thee, by thy grace, with my whole heart. I
still hope in thy mercy.

May 18 th. This day much sunk, on account of Mr. Helyer and the church. I find
Satan besets me like a roaring lion. But I look to my good God. My dear,
tempted Savior, can succor me, when tempted. Having had, as I trust, free
access to God, for the good of his church, I was led to confine it to the life
of Mr. Helyer; and therefore to conclude he would surely recover. And hence I
told a friend, if he did not recover, I should be ready to doubt of all my
experiences; and whether I had ever exercised a true faith in God. And here
Satan took great advantage of me.

June 1 st. On the 21st of May, a sovereign and righteous God took my dear
pastor, Mr. Helyer, to himself. And, O how do I now seem to be stripped of my
guide, my spiritual counselor! Satan has this day beset me to disbelieve all
that God commands me to believe. And my having so strong a persuasion of Mr.
Helyer's recovery, made me almost ready to fall under the temptation. And just
as I was ready to give all over as lost; as if God was not the hearer of
prayer, and my faith as well as all my religion, must be vain, this thought
darted into my mind, that I would once more see if the word of God could afford
any light to my distressed soul. I immediately opened the Bible; and the first
words that offered to my sight, were those in John xxi. 23. "Then went this
saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: Yet Jesus
said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come,
what is that to thee?" Here I saw, that some mistook the words which Christ
himself spoke. Yet my unbelieving heart replied, But surely these were not his
children! But, upon a review of the words, I found the saying went abroad among
the brethren. And now, O how was every objection answered! Even Christ's own
disciples might mistake his expressions, and yet be disciples still: And so
might I be a child of God; and yet mistake his intimations of answering my
prayers for the church's good, for his intention to preserve the life of his
servant. This was such a display of divine condescension and grace, as calmed
my soul, and put Satan to flight. There are, however, many things dark and
intricate in this affair, which I never expect to see through, until I awake in
his likeness; but then I shall be satisfied.

June 23 d, 1746. O my unbelieving heart! How long will thou rise in secret
dissatisfaction at God's disposals of me? As I appear recovering from my
disorders, I would fain think it best; cheerfully embrace life, and bless my
God for it: And yet I feel a reluctance, even while I am writing. I am almost
impatient for that state and world, where my will shall be entirely swallowed
up in God's. I believe, for above two years, there has not been a day, if an
hour or minute, when awake, in which, if death had come, I could have said, It
is come in a day or hour wherein I have not longed and panted for it. The
vanity of this world has rendered it burdensome to me. I am sure the bewitching
pleasures of it have more imbittered it to me, than all its sorrows.

When I compare infinite with finite, eternal with temporal, boundless and
unfathomable, with shallow nothing, I find there is a boundless unfathomable,
infinite, eternal disproportion, between those immense, immortal delights
above, and those of time and sense. And is it a small disappointment, when I
hoped in a short time to have been in the full enjoyment of God, and these
glories; when I seemed to be on the confines of eternity; new glories appearing
to my gazing, astonished soul, all bright, all serene, the happy haven: From
these happy views, to be ordered back to earth, all dark and gloom; the cavern
far from God, my life and my all in all; to grovel among the insects of this
earth; the fear of a vain heart, that it will choose vanity? O, how shocking,
how surprising the change! What finite spirit, though of a superior order,
would feel no emotion, no reluctance at such a disappointment, I cannot
conceive.

But come, my most noble powers, show your wisdom by a profound submission.
Come, ye noble orders above; ye immortal choirs, assist my soaring
contemplation; take me on your wings, and hasten the tedious hours. But in vain
do I call to finites. You receive your heat from that infinite fire, and derive
your light and life from a Being accessible by sinners, through the great
Redeemer. Then, O Fountain of light, life and love, dart into my dark, drooping
and benumbed soul, some glorious beams of light, life and love. O, make up to
me, as far as possible in this distant, mortal state, the want of full,
complete discoveries of thy infinite glories. I know, I know, there are soul
ravishing, soul quickening, soul humbling, soul transforming discoveries of
invisibilities. These have inflamed my soul for those yet unknown glories; and
yet well known by anticipation, and prelibation. O for a fresh view, while
here. O my God, mitigate the darkness by intervening light.

June 26 th. Yesterday I had a sweet morning. My meditations of God were
composed and solemn. My heart was fixed and enlivened in prayer. But nature was
much spent; so that I felt the effects all the day after. O, what a clog is
this body! At night, after serious examination by my rules, I addressed the
throne of grace with some little life. The blessed Spirit came, and filled my
soul with a sense of the glory and majesty of the great Jehovah; and of the
repeated affronts and indignities I had offered to him: Of his astonishing
patience and forbearance, that I was not made a monument of divine wrath; a
spectacle to angels and men and devils. That, after such incorrigibleness,
under divine cultivation, both of the Spirit, providence and ordinances; all
the sweet sunbeams of overflowing, unbounded, infinite, everflowing love, I was
not bound over to suffer the strange punishment assigned to the workers of
iniquity; but that God was yet accessible, through the glorious Mediator; my
infinite need of the Mediator; my ground of strong confidence in him; that he
was surety, whom God the Father had appointed, and declared himself well
pleased with. I saw myself a sinner, and dare not approach absolute perfection
in any way but through a Mediator. The faithfulness of God afforded strong
consolation.

Thus was I held up above nature, until on a sudden I almost fainted; and
nature seemed as though it would afford no more assistance. Yet, after some
struggles for breath, reviving a little, my soul remembered a degenerate world,
Heathen and Jews. One never heard of this dear, sure, and infinitely sufficient
Savior, and only refuge for guilty man; and the other now saw no form or
comeliness in him that they should desire. My soul could not but wrestle for
these, until the body was almost lifeless, and I was forced to commit my self
into the hands of a faithful God; and was obliged to be helped to bed.

O, if this body were no help to my devotion; yet, if it would but keep pace
with my nobler powers, I could bear it: But that it should drag down my
immortal powers; I could not bear it from any hand but thine, thou wise, good,
gracious, just, sovereign God and Father. It seems to me I should resent it
with contempt, as an affront, should the greatest monarch on earth offer me a
reprieve from those immortal joys, which are in thy presence. I receive life,
and bless thee for it, only as it is the will of my wise God. Not all the
creatures on earth, nor the dearest relations here, would make me willing to
stay a moment, had thou not said. "Return and live." But now, welcome this
body, and this (otherwise) my hated clog, and continual burden. On these terms,
the will and glory of God, whatever I receive from thee, my God, I would choose
and love; as I have chosen thy will for mine, in all things.

June 30 th. Glory to God in the highest, for free, rich, undeserved goodness!
This day, I have, at least in heart, declared my experiences of the mercy of
God, even in the great assembly of the people of God; and renewed my vows to be
the Lord's; and called his saints to witness, if I forsake the Lord, in singing
the 32d and 116th psalms. Scarce a word in them, but my heart went with it; and
I made it my own act and deed. O, how solemn, how sweet, how awful was the
place! O, unmerited free grace! The word preached came with a divine power on
my soul. I saw an infinite beauty and amiableness in the allsufficient
God-Man-Mediator. I admire and love him, for what he is in himself, as well as
what he is to me. Yea, I love his laws; his will is dear: I choose it; I place
my chief happiness in a conformity thereto. Yea, and I resolve to walk before
him, in the land of the living.

I said, at the close of the service, "Lord, flow let thy handmaid depart; for
I have seen thy salvation." And I would be willing such a Sabbath should be my
last, such moments to land me at the desired heaven.

July. Lord, I am thine; resolvedly so. It is my constant study, What shall I
render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I look back with pleasure
on all those engagements, whereby I am bound to be the Lord's. O, never let me
retract those solemn vows! It is thou who have pitied my weakness, and pardoned
my most unnatural rebellion. O, infinite mercy, free grace, unbounded love,
unspeakable condescension! What shall I say of God! My thoughts rise and swell.
My love burns and flows, while I muse on God, in himself, and God to his
creatures. O, what shall a finite, mortal worm say about, or conceive of, an
infinite, immortal object! It is high, what can we know! Deep, what can we do!
And, alas! as for me, how little do I know of what may be known of this dear,
immortal, essential good! Yet, blessed be God, so much I know of him, that I
count all things else but dross and dung, for the excellency of this knowledge.
O I long to bathe myself in this infinite fountain, and let out all my soul in
God. But ah, finite, narrow, depraved capacity, when shall you be enlarged, O
when!

Nov. 17 th. My soul has been much afflicted this day, and refused to
comforted, because I am not allowed to go up to my Father's house. O, had I
nothing to consult but my own ease, I would venture a rack of pain after it, if
I might visit thine abode, O my God. But I must consult the duty I owe to body,
and the dishonor I may bring on religion. O when, O when, shall I enter thy
courts above, and live the life of heaven born souls! Lord, is there no soul
there, who was once as unmeet to partake of that inheritance as I am; whom thy
free grace has made meet? If there be not, yet, Lord, what cannot infinite
power, and free, unbounded grace effect? I know, if I ever enter the new
Jerusalem, the almighty power and sanctifying efficacy of the Spirit of God,
must pass on my soul, to make me a meet inhabitant for that high and holy
place. This, this, will not suffer my heart to object my unfitness. And, alas!
my advances are so inconsiderable, that I dare not wish for months and years;
but rather for glory begun, this grace made perfect. Then, O then, shall I
really make advances in love and likeness to my God. O thou end of all my hopes
and wishes, stand not afar off from my soul. O, let come what will, give me to
behold thy face and glory, reconciled to me in Jesus Christ, and I venture all
events. O, may I but enjoy this my God, and all the blackness of hell could not
dismay or affright me.

Feb. 5 th, 1747. Some very solemn, awful thoughts of death, this day. That
vast, and, to nature, shocking separation between soul and body, those old and
dear companions. That this body, these eyes, this nose and mouth, must erelong
become food for worms; be covered with the colds of the valley; rottenness
enter into my bones! Here I mused; how dark the scene, while my infirm, sickly
constitution tells me, it is hastening on me.

But directly I muse, and stretch my thoughts beyond the grave. Here I view a
risen and ascended Savior; an innumerable company of the spirits of the just
made perfect; refined from all the dross of sinful corruption; dressed in the
likeness to their God. Transported here, I gaze on brighter scenes of bliss,
overbalancing all the gloomy prospect, arising from the horrors of the grave.
For me to be with Christ, I esteem far the best.

Great encouragement this night in prayer, wrestling with God for zeal and
courage to dare to be singularly good, in this corrupt world and age, in which
I live, and that I might never cease making this petition, until I had obtained
this mercy of him; nor even until I did arrive complete in his kingdom and
glory above.

Feb. 6 th. Great refreshment and assistance this night in prayer; far beyond
what is common for me. O, how was I held up, as it were, to heaven, to gaze on
the divine glory; while the spirit of prayer and supplication was abundantly
poured out into my soul: Yea, I took hold of the strength of the almighty
Jehovah, protesting, with all reverence, I could not, I would not let him go,
except he bless. O, it seems God did allow me the utmost bounds of humble
boldness. I saw, by the eye of faith, the Lord, the Lord most high, exceeding
glorious; myself, less than a worm. He, most holy; I, a wretched, polluted
sinner. He, infinitely wise; and myself ignorant as a beast before him. I
beheld an infinite disproportion between absolute perfection, and imperfection
itself; and yet that this God was accessible, through the blessed Jesus; and
that I stood in absolute necessity of his favor, and gracious regards: And,
with me, so did the whole race of mankind.

I wrestled in an agony for this family, particularizing every foul in it, even
to the third generation. My soul felt their absolute need of God: And,
imitating my Savior, who, being in an agony, prayed more earnestly, my soul
was so engaged, that it seemed ready to break loose from the body. So likewise
for all the children of God; for our church and congregation; for the whole
town; for this land; for our nation; and for Heathen and Jews. I do not know
that I was ever more, if so much, strengthened and carried out, in every
petition, with such unwearied undivided importunity, in my life before. I said,
"It is good to be here."

But I am now fully persuaded, that a few such seasons, successively, would
burst the bands of nature. For, although I was at that time insensible of my
weakness; yet, since nature seems as though it would sink and die. But, O, such
a season would a thousand fold more than recompense me, though life should pay
for it. My soul did even break with the longings I had for the open vision and
full fruition of God: But, until then, for as large measures of grace, as was
possible for me, a finite, mortal worm, to receive. I could not, I would not,
stop my thirst beneath the highest attainment possible in this world. O, how
infinitely easy did it then appear to me, for God to fill and satisfy a finite
vapor, out of his unmeasurable fullness! I longed to be filled from the fullness
of God.

Feb. 7 th. An abiding sweetness remains on my spirits this day, from the
visitations of last night. O, how good is God to my soul! How sweet the
abundant expressions of his grace and love to me! Verily, I would I could
forever offer up my whole soul a sacrifice of love to this God of love, for his
most free and unspeakable love to our wretched race; and to me, the least of
them all. Here language fails, and my mortal tongue dies, unable to utter such
an unspeakable mystery. O, may I live answerable to such high privileges,
always under a realizing and powerful sense of such free, boundless, sovereign
love! O, the height and depth, the length and breadth of this love of God,
which has stooped to regard me, even unworthy me, the least and most unworthy
of all the finite race!

Feb. 8 th. Abundantly refreshed; especially in conversing with a christian
friend. God was pleased to revive in me a fresh sense of his long experienced
faithfulness, while I was speaking of his infinite goodness. My Savior, my
almighty friend, seems again returning to my soul. O, I would bid my God ten
thousand welcomes to my soul! And, O that christians would practice the duty of
christian conference more! What a mean would this be to revive vital godliness!

Feb. 13 th. O God, if I may not get satisfied in thee, now pass, I beseech
thee, an irrevocable decree; O, swear by thyself, that nothing else shall
satisfy me. I want none but thee; and if thou satisfy me not, I would remain
eternally unsatisfied, uneasy and restless. But I know thou will do it. For
thou have bid me open wide my mouth, and have promised thou would fill it. O
divine power, come with the command, and, behold, it is opened! Opened so wide,
that nothing but thy infinite self can fill it; and thou will, consistent with
thy truth and faithfulness, fill it. Yea, I know thy mighty love and
beneficence would incline thee to do it, had I not a promise to plead; even
that love and beneficence which first moved thee to promise, and has now begot
in my soul this sacred thirst.

When shall I come, and appear before God! I would, my God, wait with patience
thy time; yet, O be not offended with my importunity, which rises not, I trust,
from discontent with the allotments of providence. No, blessed be God! I have
friends, the most tender and kind, that the creation affords. Thy providence
has, and does supply all my wants; so that I can say, I am full and abound: I
am surrounded with goodness and mercy. And when I look around me, I know none
on earth, with whom I desire to change circumstances: Because, though I have
not their wealth, I have not their cares and entanglements; and can enjoy my
God without their distraction. But, I trust, the true spring of my desires is
love to God, that I may behold his face and glory, and get free from this body
of sin and death; where and when I shall adore, love, praise and serve this
ever blessed God, to the utmost of my powers.

My God, my Father, my Savior, my almighty Friend, my only everlasting
portion, when shall I see thee in glory? O, the unutterable felicity, once to
behold the God I love! Thou, thou art the delight of thy own infinite self, and
beholdest thy own infinite perfections, with infinite pleasure; how then shall
thy poor, finite worm, he filled, ravished and transported with the glorious
vision! Could I see no more of thee hereafter, than now, I would be content to
struggle and fight, in this field of battle. But to see the God I wish! A
glance of his infinite perfections has swallowed up my whole soul in longings
to behold with open face. What faint ideas have I of the perfections of God, in
this distant land! How short my views of infinite holiness! How low are all my
conceptions of thy admirable beauty! O, for one moment's contemplation of thee,
as do the blessed above! But this I know, would fix me eternally there. I
cannot see thy face, and live. O then, let me die, to behold it. I would give
my life away, for the blessed vision and fruition of my God; and should think
myself an infinite gainer. O, come, Lord Jesus, pity, pity my thirsty soul!

May 1 st. God is now easing all my pain, by the sight of his blessed
countenance. After a few cloudy days, he is come himself with the rod; and I
have so much to do to admire him, that I lose the smart of that. Thou art
welcome, O my God, thou art welcome, bring what thou will with thee. Come
thyself, and it is well, I am happy. I have this day heard that my doctor says,
he can do no more for me; signifying me incurable. I think I never did waste so
fast in my life, as within these few days. But I can, yea, I will rejoice,
while my God does thus smile.

May 9 th. Very weak and low in body today. This is new work. To be sick is not
new to me; but dying work is new. O my soul, I never knew what dying was. O my
Savior, help me to encounter this last enemy, death. Since thou have taken
away the sting, hence arises all my hope. The valley is dark; O, let thy rod
and staff comfort me. Let there be no delusion in my faith.

May 10 th. Permitted this day to commemorate my Savior's dying love. And here
is my comfort in death. How sweet were these words to my soul! "This is my
body, which was broken FOR YOU; and this is my blood shed for your." O
condescending love! Why has it stooped to me? O sovereign grace, never to be
fathomed by a finite worm!

May 11 th. Exercised with strong pains, amazing to nature. I sued for patience
with every breath, supported by these words, "Patient in tribulation;" a
Christlike, childlike disposition. Shall a living man complain; a man for the
punishment of his sins? O, how good is God, that I am not always held up under
such extremity of pain! Verily God is gracious in all. Though he slay me, yet
will I trust in him. Lord, thou art the portion of my soul.

May --. Weak in body* O what a solemn thing it is to die! How shall I
encounter death! For soul and body to part, must be hard work. O the important
hour, that hastens on me! A mistake here, can never he repaired. A delusion
here, will prove everlastingly, eternally fatal. But, surely, my Savior, I
rest on thee for life and for salvation. I see infinite fullness in thee, for
all my wants; and my heart rather fears to die, than to be dead. Yet this care
I will leave with thee, my dearest Redeemer.

May 14 th. I find it to be the opinion of my doctor, that I am hastening on to
my great change. Blessed be God for so pious, faithful a physician. And, O, how
sweet now to survey that dear, that blessed inheritance! There is my treasure,
my God, and my Christ. O infinite riches! Come, Lord Jesus, O come quickly!
With an ever hasty soul would I meet the message. Transporting hour of dear
release; I long for thy approach. I am weary of all below; and for thee only do
I wait. But, ah! methinks I find too much reluctance at lingering, and cannot
find such a cheerful freedom to wait God's time, though it should be months and
years, as I desire. I want to be entirely resigned to stay, if it be the will
of God that I should linger along to the utmost bounds of human life. Lord,
make me to resign to thy sovereign pleasure. Yet, if it may be, O come thou
quickly, my life, my Lord, my joy, my only rest and satisfaction.

May --. Much better in health. But O, with what reluctance do I meet this
life! O what an unresigned soul is mine! How, unprepared to meet such a
disappointment! Yet, O my God, I am resolved never to give over struggling,
until I am fully resigned to this. Help, Lord, help.

May --. Great alteration in myself today. Disorders seem to vanish. God seems
passing before me in adorable sovereignty. When I am raised on the wing of
desires, as it were, just on the entry of bliss; and joys unspeakable are
opened to me, in the most ravishing prospects; my flattering disorders tell me,
it was but a dream I was in: I may yet live long. O dark, O dismal
disappointment! How do thou cause my late transported spirits to flag and
droop! Stay, my soul, it is GOD. O adorable sovereignty! Thou will make me
submit. Henceforth, come life, come death; only let my will he swallowed up in
thine, and all shall be well. I am determined, through grace assisting, that
nothing shall displease me which pleases thee. This is my prayer, and this my
purpose; let practice be the same. I may shrink at the rod, fear the frown; but
still I will cling to the hand, and love the face, if both he there. Let me now
take up all my rest and satisfaction in God, and improve all my time and
talents for his glory.

Oct. 1 st. Glory to God for his assistance this day: He has held up my poor
weak body beyond all my expectations, through many duties. Glory to God, for
that nearness of access, with which I have been favored. And glory to him for
that affecting sense of sin, in my confessions; and for that unreserved and
renewed surrender of myself, soul and body, to God. Now know I, O Lord, that
thou art a prayer hearing God. Now I know, that not all my unworthiness can
stop the current of infinite goodness; and that thou art gracious, because thou will be gracious. O, how have thou triumphed over all those mighty
difficulties, which seemed to be in the way. And as thou have never failed, on
thy part, in giving abundant matter for praise; O let me not now fail, in my
measure, in ascribing glory and honor to thy free grace. Let me now, and
forever, be studying what I shall render for all thy benefits done unto me.

O the height and depth of that unbounded grace and mercy, which loved me out
of death and destruction, into life and salvation: Yea, out of all that is
dreadful, into all that is desirable. From the strictest search I can make, I
must conclude that, through free, rich, sovereign grace, I am of the number of
his chosen, redeemed ones; in whom there is wrought, by the Holy Spirit, a
free, full, hearty consent to the terms of the gospel; a reliance on Christ
Jesus for life and salvation; with an entire resignation of the whole soul to
his government and discipline; a cheerful embracing of Christ, as Lord and
Savior, in all his offices of prophet, priest and king; and in all his
benefits. And in the exercise of this faith, cleaving to him, and him only,
hating every false way, and delighting in the way of holiness.

Now is Christ precious to my soul: I esteem him the pearl of great price; the
chief of ten thousands; yea, altogether lovely, even in his personal
excellencies, and the only suitable Savior for me. To thee will I repair for
all supplies of grace and strength. I long after a thorough conformity to thee.
I love thee above all, and earnestly long to leave all to be with thee, where
thou art. I love my friends, as my life; yet, I would leave both for thee, O
thou desire of my soul. O, when shall I be where I shall sin no more! Never act
the part of a traitor; never behave as an ungrateful enemy to the best of
friends. Lord, I cannot bear to treat thee, as I too often do. O, what had I
been, had it not been for thee! How wretched, how miserable! What hope toward
God could I have had! Banished from God, I must have wandered an eternal exile.
O my Redeemer, what have thou done for me! Why were I not a miserable heathen?
Why have I heard the joyful news of a Savior? And O yet more, Why has he been
savingly revealed to me, unworthy me? O the freeness of this grace! O the
infinity of his love! O my God Redeemer, what is it that thou have not done for
me! I were undone without thee. I have no hope but in thee: No access to God,
no comfort of the Spirit, but in and through thee. O thou best of names, and
best of beings, I cannot speak thy worth; it is infinite, and needs an infinite
understanding to know it.

But art thou thus infinitely great and gracious; and thousands of thousands of
souls know nothing of thee, but by the dim light of ^^^ture? O send thy light
and truth into the dark corners of the earth. O, let those who never heard of a
Savior; and those who now see no form or comeliness in him, fall down before
his most amazing beauty. O, reveal thyself to these, and they shall confess all
besides is but dross and dung. O, let Heathen and Jews see the God whom they
have hitherto despised.

Feb. 1748. I am amazed that I know so little of God. Lord, I am as ignorant as
a beast, before thee. I fear, whether such ignorance be consistent with a state
of grace. Can I be born of God; and yet know more of the mysteries of thy
kingdom? O, however ignorant I am, in other respects, let me know thee, and
Jesus Christ, whom to know is life eternal. Blessed be thy name! thou have
chosen the foolish and base things of this world. O then, let me but be able to
comprehend, with all saints, what is the breadth and length, and depth height,
and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, and I will never envy
the most capacious, learned understanding, in the whole universe, who yet knows
not thee. But art thou; indeed, my God, my infinite portion; and yet I know no
more of thee? O, unveil thy glories to my soul! O, take me to thyself, to the
open vision; and I shall then know more of thee, than the most learned,
experienced saint ever did know, in this world.

This night I was swallowed up under a sense of my ignorance, so that I knew
not how to live under it. I was afraid I was too ignorant, ever to have been
savingly enlightened. I appeared to myself to be the most ignorant wretch the
earth ever bore, scarce rational. But, blessed be God! in this time of great
distress, he was pleased to let light into my mind, and assure me that flesh
and blood had not revealed God, and Christ, and the things of the kingdom to
me, so as to make me choose them before the things of time and sense.

And now was God pleased to make such discoveries of his glorious fullness to my
soul, as gave me some sweet idea of open vision; and I even fainted for full
fruition. O, with what importunity did I wrestle for the assimilating vision!
But alas, this clog of flesh interrupted! I felt as if I had almost grasped
invisibilities; and that I would hold my beloved, and not let him go* and that
I would gaze forever. But ah this clog! I soon found nature to faint. O cruel
weakness and disease, thus to interrupt my adoring soul! Had you come, and
stopped me in the enjoyment of my friends, and forbid my continuance amidst ten
thousand earthly delights, I had not said a word: But O how cruel to interrupt
my weary, thirsty, famishing soul, when just hoping to take my fill amidst such
delights and glories, as were then breaking in on my soul!

O my God, am I thine, and shall it be thus with me? Shall I enjoy thee no more
here? Then, O my compassionate Savaiour, take, I pray thee, take me where
neither sick nor sinful nature shall ever interrupt more. I am almost ready to
say, Could one of the perfect, blessed spirits above, who have no propensity in
their nature to murmur or repine, forbear to complain of such a clog as this!

Dec. 19 th, 1748. I have been with a dear child of God. Saw her sick, dying,
and dead. I saw the distressing agonies of her soul. God hid his face, and she
was troubled. Satan roared, and she was terribly afraid. Death approached her,
and its horrors took hold upon her soul. O, how often was I called to her dying
bed, to hear her distress! May I never forget, or lose the impression of these
things! I saw her ghastly looks, and heard her doleful cries. Yea, I felt her
agonies. They pierced my soul. God gave me to believe that he would appear for
her; and I thought I was come there to be encouraged against my own death. But,
ah! I found her dying, and knew not how God was dealing with her, as to
comforts. And while I was yet looking to God, she spoke. God covered her head
in this day of battle; and she was no more afraid. Now was her soul inflamed,
while her body was cold. My soul revived: I felt her joy. She kissed me with
her dying lips; and, with smiles, expressed her full assurance of eternal
happiness; admiring a precious Christ, till she could speak no more.

O, adorable sovereignty! I saw God in all this. It was the Lord's doing, and
mavelous in my eyes. God met me in the way of his providence. He granted my
request, with respect to his handmaid. I was with her in her last moments; saw
God's faithfulness: I saw him fulfill his word to her; the word on which he had
caused to hope. And, O! may I never forget what a solemn thing it is die. How
inexcusable shall I be, if I should be found unprepared after all these things!

April 18 th, 1749. O, how soon is the scene changed! I was lately even
swallowed up under a sense of the unbounded series of mercies, constantly
flowing in on me: But now anguish and horror has taken hold of me, so that
nothing in this world affords me any real delight or pleasure. My fear and
dread of thunder is so great, that I find no rest at home or abroad; but am in
one constant distress, whether it be clear or cloudy, so that nature is scarce
able to endure the amazing shock. Miss Anthony, from the constitution of her
animal frame, or from some unknown cause, was from her youth greatly terrified
by thunder; and was often thrown into great perturbation and distress, when
there were any signs of a thunder storm: And even when there were no
appearances of it, she was sometimes in constant distress and terror from day
to day, by apprehensions of it; which seems to have been her case, when she
wrote this.

It was truly unaccountable, that a person of such piety, and who was often
raised above the fear of death, and did frequently long for it, should be thus
terrified. What she suspected, was doubtless true, that the tempter took
advantage of this animal weakness and propensity, to work on her imagination,
and confuse, disconcert, and perplex her mind. In the after part of her life,
she was in a great degree delivered from these fears.


O my God, my God, my covenant God, my Father, my rest, my refuge, my high
tower, my rock of defense; for so I believe thou art to me; and therefore would
cast my soul on thee, with the utmost confidence: And yet my nature is thrown
into the greatest distress at the noise of thy thunder. O, shall my soul be
shaken from its confidence in thee! Where then can this immortal, this
distressed soul find rest? O, stay me on thyself. Let me not be afraid with any
amazemept. O, compose me to a quite temper of mind. Calm all my fears, and I
will rejoice in thy salvation. The humble shall hear thereof, and be glad, and
trust in my God. O, say to my tempestuous soul, Be still, be calm, be not
afraid; it is I, I, thy covenant God, and dearest Father; thy faithful God, and
thy almighty Redeemer. O, speak with almighty power, and all this mighty terror
shall instantly vanish; and sweet rest and composure shall ensue.

O my God, contend not forever, left the spirit fail, and the soul which thou
have made. Nor let Satan take the advantage, to work on my fear, and so drive
my soul from its confidence in God. This I believe he is powerfully and
subtly aiming at. O, show thyself stronger than the strong man armed. O, thou
Captain of my salvation, arise for my help. I am thine, and thou art mine. I am
persuaded, neither life, nor death, principalities nor power, things present,
nor things to come, shall ever be able to separate me from the love of God in
Christ Jesus my Lord. And though Satan may, if thou permittest, terrify and
distress, even to death; yet he cannot break the blessed union between Christ
and my soul: And even by death, through Christ, I should be made a complete
conqueror, over sin, Satan, death and hell.

Tuesday, Aug. 1 st, 1749. Blessed be God for the assistance of the day, in
extraordinary prayer for the advancement of Christ's kingdom and interest in
the world. I trust my soul has, been more than ordinarily engaged for the
outpouring of the Spirit; for the whole church of God militant; for the
downfall of antichrist; and for the bringing in of the Jews and Heathen. O that
the savages of the wilderness may become the lambs of Christ's fold! How sweet
is it to be united in spirit with a number of God's dear children, at one and
the same time, for one and the same glorious interest, even the advancement of
our Redeemer's kingdom in the world! Though absent in body, yet united in
spirit and interest: O may we lift up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. O
grant the unity of the Spirit, which is the bond of peace. O may God hear our
prayers! Let our request find a gracious acceptance. Fulfill thy promise to thy
Son; and let he glorious things spoken concerning thy Zion be soon
accomplished, to the glory of thy eternal name, and the good of thine elect.

April 16 th, 1750. O my God, when will thou come unto me, and release my weary
soul? Thou have now taken a dear saint from her knees to glory. She often told
me her fears and tears; but thou waft the guide of her youth, and the staff of
her old age. She is cut down as a shock of corn, fully ripe; a lovely pattern
of piety. I knew her humble expressions of herself; great self diffidence and
raised hope in the dear Redeemer. And now God has distinguished her by her
death: She was found dying, on her knees, at prayer. Blessed is that servant,
whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. O, methinks, perhapt her
soul was kissed away. Her clay vessel, unable to bear the weight of divine
love, burst out with beams of joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Did not God,
while she was in prayer, give her such lively views of himself, such a
ravishing prospect of infinite glory? Did he not draw aside the veil, and let
her behold him? O, methinks I hear her crying in an ecstacy, "I cannot see
thee, and live: Let me die, that I may behold thee, as thou art." O, methinks I
see her drink in and gaze, until she had even forgot to live. O blessed death!
O sweeter life! There, seeing God, I trust, she is satisfied.

O, when shall I follow her! I long, I long to rise, and dwell above. How long,
Lord God, holy and true, before I hear the summons and drop this clog of earth?
Ah, how am I pained at this distance! This frail body unfits me for every duty.
My soul cannot rise and sing. Darkness, fears and pain fetter my soul in its
most lively efforts. O, come, my dear Savior.

July 3 d, 1750. Exceeding terrible thunder and lightning last night. But,
blessed he God, I did not feel those distressing agonies which I used to feel.
I believed my God gave each clap of thunder its commission. O what shall I
render to the Lord for so far composing my soul, and preserving the whole house
and family! O, for more light, life and love!

This afternoon hard thunder again. But, blessed be God, I was in no distress.
O, how good is God to me in this, as well as in every distress!

July 8 th. Had little or no sleep last night. Rose very early. Went to town.
She then lived at a little distance from the town.
It was extreme hot; all which, with a slothful, wicked heart, did much unfit
me for public worship. Yet, blessed he God, after meeting, I was much
refreshed, and my spirits much revived, by reading Dr. Watts's sermon on
Nearness to God, the felicity of the creature. O, if I know any thing of
heaven, this, this is heaven, to be near my God. There is scarcely any thing
that does so revive and sweetly refresh my soul, even when at the lowest ebb,
as this. How soon do I feel the warming, quickening influence of such
meditation! O, what can heaven afford equal to the fruition of God! I long for
heaven, for freedom from sin; and for the blessed society of perfected saints
and angels; and on many other accounts; but the most pleasing, constant and
abiding joy flows from the thought of enjoying God, as he is in himself,
Father, Son, and Spirit, my infinitely full and allsufficient portion. O happy
hour! Come, come, O come, and dawn on my languishing spirit. O come! I would
fly to meet the transporting moment. But language fails. My soul swells with
the thought, too big to be uttered. I must cease to attempt to express my
longing, and lose my soul in contemplation.

July 10 th. Again my soul is refreshed with and in God. What can a finite
creature wish or desire beyond rest in God? O, how inconceivable is the
happiness, for a finite vapor to be filled out of God's fullness, and almost
seem to clasp an infinite God in itself, as in heaven, while it stretches after
this God, and enjoys him to the full! O infinite mystery! The infinite God, the
portion of a finite worm; and yet not completely satisfied, until it awake in
his likeness. My soul stretches for God, as though it would stretch into
immortality. This is the God, whose being and perfections I have been tempted
to disbelieve. O, let me see him as he is; let me see him for myself; let me
love him, as he is worthy; or rather, let me love him as much as finite nature,
enlarged in all its vast capacities, is capable of.

O, why this distance! Why this veil between! I would gaze my life away on this
beauty, and these perfections. O infinite God, thou only delight of my soul! It
is through Jesus the Mediator, by the Holy Spirit, that I have access to the
infinite Deity himself. Be not afraid, my soul, with any amazement; but be
humble, humble to the dust.

Spent some part of this day in seeking God's direction and blessing in regard
to my proposed journey to Boston. My soul seems utterly averse to going,
without the divine presence. Blessed be God! whether I go, or stay, I trust I
have been near to God, and permitted to wrestle hard for his direction, with an
unbiased affection either for going or staying. All I seem to seek for, or
desire, is to glorify and enjoy God: For nearness to him is the greatest
felicity I can see or desire. Therefore, I leave it with God, trusting in his
faithfulness. I will cry unto God, unto God most high, who performs all
things for me.

Feb. 13, 1751. Last Monday, Feb. 11, at night, my soul was led to contemplate
the being and perfections of the blessed God. Here I stood and gazed, until all
my soul was fixed with unutterable attention. O, how did, the glory of this
divine, infinite, selfexisting, selfsufficient Being, raise my contemplation,
and draw out the strength of my soul, with vigor and ardour, to dive as far,
and take in as much as a finite mortal being could contain! O, how glorious,
how infinitely glorious, did the exalted, immense, immortal, incomprehensible
Deity then appear, to my enlarged, adoring soul! And while I gazed, my soul was
filled with inexpressible astonishment at the many and great affronts and
indignities I had offered to this divine, infinite Majesty. O, how did my soul
shrink into nothing, and less than nothing, before Jehovah, while I lay
prostrate before him, and confessed my aggravated guilt, with renewed
application to the blood of Jesus Christ his Son! O, how mean did all the human
race then appear! Infinitely unworthy of the least regard from God. I cried,
Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him! Man, who is a worm of the
dust, that he should be capable of contemplating and enjoying a Being, who is
his own infinite delight and happiness. O, all incomprehensible, unfathomable
Divinity, it is thou, and thou only, who can trace, and fully reach these
boundless depths. In vain my finite soul, clogged with earth, stretched after
clear and full discoveries.

But, O mighty God, why have thou thus dignified worms of the dust! Verily this
is the highest felicity that human nature is capable of. God himself, no less
than this infinite, selfsufficient God, whom I now behold beyond all expression
astonishingly glorious (and yet I behold an infinitely small part of his
fullness) the happiness of man! Verily my soul is here lost in wonder. O
infinite goodness and love! This is a dignity, even the contemplation and
enjoyment of thyself, that the most daring sons of men would never have dared
to ask, had not thou, thou only, who waft able and willing, thus dignified
our nature.

But here again, my soul, reaching after higher degrees of wonder, love and
delight, looked on fallen man, who had slighted and despised this dignity; and,
by his apostasy, was put out of all possibility of enjoying this God, by any
thing he could do. Here I beheld this God providing a Mediator, even his own
Son, that so all who believe in him might be brought to the full enjoyment of
him, in glory. Now my soul was all engaged, and inflamed; my desire intensely
reaching after the open vision and full fruition of this all amiable and
glorious Being. My soul even broke with longing after God, my only desirable
felicity.

My thoughts were very deep and fixed. I can scarce remember any season, in
which I was more immoveably fixed and engaged. Nor could my thoughts be
diverted, after I came out of my chamber; but continued very fixed, though I
felt my body greatly disordered and racked. Went to bed; but a violent pain
seized the nerves and sinews of my head, so that I got little or no sleep.

March 26 th. On Saturday the 24th, it thundered; but I felt composed, and not
terrified, as I have been sometimes: But when I retired, though the thunder and
lightning was over, yet Satan was permitted to work very powerfully on my fear,
even to amazement. Yet I kept on in duty, rolling myself on God, through
Christ; claming God as my covenant God and father; adoring God for the
sufficient security he had provided in Chirst Jesus for all that do believe;
appealing to God for the sincerity of my faith; of the free, full and
unreserved dedication of myself to him and his service; and choice of him for
my portion, Lord and king; not only when in great fear and terror, but in the
most sedate and composed seasons I ever knew; as well in prosperity as
adversity: A choice which flowed from a deep, sound conviction of him infinite
excellency; a choice entirely free. I asserted the faithfulness of God;
triumphed in his infinite grace and love. And all this while there was the most
violent conflict within; Satan opposing all those, and many more, and raising
my fear to a distressing height. And thus I continued for some time, so that
when I had finished the duty of prayer, I found my spirits much exhausted, and
my body almost stiff, as though it had been numb.

These are some of the distressing conflicts, with which I am frequently
exercised; so that nature seems sometimes almost ready to saint under them,
chiefly in secret prayer. I am forced, as it were, to do like the Jews. It is
said, Every one, with one hand wrought in the work, and with the other held a
weapon. O, glory to God, who does thus uphold me, that I am not quite overcome
by these powers of darkness! O, when shall my soul be at rest in this God! I
long for a happy release. Yet I submit to thy will: Only afford me thy strength
and gracious presence, that I faint not, nor be outdone. O, let not Satan get
the advantage against me. O, glory to that God, who has stood by me, and
defeated the subtle policy and malice of those combined legions that have risen
up against me. Surely I was no match for one of these, had not Jehovah appeared
for me.

O then, my soul, be not dismayed: Be resolute, and resist in his strength,
which has been made perfect in thy weakness. Let not these fore combats
discourage thee; but rather encourage to trust and fight under the Lord
Jehovah. Perhaps thou art near thy journey's end, that Satan rages thus. O,
droop not, then, at the end of thy race. Will thou ingloriously desert the
cause of God? It is not unlikely that Satan has reserved the most violent
assaults to the last. But will that God, who has never left me in one
instance, unsuccoured, or unrelieved, now forsake me? No, surely no. O then, my
soul, fear not, though Satan strive to shake thee. Sometimes he would suggest,
God is not such a Being, at I have apprehended him to be; and that there is no
security in the gospel way of salvation, by Jesus Christ, to venture an
immortal soul on. Again, he would persuade me there is no reality in religion;
the work of grace on the hearts of God's children, in regeneration and
sanctification, is nothing real; that there is no real change in these. And
then he proceeds to deny all revealed religion; and then the Being of God. Thus
does he strive to ruin my soul. But blessed be God who does fight for me.

Match 29 th, 1751. Fain would my heart aspire after God, and rise above all
earthly and sensible objects; but I cannot, I cannot; I am drawn down and held
by such clogs and fetters. My bodily disorders are such that I cannot fix my
heart on any thing long: Not on any thing, either worldly or religious. If it
were only in religious matters, I might well fear it were indeed owing to the
disorders of my heart. But it is the same in every concern of life. A little
fixedness and intenseness quite oversets me. O when shall my soul be free and
active! When shall it no more be clogged with this burden of mortality! O when!
My God, I long to get near thee. I long to reach a more noble and exalted
height of life and fervor. I long to get above the sun, and sing among the
heirs of glory, those birds of paradise. There, transported, I shall see the
God I love; see him, in the sight of whom, I hope to enjoy unbounded felicity:
And seeing him, I hope to be like him, conformed to his image. O blessed
vision! O endless fruition! Then I shall not fear or faint any more. O come, my
Redeemer, come away. Break through these intervening clouds, and set the
prisoner free from every interruption. O, bring me, where I long to be, near my
God and Savior. Thou art all my rest, delight and desire, while I remain here;
and thou shall be infinitely more so, when I see thee without this veil of
mortality. What is there in life I count worth living for, but thee? Does it
not appear all vain, yea, burdensome, without thee, my God? Verily I see
nothing worth living for, but this God; nothing but glorifying and enjoying
God. O then, why should mortality confine me here, under such languishments!
May I not glorify and enjoy thee more, when my soul is more refined, and
satisfied with full vision and fruition? Lord, thou know what is best: Yet I
long. O come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

May, 1752. I have this day been in some young company, not of the ruder sort:
But, alas! how vain, how unprofitable the conversation! Nothing solid, nothing
real and substantial; all vain and trifling. O how empty is such pleasure! Are
these rational, immortal souls, who are capable of enjoying God, the infinite,
immortal fountain of delight and happiness; and yet do they neglect this, for
such insipid, false delight! O mean, sordid souls! Let me never have my portion
here. May I always look on it, as it must one day appear, unworthy the regard,
below the notice, of a rational being, capable of such superior joy, as is in
thy favor, and the contemplation of thee, O my God. Here is solid, rational
and immortal delight, and unbounded pleasure; all that is worthy the vigor,
ardour and delight of immortal souls.

They may wonder at me, that I have no taste for such things: But I wonder,
even with astonishment, at them, that they can starve their souls thus. I
wonder, if they have no delight in God, as a pure, holy, kind and good God, yet
that they do not follow something more solid and subline, more deep, and worthy
a rational soul. Miserable life! O pining poverty, starving souls, most
tormenting penury! O rather let me lose mortality, drenched deep in unbounded
fullness, and over filled with deep, immense divinity!

June, 1752. O my God, my gracious God, is it so! My soul, my immortal soul, is
it as I have this day heard? Are believers thus nearly united to Christ? Is it
a vital, spiritual, indissoluble union, "I in them, and they in me?" My faith
was even ready to stagger at this, as to my own part. I can hold it, in a
general view of it; but when it is set out in such lively terms; the
inestimable privileges resulting therefrom, and the surprising heights and
depths of the condescending grace of God, to take worms of the dust thus near
to his infinite Majesty, I am ready to say, All my hopes are vain! It can never
be so as to me. I can never be thus united to the great God-Man-Mediator, and
derive no more life from him! Can I be thus closely united to an infinite
Being, and yet feel so little strength and grace? Can I be united to the pure
and holy God, and yet be thus unholy? Can I be in him, in whom dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead, as the branches are in the vine, and bear so little
fruit? O, methinks it is impossible! And yet in this is all my confidence,
delight, desire and expectation. This makes life supportable and death
desirable.

O my Lord and head, am I thus united to thee; thou in me, and I in thee! I
could never have dared to claim such an union with the Most High, had thou
not revealed it. O happy privilege! the only desire or joy of my soul. The
highest felicity of a rational being, as it is the foundation, whence slows all
the happiness I enjoy, expect, or desire. O blessed union! O dear privilege!
All that is worthy the wish of a rational creature. Why was I born to be made
thus happy? O blessed, forever blessed be God, that I have a being among
rational creatures, for this end! That I should be raised to this honor and
dignity of being so nearly allied to the great, eternal, infinite God. Here be
all my future contemplation and joy. Here be all my sense of pleasure. Here be
all my sweet repose, and all my rest. Here be all the confidence of my soul;
its only center, and fixed abode. Here let me lose all the relish of creature
delights: And with these, here let me lose concern to please a vain world. Let
them think me mean, sordid, low lived, and having no taste for refined
pleasures: While my whole soul is divinely ravished, with the infinite glories
of thy nature, and the felicity of being so nearly united to Jesus the dear
Mediator, it is enough.

Lord, here I would delight to dwell. It is long since I have voluntarily
chosen to lay up all my good in thee. And I have never willingly retracted.
Though, alas! I have too, too often seemed so to do; yet, O my God, my desire
has been to thee, and to the remembrance of thy name. I trust my heart has
never even secretly drawn back from, its first choice of thee; but has a
thousand, and ten thousand times renewed its first solemn engagements to be
thine. And, if a hearty consent to the terms of the gospel, and a daily desire
after, and delight in Christ, and after conformity to him, be an evidence of my
union to him, I will still hope. Notwithstanding all my yet unallowed weakness,
barrenness and sin, I am united to this God by faith; and shall be brought to
glory. Here, O my soul, take thy shield, thy faith and confidence. Be fixed,
and be no more afraid. Here rejoice and triumph. If indeed united to the great
Redeemer, thou art happy, and shall be so, though heaven and earth pass away.
As long as the eternal God is thy refuge, nothing but sin shall hurt thee. And
that shall not have dominion over thee. O my only desirable refuge, save me
from every inclination to sin.

June 30 th. This day I have been in company with some of great note, persons
of quality, who were very agreeable, as to civil, social, affable behavior.
But I would not give one hour's familiar, christian conference with a dear
saint; or, what is more, one moment's communion with God, for a year's converse
with these. O when shall the ties of mere civility and common friendship be no
more; but I shall dwell and converse where I long to be, with Jesus, and saints
made perfect!

-- Again paid a visit long due. I went with some reluctance; but went because
I would prevent or remove all prejudice against strict religion, and leave no
room for any to think religion made me stiff and unsociable, disregardful of
relatives. But, O, when shall I dwell forever where I love, with Jesus, and his
dear children, to converse of him only; for here is all my delight! O come
sweet hour of my release! All below this, is but sordid drudgery, only as far
as it is done in obedience, under a sense of duty.

July --. This day disordered in body; and the weather extreme hot. Yet I have
been to the house and table of my Lord Redeemer. I had an idea of this feast,
as a token or pledge of reconciliation. And, blessed be God, here I have
received full assurance that God was my reconciled God and Father. In this
ordinance I saw represented to faith, the sum and substance of all religion,
all my hope, expectation or desire. My soul did even break with love and joy. I
longed to be where no mortal eye could behold me, for this seemed all the
restraint I knew. My frame seemed as though it would dissolve, to give vent. O,
here I saw the great Father reconciled, by the Son reconciling; and the Spirit
applying and sealing. O, methinks this is heaven in kind! All clouds were
scattered: The partition wall broken down; and I was brought near to God and my
Redeemer, by the blessed Spirit. O happy moment! I saw my evidence clear, and
the truth and faithfulness of God engaged to bring me to glory. Now love cast
out fear. All slavish fear fled. My faith beheld the dear Redeemer dying,
rising and reigning: And I was assured it was for me. Love embraced and admired
him; and godly sorrow arose and joined the transport of love and joy. Humility
accompanied my glory and triumph: I lay in the dust: I triumphed to heaven. I
appeared below the worm; yet challenged angels to compare with me, with respect
to redeeming love.

But O, what more shall I say respecting this memorable season! O my soul, when
thou reviewest this record, and fain would know more of it, think, if thou art
capable of the most elevated thought, O think, what divine delight it affords a
poor, weary, combating soul, to be taken near, yea very near, her only delight,
her God; and have the most free and intimate communion, without a doubt,
without a fear; to behold her God and her Christ secure; her heaven sure; yea,
all she wishes or desires approaching her, very near. And thus, if thou would
know by renewed experience, O taste again, my soul; for this is the best way to
know: For all expressions are flat, and below its worth.

Oct. --. I am now exercised with a sore trial. Difficulties on every hand
approach. I am tried in the tenderest part. My dear parents afflicted greatly.
My natural affections work strongly. Exposed to want and contempt; and no
prospect of relief, only from the unseen hand of Providence. All ways seem
hedged up. I think things could not be more intricate, unless all was come on
me, which I have reason to expect, without a wonderful interposition of divine
Providence. Yet, contrary to my natural disposition, I am kept from sinking. I
see no injustice, nor want of faithfulness and love, in God, in thus trying me.
All my enjoyments are his by right, as the sovereign giver and disposer of all
things. His, as I have most solemnly and repeatedly given them up to his all
wise disposal of them. I can but adore his goodness and mercy, that I am so far
supported under these things. My spirit is serious, I trust, yet not
overwhelmed. I see God ordering and governing affairs relating to my temporal
interest, for my trial, and, to human eyes, dashing all expectation of
happiness or comfort, yea, of a bare subsistence in this world. Yet I would set
the crown on the head of King Jesus, and bid him reign; yea, reign sovereign
and glorious, in the kingdom of providence, governing and disposing of all that
relates to me, according to the purpose of his own will, and for his own glory.
And herein I would rejoice and glory. O, it is enough if he be glorified, for
whom it is my happiness to live, and my joy to die; whose glory is my entire
felicity, whether in adverse or prosperous circumstances, in regard to my own
personal, or family interest.

Nov. 19 th. This day permitted to wait on God in his house, and at his table.
I was glad, under my present trials, that I had an opportunity publicly to own
and renew my choice of God for my portion; that, however he might see best in
his providence to try and afflict me, yet I would still own and avouch him for
my God and Governor: For, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, and let
the world know I do so. O, I long to make some more full and public
acknowledgement, that I now, under these most dark and distressing
dispensations of providence, esteem him the only object worthy of the highest
praise, love and delight. I trust it is out of the power of all created mortal
finite things to make me wretched, or unhappy, while God, the infinite,
uncreated, immortal source of being and blessedness, cannot change, and my
interest in him is firm. That this God cannot change, I am confident, without
the least doubt; yea, I am sure of it. And that my interest in him is firm, I
am, through grace, well satisfied of. And having laid up my good in God; I am
at rest, and pleased that he should choose all my trials and comforts, as he
sees best.

Blessed be God, my communion season was sweet, and, I hope, strengthening.
This time twelve months I came to the table of the Lord laden with large
experiences of his goodness to me in my journey to Boston, and return home. I
saw him wise and good to me then, in his mercies: And now I see him the same
wise and good God, in his afflictive dealings with me. O thou best of Beings,
who would not trust and love thee? Surely all who know thy name will. So let
me, though thou should deprive me of all earthly friends; of health and
food, and all the necessaries of life, but such as I seek from the charity of
the world. And this, without the constant, bountiful interposition of
providence, I may expect. Yet, that thou art, I trust, my God, affords greater
joy, than when corn and wine, and all the riches and dainties of the world, are
increased: For thou art a sufficient portion for my soul, abstracted from all
the delights of earth. Thy perfections afford the highest entertainments, of
which human nature is capable; and thy glory the highest end that can be
pursued. While thy glory is the highest and ultimate end of all my desire, love
and joy, and I believe thou have this in view, in all thy dispensations, I may
well rejoice in all the trials that befall me. Blessed be God! all my affairs
are in the hands of that God, who does all things, according to the purpose of
his own will, and that it is for his own glory. Well, if it be so, then all is
well, infinitely well. My felicity and eternal happiness is the glory of God in
the display of his perfections. And while my soul longs for this, I must
rejoice in the prospect of it, or prove myself most base and false. And is I do
rejoice in this, I must bless God for the methods he takes to advance this,
however it cross my poor, pitiful, low and mean temporal interest.

If then I can trust God with his own glory, I may rest assured all is well,
and my most ardent desires are fulfilling. O blessed God, this gives the most
adverse dispensations of thy providence another face: When I know no interest
but the cause of God, and can confide in him, that he will take care of this.
Father, I have said, Thy will be done. I repeat the sacred request. O, let me
never retract. Dispose of all my concerns, as thou see best; though now thy
providence seems to be exposing me to poverty and want, to reproach and
contempt, to false reports: Yet I bless thee that they are no more. And so
entirely do I acquiesce in this wise and good, though afflictive dispensation
of thy providence, that my soul cries out, Reign, Lord, reign, and govern all
things as thou see best.

Dec. 1752. I have had a short reprieve from death. Lord, let me never forget
the solemn shock, when I was at the point of death, and really thought myself
actually dying. O the important moment, the amazing struggle, for soul and body
to part! Never did I apprehend death so real, and terrible to nature. My soul,
I trusted, was secured; yet, O yet, death appeared the king of terrors, as an
enemy to nature. I would look on this as a warning to me to prepare for a
sudden death* which God only knows how soon may be. I would now live as one who
daily expects another sudden shock, that shall put a period to life, as in a
moment. Lord, I bless thee for the abiding impression on my soul, and the
reconciliation I find to a speedy and sudden exit. Come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly. However sudden and terrible the shock may be to nature; yet grace
shall gain the conquest. My soul shall rise triumphant to the seats of
immortality and bliss. Farewell, my dear friends. You have been long and often
warned of a separation. Think not then that it is too sudden, since my daily
and hourly desires after immortality prevent the surprise. I believe and trust
my hope is secure, built on the Rock of ages. God, my eternal refuge, will not
fail me in the last extremity, whether I be able to let you know the frame of
my mind then, or not; yet, I trust, you may rejoice in my state, which, through
grace, on repeated examination, I am confirmed is safe and secure in Jesus, the
all sufficient Mediator; to whom I now commit my soul, in expectation of a
sudden death.

God has been visiting me with severe and terrible pain, so that I was not able
to lie in bed more than two nights in eleven. Yet goodness and mercy still
followed me, and I was made comfortable, in the midst of poverty and want. All
my wants were well supplied; food, physic, firing and clothing, without my care
or charge. Yet the pain was so severe and extreme, that I found, that, without
divine assistance, I was utterly unable to surmount it. God graciously showed
me my own weakness in a time of trial; that without him, I should faint under
the least rebuke of his hand. O how tenderly does God deal with me! I was
afraid I should grow selfconfident and proud, because so resigned under the
last trial; and was almost ready to think it necessary that my corruptions
should be let loose in me, to show me what I was, or feared God would suffer it
so to be, to convince me what I am. But, blessed be his name, he has not taken
that method; but by a gentler way, however painful to the body, showed me my
amazing weakness and inability to bear the least trial of myself. O, who would
not trust this good, kind and wise God! O my God, let me still do so, though
thou continue to shut up all prospect of support from us. I know thy truth has
never failed me; nor has thy mercy neglected me. Why should I fear any evil,
since thou art with me? I am the care of thy providence, and the regard of
thine eye. Thou will not leave me friendless and helpless. Thou will not leave
thyself without a witness in my soul* that thou art he who art the help of the
helpless, and the refuge of the poor. I trust thou will supply my wants, while
here, and at last bring me to glory.

Feb. 1753. God seems now about to deprive me of the dearest enjoyments here,
even secret retirement. I lately thought, it was out of the power of all things
here below to make me unhappy: But I had forgot my religious privileges. Now I
am ready to say, I shall never enjoy myself more. If I cannot unbosom my soul
to God in secret, farewell comfort: I must sigh out my remaining days! O my God,
teach me a becoming temper, under this dispensation. I am ready to say, I do
well to grieve for this, and to refuse to be comforted; because it is the
enjoyment of God himself. How can I keep up lively communion with God, in the
constant hurry and converse of the world, and creatures? I never yet could.
But, however, there is surely some submission required of me, to all the
allotments of divine Providence. O, be thou my teacher. Lord, my soul is
overwhelmed, do thou appear for me. My way seems hedged up, and grows darker
and darker daily. But O, may I not mistrust my good God in the least, who, I
believe, has, in infinite wisdom, appointed every trial for me: Not one but
what is the result of perfect wisdom and counsel. O then, let me patiently bear
every trial, until it shall please my kind, wise and good God to remove it. O,
let me not faint under this affliction! O, where shall I go, or what shall I
do, when I may not pour out my joys and sorrows, into thy bosom, O my
compassionate Savior!

God is now denying me all opportunity for secret retirement in my father's
house, another family having moved into it; though all things else appear more
comfortable for my abode there, than they did some time past: And is by this
providence, and the desire of some friends, compelling me, as it were, to be
abroad, where I can with freedom, without restraint, enjoy religious
privileges, both private and secret; yet with some disadvantage to temporal
affairs, and with no prospect of a continuance; so that I am kept very unfixed
at present; and there is no prospect of my being more settled. Lord, I wait and
hope. Thou have been my refuge and trust; a very present help, in time of
trouble. I look unto thee yet. I cry unto God, unto God Most High, who has,
and I trust will, perform all things for me. O lead me in the way of duty, that
I may not go astray. Thou have never yet left me in any exigency: Shall I now
distrust! Fortify my heart against every desponding thought: And when thou have
prepared me for, take me to, those dear mansions above, which thou have
prepared for thy children. O fix me there near thyself. Come, Lord Jesus, O
come quickly! The world seems weary of me, throwing me from place to place: And
I surely am weary of the world. We are agreed to part. O then, why tarry I
here? Lord, I am satisfied with this mortal life. I wish, I long for a release.
I thirst for the waters of immortal life. I groan, being burdened with earth
and sin. Fain would my soul reach the realms of light and life, and go no more
out; but dwell near Jesus the transcendent Redeemer; the lovely Mediator; the
joy of nations; the darling of thy saints; the desire of my soul.

March --. O my God, when shall my soul be entirely conformed to thee! I know
it shall be, when I awake in thy likeness: But I long for greater degrees of
sanctification in this life. O make me inwardly and hiddenly conformed to thy
will and law; that my whole soul may be transformed into thy image. O, cause
that the inmost recesses of my heart may be sanctified: And give me that sweet,
that lovely grace, sincerity in the inward part. I am weary of this designing,
deceitful, treacherous heart. Lord, root out of my soul, all that is not
conformed to thee. Set fire to the stubble, and burn it out of my heart. Tear
out this base, this wretched, sordid selfishness. Slay this pride and
opposition to thee. My soul thirsts for that righteousness, which only shall
render me pleasing in thy sight; in thy sight, who art of purer eyes, than to
behold sin, and can not look on the least iniquity, but with infinite
detestation and abhorrence. O, come, blessed Spirit, O come, and work in my
soul a hearty, entire, universal, perfect conformity to God. Nothing below this
can satisfy or content me.

But, alas! I still find my heart prone to forsake God. This wretched,
ungrateful soul of mine is bent to backsliding. All things reproach my sordid
soul; and eternal infamy seems to await such an abuser of infinite love and
benignity. O my soul! Why art not thou confounded with shame? Was ever a wretch
more vile and ungrateful? Look all around thee, and see heaps on heaps of
abused, forfeited, slighted mercies. Where shall I hide my guilty head? Can
such horrid treachery be in a single heart? Can such unnatural rebellion appear
in a soul consecrated to the law, interest and authority of its sovereign? But
O, still more affecting! Can such heights of ingratitude, enmity, rebellion and
disobedience, remain in a child, bound by all the obligations of gratitude and
love, to honor, love, fear and serve a kind, wise, good and gracious Father? O
God, can it be! What are my hopes? How inconsistent my practice! Lord, screen
my guilty, obnoxious soul, from the eternal, amazing reproaches of such horrid
ingratitude. O Jesus, the hope of thy people, the refuge of the distressed,
save me from the tormenting reproach, which my ingratitude deserves. Surely, O
surely, the least deviation from thy law, or trespass against thee, after such
mercies as I have been favored with, deserves infinite revenges. But O,
sovereign Prince of peace, I hear thee say, "Fury is not in me, to those who
desire to make peace with me." O, infinite grace! Here is my everlasting
confidence, even in Jesus the Mediator of reconciliation. O my almighty refuge!
through thee I have the utmost confidence, and boldness of access, even to a
holy, sin revenging God; confidence, as to a Father, without the least slavish
fear. My Redeemer is the Son. His Son is my surety and advocate. O blessed
privilege! Glorious security! My soul is here at rest from fears of
condemnation; but restless for perfect conformity; always to serve and please
God.

April --. This day visited a dear afflicted relation. One inexpressible
distress of body, who has received the sentence of death in herself. I find my
affections strong, and am forced to stifle, check, and hold them in, left they
should quite overcome. O lord, I have sworn, and may not go back, that I will
give up the dearest enjoyments here below, at the call of thy providence. I
have solemnly renounced relative self, so as to resign my dearest friends, at
thy call, without murmuring. And now the vows of God are upon me, and I cannot
go back without perjury. Lord, thou know what strength of affection I have
for my friends; that there is nothing in life, next to the enjoyment of God,
that I am so weded to. Yet these I now give up to thy divine disposal. O, let
me have no will of my own; but be always swallowed up in thine. And, O my God,
prepare me for every trial of this kind, that I may be called to endure: For I
know, without thy strength and grace, I should be but as a wild bull in a net;
or as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. I should rage and foam, until I had
grieved thy Spirit quite away. O my God, now help me by thy grace, through
which I resolve to watch my heart with the greatest diligence. Lord, help me!

April --. Lord, when shall I put from this tempestuous shore? I am weary of
the world. I long for a calm, cool retreat from noise and heat, and all the
sordid clamours of earthly, grovelling souls. I hate the sulphurous breath of
calumny and detraction. My soul was made for harmony and love. And without
this, immortality would be a curse; my being a horrid torment. My soul abhors
rancour and envy. I detest evil surmises, and love the balmy air, where peace
and friendship reign unmolested; where sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals
of juniper, never fly; nor clouds of smoke from the infernal pit, suffocate the
air, or taint or poison the dear associates. O there I would fix my dear abode;
wide from the wrangling wretch, who courts resentment and revenge: Nor should
his rage, nor should his yells, within the sacred realms be heard. My soul is
near allied to spirits born and bred on high, where no resentment ever rises:
Nor is the vulgar passion, common to fools and madmen, with the sordid bull and
bear, ever known there. There, sweet are their joys, and blessed are their souls,
where all unite in piety and love. O, I long to join the lovely band; nor would
I ever quit the dear delights.

Scarce any thing in life gives me a greater disgust to earth, than the sour
and severe reflections some people take a pleasure in making on their
neighbors. I hate contradiction; yet conscience often obliges me to vindicate
the injured absent. I had rather be counted a fool, not capable of resentment
of injuries, than feel the disquieting passion in my soul. My Savior would
have his disciples wise as serpents, but harmless as doves. If others offend, I
will forgive. I would never relate any injury I have received, so long as I
find the least anger stirring. It is sometimes necessary to relate what we
think ill treatment, in order to have it cleared up, if it can be: But yet, I
would first get above it in myself, before I mention it to another. It is a
fixed maxim with me, first to get the victory over and in myself, before I seek
to get it for myself over another. I sometimes give my sentiments about persons
or things, if it be needful, and I do not find myself or friends injured by
them: But when that is the case, I suffer not myself even barely to relate the
affair, lest it should irritate my own or my friend's corruption. My first work
is to keep down every heart rising thought, and exercise every candid,
charitable one toward the person; and so never leave this struggle with my
heart, until I find a hearty regard for them, so as to influence me to carry
them to God, in the arms of faith and prayer. Nor do I please myself that I do
really forget and forgive an injury, until I can with freedom and fervency beg
all the blessings and comforts of God's grace for them; not only their escaping
eternal misery; but that they may have a large measure of grace; that they may
be filled with holiness and comfort, and shine as lights, and do much good in
the world; and at last shine as monuments of free grace, in the kingdom of
their heavenly Father.

May --. Blessed be God, I have this day had liberty to enter his courts, and
heard two excellent sermons from 1 Pet. i. 22. "See that ye love one another
with a pure heart fervently." These sermons afforded me matter of conviction
and humiliation: Not did this prevent solid comfort and satisfaction. Lord, I
blush before thee, that I rise no higher in brotherly love. I find, in many
things I come short of my duty. Yea, in all I come short; and in many go beside
and contrary. I often neglect and omit my duty, or else perform it so, that it
had as good or better been omitted. O, give me understanding, that I may keep
thy precepts. How impure is my most pure love! How remiss is my most fervent
affection, both to thee, and to thy people! And therefore it is that it has so
little influence on my practice. Lord, I am ashamed, and even confounded before
thee, that I follow thee no closer; that I am no more conformed to thee; that I
keep thy commands no better. Surely I love thy law. In it is all my delight. I
approve of it, as most right. My very soul, if I am not utterly deceived,
says, It is more to be desired than gold; yea, than much find gold. All the
duties thou have enjoined on me, I love, and long to practice. O then, why do I
neglect? Why am I not just what God has commanded? O, why do I not express the
devout sincerity of my love to God, by a universal and perfect conformity to
all his laws and precepts? O my God, when shall it be? Why, O why, does my
practice proclaim such ingratitude? O my best friend, my Father, my Savior, my
kind benefactor, compared with thee, all others are but empty names: Why then
do I not always do the things that please thee? O help me, Lord, by thy grace
and Spirit. I want to be such as this wise, good Being will approve.

May --. I have this day heard two more dear sermons from 1 Pet. i. 22. I still
find farther cause of humiliation, that I fall so short of what I ought to be;
and yet strong evidence that I have this divine principle of love to the
brethren rooted in my soul. I find the most steady, cordial affection to all,
so far as I can discover the image of Christ in them. I have a present proof of
this. Some persons whom I heartily love and honor, believing them to be dear
children of God; though I have reason to believe very disagreeable. I have
heard much amiss of them; I see many things in their conduct, which, though I
do not condemn as sins in them, yet I believe would be so in me, if I were to
act them; and which are quite contrary to my sentiments, and turn of mind: Yet
I feel a disposition, on every occasion, to cover their failings with a mantle
of love, putting the most favorable construction on all their actions; even
when they appear to be against me. God is my witness, how dearly I love them,
without any natural bonds, to engage me to this love; and how greatly I long
for their comfort, both in temporals and spirituals; and how I desire to serve
them.

I find a sweet cementing love to all the members of Christ's body, wherever
they are dispersed, up and down in the world; not only those of my own
acquaintance and opinion; but those whom I never saw; and who differ from me,
in many respects: Yea, even those who contemn and despise me. Love to all these
appears to be a spiritual, genuine, gracious affection, which extends to all
saints. Witness the refreshing seasons I have had, when wrestling with God for
a time of refreshing from his presence on all his children. I have felt the
unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace, sweetly drawing out my own heart to
love and long for them, as for my own soul.

And I have found of late, this love more strongly acting, more sensibly
exercised, than formerly; and felt the satisfaction of it, though, until now, I
have not rejoiced in it, as the strongest evidence of my love to God. And
therefore I have this farther proof of my sincerity; that I did not cherish and
hug this frame or temper, because, or on account of its being an evidence in my
favor; but for its own worth, being good in itself, proceeding from God who is
love, and commanded by a good God: And the nature, properties, and tendency all
divine. If I love not God supremely, for himself, and his children, for and in
him, I must doubt whether I am rational, or capable of judging or knowing any
thing of the actings of my mind.

June 10 th. I have this day heard two excellent sermons on enduring
temptation. My soul feels such a mixture of joy and grief as I cannot express.
I feel an unspeakable joy in the liberty of public worship; and yet I am melted
in grief and sorrow, because deprived of secret retirement. I have had no
opportunity for this the last week: But what fixedness I have been allowed, has
been in a common room; for I have not the privilege of a closet or a garret for
retirement. This takes away almost all the relish of life. I feel a more
sensible indifference for all other comforts of life, than ever; and what I
have formerly most feared and dreaded, now seem matters of indifference,
neither feared nor dreaded; as though nothing could give me any trouble, but
the want of secret, fixed, and solemn communion with God. I am ready to burst
into a flood of tears, when I look on the dear children of God, my christain
friends, and think how they can pour out their souls in secret, into the bosom
of their God and Savior. O, how did my soul long this day, when public worship
ended, to retire into some corner, secure from all fear of interruption, and
pour out all my soul to him! I was almost ready to go to some christian friend,
and vent my grief, and beg a place of retirement. But I feared it might offend
them, as pharisaical, and Satan take the advantage to distract me about it;
though my soul did even break with the longing I had for my God. O God, thou
desire of my soul, appear for me. Every day's prevention seems to increase the
vehement longings of my soul for an opportunity. O when, when shall I come and
pour out my soul before thee in secret! When, O when shall I enjoy thee, as I
have enjoyed thee, in secret duties! Let me never forget the pain I now endure
in being deprived of retirement, when my soul feels the most devout ardour, and
fervent longings to get near my God, and plead my cause before him.

Yet, blessed be God, who, I trust, keeps me from a repining impatience, I hope
I feel a childlike tenderness, under the rod. I weep beneath the stroke; and
desire to justify, love and rejoice in my Father forever. I find a disposition,
under this heavy trial, to justify God, and speak well of him, before my dear
christian friends, who tenderly pity and sympathize with me: And I am afraid
freely to vent my grief to them, lest Satan should take the advantage, and
betray them into some unbecoming thoughts of my kind, good and gracious God. O
thou, thou thyself art the desire of my soul; the perfection of beauty; the
only delight of my immortal spirit, whatever thy outward dispensations may be,
toward me.

June 17 th. This day heard two more precious sermons on enduring temptation.
Blessed be God, I have had a little more opportunity the week past for secret
duties, though abroad, and attended with frequent interruptions. O, I find the
want of my former uninterrupted opportunities. O, if ever a thirsty heart panted
for the water brook; more, unspeakably more, does my thirsty soul pant for God,
the living God. When shall I come and appear before him? I love God's
sanctuary. I clasp the precious moments; embrace the dear season; and feel an
unspeakable satisfaction to find myself worshipping God, the supreme Deity, who
is infinitely worthy of all possible adoration and worship; and long to
continue the sacred exercise, where no mortal eye can see, or ear hear; but the
omniscient God alone witnesses the devout ardour, the intense fervor of my
love; while, with undissembled sincerity, I pour out my soul in vehement,
immortal breathings after him, the infinite good, in whom is all my delight, or
desire. O that I could once enjoy that blessed, that happy retirement, I have
long enjoyed. Methinks I should feel myfelf on the borders of the heavenly
Canaan. How, O how are my Sabbaths spoiled; my glory defaced, the Sabbath. This
dear day so loved, and was concerned to spend every moment in the exercises of
religion. I felt impatient of every moment that was taken up in civil, or
social, and even necessary concerns. All was* burdensome to me on the Sabbath,
but the time that was spent in public or private duties. But now, every minute,
almost, beside public worship, is spent in company, and worldly conversation.
For these things my soul is melted, and sorely bowed down.

Sept. 2 d. O how infinitely gracious is God to unworthy me! I have seen the
King in his beauty, and the land that is far off, by faith, while in his house,
and at his table. I have this day tasted that the Lord is gracious. My soul was
even overwhelmed with the wonders of divine love and grace, of God manifested
in and through Jesus Christ his Son. I was obliged to put the utmost restraint
on myself, to prevent discovering it, before the dear communicants. I was
scarce able to contain myself, under the powerful communication of divine
goodness to my soul. I have had a sweet pledge and foretaste, this day, of
eternal life. My soul was raised above this earth. Here, O here, I let go my
hold of every creature enjoyment, and clasped the immortal God, in the arms of
my faith, as the only desirable portion of my soul. And here, O transporting
goodness! here he displayed his infinite fullness and perfection, as worthy my
everlasting confidence and delight. I said, It is enough; my soul can wish no
more. Burst, ye bands: Break, break ye fetters, and let me know the extent of
my blessedness. I found, indeed, as his word testified, Christ to be the bread
of life. And here, I trust, I did find strength and nourishment, by faith in
Christ, at his table.

Let them despise this ordinance (if they dare speak evil of those things they
know not) who never enjoyed God in it. But surely my soul shall forever magnify
his name for this glorious gospel feast, wherein all the blessed privileges and
promises of the new and everlasting covenant are held forth, displayed,
confirmed and sealed. O methinks the sum and substance of the whole law and
gospel is here displayed to the believing soul, beyond what it is in any other
mean or ordinance on earth. This I have reason to call the highest privilege,
this side heaven. The enjoyment of God at his table, seems to have the nearest
resemblance to the pure and perfect enjoyments of the heavenly state. Blessed
be God, who has, for several months, if not years past, in my most dull, dead,
or disconsolate, distressed frames, brought me near himself in this ordinance.
Here the partition wall has been broken down. Here my soul draws near with
confidence, as to a reconciled God, through Jesus the Mediator, by the Holy
Ghost: Even when I could get near, in no other duty, here I have ventured, and
found speedy access: For the blood of Jesus has given boldness.

And now would I walk with God, as did Enoch. I have, this day, renewed my
solemn engagements to be the Lord's entirely, body, soul and spirit; confessing
sin; flying to Christ for pardon; giving up all my enjoyments to the disposing
hand of providence; and, by faith, I trust, seeking to God, through Christ, for
grace and strength to practice every duty, and bear every burden, so as it may
be for the glory of his name. Lord, prepare me for death or a life of trials.
Thou know to which I shall be called.

Sept. --. I have this day heard a sermon from Ephesians. vi. 1. "Children, obey your
parents in the Lord; for this is right." The parent's authority, and the duty
of children, was showed. Upon a strict inquiry, I have reason to be humbled
that I have fallen so far short of my duty to God, and my dear parents. God has
given me the best of parents, whom I am under innumerable obligations to love,
honor and obey. I know of no person in the world so happy in parents, as I am.
But, alas! I have abundant reason to be humbled before God and them, that I
behave so unworthy a child, thus highly favored.

Yet, blessed be God, I hope it is my most sincere endeavor to approve myself
grateful to God, and dutiful to them. And, upon a strict search, do not
remember, that I have knowingly and wilfully transgressed any positive command
of theirs; nor acted contrary to what I thought was their mind: Except in
matters of religion, where conscience, and a sense of duty to God, has inclined
me to some things, which they would have chosen I should not; yet, through
their lenity, did not absolutely forbid. I know I have sometimes exposed my
health in the ways of religion, beyond what their tender affections for me
could freely consent to: Yet it was with grief, from a real sense of duty, and
ardent desire after the enjoyment of God. And I know this zeal has made me
venture as far as I dare, without violating a positive command, which I do not
know that I ever did knowingly. But in other matters I have endeavored to shun
every thing that was disagreeable to them; and to practice those things which
were most pleasing to them, upon the smallest intimation of their pleasure. And
I have never wilfully or knowingly abused their tender indulgence, their
unwillingness to contradict and cross me. To take the advantage of this, has
been highly detested and abhorred by me. The uncommon respect and lenity they
have showed to me, especially in matters of religion, has often filled me with
shame and blushing; and has never lessened, but increased my sense of duty and
respect for them. And the least discovery I have made of disrespect to them in
my carriage, though not taken notice of by them, so far as I could discern, has
filled me with the deepest resentment, detestation and abhorrence of myself,
and the severest reflections, before God. The strength of my affection for them
is much greater, than to any creature comfort, in this world; and no worldly
trouble goes so near my soul, as that which afflicts them. Their troubles are
most sharp and cutting to me. And the loss of my parents, I fear, would be
almost insupportable to me. This is what my very soul shrinks back from. And
therefore I daily find need to go to God for grace to bear such a trial, if
called to it. That I do love them most strongly, I know. But, alas, how far do
I fall short of that filial respect and reverence, which I do acknowledge to be
their just due, and my duty to give them!

Ah, Lord, how short do I come of those relative duties, which are incumbent on
me! Thou might justly deprive me of the comfort of these dear creature
enjoyments, which have hitherto, through thy blessing, rendered my life so
agreeable. Thou have given and continued to me parents and sisters, free from
every scandalous transgression, possessed of many agreeable qualifications, and
in good repute; tender and affectionate, to the last degree: Most amiable and
desirable, as relatives. And I hope some are possessed of thy grace. None, I
hope, altogether unmindful of thee. O when shall they all strive to glorify
thee, with souls possessed with sincere love to thee, and all thy ways!

O, how great are the obligations lying on me, both from God and them, to
behave most dutifully, setting forth a bright example of piety and virtue! The
solemn and distinguishing profession I have made, loudly calls for this from
me. Lord, what shall I say! I am confounded, when I reflect on the many
obligations lying on me; and how far short I come.

April 4 th, 1754. Fast day. This is a day set apart by a neighboring
government for humiliation and prayer. And as I am called upon by my pastor and
the church to join with them in public duties; so I would gladly sequester the
time from worldly concerns, for secret duties. Especially is God calling me to
it, by the alarming reports of war, which are now spreading; as I have lately
renewed my purpose, to seek the Lord for his glory in the good of his chosen;
and these two occasions are now offered, which I knew not of before, viz. A day
set apart for that purpose; and the rumor of war spreading, so soon after it;
I am therefore more confirmed in my purpose. Lord, excite and assist. O be thou
in the midst of thy people this day. --

This day, I trust through grace, my soul has been engaged with God for
personal, family, town, land, national and universal blessings. O, blessed be
God for assistance in confession and petition. Lord, I leave them with thee,
for a gracious return, through Jesus Christ, our glorious high priest: And beg
supports or relief for my frail, fainting tabernacle, which is even ready to
dissolve.

April 21 st. Heard a sermon from Jer. vii. 22. "Is there no balm in Gilead? Is
there no physician there?" etc. My soul has been in a serious, attentive frame,
this day, reaching after, and relying upon the only Physician of souls. But
this night, by faith, in prayer, I saw him more clearly, whom my soul loves,
infinitely beautiful and glorious. O, how suitable does he appear for the work
of a Mediator! How every way infinitely sit did he appear, both on God's part,
and on man's! And the shameful, shocking reproach it cast on all the divine
perfections, to refuse a cordial compliance with these most wise, most kind,
most just and most reasonable terms of salvation, which the gospel holds forth.
O how did my soul acquiesce in this wonderful scheme of redemption, by this
wonderful Redeemer! Every attribute and perfection of the Divine Being, appears
in full luster and glory, in this work of grace. And man appears the most base,
sordid, irrational and stupid, when he refuses to come in, on this gracious
invitation. Lord, here at thy cross I throw down all my weapons of rebellion;
all my natural enmity, pride and stubbornness: Here I give up all specious
duties, good frames, and proud pretenses, and glory in the cross of Christ. In
this, I esteem the wisdom of God, and the power of God. And in a Compliance
with this, I esteem man's highest wisdom, strength, beauty and riches. O the
riches both of the wisdom and goodness of God! O thou Prince of peace, I here
renew my choice, and all my engagements to be thine. Did others see that
excellency in thee, which I now behold by faith, they must submit, and
acknowledge thee to be the chief of ten thousands, and altogether lovely. I
must cease to be rational, if I did not now choose and embrace thee, under
these views of thee; and venture my whole salvation on this gospel method.

July 7 th. Sabbath day. Last night and this morning I sought the Lord for his
presence with me, in his house, and at his table, this day, though several
circumstances seemed to concur to prevent my attendance, which gave some damp
to me; and I found not that access I hoped for, nor that lively exercise of
grace that I desired. Yet I hoped I had my eyes to the Lord for his presence
and grace, and felt not wholly barren. But was still more fixed and enlivened
by the sermon, from Psalm. xxvii. 1. "The Lord is my light and my salvation."
And when permitted to commemorate the dying love of my Redeemer, my soul was
even swallowed up in love, wonder and admiration. What tongue can express, what
soul conceive, the boundless depths of divine, infinite love and condescension
to a world of mankind! And to me, unworthy me! Has the great and glorious God
provided all these great and glorious things for me; for my eternal delightful
entertainment? All language fails. My soul is unable to express the enlarged
and extensive views of the divine goodness.

Again, this afternoon, all my devout reflections, and grateful sentiments,
were revived and enlarged. I know not whether ever I enjoyed a better day. But
ah! I felt myself doubly fettered; in the body, and the body fettered with
fellow mortals! I longed to have left both; but if not, I wished to have been
where no mortal could have seen me: For my soul was even ready to break through
every restraint. This has been like one of the days of heaven on earth to my
soul. O the boundless, endless treasures of grace and love! O the unsearchable
riches of grace! But why do I attempt to speak of these astonishing things, I
have this day been allowed to feast on? To write or speak of these things, at
this time, is like turning up a full bottle, where the hasty pressing of the
liquor stops the vent. I am lost in conceiving and contemplating; much more, in
describing or uttering. The powers of my soul are straitened. The faculties of
my mind, I sensibly feel, are overpowered with divine, infinite, eternal
wonders. No wonder then, that the organs of the body are unable to perform this
part. Let it suffice to say, I have this day by faith seen the King in his
beauty, and the land that is afar off. I have been satisfied with the goodness
of his house; and yet am insatiably longing for full fruition.

It is enough! What more could God have done for me, or entitled me to? It is
enough! The infinite God has given me an infinite fullness. It is enough! I see
it so. I can wish no more. My finite nature can hold no more. When enlarged in
all its faculties, then the full fruition. And this earthen vessel can only
bear these drops; and with these is ready to dissolve. Did thou not support
it, this day would have proved how brittle it was, such were the powerful
discoveries, with which God had favored me. O God, let them be enlarged into
full fruition. O, when shall I see and know all that of which my finite nature
is capable!

August 9 th, 1754. I have been much taken up of late in company and
conversation: But both have been chiefly of (...) religious kind, and therefore
more satisfactory in its nature, than otherwise it would have been. But yet my
soul wants to retire from all things temporal and visible, and converse in a
more intellectual* and spiritual manner with invisible realities. I know I have
a spiritual part within, which was never made to feed on any even the most
refined sublunary enjoyments; an immortal nature, which must have eternal
things to contemplate, or it will never find rest and delight; a capacious
soul, which must have an infinite object to busy and entertain its noble
faculties and unbounded desires; that nothing but an infinite, eternal,
selfsufficient, selfexistent good can suffice. And, through grace, I trust I
have a gracious principle, a new nature, a regenerate part, a love stronger
than death, that does most powerfully carry my whole soul after a Being who is
most wise, most holy, just and good: And after all creature converse, will
remain unsatisfied, without sensible and sweet communion with this Being. I
find nothing in all the vast creation commensurate to the unbounded desires of
this capacious spirit. And, blessed be God, I find nothing, that can give
renewed nature a moment's satisfaction, but this holy, spiritual Being; what
comes from and centers in him. In vain a thousand amusements and tempting
vanities offer their assistance, to mitigate his tedious absence, or grace his
return: For I quarrel, and complain of the whole system of nature. I feel such
a restlessness, as I can no ways account for, but that the God of nature and
grace has sworn that nothing but himself should ever delight me.

I did lift my voice to heaven, crying to the propitious Deity, who had himself
formed my soul with such faculties and powers, as must pine away in tormenting
penury, without him; that he who knew his own infinite perfections, would cause
that none else should ever satisfy me; but that I should be forever restless
and uneasy, when he did not condescend to visit me. A deep sense of the divine,
supreme excellence and perfections; the boundless capacity of my soul; and
divine love to God, inflamed my heart; and lively faith emboldened me to ask:
And infinite, divine condescension, I trust, heard and granted the request.

August --. My time has been taken up chiefly the week past in a diligent,
though, blessed be God, not an anxious attendance on my calling. I find God is,
by his Spirit, daily clearing my evidence, and delivering me from a spirit of
bondage, whereby I have the testimony of my conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, I have my conversation in the world. I know the natural bent
of my mind is for study: Yet, I trust, I have a good conscience toward God,
that I do not allow one duty to interfere with another; but render to Caesar the
things which are Cesar's, as well as to God, the things which are God's. And I
do as really study and endeavor to be diligent in business, as fervent in
spirit. I am conscious to myself, that I neither allow nor love an idle, lazy
live. My natural temper does not incline to it; but when indulged or employed
in study, and in the exercise of the mind, is most diligent and laborious.
Blessed be God, who has cleared my way, and, I trust, teaches me so to conduct
as gives peace to my conscience, and confidence toward God, through Jesus
Christ, my only hope of acceptance with God.

Saturday night, August --. Alas! this day has been a very incumbered day; and
I came to my chamber weary and tired, both body and mind. I have torn myself
from the business of the world, and I find so many duties before me, in regard
of the communion, as would last me through the night, would my strength hold
out, or could I enjoy my chamber alone; but I cannot. O God, fit me for the
approaching solemnity of thy day and table. O compose my soul for holy duties.
I trust I have been serving thee in my worldly employment, and had a sense of
my duty in being thus engaged. And now, O my God, let me meet thee in the more
sweet and pleasing duties of reflecting meditation, examination and prayer; and
find it is good for me to draw near to God. O how does my soul love and long
for those exercises which bring me near to God! Or rather, in which God
manifests himself to me. I love my God; I love his laws; I love all those
duties he was enjoined on me; and therefore long for the heavenly employments
above. O come, Lord Jesus, come quickly!

Sept. 1 st. 1754. Sabbath noon. Will God, in very deed, dwell with men? Will
he who is the High and Lofty One, who inhabits eternity, condescend to visit
worms of the dust? O infinite grace! He will, I know he will. Witness my soul;
witness his house and table; witness this day. O how sweet has been the season!
Verily my soul has found it good to draw near to God; Here I have seen sin to
be the worst of evils; and my soul the most polluted, sinful, proud, unhumbled,
ungrateful creature that I can behold on earth. But, O forever adored be God, I
saw Christ Jesus, the most amiable and wonderful Redeemer; and I saw him mine.
The blessed Spirit assured me of my interest in him, and of that covenant
relation God the Father has condescended to enter into with me, through him. I
know, surely I may say, I know I am born of God; for the Spirit himself has
borne witness to this truth, by those evidences of grace; and sealed me to the
day of redemption. Blessed be God for this hope. O happy day! O glorious
moment, in which God conveyed life and light to my soul, and brought me into
his convenant! O my happy soul! how shall I congratulate thee, on this high and
happy relation! Fain I would; but have neither powers of mind fully to
conceive, nor words to express, this inexpressible, incomprehensible grace,
wherein I stand secure of all the invaluable blessings of time and eternity,
through the almighty, allsufficient Mediator, Jesus Christ, my only hope and
confidence toward God, my sure refuge. O my complete Redeemer! by what name or
title shall I extol thee? For since I began to admire thee I find there are no
bounds to thy amiable and glorious perfections, as God-Man-Mediator. O (...) of
God, you adore and admire him: But it (...) happy lot to claim the most near
and tender relation (...) love and serve him, as your Lord and King: But it is
my triumphant boast to love, admire and rejoice in him, not only as my Lord and
King; but as my most kind, tender, faithful, allsufficient Redeemer; Yea, my
all in all.

O how did these views of these things draw out my soul to renew my choice, and
renew every devout resolution of my soul, to be for him, and to other; and with
full purpose of heart, more than ever to serve and, obey him forever! Thus, and
more than I am able to recount, did God meet with me in his house, and at his
table.

At night. Surely I may say, God has been with me, of a truth, this day. I have
sat under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste.
The morning was spent in prayer, and a solemn renewal of my covenant. The
forenoon in hearing the word. Noon, in commemorating the dying love of my dear
Redeemer, in sorrow and joy. This afternoon in solemn worship, and hearing his
word. This evening in reflection and prayer. Blessed be God! I trust I could
say this day, O God, my heart is fixed; solemnly fixed and engaged throughout
the day. O how sweet such seasons! though my body is ready to faint under them.

Oct. 11 th. I am now resolving for God. And, O, how is my soul ashamed and
confounded before him! Alas for me! my heart swarms with every lust. My soul
appears defiled in every part. I know not what to do. O God, arise, arise, I
beseech thee, and quicken me according to thy word. Awake, my sleeping soul,
and arise. And do thou give me life and vigor. Without thee I can do nothing.
Through thee I can do all things. O come in, blessed Spirit, and revive my
sinking soul. I have been a talking christian; but make me a feeling,
experienced one. I have been a rational one; but make me a spiritual one.

It is now some years, since I have spent a whole night in prayer: and some
months, since I have spent a whole day together in the duties of the closet;
and some time, since I have lain prostrate before God, in a solemn
extraordinary confession of sins. All which I have found special helps to keep
up the power of religion in my soul. Actual disorders of body and scruples
about the duty I owe to the body, have, I think, chiefly prevented, when I have
had opportunity. But now I am resolving that, through grace, as I have
opportunity, to spend more time this way, than I have of late done. Yet not to
cast off all concern about the duties I owe to my body; nor destroy myself: But
to make the law of God my rule; religion my business; communion with God, my
daily employ; and the glory of God, in regard of body and soul, my highest end
and aim.

Oct 14 th. O, methinks never did I feel such an affecting, humbling, keen
remorse for sin, as I have done these five days past. My soul lay prostrate
before God, under the deepest sense of my ingratitude, acknowledging the
justice of God, if he should dent me the lively, powerful influences of his
Spirit: Yet not confounded; but with access, allowed to wrestle with Jehovah,
and with full assurance to call him my Father, my Redeemer, my Sanctifier, and
my God. O what condescension is this! O what grace is here! Did ever God deign
to stoop so low, to such a vile, ungrateful wretch as I am? Will the blessed
Dove again diffuse his influences over my soul? He will, he will. I feel his
sacred operation on my heart. O transporting joy! O unparalleled condescension!
O unbounded, infinite grave! Now I am thine, forever thine. O let me never more
offend against thee. Let me die, rather than grieve thee. O suffer me not ever
to act so vile, ungrateful a part, while life remains.

Nov. 17 th. I have been from home nine or ten days, and have enjoyed some
sweet seasons; but often have found my heart like a deceitful how, or bone out
of joint. I find the power of corruption strong. Lord, I am amazed that there
are such remains of sin yet in me. O my soul, what have thou been doing? Thou
have been in this world above twenty eight years; and always lived under the
means of grace. And yet, how unsanctified have thou remained. For this twelve
years, what a rich variety of means have thou enjoyed, both public, private and
secret! How many hundred sermons have thou heard! How many scores of
sacramental seasons have thou enjoyed! And how many thousand prayers have thou
put up! How many thousand, thousand petitions have thou joined in, and put up
for more sanctification, and greater holiness! And thou know, God is a God
hearing prayer; and that this is the will of God, even my sanctification. And
yet what remains of sin, and how little sanctification appear in my soul! How
perverse and stubborn is my will! How dark and blind my understanding! How
carnal my affections! Alas, what pride; what hypocrisy yet remain! How little
faith, love, humility, repentance, new obedience, sincerity, and holy
conformity to God, is to be seen in my soul! So that I am even ready to cry
out, I am altogether as an unclean thing; that there is nothing but wounds and
bruises, and putrefying sores; that the whole head is sick and the whole heart
faint. And am ready, even to this moment, to complain, that the wounds of sin
stink and are corrupt. Such is the running leprosy of sin, that I even now
feel, after all the means I have enjoyed for my sanctification.

Gracious God, what have I been doing! How have I trifled with all thy sacred
institutions! O let me from this time, after every single duty, strictly
inquire what degrees of sanctification I have gained by it. O my God, have I
not, in this respect, received the grace of God, or the means of grace, in
vain? O methinks I never knew the plague of my heart. It bursts out like a
putrid sore, that never was truly healed. Lord, rip open the inmost sides, and
let me be ashamed and confounded, because there are yet such horrid remains of
the abominable thing, which thy soul hates; and which is forever rebelling and
going contrary to thee; which is not subject to thy law, nor can it be. And O
let the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world, be more than ever
precious to me: That blessed Redeemer, who takes away not only the guilt, but
the filth; not only the power, but the pollution of sin. O blessed Savior,
dearest Jesus, thou Son of God, I come, I come to thee; for I have heard thy
blood cleanses from all sin. O, this, this is the sovereign remedy, the balm
of Gilead, and thou the only physician. Thy blood only can cure this leprosy:
Nothing else will do. The blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an
heifer, cannot purge the conscience. Thy blood only, O incarnate God, can
cleanse my soul. O make me holy, and take me out of a sinful world. Lord,
sanctify my whole soul, and bring me where nothing that is unholy or defiles
shall ever enter. O take me out of this defiling world. Lord, my heart is
defiled, and methinks all I converse with has a defiling influence on me. O if
thou have yet any thing for me to do or suffer, give me zeal, life and fervor,
and let me as an hireling fulfill my task. I am almost impatient to get rid of
this defiling heart and world. O my God, deliver, I beseech thee, deliver me
from this bondage of corruption. Have mercy on me, O God, I entreat thee by all
thy former clemency; have mercy on me, and free me from this burden of sin, and
make me holy; and let me dwell in the holy place, where there are no traces of
sin; no resemblance of any thing that thou abhorrest, or that defiles. Lord,
make me holy, and I fear no evil. There is nothing I fear but sin, or desire
but holiness; for thou art holiness. Deny not my request, O Lord, I beseech
thee.

God only is witness to the ardent breathings and breakings of my soul for
holiness, and entire conformity to himself; and perfect freedom from every
thing that is not perfectly agreeable to his holy will, and pure nature.

Nov. 18 th. Blessed be God, I am assured, neither sin nor Satan shall ever
separate my soul from him; that I shall never fall under eternal condemnation:
Yet, O yet, how does sin vex and afflict my soul, because it is contrary to a
pure and holy God! On this account I hate and abhor it, and dread it more than
the sharpest affliction I ever met with, or can conceive of. And yet, O my God,
how insensible am I of its odious nature! How little can I conceive of this
infinite evil, as contrary to a holy God! O may I see more and more of it. O
let it humble me continually before a holy, sin hating God. Let me never have
another proud thought arise; but ever reflect on my hateful defilement, my
contrariety to God. O may the sad and dreadful remains of indwelling sin keep
me low before God, and make Christ infinitely precious, as the Lamb of God, who
takes away the sins of the world.

I was led this night to query, why I am no more sanctified? Since God's word
declares, "This is his will, even your sanctification;" and for this Christ
died, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works: And it is his command, "Be ye perfect,
even as your Father who is in heaven is perfect:" And again, "Follow holiness."
And for this he prayed the Father, "Sanctify them through thy truth;" and he
said the Father always heard him. And for this cause he gave his Spirit; and it
is the will and work of the Spirit to sanctify all that believe. Why am I then
no more sanctified? Am I born of God, and yet partake no more of his holiness?
Am I united to Christ, as a member to the head, or a branch to the vine, and
yet no more like him? What reason shall I assign? Do I believe these
declarations which God has made? Surely God is true, and must be; and yet why
then am I not more holy? This then must be the reason, "For these things, says
he, I will be inquired of, to do them." Then, surely then, the fault is in me.
I have not sought God for the sanctifying operations of his Spirit; I have not
wrestled, as became one of his redeemed ones; as one who had a right to sue for
them, in and through Jesus Christ, the great Mediator. I have not laid it
enough to heart. I have not been duly sensible of the worth of these things. O
my base, slothful, negligent soul, complain no more; but arise and wrestle,
till thou obtain as great degrees of holiness, as ever mortal did, or could.

Nov. --. O blessed be God, that he condescends to take me near himself, and
commune with vile, unworthy me, after all my backslidings and wanderings from
him; and notwithstanding the opposition I meet with from Satan, and my wicked
heart. O the horrid nature of sin! Verily it is the worst of the worst of all
things. Sin now appears exceeding sinful, extremely odious, as defiling,
contrary to a holy God. Christ, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the
world; not only the power, but pollution; not only the guilt, but the filth, is
most precious and lovely. O blessed be God for Jesus Christ! O precious,
precious Lord and Savior, prophet, priest and king! O how sweet is it thus to
draw near to God, and find him near to my soul! O for a perfect nearness, never
more to cease! I know heaven is my home; for I long to get there, where my
treasure, my heart, and my hopes are already. I know it is the land of promise;
for these clusters are the foretaste, pledges and earnest of my inheritance.
This, this communion with God is the dawn of glory, and anticipation of eternal
life.

January 31 st, 1755. I have been all this week trying to spend a day, or part
of a day, with God in secret; but every day has had its necessary encumbrances,
clog and hindrance. Last night had some glimpse of light, peace, joy and
confidence in God; but it was soon gone. This day I have set myself to prayer,
and reviewing my various experiences, if possible to give a turn to my mind;
but I scarce know what I am about. My head is pained, confused and bewildered,
so that I get lost. My heart, I know not what it is. I always found it wicked;
but I have little humbling sense of it now. I tell God, I am as vile a wretch
as ever lived; but I am not affected with it. I tell him, I want none but him;
that he is the only real good; but I feel no realizing sense of his divine,
infinite excellence. I believe these things, because I once felt the power of
them; and not because I now see. My eyes run down with tears, while I express
these things, before my more stupid heart is affected. O what a soul have I!
The members and organs of my body are more affected than that: My tongue to
complain, my eyes to weep.

Feb. 1 st. I was forced from those duties yesterday; my bodily illness
increasing so that I was scarce able to hold up my head. And this day I find
myself so disordered, that I can attend on no duty with any fixed engagedness.
Well, my God, I am thine. Let me not repine; but quietly bear thy hand.

Feb. 1 st. At night. Blessed be God for nearer access, and enlargement in
prayer, with two or three christian friends, this afternoon; and some freedom
this night, though attended with bodily disorders. O when will the happy day of
release arrive!

July 3 d, 1755. Fast day. Much incumbered last night; unfit for preparation
for the exercises of this day: And so awaked this morning, unsettled as to the
particular duties of the day. Yet God graciously afforded some near and lively
access to him, in prayer for Zion, both in secret, public and private. My soul
reached after God, and laid hold on the truth, faithfulness, and almighty power
of Jehovah, and head of the church. Sure I am, without a scruple, that I prefer
Jerusalem to my chief joy. I almost forget my own private and spiritual
concerns, only as they stand in relation to, and are included in, the
prosperity of Zion. If Christ has a church in the world, and they are all
united together, as members in the body, and united to Christ, as their head, I
surely feel the inseparable union, beyond all the ties of nature, or law of
common friendship. Strong influence, powerful efficacy! But weary and spent in
family and secret duties at night. O frail and faultering flesh! When shall I
get free!

Feb. 5 th, 1757. A sweet morning! My soul engaged with God in prayer, for
myself, the whole world, the protestant nations, our nation and land, the whole
church; all the ministers, particular ministers and christian friends. Sweet
access; blessed freedom, through Jesus Christ, God-Man, my dear, glorious
Mediator. O how sweet such a season! Though my spirits were exhausted, and
unfit for other duties. Found my body needed refreshment.

Some sense of divine things at noon; but not so engaged: More broken in my
thoughts. Sent for to visit a dear, sick christian friend. Had some sweet
christian conversation. Felt straitened, at night, and not well. Endeavored
Solemnly to renew my covenant; and trust I was clear, fixed and hearty in the
dedication and consecration of my whole self, body and soul, and every member,
power or faculty; all I am, and all I have; every interest or concern,
temporal, spiritual and eternal: Yea, I think there was not the least reserve;
not the least iota, but was solemnly given up to God. All that my engaged soul
could comprehend or apprehend, that did or could relate to me, was heartily
committed to God. And I trust I was enabled as cordially, and as unreservedly,
to embrace the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as my everlasting portion. Yea, I
trust I did embrace the whole Trinity, for all that I could conceive or
apprehend an infinite God could be or do to and for me, for time and eternity,
for soul or body.

And thus I am the Lord's. I am the Lord's only* solely, and forever: And I
rejoice in this disposal of myself. And thus the Lord is mine; and I boast and
glory in my portion. And now, blessed be God for Jesus Christ! What more can I
say? Here, here I must dwell; blessed be God for Jesus Christ!

Feb. 9 th. Blessed be God! I trust I do enjoy some sweet communion with God in
prayer, every season, and have a sweet relish of spiritual things on my heart,
more or less, all the day; but cannot attain to deep, fixed, and solemn
meditation. Since Sabbath day, my head is disordered. It is well, blessed be
God, that I am allowed a taste. Thou art my center: Here I would rest, and long
for the happy day of dear release. O thou blessed portion of my soul, draw me,
and I will run after thee. When thou give me strength and nearness, I
resolve, through grace, to follow hard after thee. But when thou do weaken my
strength in the way, I will wait and hope, look and love; and say, Thou do
all things well.

Lord, I now find the creature cannot satisfy. Thou only art my dear delight. O
the sweetness of religion! Its ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths
are peace. I find, I feel the dear yoke of Christ is easy, and his burdens
light. O happy soul, who has listed under this blessed Captain, and has entered
into his service. Blessed be God! I trust I do know, experimentally, that they
have great peace, who love thy law. And with this let me lay me down, and
sleep; for thou shall keep me.

Feb. 19 th. I hope some fixedness and refreshment, yesterday morning. The rest
of the day abroad with the sick. Blessed be God, that I can be any comfort or
help to the afflicted and helpless. Composed and refreshed, last night. More
wandering and hurried this morning. Went again to visit the sick. Found my sick
friend dying in distress. Begged me to pray for her. Prayed for herself. "For a
Christ, O for a Christ! for the precious blood of Christ to be applied to my
soul! No blood of bulls or of goats would save; but the precious blood of
Christ. Mercy, Lord* mercy, Lord!" And so she died. O may this affecting scene
make an abiding impression on my soul! O the importance of a dying hour; when
time is closing and eternity opening! O what but a Christ can then afford the
least comfort or support! And this hope my friend had. I cannot but trust she
fell asleep in Jesus. If her faith was weak, her passage was easy: She died
like a lamb, at last.

O how much wisdom and goodness has God showed to me, that I was here: The more
so, because it was a family which had appeared much prejudiced against me, ever
since I made a profession of religion, till of late. And now I had an
opportunity to magnify my profession, by being kind, and doing good, not only
to the sick; but to a dear relative of hers, who had cast my name out as evil.
O that I might be able thus to requite all who abuse me! What a christian love
and harmony is between us now! And now, I would make this improvement of this
providence -- Never to resent any injury; but leave it with God to vindicate
me: And it will then always turn out well.

And again, I would improve this providence, to prepare for my own dissolution.
Die I must; but when, and under what circumstances, thou only know. Nor is
it much matter, so I be but found in Christ. O my soul, thou have this dying
work to do. Thou have this dark, unknown valley to pass. Thou have this king of
terrors to encounter. O, art thou prepared? Can thy faith, can thy present
hopes, bear thee out? Thou art often longing for the blessed vision of God; but
O what will be thy frame, when Death, grim, ghastly Death, stares thee in the
face, and holds thee in his iron jaws, while the piercing cries and shrieks of
dear relatives strike through thy tender fond heart? O Death, I have not known
thee. I have not yet passed through thy territory. I cannot mark the gloomy
way. But my Christ, my captain and guide has; and having him with me, I cannot
miscarry. Then it shall be my renewed care to have him really and sensibly with
me, both in life and death.

March 12 th. Was waked with the cry of fire, just by us, as the day dawned.
Soon felt much disordered. Not enlarged in reading or in meditation. Felt
serious; but could not get near my God in prayer, for some time. Felt not able
to strive, nor any drawings of soul to God; yet remembered my yesterday's
frame, and was unwilling to leave the duty, without some communion with God.
And, blessed be God, I began to feel some desire and drawings of my soul, and
closed with them, until, I trust, I enjoyed sweet, intimate communion with the
blessed God, through Jesus Christ, my dear Redeemer. My passions were much
moved; and I knew there was some degree of bodily disorders working in my
frame; yet, I trust, there was the distinct exercise of grace. I longed for the
grace of faith and humility. O how did I long to lie in the dust, and live on
God for every mercy; to be nothing, and Christ all; to be broken off from all
dependence below God; to sit under his table, and be fed with the crumbs which
fall from it.

I felt no desires after great prosperity, or high joys. As to temporals, I was
willing, yea, I think, desirous to receive all by morsels and crumbs, as I
thought it was the will of God I should. Only I desired that he would feed me.
And as to spirituals, I rather desired to take deep root, than to flourish. A
humble, childlike temper did appear most desirable. I trust I heartily chose
conformity to God, before comfort; humility, holiness, rather than joy. O
surely I had access to the throne of grace! But my strength has failed; and I
have been exceedingly disordered all the day since. O come, Lord Jesus, O come
and finish thy work. Let heaven succeed. I hope some refreshment this night;
but not enlarged as usual, for the church, or the approaching Sabbath.

May 27 th. God has been graciously pleased, for these several days, to draw
out my soul for dear Zion. I have begun my prayer with some petitions for
myself; but my thoughts have turned on Zion, and I have scarce thought of
myself any more, only as a member of Zion, and a partaker, with the whole body,
of every blessing. O how has God enlarged my soul, and held me up to wrestle
with him on Zion's behalf, until my nerves have been so strained, that the back
part of my head and neck have been so swelled and sore, that I could scarce
move it; and have been obliged to take to my bed, from my knees! After which, I
have thought it my duty to desist from any close exercise of mind, until I have
recovered: And then I have found the same gracious assistance.

O how good is God, that he will allow a poor, polluted worm of the dust, to
speak to him, who is the High and Lofty One, who inhabits eternity! It has
sometimes been suggested, that I should strain my head so that distraction
would follow. But though this be an affliction, which of all evils, except sin,
I apprehend the forest; and from which I most reluct; yet I have been enabled,
I trust, sweetly to commit myself to God; and could trust even a distracted
body and mind to the care and protection of my heavenly Father. This though
more to be dreaded than death, I felt disposed to submit to, trusting my all
into the hands of a faithful God, who has excited these most ardent desires for
his glory, and the prosperity of his church; and has engaged my soul to wrestle
for blessings on his church and people, in a manner unaccountable to me; and
why, I knew not: But by the event, I have been confirmed that the secrets of
the Lord are with them that fear him; and to them he will show his covenant.
Yea, notwithstanding all my inward conflicts, and the accusations of Satan
against me, I have been encouraged. If I had regarded iniquity in my heart, God
would not hear me: But verily God has heard me; he has attended to the voice
of my prayer. O amazing condescension!

June 26 th, 1757. Very heavy this morning. Lay in bed too late. Had but little
time or heart for secret duties. Went up to God's sanctuary. Felt somewhat
serious and engaged in public duties; but more lively at noon, in company; but
not so fixed this afternoon. Came home: Felt little composure for prayer. I
tried to read and meditate; but found I did but trifle: Could no way get my
mind fixed; but time ran to waste. I resolved to go to God for a suitable
frame; to spend some time in prayer for dear Zion, our nation and land. Felt
great opposition from Satan, and my own heart. Discouraging suggestions, as
though I had no warrant to be importunate with God for our nation and land. But
I urged, that God had commanded us to pray, and to give him no rest, till he
establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth: That even when he
forbad Moses to pray for his people, to testify his anger; yet he graciously
heard, and manifested his approbation of Moses, and his zeal and fervency. I
confessed my own infinite unworthiness to open my mouth, and the unworthiness
of our sinful, guilty nation and land of any mercy. I acknowledged his infinite
justice and righteousness, should he utterly and forever reject us, and make us
an heap and desolation. I lamented the general stupidity which had seized the
whole nation; and that we appeared to be a people ripe for sudden and awful
destruction; to be given up into the hands of our enemies; that they should
enter, not only into our borders, but into our bowels: That our nation and land
should become a reproach among the heathen, and the scorn and triumph of our
antichristian enemies. But, then, what would God do for his own great name? Had
he not said that thus and thus he would do with Israel, were it not that he
feared the wrath of the enemy, and that their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely; and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the Lord
has not done all this? I pleaded, that he who was infinitely above all fear or
restraint from men or devils, had thus condescended to give us arguments to
plead with him. But if he was fixed in his purpose to destroy us, as a nation;
yet, I pleaded his promise to his church. That the gates of hell should not
prevail against it; that he would send his gospel into the dark corners of the
earth, and yet have a peculiar people; and that his name might yet be glorified
in the earth.

I adored his sovereignty; acknowledged his justice; and, I trust, submitted to
his hand: Yet again was strengthened to plead for the nations of the
reformation, our nation and land, until a most violent pain seized the nerves
of my head, which were much strained, and forced me for some moments of desist.
But my soul now being engaged, I made another attempt to continue; but was
seized with such extreme sickness, as took away all my strength, and almost
life. Cold and helpless I lay, while nature struggled hard for life. And I am
much thoughtful whether there is not much of the agency of Satan in these
turns, as I find hard inward conflicts, Satan strongly resisting me, when
engaged for dear Zion. Almost all my engagedness, and access to God, of late,
has been for Zion: And for about two weeks, I have not once had lively access,
but I have been broken up by a sudden turn of bodily disorders; though I have
been able to attend other duties, with fixedness and attention; besides, a
great variety of inward temptations. Yet, O may God but hold me wrestling for
his dear cause and interest; may I but prevail with him by faith, through Jesus
the glorious Redeemer, for his dear church; here I am, at his wise and gracious
disposals of me: Only, may he be my strength and stay. Lord, I know thou do
not need me, nor my poor prayers. It is only by thee that I am allowed to open
my unworthy, polluted lips. Lord, it is infinite condescension in thee, that
thou will suffer me to take thy sacred name on my unhallowed tongue.

Wednesday, June 29 th, 1759. This day, rose early, and improved my time, that
I might be prepared for the hour from seven until eight. I then addressed the
throne of grace for public blessings. Was enlarged in confessing and lamenting
the national sins and guilt, till the hour was expired. Alas! what a few of the
many particulars thereof, can be enumerated in one hour. I seemed but to touch
on them, in the time. Good God, what a world of iniquity is this! I know not
where to begin, or where to end, in the enumeration of our sins. O what
infinite patience has borne with such vile rebels as we! Lord, what a world is
this! What a den of unclean beasts! What a sink of sin! What an inhospitable
wilderness have thy dear saints, who live now, to pass through, in their way
home! O relieve their pain; alleviate their thirst, by some kind cordial, some
foretaste and pledge of their heavenly inheritance. Continued in prayer, till
strength and spirits failed.

Thursday, June 30 th. This being the last Thursday in the month; a day which
some pious persons have devoted to prayer for the prosperity of Zion, our
nation and land; and on which is our lecture; I would observe it, as far as my
health and my circumstances would allow.

Enjoyed some freedom in prayer. Read Britain's Remembrancer. Was ready to say,
from a view of our aggravated guilt, It is a gone case with our nation! God
will show us, by his judgments, what we would not learn by his mercies. Went up
to God's house; heard his word; and hope I had some sense of divine things.
Returned home, with desire to enjoy God in secret; where I set myself to
meditate, and examine, in order to prepare for the holy supper: And to leave
the concerns of Zion and our nation and land for after meditation and prayer.
After some serious examination, I attempted to pray; endeavoring to confine
myself to my own case. But while I was wrestling with God for grace and large
communications at his table, to preserve me in this evil, sinful time, my
desire would enlarge for the same grace for all his dear saints, who were
traveling the same pilgrimage, hungry, and hard bestead, groaning under the
same evils that attended me.

I had a lively sense of the sin and guilt of our nation and land. And while
pleading for them, I had such a sense of the injury done to the divine name and
law, by their sin, and of the reasonableness that the divine Being should
arise, and vindicate his injured attributes, against rebellious worms, though
he should utterly consume them; and such ardent desires for his glory, that I
freely gave up the nation and land to the will of God. The language of my soul
was, "Lord, spare us, if thou will redeem us; but I cannot wish we should be
spared to revolt any more. Thy glory is infinitely more dear to me, than any
thing else; and I freely sacrifice all to that. But O, if it be thy will, take
me from the evil to come; and let me not see the evil that will come on this
people; but this with submission to the divine will."

O what a precious season was this! How ardent were my desires for every member
of Christ's body. O how did I feel the unity of the spirit! And how earnest for
sparing mercy for our nation and land! And what a lively sense of the dishonor
done to the glorious attributes of God, by our sins! And what a holy revenge
against sin, and humble submission to the divine will! What a hearty consent,
that God should vindicate his injured name and laws! O how sweetly composed,
and swallowed up, was my soul, in the glory of that God, that best of beings,
whom I saw infinitely just and righteous, and yet infinitely affronted, abused
and contemned, by despicable worms of the dust! O how was I enabled to cast all
my cares and burdens, public and private, national and personal, upon this best
of beings! O how is my soul now at rest in God! Blessed, forever blessed be
God, for this season of sweet communion with him! Though spent in body, yet
sweet peace in mind.

January 17 th, 1761. My head has been much disordered this week; yet, thanks
be to God, I trust it has been better with me, than in the last week. I hope
some sweet access for myself, and the dear afflicted church, to which I belong.
Felt a tender sympathy with my dear pastor; begged direction; and wrote a
letter to him this day. May God bless it! I have devoted my pen to him; and
what he shall assist to write, that I commit to his blessing. I know I have but
little faculty, at present, for writing; but if God delight in me he can assist
and bless: But, if not, here I am; let the Lord do as seems good to him.

I have this week been ready to think I should be exercised with some sharp
trials, from the frame of my mind. For when I have endeavored to realize the
most sore and trying affliction coming on me, I have rather embraced, than
drawn back; because I believed, if God called me thereto, I should see his
salvation. And O, communion with God is all I can wish. O I am weary of life! O
for conformity to God, and enjoyment of him! At present, I seem to have no
hopes or fears about the world. If God will but sanctify and satisfy my soul,
it is enough. O my God, my God, thine I am. O take me into thine own merciful
and gracious hands. Subdue every lust. Conform me to thy blessed law. Resign me
to thy sovereign will. Delight thou in me. Make me to delight in thee, and it
is all; I have no request, beyond this. Lord, if thou see me slighting
temporal blessings, O correct this error; for I know I am absolutely dependent
on thee. But O, conformity and communion with thee, appears the one, the only
one thing needful. With thy smiles, I can be happy on a dunghill, or in a
dungeon. Without thee, I must be miserable in a palace. O hold not my soul at a
distance from thyself, thou only best of beings, thou center of my soul, thou
end of all my wishes. Thou art the boundless bound of immortal desire. My God,
my God! the fathomless ocean of delight; it is thy own infinite dignity to be
selfsufficient and independent. And it is my highest felicity to be dependent
and insufficient; but in an allsufficient God, through an allsufficient and
most glorious Mediator. O here, here let my soul forever rest; and all my
wishes, all my hopes, be forever fixed.

April 4 th. Thanks be to God, I have enjoyed more peace and tranquillity of
mind this week than for a long time. I awaked on Monday morning from dreams
which had a tendency to distract my fancy; but, blessed, forever blessed be
God, some sense of his perfections stayed my soul: And I have seen such a
fullness here, as made me willing to relinquish all hopes or expectations from
the world, for such discoveries. O here I found a solid, rational satisfaction,
beyond what all this world can give. I felt myself at once weaned from it; and
God only a suitable good. Here the issue was staunched; and here my soul
rested. O this, I found, was the cause of my former weanedness from the world;
the discoveries I then had of the perfections of God, the transcendent glories
of the divine nature, and the foretaste I then had of heaven.

I now felt reconciled to a weak, sickly body, which of late I had so dreaded,
if it might be a mean of shutting my eyes to the world, and opening them on God
and eternity. I felt indifferent; yea, reluctant, to the pleasures and
amusements of life, and reconciled to the trials of it. Nor have daily
occurrences made any great impressions on my mind. But I find my views abate. O
Lord, revive them!

October 17 th. Thanks be to God! this night my desires were so enlarged, and I
had so much to say, that I knew not how to leave off, even when bodily strength
was exhausted. O what a good God have I! What a good master do I serve, in
whose service is great delight. I have devoted myself to him. O may I be
devoted to the service of the sanctuary; a consecrated vessel, though of the
meanest use! Here I am, O Lord. Set me apart for thyself. Will thou condescend
to take me into thy service. Though I minister not publicly before the Lord, in
holy things; yet fain would I be devoted to the service of the sanctuary, in
secret, solemn, and fervent supplication. Especially, may I consecrate myself,
and the Saturday night, and Sabbath day, for this service of his sanctuary;
that his gracious presence, assistance and influences may be granted to all his
churches. God seems to be inclining my heart to this public service, in a
private, secret way. And blessed be God, who is inclining my heart to forsake
every false way; and to greater endeavors to perfect holiness, in his fear. O
my God, thou know my sincerity. Accept and improve me; for I am thine. But
O, bear my expenses: Furnish and supply me, for, and in the service. I know
thou will get nothing by me; yet, O boundless grace, fulfill my humble, yet bold
request. Lord, I trust my eyes are not lofty, or my heart haughty, when I beg
to be improved in the service of thy sanctuary. I feel disposed to bring the
cases of God's people, mentioned in public, into private, secret prayers. O
that God would set me apart for himself!

But O, let me not forget the duties of the private station, in which God has
placed me. I have many relative duties incumbent on me, which I am too apt to
forget, neglect, or perform too superficially. O let me not now, under pretense
of more extraordinary services, overlook these. But let me now, while I am
offering myself to the service of the sanctuary; devoting myself to God, and
waiting on him, for the spirit of prayer and supplication, be setting myself to
study my several relations in life, and the duties of each.

November 4 th, 1761. Nineteen years ago, this day, She now reckons according
to the alteration from old style to new.
I gave myself up to God, in a public, solemn covenant, and swore allegiance to
King Jesus, as my only rightful Lord and King, and vowed submission to him. O
my God, what a barren fig tree have I been, in thy vineyard! I blush, and am
ashamed of my wretched unfaithfulness, under all thy rich cultivations. O when
shall I be transplanted under thy immediate sun beams; where there is not one
barren and unfruitful? O that the ensuing year might place me in the paradise
of my God, to go no more out forever. Methinks my warfare is near at an end. O
come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

November 5 th. I strove to spend last evening solemnly with God; but attained
to nothing more than hard conflicts. And, this day, on which I am thirty five
years old, I would fain have spent in humble confession, devout adoration, and
in self dedication; but bodily disorders have prevented. Nor could I attain to
that cheerful, hearty submission, I ought, and desired to exercise. O God, few
and evil indeed have been the years of my pilgrimage. It has afforded me some
strength this night by reflecting, that the great Captain of my salvation has
conquered sin and Satan. That there ever was, and will be, enmity between the
seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent. That Christ ever knew the
strong opposition Satan would make; and therefore conquered him for all his
elect. And yet, as Christ was made perfect, through sufferings, so must every
child taste of the cup. Satan's enmity is against Christ himself, to distress
and destroy his interest as much as possible: But he shall never prevail.
Christ will maintain his throne, though earth and hell oppose. He has
conquered, and will defeat the powers of darkness; and not one of his members
shall be hurt. O my Redeemer, what support does this afford my poor soul! And
will not he, who has preserved me these 35 years, still preserve? But O, have I
attained to but half the years of the human life! How does this damp my soul! O
cut short the tedious days! But let them be well improved. Gracious Redeemer,
when I reflect on the amazing conflicts I have had, I am ready to say, Why has
such a reed been set up, as a mark for Satan's rage? But I trust thou will
hereby ordain praise to thy victorious, all conquering power and grace. Sure I
am, did thou not keep me by thy almighty power, I had long before now fallen
a prey into the teeth of this devouring lion. O glorious Redeemer, leave me
not: For the moment thou do leave me, I fall a sacrifice to the malice and
craft of this serpent. I am amazed at the vigilance of Satan! If he cannot
terrify, he will allure. If he cannot gain his end himself, he will take unto
him seven, yea a legion, of other spirits. And if spirits prevail not, men
shall be used as instruments to carry on his designs, by frowns or by
flatteries. O, methinks, if ever I get to heaven, I shall be a miracle of power
and grace. But hitherto thou have preserved me. Through thy grace, I have stood
the siege of 35 years; sometimes enabled to sally out, under thee the great
Captain of my salvation, and put the enemy to flight. At other times they have
been suffered to approach near the walls, and made great breaches. O how often
have I been brought into deep waters, where I could find no place for my feet.
At other times, thou have led me through Jordan; and I have, as it were, taken
stones out of the bottom, while my feet have stood on dry ground.

Thus, O God, have thou led me 35 years to this day. And here I am, a living
monument of thy power and goodness. O furnish me with greater degrees of grace;
and hasten my escape from this Sodom. I have waited for thy salvation. When
shall my soul be satisfied with thy favor, which is my life? O when shall
these shadows flee away? O when shall it be all bright, immortal day, without a
setting sun forever?

November 8 th. Sabbath day. Hard struggle with Satan and a disordered body,
last night, and this day. Blessed be God, attained some attention and
engagedness in his house, this morning, after much wandering and
discouragement. But all my hope is in God. Past sins and failings are Satan's
bait (and I am persuaded he is permitted to charge me with unknown faults)
these I would lament, and fly to Jesus for pardon and cleansing; but not be
discouraged, since Jesus ever lives my glorious advocated above. I know sin and
Satan would fain separate me from Christ Jesus, my Lord; but since he has
promised sin shall not, in its guilt, blemish or blot the justification of his
people, which is complete in him; so I ought not to let it separate from his
consolations, by its discouraging influence on me.

Rouse up, O my soul, fly, cling to thy Redeemer, who delights in those who
hope in his mercy. I have trusted, and shall never be ashamed. I have committed
my everlasting all into his faithful hands. I daily renew my trust and
confidence in him. I have given up myself, and my all to him. I am at his
disposal, and count it all my happiness to be for him, and no other. One thing,
and only one thing, as first and supreme, have I desired; and that do I
diligently seek after: To glorify God, and enjoy him. I am determined for
nothing else, and none else but God. Master, I love thee, and thy service, and
will not consent to leave it. I have renewed my solemn choice, and am
endeavoring to put far from me every iniquity, as I hate every false way, and
practice every known duty. I trust I am now actually engaged to lay aside every
weight, and the sins which most easily beset me. Let the Lord do with me what
seems good to him. Let him give prosperity, or adversity, comfort, or
distress; I am determined, by his grace to follow hard after him, to endeavor
after an entire submission to all his dispensations, a cordial compliance with
every known duty, a firm and resolute resistance of every sinful desire, or
temptation. It is meet to be said to God, I have borne chastisement, I will
offend no more. O may his grace be sufficient, and his strength made perfect in
my weakness! If God afford light, peace and joy, I shall go on my way
rejoicing: But if farther trials and conflicts await me, let him lead and guide
me. I am his, and at his disposal. Let me never repine, so he do but glorify
himself in me. What though I be brought by ways I know not, and led in paths
that I have not known; yet he has promised to made darkness light, and crooked
things straight, and not forsake. Amen, and amen. O God, thy word is enough;
thy promise is a sufficient security.

November 25 th. O my everlasting immutable refuge! When will thou appear for
my relief? I am under no apprehension of an eternal separation: But why hidest
thou thy comforting, quickening face, at this time, while devils and inward
lusts vex and distract my soul? O how are my strength and heart broken with
these fiery conflicts! All my hope is in thee. O let me not be ashamed of my
confidence. It has been my long boasted triumph, that I never came before thy
throne, and found thee loath to hear; that I always found thee a God ready at
hand, in times of need; and while I was yet speaking, thou did answer. But
why do thou now seem to shut thine eyes and ears at my distress? Lord, thou
know I hate these lusts and corruptions. I long for nothing so much as
entire conformity to thee; a cordial and absolute subjection to thy sovereign
will: And this makes the conflict with all that oppose. Lord, here I am. Fulfill
the whole good pleasure of thy grace in me, and the work of faith with power.
Complete what thou have begun, and art about, however distressing. I am thine;
make me what thou will have me to be. Spare not the rod, to spoil thy child.
Thou best know what is best for me. Father, I submit. Let me not reluct. It
is right thou should take thine own way. I glory in thine adorable
sovereignty. I would not, for a thousand worlds, be left to my own choice. I
had ruined myself eternally, long before now, if left to myself. I need hard
things. I have an untoward, proud, stubborn heart, that needs bit and bridle,
curb and spur, and the lash too. O shameful, hateful character of a redeemed
soul! Lord, never leave me, till thou have reduced me to a better temper; and
then preserve me in it, or I shall never keep it. I trust I have a principle of
real grace; but I cannot keep it; I cannot exercise it of myself. All my
sufficiency is of thee. O omnipotent Redeemer, maintain thy conquest. Thou have
conquered me, sin and Satan; though they would fain rend me from thy almighty
arms. But in thee I trust.

Feb. 1762. Blessed be God that my salvation is not in myself, nor from myself:
But in Christ Jesus is full redemption. Glory to God! all I want is in the Son
of his love: And I have sufficient warrant to come freely, and take boldly, all
I want for myself, and give to God all I owe to him, out of this same fountain.
Here I have wisdom, righteousness and sanctification; and here I have
redemption; the full price to plead with God. True, I have sinned; but Christ
has died. Here is my advocate. Look on my shield, the face of thine anointed,
and turn not away from me. O my soul, sink not into thyself. Grovel not thus in
thy own corruptions; but stretch thy thoughts to infinite fullness. Here is
enough; and it is offered to thee. Take it freely. God the Father, God the Son,
and God the Holy Spirit, bids thee come and welcome. Here I have enough;
durable riches and righteousness: Enough for time and eternity. Spend freely,
my soul, thou have goods laid up for endless years. Feast forever, the stores
will never be exhausted. Fare sumptuously every day. Put freely on thy wedding
garments. Freely eat, and freely drink. There are dainties enough in my
Father's house. O my soul, pinch not, pine not, when there is bread enough, and
to spare, and wines on the lees, well refined. Here is infinite fullness, freely
offered. God has prepared it for thee; and thou shall soon be at the fountain
head in glory. Let faith now fetch in large supplies, till thou do arrive
where faith shall be turned into fruition.

June 6 th. Attended public worship three times this day, and sat down at
Christ's table: But very much indisposed in body and mind. I am persuaded these
disorders are the attendants of this dark state of things: But shall sly, as a
fog before the sun, when God arises to favor Zion. I live in the faith of this.

O God, will thou serve thyself by me! What am I, or what can I do? O do thou
serve thyself by me; and then I do answer the great end of my being. O how
sweet is it now to me to think of God's serving himself by me! To this I now
feel disposed to give up all my comforts; all my wishes or desires; and all
seems centered here. O if this wise good God will but serve himself by me, it
is the whole of my being: It is the highest dignity, the best employ, the
dearest lot in life. Being interested in thy special favor, through Christ,
what more can I desire, but that thou should serve thyself by me. Here I am,
O Lord, and have devoted all I am to thee and thy service. O glorious
privilege! O grant me this request, in which I see such unspeakable delight;
and in which every desire and wish seems answered, and every good implied; as
to please and glorify thee is perfect felicity to me.

Sept. 4 th. This night was enabled to cry to God, as the God of Zion, for
help, under his awful withdrawings; sensible that none but he could help. I
hope he did excite desires, give strength, and show me my unworthiness, who was
but dust and ashes, a worm of the earth, to speak unto the Majesty of heaven.
Yet, under some sense of his supporting influence, I was emboldened to wrestle.
I trust he gave me some view of the dependence of all creatures and things on
him, for life, being and motion; that as all things and creatures were created
by him, so they were continually dependent upon him. That the highest angel in
heaven; yea, all the thousands, and ten thousand of thousands, the innumerable
millions that surrround the throne of God, both saints and angels, are
dependent on him: With all the stars of heaven, and foundations of the earth:
All the beasts of the field, from behemoth, to the meanest reptile that crawls:
All the fishes of the sea, from leviathan, to the least fish that inhabits the
watery world: All the fowls of heaven, to the least fly that traces the air:
Not only the animate, but the inanimate also, from the tallest cedar, and
sturdy oak, to the meanest reed or rush, or spire of grass that grows; from the
largest mountain, to the smallest atom; are supported by his influence and
energy. Joined to these, I saw the whole race of mortals, that ever were, or
ever should be, supported, upheld and governed by this God, to whom I was now
applying for his gracious aids and spiritual influences on the hearts of his
people. How did my finite thoughts stretch to take in this numberless number of
creation; and then the unbounded Infinity, which sustained, supported, supplied
and governed them, out of his own infinite selfsufficiency! And O, from my (yet
too low) conception of this Being, and all these things, did I plead, that his
dear saints might not be left as a barren heath, destitute of his life giving
influence. O, in what extreme poverty and want, did I behold Zion, at this day;
and cried out for the Lord God of Elijah, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus,
and the residue of the Spirit; that he would appear and own his own
institutions, and manifest the power of his resurrection, on the ensuing day of
the Son of Man. I cried after a departing God.

Alas, what an awful time is this! Is not God gone up from among us? Is not
that glory that once filled his temple, scarce discernible, in its remotest
part? Good God, shall not thy people cry after thee, O help, O help, Lord God
of our salvation! And while thou art thus sustaining, influencing and
enlightening the natural world, as its creator and preserver, O let not the
great Head of his church suspend spiritual influences. Should thou withdraw
thy sustaining influence, creation sinks into its primitive nothing. And O
should thou withdraw thy vital influence from thy church, and children, it
withers as a sapless branch. O turn us to thee, and cause thy face to shine
upon us, and we shall be saved.

Sept. 5 th. Blessed be God, I trust I had gracious access this morning, for
his presence in his house. And I think I may call it a good day; my soul was
engaged. Entertained from Luke xvii. 5. "Lord increase our faith." Sweet,
instructing and strengthening truths. A word of reproof and comfort to me
concerning Zion, that Zion's God reigns. O blessed be God for this Sabbath! And
I am willing it should be my last. I endeavored to hear, (...) and improve, as
my last. I trust God was in this place and did not leave himself without
witness, that he is the exciter and inditer, the hearer and answerer of prayer.
I viewed myself as passing off the stage of time, into boundless eternity. The
things of time and sense shrank into nothing; and I was serious, and solemnly*
willing to put from this mortal shore.

O that thou would water the seed this day sown O do thou give the increase.
O my God, I cannot let thee go, unless thou will arise and bless Zion. I cannot
see this evil on Zion, and hold my peace. I cannot see this general and awful
declension: I cannot see this abounding profaneness, and immorality; this
amazing blindness, stupidity and security, and be unconcerned. I cannot hear
the complaints of thy dear children, and feel the same cause in myself, and be
silent. O thou God of Zion, arise. O thou Almighty Arm, awake. Do thou not
see; and do thou not regard? O thou who art jealous for thy name and worship,
do thou not behold thy assemblies? How heavy, dull, dark and wandering thy
own children are! How stupid, secure, careless, and vain, sinners are? O! Is
not thy worship, which ought to be lively, spiritual and holy, degenerated, in
most of thy churches, to mere bodily exercises? I fear there is not one soul,
at this day, in all thy churches, that worships thee, as thou wast worshipped
in primitive times. O God, how is the gold become dim! O, what deadness, what
blindness, has overspread us!

Once I was greatly engaged for Zion, on account of outward circumstances; but
I seem scarcely to think of that now, under her most melancholy spiritual
dangers. I fear God is about to say, Let her that is filthy, be filthy still. O
for that rest that remains to thy people. O show me thy glory. If I may not see
more of thee here, take me to heaven. My God, my God, thou know I love thee
above all things else. Let me not despise the bounties of thy providence. But
take me near to thyself. Do thou not know my desire is after thee? O does not
every wish center in thee? Do thou not fill all my thoughts? Is not the whole
bent of my thoughts, from my first waking, to my last, after thee? Do I not
pursue thee all the day? O let nothing turn me aside, till I find thee. O let
neither riches, pleasures nor honors, nor all the best enjoyments of earth,
stay my pursuit, or amuse my soul for a moment.

September 7 th. Thanks be to God, though I am perfect weakness, I have
Omnipotence to rest on. Though I am ignorant as a beast, and have no knowledge,
I have infinite wisdom to apply to. And this God has said, "To those who have
no might, he increases strength." And he has said, "I will instruct and teach
thee in the way thou shall go. I will guide thee by mine eye. Commit thy way
unto the Lord, and he shall direct thy path." Amen, and amen! Fulfill thy word
unto thy handmaid; the word on which thou have caused me to rest.

Blessed be God for heart's case, by prayer; and heart strength, by emptying
itself into infinite fullness. O happy moment, when this finite vapor shall
ascend to infinite fullness, and be fed and nourished by substantial realities!
And this bubble swim in the infinite ocean: This drop of the bucket be most
sensibly encircled in the everlasting fountain; and this single particle of the
dust of the balance, be a pillar in the temple of my God! O when, my God, shall
darkness and distance vanish? O when shall my heaven commence? when my God
shall be all and in all; the perfection of being and excellency; my
everlasting, consummate bliss? I received my being from thee, and shall never
be happy but in thee. I enjoy myself only in reaching and stretching into thy
fullness.

O glory to thy name, for this most wise, most just, most gracious way of
salvation by Jesus Christ; and sanctification by the blessed Spirit: This union
with God; and this transformation into thy image. O what shall hinder my
everlasting communion with thee, since I am brought nigh by the blood of thy
Son, and in some measure conformed to thee, by thy blessed Spirit? I have
committed my everlasting all to Jesus Christ: Have come in on the terms of the
gospel: Flew for refuge to the hope set before me. And I esteem all thy
precepts, concerning all things, to be right; and hate every false way: And
neither wish nor seek any good, in earth or heaven, but the fullest enjoyment
of God; and all that is implied in this.

September 8 th. Blessed be God for that gracious access he allows me; though,
for the most part, when I begin prayer, I know not what to say, or ask, as
though I had not words or desires. But, glory to the blessed Spirit, who
ordinarily helps my infirmity, and engages my heart. This night it came to my
turn to pray with his dear handmaids. But O I knew not what to say; and a pain
in my head seemed to unfit me. But I dare not refuse; though I expected great
straitness. I begged assistance; yet I feared the desire might rise from pride:
And, therefore, I hope, submitted to God. But O how gracious was God to me:
What kind access! What desires did he put in my heart, and arguments in my
mouth! I seemed to find a childlike freedom and confidence. My requests were
chiefly for Zion; the glory of God; the interest of Christ; the salvation of
souls; and the strength and refreshment of saints. Surely the blessed God put
strength in me, that I might plead with him. O methinks God was in this place;
and I trust others could say so too. Glory to God. Some account of this society
of women: and of her praying with them, is given, page 7.


September 26 th. Thanks be to God for the assistances of this day. Though
Satan was busy, yet my God has helped. O for the prosperity of Zion; for the
salvation of poor sinners; though while I pray, they curse and swear! O how
affecting is it to my soul! While I am in secret, earnestly wrestling with God,
for their salvation, my ears are filled with the profaneness of the street. O
how does iniquity run down our streets, like an overflowing flood! And even
while I am saying, O Lord, have mercy on sinners, and glorify thyself in their
salvation, my ears are filled, my heart is grieved, my soul is vexed, and my
flesh trembles, with their horrid imprecations. And while my soul is in an
agony for their salvation, I hear them imprecating their own destruction. And
while my soul is bowing down, with solemn and awful reverence, before the
Majesty of heaven, solemnized with his dread; how, O how shocking is it, to
hear a company of rebels taking his sacred, venerable, precious name, profanely
on their unhallowed lips! Perhaps I seldom retire for prayer, at least in the
evening, but I hear the sacred name of Jehovah profaned an hundred times, while
I am engaged. Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, and dwell in the tents of
Kedar, and my place of retirement unavoidably so near a profane, unrestrained
street of people. O the patience of a God! And O the enmity of the carnel mind!
Surely God's throne will be forever just, if after so long forbearance, he turn
the wicked into an eternal hell. Just, forever just shall be thy executed
vengeance on stupid, secure sinners; rational, immortal, yet God provoking, God
despising, heaven daring, damnation requesting transgressors. I tremble; yet
adore the justice of their sentence!

November 9 th. God was better to me, yesterday, than my fears. My chief
petitions at the throne of grace, for myself, are for submission to his will;
for thankfulness; and a fixed trust in him. I humbly ask every needful supply
from him; but that he would give me resignation to his will; and let the Lord
do with me, as seems him good. I can look on the poorest, meanest
circumstances in life, with a humble subjection to God, and acquiescence in his
will, infinitely preferable to all the affluence, pomp and grandeur of this
world, with a temper in contrariety to God, and his sovereign will.

O blessed Jesus, when the poor diseased people followed thee, crying after
thee, when thou wast on earth in the flesh, even when thy disciples forbad
them, did thou call for them, and heal them. How many months have I been
crying after thee, day and night, that thou would heal this unresigned will?
And O will thou not hear and heal me? I trust thou will, since thou do enable
me to follow thee with persevering importunity, notwithstanding thy seeming
denials and delays, and the cruel discouragements cast in my way by Satan and
unbelief. I hope I have felt my soul cling more sensibly to God, as my covenant
God, on some threatening aspects. O well, if this may be the dear effect, all
shall be well, infinitely well, that ends in a closer union with God.

O my God, thou have heard me; thou have not cast me away in anger. Thou have
heard, thou have owned me. Thou have not despised my affliction. Thou will
assuredly do well by me. Thou will serve thyself of me, and glorify thyself in
me. Mercy and truth shall yet spring up. God will yet appear to my joy and
triumph. God will arise. I shall yet see his salvation. Surely God will fulfill
his word and grace to me. Surely he does not hide himself, as to his
comfortable presence, and gracious approbation, and in his providence, from me;
and yet keep me seeking him, with perhaps the greatest diligence and
engagedness of any time in my life, for naught and in vain. Surely, did not the
Spirit of God secretly hold me wrestling, I could never thus follow him, when
sensible comfort was so suspended* and under so many and great discouragements.
On God will I wait. In God will I trust. He is my rock.

Feb. 7 th. 1763. O what torment is this insensibility! Wherefore is it? Is
there any thing that I hold dearer than this God, that causes him to hide
himself from me? Is there a wretched, base lust in my soul, preferred before
this glorious, lovely, best of beings? O tear it out! Lord, if I perish
forever; yet let me justify, adore and love thee, above every thing else. But
perish, perish did I say! What! banishment from God! That I cannot bear. I am
undone, I am ruined, if separated from God. I cannot, I cannot! What! torn from
my center; rent from my life! O hell of hells, beyond all conception! Lord,
Lord! what should I do! What! immortal, and separate from God! What! and after
a display of such love, and such satisfying enjoyment of a Being, who is his
own infinite happiness! O what! without God! The thought has too many hells in
it, for me to bear. I cannot, my God, I cannot bear it. Separate me not from
thee. O, rather let me sink into my primitive nothing, than have a being,
without such a God as thou art, for my portion and everlasting felicity.

But I cannot be content to be assured of enjoying thee hereafter, and yet live
without thee here. No: I am comfortless, helpless and dejected, yea wretched
and miserable, in the enjoyment of every thing else, under a sense of absence
from thee, even in this life: And am ready to say, Leave me only my being and
my God, and I am content. Thou know I have triumphed in thee, in the sense
of absence from every thing else.

And O now, if there be any secret rival in my heart, tear it out. If I love
any thing more than thee, I am unworthy of thee, whether parents, sisters,
friends, houses, land, riches, honors or pleasures; yea, food or raiment, or
life. Search out the Agag, and let it be hewed to pieces, before the Lord. O
let thy Spirit enter the most secret recesses of my soul, and divide between
the joints and marrow. O help me, help me! For without thee I can do nothing.
Help me to accomplish a diligent search, and to find out the secret abomination
of my heart. O help me to dig into the wall, and to find out the hidden
abominations, which thy soul hates; and which cause thee to hide thy face. Let
there be nothing in my soul, loved or hid, that is offensive to thee, O thou
best of Beings, who only art worthy to be loved and served and enjoyed. O
purely purge away my dross and my tin, and reveal thyself, and thy love, so as
to enkindle mine.

And O cause me to remember this solemn season. If thou should call for
every thing I enjoy in life, let me still remember, it is not my being, nor my
God; and therefore cannot make me miserable. O let me remember how mean, how
nothing, all things, besides these, now appear. O secure but thyself to me,
thou allsufficient good, and I must be happy. O what motes, what atoms, what
dust and vanity, are all things else! They are no portion for my immortal
spirit. I cannot live upon them. One thing, and only one, is absolutely needful
for me. And that is, God for my portion. Nothing less can suffice my immortal,
capacious spirit. O for a fuller assurance! O for a nearer access! O for a
closer union! More intimate communion: Some sure earnest, or speedy full
possession! O why this darkness, this distance, this unsufferable absence and
ignorance! O thou, who only know thine own infinite worth and excellency,
and my absolute poverty and necessity, reveal thyself to me, in and through
Jesus Christ. O hold me no longer at this insupportable distance, in this
fordid, stupid insensibility!

May 15 th. Blessed be God, there is help laid on one who is mighty to save. I
cannot be so low, but Christ is able to raise me. I cannot be so weak, but he
is able to strengthen; nor so polluted, but he is able to cleanse; nor so
needy, but that he is able to supply all my needs. O most glorious, almighty
Redeemer, as ever thou did undertake the cure of any soul, undertake for me.
I have this day heard, that thou art made of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, to thy people: And thus, O thus, I need thee.
And O, forever blessed be thy name for the hopes I have in thee. O make me love
and prize thee more. O let me enjoy thee, and my soul says, It is enough! Look
into my heart, and see the secret groanings of my soul after God; and hear the
passionate sighs and cries, after conformity to, and communion with, the great
first cause and last end of all things; the great source and fountain head of
all perfection; the uncreated, surpassing excellency; essential rectitude; only
complete, infinitely complete original of all possible existence and felicity.
O does not my soul reach, and stretch, and long after perfect conformity to
thee, thou great first and best of beings; thou sweet and only center of my
immortal, rational, and (I hope) gracious nature; thou only and utmost wish of
my soul. O attemper me to thyself; fix me on thyself; satisfy me in thyself;
supply me from thyself: And may all I am good laid up in thee.

Sept. --. O, in what a depraved state is fallen man! And what a wretched heart
have I! Good God, what a leprous soul is this! How polluted, how defiled! What
a running sore, that pollutes all I touch! I stain and spoil every thing, I
have any concern with. Sin, this worst of leprosy, defiles and ruins holy
ordinances and duties. It deprives God's word and ordinances of their efficacy.
Yea, it turns precious truths, and wholesome food, into poison, through some
secret prejudice, or indulged iniquity, some root of bitterness. It takes
offense at the matter, or manner, or instrument, or season; or occasions
carelessness and inattention: It weakens faith: It disturbs or destroys love:
It corrupts zeal: It abates fervor: It poisons patience and meekness: It stabs
humility: It murders holy resolutions: Many, very many of them, die under its
hands. It strangles brotherly love, and makes an insurrection in the moral
world. It commits outrage, in God's rightful dominions. And as it weakens every
grace, so it pollutes every duty, wherein some or every grace is to be
exercised. O how does it pollute prayer; that sacred thing, which we never
touch, but we defile, and leave the print of our loathsome corruption and
pollution upon it! It turns mercies into a curse; and prevents the right use
and end of afflictions. Thus does sin spoil all it comes near to. And thus do
we, as sinners, pollute all we have any thing to do with, whether ordinances or
providence.

And thus, O my soul, art thou polluting holy things, from day to day. Lord, I
blush, I am ashamed: What shall I do? I dare not omit duty; yet may a sacred
blushing cover me, whenever I attempt a duty; knowing that I shall now leave
the print of my pollution on this holy thing. And O, hence let Christ be more
than ever precious to my soul.

Surely I need just such a Savior as the Lord Jesus Christ; and with none less
could I ever be saved. Not all the wisdom, power and grace of all the angels
above, or saints below, if joined in one, could save me. Nothing less than
infinite wisdom, power and grace could save me. And sure I am, I shall yet
perish, if sovereign, rich and free grace, through a Redeemer, do not prevent.
So great, so strong is the power of my pollution, notwithstanding the
implantation of God's grace in my heart, I should make shipwreck of faith, and
a good conscience, if left to myself. O methinks it is a wonder, a miracle of
grace, that from such a heart as mine I have not run into all excess of
wretchedness. O it is owing to infinite power, and preventing grace, that I
have not acted as bad as ever one did.

December 18 th. At night. Thanks be to God, for some access this evening. I
hope I did hunger and thirst after righteousness; and was enabled to apply to
the great Redeemer for grace sufficient for me; for wisdom and prudence; for
meekness and patience; for a hearty, cheerful acquiescence in the will of God;
for hearty love and good will; for strength against every temptation; and to
the purposes before mentioned. That God and the Redeemer might be abundantly
glorified in and by me, by the indwelling and abundant communications of the
Holy Spirit. I hope I was enabled to apply to the Fountain, through Jesus, for
a full supply for life; and, in particular, for the week ensuing, sensible of
my own absolute poverty and necessity.

O my great Redeemer, how many and great are my wants! Lord, I am ruined, if
thou do not appear to supply them. There are so many great and constant
demands on me for every grace, arising from present circumstances, temptations,
corruptions, duties, difficulties and relations, that I seem to have run all
out, and, like a broken merchant, to have been making sham, sorry, mean and
beggarly shifts, to keep up my credit. But I can shift no longer. A new supply
I must have, or my credit is gone. And thine honor is concerned: I fall not
alone. Lord, I have boasted a fountain at hand; a sufficient supply to answer
all demands. I have said, My God shall supply all my needs. But my demands are
very many; and the tempter sees my weakness and poverty, and grows insolent,
and threatens ruin. Lord, art thou not surety for thy handmaid? I trust thou
art; and I shall not be cast into the prison of hell.

But I have demands upon me, as thy servant, Lord; and my expenses are very
great. Thou would have me live up to my station and dignity; and this is
vastly expensive to grace, in this evil world. Thou must maintain thy servants
out of thy own inexhaustible treasury. Lord, I have nothing to live upon of my
own; and, turn which way I will, there is a demand upon me for wisdom, for
patience, for meekness, for faith, for love, for humility, or for some grace or
other. O my glorious Head, I pray thee communicate a supply. What shall I do if
thou do not? Duties and temptations both have such demands, as nothing of my
own will answer. O my blessed Master, bountifully supply my wants, and I will
be for thee, and no other, all the days of my life. And, speedily, Lord; for
thou know the demands of every duty and temptation are positive and
pressing, and must be answered from thee.

Feb. 5 th. 1764. Broken off last night from prayer, by a very sick turn: Had
an ill night. A confused stupid morning. Could do nothing in any exercise of
religion; and the weather forbade my going out. But could bear it no longer,
thus to waste holy time. The weather permitting, I went out this afternoon, and
sat before the Lord, as his people sit. But, alas! I was as a beast before him.
I was ready to say, Why are such pearls cast before such a swinish temper as
mine? "Wherefore is there a price put into the hand of a fool, seeing he has no
heart for it?"

O, to believe I have powers and faculties, capable of the highest and most
noble contemplations and enjoyments; and to believe there is a most glorious
Being, infinitely more than adequate to the utmost desires and wishes of my
powers and faculties; a Being, to whom I am under every possible bond and
obligation, to contemplate, love, serve and adore him; and a Being, in the love
and service of whom, is my highest and only interest and felicity: And yet, to
be thus insensible and inactive, is most extreme pain! O, God, what is hell,
but a privation of light and communication from thee the fountain of all being
and blessedness! O, to be called upon to behold the Lamb of God, who takes away
the sin of the world, and believe my whole salvation to be there; and to have
no sensible conceptions, nor apprehensions thereof, surely is more than brutal.
"The ox knows his owner, and the ass his master's crib."

But O, glory to God! I have found him accessible this night, in secret prayer.
I found him able to enlarge the most narrow, contracted soul. Nothing but
almighty power could effect so great, so mighty a work. Now let my light break
out of obscurity, and my darkness be like the noon day. O what are all the
enjoyments of this empty world, to one moment's communion with this first and
best of beings; the source, fountain and center of all perfection; the original
and only felicity of a rational mind; the only durable and lasting good of an
immortal soul; the life of my soul, and length of my days; the author of my
being, and strength of my heart; the only suitable portion of my soul forever!
I shall outlive all these sublunary, earthly delights: And what but this best
of beings shall then be a suitable, permanent happiness for my immortal spirit?

March 27 th. Blessed be God for some rational conception, and spiritual
conviction, that religion is a most reasonable service; conformity to God, the
sum and substance of all religion; the beauty, harmony and importance of being
intentionally and designedly devoted to God, as the chief and proper good, and
his glory, as the best and last end; the comfort and happiness of enjoying the
same mind that was in Christ, whose meat and drink was to do the will of God;
the unspeakable pleasure and privilege of always doing the things that please
God: Ardent desires after this, as the only suitable, substantial and necessary
good.

Most great and glorious God, wean me from every thing beside and below thy
ever blessed self. Thou only Fountain of complete happiness, direct all my
ways; guide all my desires; sanctify, regulate and enliven all my powers; and
may they all act for God. Cure me more and more of every selfish, sinister,
carnal, and worldly disposition. O purify and purge all my intentional aims and
designs, and use me for thyself. I am thy own: Made by and for thee; redeemed,
upheld, and preserved, for and to the same end, and voluntarily devoted. Fain
would I be fixed in my post. I not only esteem my service thy due, and thy
salvation my happiness; but I esteem thy service my happiness, my privilege, my
pleasure and greatest honor.

O my God, I beseech thee, by all thy gracious character; by all thy endearing
compassion; by all thy unbounded goodness; and by all thy infinite
condescension to man; by all thy grace to me; by all the love of redemption; by
all thy covenant faithfulness, shown to thy unworthy worm; that thou will
conform me more and more to thyself; that I may come as near to my glorious
Redeemer, and great pattern, as is consistent with this slate of imperfection.
O when shall every moment be filled with duty; and every duty with purity,
spirituality, love, zeal and devotion! Why, seeing I am the daughter of a king,
should I be lean from day to day? Why should I appear as one of dishonorable
birth and parentage? True, my original was mean and base. My nature sin. My
father an Amorite, and my mother an Hittite, an accursed flock! But by thy
adoption, I am become honorable in thy sight; and thou have said of me, "The
king's daughter is all glorious within; her clothing is of wrought gold." O
make me then to shine in all thy beauty, my Lord and my God!

April 29 th. Glory to God in the highest, that there is peace on earth, and
good will to man! All glory to the Redeemer, that he is taking to himself his
great power, and triumphing gloriously, in some parts of our land. O our
Immanuel, come, and make thine abode with us. Ten thousand praises to Jesus,
the King of the Jews, that any one of them is bowed to thy scepter. O glorious
Conqueror, go on to conquer, till with Israel, the fullness of the Gentiles are
brought in. O my dear omnipotent Redeemer, how shall thy infinite strength be
magnified, if Jewish prejudices, obstinacy* blindness and infidelity be broken
down, before thee* O, at this my hope takes wing, and mounts on high, borne
aloft by a thousand precious promises of the latter day glory, and the great
Conqueror's triumph! Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, and fulfill the glorious
things that are spoken concerning the city of our God. O come, and show thy
almighty power in subduing Jewish prejudices against thee, which have been
contracting and strengthening, for more than seventeen hundred years. O now
make bare thine arm, and reveal thy power, thou already come Messiah: And let
them no longer look for another.

Oct. 21 st. O my soul, aro^^^, shake off thy sloth. He quickened thee, who was
dead in trespasses and sins. Was this thy awful, wretched (...)! And am I now
made alive? O let me live to him and him alone, who gave me life. I see a life
of religion; a life of entire devotedness and conformity to God, that best of
beings, the first cause and last end, the most rational thing in nature. I see
sin, which is a transgression of, or want of conformity to, the law of God,
that transcript of the divine nature, and everlasting rule of righteousness,
the most irrational, absurd thing in the world.

O for a deep abasure, suitable to the dignity and grandeur of that majesty, I
attempt to bow before! O for a divine rectitude, trust and confidence, purity,
integrity, uprightness, and enagedness of spirit, proportionable to the
perfections of him, whom I worship! O for ardent, vehement love, like his, whom
I admire and adore, which overflows all its banks! When, O when, shall I be a
true worshipper! true to the interest, character and dignity of my Lord; true
to my own interest, character and estate; so suitably, spiritually and truly
impressed with both, that I may set God in his place, and lie in mine, before
him. O how far short have I ever come of being a completely true worshipper!
Lord, it is only thou who can make me so. Help, O Lord, help! To thee I fly.

April 26 th, 1766. I am more and more confrmed in this most certain truth,
That an unholy creature, is necessarily an unhappy creature. God be merciful to
me a sinner. A sinner found among apostates. A rebel by nature. "All my
original is shame, and all my nature sin." Continually going counter to God's
holy law and nature. O my great, my absolute need of the great, the almighty
Redeemer, to sanctify me by his Spirit and grace, as well as justify me, by his
atonement and merits. Here is all my hope, my refuge; this sure foundation,
laid in Zion.

Glory to God for that most sweet and gracious sea^^^, I last night enjoyed. I
bowed before the Lord, with fear and trembling. I felt myself to be a polluted,
guilty sinner. The terror of suspected thunder took hold of me; while, I trust,
a childlike desire and longing for his dear, delightful favor, engaged me. O
how did I long for his manifested love to my soul! I cried, My Father, my
Father, the maker of my frame, and the Father of my spirit, do not, O do not
forsake me! O banish me not from thy favor!

" I cannot live without thy light,
Cast out and banished from thy sight."
O how could I bear to be separated, and under the frowns of God! Whose heart
could endure, or hands be strong, in that day? Sure mine could not.

And O how intensely, ardently and vehemently, did I long and wrestle for
conformity to this amiable and best of beings! And how sensible of my great
want of holiness! God be merciful to me a sinner, was my prayer; and my soul
was in the prayer. God be merciful to me a sinner, contained, at once, my
misery, and my help. That I was a sinner* I felt, to my inmost soul. And that
was my unspeakable misery; and therefore my absolute need of mercy, even the
mercy of God, which is infinite pardoning mercy, and sanctifying mercy. And,
indeed, the sense of my misery, as a polluted, unholy sinner, got the
ascendant; and so my desires after holiness engaged my whole soul, and
swallowed up my fears of thunder, or dread of other evils. Sure the Spirit of
God did excite these desires in my soul. And I laid me down, and slept; for the
Lord sustained me, and held me sleeping, while it thundered, and lightened, and
rained; and I heard it not. O how gracious is God to me!

October --. Woe is me, that I am a sinner, the chief of sinners! O the amazing
power of iniquity in this wretched heart, that is too mighty for every thing,
but omnipotency! It is hell in kind; and will be hell in degree, if almighty,
sovereign grace do not prevent. Lord God Almighty, is any thing too hard for
thee? This sin in my nature is too hard for every power, but thine. All the
angels in heaven, and men on earth, united with me, cannot (...) it. It is like
Leviathan, without fear. It is the same that makes devils: And it is of thy
mercy, that it has not completed me a raging, roaring devil. Had thou
assigned my rank among their order. I need no more than these lusts, this
unsanctified, polluted, depraved nature, unrestrained, to complete the
character. And if ever I escape their punishment, it will be solely of the pure
mercy of God, through a Redeemer; and not from any natural worth in me: Yea,
and sovereign mercy, of him who has mercy on whom he will have mercy. O my God,
appear for me!

May 21 st, 1769. It is long since I wrote any thing. Disorders of body,
dejection of spirits, aversion from my pen, and temptation, from within and
without, are my exercises. But why, my soul, sunk down so low? It is upon the
immutability of God's covenant I have rested. And here alone I must rest. And
here, through grace, I will rest, when Satan and unbelief bid me die. It is
unchangeable; it is everlasting. This has been my strength, and my confidence.
And here again I rest. What this has and does give me, I shall surely have; and
more I have no warrant to expect. It is well ordered in all things, and sure.
It contains all my salvation: Let it be all my desire, and all my delight.
Here, as on an eternal basis, my soul has rested. It has life, and death, and
eternity in it. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Fit me and take me.

June 25 th. Soon after I wrote last, my bodily disorders increased, so as to
lay me by: But a sweet calm, resting on covenant fullness and faithfulness,
abode with me, so as to render it rather a dear refuge and release, a recovery
of spiritual strength, than a smarting rod. The word preached by Mr. Heart, and
Mr. Austin, has also concurred to strengthen faith.

Bodily disorders abated; but for a few days past have returned, with inward
exercises. But, blessed be God, enabled this afternoon to visit his sanctuary,
and hear of his great salvation. O my base, my fordid, stupid insensibility of
this great salvation! Yet, surely, surely I have an interest therein. It has
been all my desire, all my delight, and all my joy. It has been, it is, and
shall be all my pursuit. My God, my all, I am fixed, I am determined in the
choice of this salvation; and thou have sealed it to my soul; have given me the
strongest and fullest assurance of it. My whole heart and soul have been
wrapped up in it. All my powers have embraced it, and joyfully submitted to it,
and acquiesced in it, as most worthy of God; safe and happifying to man. And
God, the unchangeable, everlasting God, has graciously condescended to assure
me repeatedly, beyond the power of a doubt or fear, that he would perform in
and upon me all that it contains.

And now, O now, and henceforward, while I live, let me glorify this God, by a
steady, confident reliance on his goodness and grace. Is the Lord a man, that
he should lie; or the son of man, that he should repent? Has he not said? And
will he not perform it? Why has he condescended to give thee such repeated,
strong assurance; but that thou should glorify him, by a steady reliance on
him? Grant me this grace, also, O my God. It is a covenant blessing. It is a
part of that great salvation; a deliverance from the power of unbelief. Faith
is thy gift.

N. B. THE Extracts from Miss Anthony's Diary, contained in the preceding long
section, are but a small part of her writings, the whole of which take up above
a thousand pages.

The editor has endeavored to select what is instructive and edifying. Much
more might have been transcribed, which, perhaps, would be as entertaining and
beneficial to serious christians, as that which is here copied, and presented
to them. But this could not be done, without rendering the publication
voluminous.

SECTION IV.
Extracts from some of the Letters, which she wrote to her Friends.
Extract of a letter, which she wrote, when in the country for her health, to
her intimate female friend, in Newport.
Stonington, August 26 th, 1769. MY DEAR, DEAR FRIEND,
I REJOICE that you and others have again seen the goings and glory of God, in
his house; the sweetest and most desirable sight on earth. If I know my heart,
there is nothing, this side heaven, I should esteem equal to it. O my friend,
to behold the divine glory, feel its influence on our souls, see its effects on
ourselves and others, transforming into the divine image, gives a pleasure that
infinitely outweighs all that earth can boast, or finite beings enjoy, beside.
When shall the great Jehovah show himself to be the dear Immanuel, by the most
powerful communication of his Spirit and grace, with his word and ordinances!
This should put joy into our poor hearts, more than all the enjoyments of
(...). This should soon cause us to take down our harps from the drooping
willows, and tune them to the highest praise. This, I am persuaded, would make
this inhospitable wilderness, this wild desert, blossom, and appear as the
garden of Eden. Even this presence of our God would make a paradise: And to
live, which now appears only a living death, would be Christ. Yea, methinks the
prospect of this (...) reconcile me to life, and make all its burdens easy and
sweet. What could be too grievous to bear, or too dear to part with, to see our
God thus glorified, the dear Redeemer's kingdom come with power, perishing
sinners plucked as brands out of the burning, and the ransomed of the Lord
returning to Zion with songs and everlasting joy.

Well, blessed be God, every promise and purpose, concerning Zion, and our Zion
in particular, shall have its full accomplishment: For we have to do with a
God, who is infinitely wise in purposing, wonderful in counsel, and excellent
in working. And has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? O for faith and
prayer! to believe what he has promised; and to give him no rest, till Zion
become a praise in all the earth.

May this be abundantly experienced on the solemn day approaching, the next
Thursday, the last day of this month: A day set apart by the general
Association of Ministers in this colony, under a sense of the great declension
of religion; that God would return, and visit the land with divine influences;
that religion, in its power and purity, may be revived. Had it not been for
this appointment, I believe I should have returned before now. But this has
seemed to set my bounds, ever since I came here (unless Providence should order
otherways for me) having a desire to be present and unite on this solemn, most
important occasion. Join us, my dear Newport friends, in this all interesting
affair; and, on this day, which will be your stated half day, as early as you
can, in the afternoon; that you may meet, perhaps hundreds, of God's dear
ministers and children, at the same throne of grace, for one and the same
blessing. O may we then feel the unity of the Spirit; bear each others burdens,
and be all united for the whole. Being cemented by the divine Spirit, may we
surround the throne of grace; be gathered at the footstool of Jehovah; and
present before the mercy seat, with our divine Redeemer and Intercessor at our
head, and the arm of faith fast about him, refusing to let him go; let us lift
up holy hands, without wrath or doubting; feel, and tell our God, we are all as
(...) men before him, if he help us not; tell him our (...) our nation, our
world is burnt up with excessive drought, for want of the dews of heaven,
divine influences. Let us put in our plea, in the name of our worthy Advocate,
and see if God will not glorify his Son, in granting our request for his sake.

Surely it is time for us to be awaked and alarmed. Where are we sinking? What
will be the consequence of this dreadful stupefaction? The symptoms of death
are upon us, or we never could live at so low a rate. Were it my case alone, or
only of a few individuals, the glory of God, and the kingdom and interest of
the ever worthy Lamb of God, and the wonderful work of redeeming love, might
yet flourish and be magnified: But when it is as an overflowing deluge, a wide
breaking in of many waters, who that has any exercise of true love to God, can
be careless and easy in such a time of declension?

If I prefer not the prosperity of Jerusalem to my chief joy, I know nothing.
Well, let us pray for the peace and prosperity thereof, and be encouraged,
notwithstanding present appearances: For the Lord has chosen Zion; he has
desired it for his habitation. This is his rest. Here will he dwell. He will
abundantly bless her provision, and satisfy her poor with bread. Faith says, It
is enough: The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. I will pray and wait in hope;
and blessed be she that believed; for there shall be a performance of those
things which were told her from the Lord (in his word.) And surely we may
stretch our desires abroad, even to the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills;
for there are glorious things spoken concerning the city of our God.

The following is another letter, written to the same person.
MY VERY DEAR, DEAR --
YOUR griefs and distresses greatly affect me. ^^^give me, my dear soul, that I
am so deficient in my attempts to assist and comfort you. I reproach myself for
this, while yet I know God only can comfort you: And I am, in my poor manner,
looking to him to do it.

You say, you doubt whether you know the true God, and in heart choose him. If
not, why do you thirst, long, and pant for, and place all your happiness in
that very sovereign, holy, righteous, good and glorious God, who is revealed in
his word, and by his works? You next doubt whether your anxiety about this does
not prove you selfish? If your anxiety about this matter arises wholly from a
desire of securing your own happiness, and preventing your own private,
personal misery, it is doubtless selfish. If you see nothing worthy, lovely and
excellent in God's true character; and therefore desire the knowledge of it,
only to secure eternal life to you, it is wrong. But, if you place eternal life
or happiness in the knowledge of the only true God, as he is the sum of all
perfection, and infinite excellence, in and of himself; then you will desire
this knowledge for its own sake; and will doubtless desire to know, that you do
know that which you esteem infinitely worthy, excellent and glorious; and will
be far from being satisfied with just a degree of that knowledge, as you
suppose may secure your title to heaven.

Suppose, my dear, I have a certain sum offered me, upon condition I become
reconciled to, and acquainted with a worthy person. I have no esteem or love
for the person; but for the sake of the interest, I will try for a
reconciliation and acquaintance; and may be very inquisitive to know, if I have
complied with the terms: That is, whether I am indeed entitled to the reward;
which is all I care for. But when I become truly acquainted with the person, I
see so much real worth and excellency in him, that my heart is most sensibly
attracted to him; and I find this knowledge is happiness. I pursue a farther
acquaintance. I hear him described, and believe he is what he is described to
be: And I hear, and believe it to be complete happiness to know and enjoy such
a friend. So I hear and believe that this knowledge is connected with some
great and good effects, in whomsoever it takes place. But I find so little of
these effects in myself (through my own blindness and stupidity) and in a sense
of the importance of the matter, that I grow anxious to know whether I have
indeed any true knowledge; and so am in the way of a growing acquaintance,
rather from the excellency and importance of this knowledge, than from the fear
of losing the sum: This, as a private, personal interest, hardly comes into
view; is overlooked, in comparison with the happiness, which is attained by the
exhibition and display of true worth and excellence, and tends to exalt it.

It is supposed there is the same natural desire of happiness in both cases:
But, then, the one has no regard to any other being but himself. The other goes
out of himself, and places his happiness in that which is the good of being in
general. And here, my dear friend, I think, it is easy to see how a desire to
know, that we do know, and are really in heart acquainted with God's true
character, may spring from a benevolent disposition of heart, a regard to him,
as the sum of all being and perfection; and so not a mere selfish desire. I
think it is certain we may desire to know this, as we are directed to glory in
it, Jer. ix. Let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, who exercise loving kindness, judgment, and
righteousness in the earth: For in these things I delight, says the Lord.

The following letter was written to a friend who then lived in the country,
who was greatly attentive to her spiritual concerns, under a strong and abiding
conviction of the depravity and hardness of her heart, and viewing herself to
be in an unconverted state.
Newport, Oct. 27, 1770. MY DEAR, KIND FRIEND,
I THANK you for your very kind and acceptable favor of the 11th inst. Only
you draw a character that does by no means belong to me. And, however
mortifying it is to me; yet I must assure you, did my real character come into
your view, you would be so far from loving and admiring, that you must yourself
be very bad, not to detest and abhor it. But so infinite wisdom has seen best
to order it, that I should not be cast out and abhorred by all living, while I
ought to loath myself for all my abominations, and great deficiencies; for
which I have no possible excuse; but indeed am infinitely guilty for my
criminal abuse of the long and rich advantages with which I have been favored.
I was early planted in the house of my good God, that I might be fat and
flourishing: But, alas! my leanness, my leanness! Were it not for the rich,
free and sovereign grace of the gospel, which affords hope and relief for the
most wretched and guilty, I must now lie down in absolute despair. Here is my
only hope and refuge.

And here is a hope and refuge set before my dear friend, let her guilt be ever
so great, or her abused advantages ever so many, if she will but accept the
offered salvation, the only remedy that infinite wisdom and sovereign grace has
provided. And what objection can she possibly have to a way and a remedy so
infinitely well calculated to secure the divine honor, and confer the richest
and infinitely the best of blessings on guilty sinners: A way which opens the
most grand and noble prospects of richest treasures, highest happiness, and
most satisfying enjoyments for one complete eternity: And opens these prospects
even to the most poor, wretched, miserable, captivated, enslaved, sunken,
destitute creatures, by a union to the great and glorious Son of God, the
beloved of the Father, and he in whom he is forever well pleased.

O how inconceivably aggravated must the rejection of the grace of the gospel
one day appear! May my dear, dear friend, so feel the weight of it now, as to
fly from the wrath to come. May she be so reconciled to God's true character,
and the character of the divine Redeemer, as to render him the chief of ten
thousands, and altogether lovely in her view; while she beholds him magnifying
the divine law, and making it honorable; vindicating the authority of God, and
supporting the eternal throne of Deity.

I am more and more confirmed, that there can be no true religion, or real
happiness, any farther than the heart is really reconciled to the whole of the
divine character. While there is a total alienation from the fountain and only
source of perfection and happiness, there must be nothing but sin and misery.
And while there is the least degree of this alienation and opposition it must
be a constant source of pollution and unhappiness, which will, in a degree,
taint and interrupt all our duties and enjoyments; though, blessed be God,
there is a foundation laid in regeneration, by slaying the opposition and
enmity of our hearts, for the highest perfection and enjoyment; and as far as
we are reconciled and united to God, we enter into the beginning of a state of
the most perfect holiness and consummate happiness, that our natures are
capable of, when enlarged in the fountain of existence, to take in
inconceivable communications from Deity, opening on vessels prepared for glory.

But O, where am I going! Why do I attempt what eye has not seen, or ear
heard; nor has my narrow, contracted heart, in any adequate degree, any
conception of! May your superior powers, by the effectual operation of the
Holy Spirit, be formed for, and enlarged in the divine, delightful,
transforming contemplation, till you arrive to the most grand and noble height
of holiness and happiness!

I am, with much affection, Your much obliged friend, SUSA. ANTHONY.

The following extracts are from letters which she wrote to a minister.
Newport, July 15, 1770. REVEREND SIR,
-- I KNOW not what I shall be or do. I fear I am sinking into great stupidity;
yea, that I am farther gone, than I was aware. I have indeed had relief from
distressing conflicts; but I have misused and abused the mercy; and am even
ready to covet them again: Any thing rather than a sottish stupidity and
carelessness. Conflicts often stir up the polluted fountain, and cause me to
loath and abhor my self for all my abominations. But I fear my heart has since
grown like a standing sink, which is not purged, but its scum remains. Some
general abiding conviction I indeed have of great deficiency; especially in
attending to Mr. Edwards on the nature of true virtue. When I come to separate
or take away that sensation of secondary beauty, etc. natural conscience, and
particular instincts in nature, alas, what have I left! So little, if any
thing, that it scarce deserves the name, and appears less than the least of all
seeds. Surely I and others have been greatly mistaken in me. Yet, even under
this conviction, I find there is great want of a through, humbling sense of
positive pollution, and universal depravity. My views are partial. My wretched,
treacherous heart starts aside, and shifts off from full conviction.

But will it not look unfriendly to attempt to lead you any farther into this
horrid depth of my depraved, polluted heart, where you will find no bottom, or
any way out? I will cease, and let it be for my own humiliation to dig into it,
and search out its greater and greater abominations.

December 18 th, 1770. REV. AND DEAR SIR,
I THANK you for your kind, obliging letter. It has been inexpressibly
affecting and welcome to your poor, vile, worthless friend. For though I know I
am utterly undeserving, yet I cannot help desiring the affection of my
christian friends, even while I feel myself altogether unfit for any free
conversation with them; and am ready to withdraw from them as a polluted,
infectious leper. The strength, number, aggravation and infection of my sins,
has been as an overflowing deluge. And I see myself unfit to have any thing to
do with any but a Being of infinite patience and absolute purity, who can bear
with me, and cannot possibly be polluted or tainted by my impurity, even in my
nearest approaches to him. This is my comfort.

O if it were not for the thought, that the infinitely wise and glorious
Jehovah can bring good out of all this evil, and glory to himself from my
dreadful wickedness, I should sink and die under it. For the thought of even my
eternal interest being secure, seems to give me no relief. This is not the
balsam that touches my wound. Here were opened some sources of comfort to me on
the last Sabbath. And here, and here only, could I see myself of any
importance, as the vilest wretch who ever lived is of importance to answer the
great end of exalting and magnifying the exceeding greatness and riches of
God's power and grace. O what superabounding grace must it eternally appear to
be, to forgive such a guilty wretch as I am! to cleanse and sanctify such an
amazingly polluted heart as mine is! and triumph over all the infinite
obstacles which lie in the way of my salvation! In this view, and in this only,
at present, my salvation appears of any worth and importance: For I know I
deserve the most dreadful and aggravated destruction: Am nothing, and less than
nothing, and of no importance, any further than God is glorified in me. But
here I can only rejoice, that he will glorify himself in me; and not in the
view that I in any respect glorify him.

O, sir, to see a soul so loaded with obligations; so bound by the strongest
bonds; so urged by the most powerful motives and arguments, stupid, sottish and
insensible; yea, obstinate and opposing, is most astonishing! Yet not powerful
enough suitably to rouse me from stupidity, or subdue the enmity of my carnal
mind. These convictions force themselves upon me by the powerful pressure of
undeniable facts and evidences: But were they the genuine fruits of true self
abhorrence and abasement, they would produce a better temper of soul, and would
influence me to better obedience, and entire devotedness to God and his glory
in my whole conduct.

It is often a question that occurs, Whether such a dreadful heart as mine is
can possibly be the new heart given in regeneration? But I suspect the
inclination I sometimes feel to answer in the negative, arises from an
unwillingness to admit the conviction of such aggravated guilt and vileness as
bears in upon me, from the affirmative.

But I will cease to lead your thoughts into a scene so dark and dreadful: And
will yet rejoice, that I am in the hands of such an infinitely wise, glorious,
and most worthy Being, who will secure his own glory, whatever becomes of me:
And all the advantages and obligations he has laid me under shall forever
justify his righteous procedures with me. If he say, he has no pleasure in me,
he shall be glorious in his justice and righteousness; let him do to me, as
seems good to him. I say, Let God be glorified, and it is enough. But then,
if I am sincere, Why do I not glorify him? Why am I not some way active in
this? But here I cease. --

June 15 th, 1772.
I NOW take my pen in hand to tell my dear friend, that I feel an inexpressible
happiness, that "Dominion is with HIM." She had heard a sermon from these words
the day before, preached by the Rev. Mr. Wales of Marshfield.
I have had a joy in this, this day, that has swallowed up every discouragement
and grief. O what can I say, but expatiate on this most glorious truth! With
Him, who is so infinitely excellent, amiable, worthy, wise and good, is
DOMINION. The Lord reigns. Surely all heaven and earth may well rejoice, and
rejoice forevermore. My soul says, It is enough! Happiness enough, not only for
one immortal soul; but for my riads of enlarged, capacious spirits; yea, the
happiness of Jehovah himself. O shall this base, this guilty worm ever seek
happiness aside from this! Now, let my thoughts roll where they will, they can
center with inexpressible delight, That dominion is with him. I love to dwell
on these words; for I can express nothing equal to them. I want to have
strength of body (or absence from it) and enlargement of capacity, without
opposition of heart, to take in the full import of them. --

I have for the most part of late been either awfully and amazingly stupid, and
had little or no sense of any thing, or such a view of my infinite guilt and
vileness, the aggravation, strength and violence of my sin, as has filled me
with the utmost confusion and astonishment. And while digging into the walls of
greater and greater abominations, which have come up to view, I have been led
to conclude, This, my own wickedness, ought to engross all my attention. But
this has somehow betrayed me into an error; and I have not found that
engagedness and enlargement for others, and my views of sovereign grace have
been accordingly narrow and contracted, till, the latter part of last week,
reading in the xxxvith chapter of Ezekiel, what God had promised to do for the
most wretched and guilty, and this for his own glory, gave me some strength and
courage, and enlarged my desires. And now I see I may rejoice and triumph, and
stretch my desires to unmeasurable, boundless grace, displayed in the highest
degree to a guilty, ruined race, since DOMINION IS WITH HIM.

July 1 st, 1772. DEAR SIR,
I JUST now came into my chamber to throw my feeble frame on the bed. But my
thoughts have taken a turn to recreate myself by a moment's converse with you.

I have been very feeble and broken this week; but supported, and, as it were,
laid at rest on the bosom of divine compassion and faithfulness. O how tenderly
does God deal with such an ungrateful wretch, and permits me to bring all my
burdens, infirmities and cares, and cast them on him! If I am indeed devoted to
his glory, and prefer his service above every other employ, ought I not to feel
most happy in his hands, and under his direction, who best knows in what way,
and by what means, this shall be brought about?

I hoped this week to have waked up to greater engagedness in my solemn
approaches to God; but how I shall be carried through the various important
duties of it I know not: Yet I find a pleasure in feeling all weakness, and as
such dropping into the arms of Omnipotence clothed with every possible
perfection* and so be disposed of in the wisest and best manner, to answer the
most noble and important ends, by him with whom there is not any thing too
hard. I do feel, at present, as if I had no other cause or interest, but to be
used and disposed of for God; and therefore do rejoice that he is what he is,
and that "Dominion is with him." O, sir, I am sure such an immense Spirit, such
an amiable, glorious Being, who was last Sabbath held up to view, is infinitely
worthy of the eternal joy and triumph of all his creatures.

August 30 th. DEAR SIR,
A POOR, mean, sinful soul aspires and stretches after more exalted conceptions
of the divine Redeemer, and his glorious kingdom. But O! my conceptions of
these are so low; I am so brutish in my knowledge, that I cannot but wish the
prison walls were pulled down. I feel myself the smallest atom in creation, and
this loaded with an infinite weight of guilt and odiousness, drawing down to an
eternal hell. How must that grace, that wisdom, that mercy be built up forever,
which redeems and fixes in his eternal kingdom such an one! And perhaps I must
live to try the power, the wisdom and allsufficiency, of this incomparable,
divine Redeemer. This I have done, and feel I am doing every moment. And O what
pleasure does it give to think how transcendently glorious this "tried stone"
will appear, when all the myriads of the redeemed, in all the peculiar
circumstances in which his sufficiency has been tried, shall be exhibited!

My attention has been a little called up to the inextricable darkness,
difficulties and dangers, which lie continually in our way, through which no
wisdom but that which is infinite can guide us, nor power short of omnipotent
can deliver. When I am a little awake, I see every day, every moment big with
such infinite importance to the church of God, and every individual member, as
at once bankrupts and ruins every sufficiency and helper, but our exalted,
allsufficient Redeemer, pronounces them physicians of no value, broken
cisterns, and places the government only on his shoulders, and constrains to
fly to the shadow of his wings for protection. And O how sweet is that rest
wherewith he causes the weary to rest!

April 21, 1774. REVEREND AND DEAR SIR,
GOD has of late been calling up my attention to solemn and tender scenes. I
have felt the ties of nature, and I hope the tender bonds of christian
affection, to one of the best of mothers, a member of Christ, in pain and
distress, under great infirmities, to a very sensible degree: Under which the
infinitely condescending Jehovah has set himself before me, as so infinitely
fit to govern, and worthy to be submitted to, yea, rejoiced in, in every
dispensation, that I have been constrained to say, Surely there needs no more
to make all heaven and earth rejoice, than to know that this God reigns. O
where can there be any true pleasure, but in a heart wholly disposed to close
in with every exhibition that Jehovah makes of himself, as well in the
judgments of his hands, as the laws of his mouth? O what a fountain of
inexpressible pleasure overflows and sweetens the bitterest waters of Marah, in
that single sentence, It is the Lord, THE LORD!

But, here I pause -- while tears of admiration and joy are my highest
expression! Fain would I lisp his praises! Fain would I speak of his glories!
But O! I find I do not feel what I ought; nor can I express what I feel. When
shall my soul be unfettered! When shall the heart of the rash understand! When
shall the stammerer speak plain! O when shall my whole soul unite in the most
perfect manner, strongest degree and universal extent, to every exhibition of
the unbounded, infinite, glorious rectitude and perfection of Jehovah's nature
and government! But, instead of this, is it possible that I shall again take
back what I have said? God has of late made me repeatedly confess that he does
all things well, and, as it were, crowd all things into his hands, professing
my hearty subjection to him, and his government. I have been calling him Lord
and King; owning his infinite right and fitness to govern; recounting his
mighty deeds; proclaiming his sovereign authority; exclaiming against every
degree of opposition to him, and his government; judging and condemning to
utter destruction all his implacable enemies. And O, now, how infinitely
aggravated must my guilt be, if, on trial, I do in the least degree retract, or
take back what I have said! But such an heart I know I have in me: And,
therefore, if after all I should perish, out of my own mouth I am condemned:
And if saved, sovereign grace shall have all the glory. O how infinitely wise
and good this constitution! How rich, how free the grace that comes to sinners
through Jesus Christ!

Jan. 29, 1776. --
GREAT is the wisdom of our divine Leader. He knows what he is about, what he
designs to bring to pass by the peculiar exercises which he enables his people
to put forth; and brings them into those circumstances that are best suited to
excite them. Thus does he carry on his glorious designs. Thus is he preparing
us for the event. O how sweet to feel ourselves, and all creatures and things,
in his wise and powerful hands, devoted to his good pleasure, led on to the
most glorious and important end. In this view I am saying, Let the Lord do with
me as seems him good; yea, with all things and creatures. His glory is
secured; Zion is safe: And more, it shall be raised to the highest perfection.
And though we know not what shall prosper under our hands; yet, being in his
hand, we may not say, "There is nothing that can be done." Surely God has done
and is doing great things. O that his dear people were all awake! Methinks
there is nothing wanting but this to bring forth a most glorious victory over
the powers of darkness. Then should one chase a thousand, and put ten thousand
to flight.

SECTION V.
Containing Observations on the foregoing Life and Writings.
I. THESE, taken together, afford a strong and striking evidence of the truth
and excellence of Christianity.

If Christianity, and the Bible in which it is revealed and instituted, were
not a divine revelation from heaven, but a mere fable and falsehood, it would
be impossible that such an effect should be produced by it, as was in Miss
Anthony; or that such a character should be formed, and such views and
exercises excited by it. Nothing but that invisible, divine power, even the
Spirit of God, which the Bible represents as necessary to form men to a truly
christian character, could produce this effect, by which she was brought to a
temper and practice, so agreeable to the dictates of the scriptures, and so
opposite to that which was natural to her, and to all mankind. By this her
selfishness, pride, and a vain worldly spirit were subdued, and she was formed
to benevolence and humility; was weaned from this world, and all the objects of
time and sense, pronouncing them mere trifles and vanity; her affection was
strongly fixed on invisible, spiritual objects; choosing the God revealed in
the Bible as her only portion; sensibly feeling, that in the knowledge and
enjoyment of him, there is complete and endless happiness.

Here we have a witness to all this. Of one who appears sensible and rational,
and as capable of judging as any one, after long study and experience* having
passed through many trials and temptations, making the most deliberate choice
and resolutions to look for happiness in nothing but the service and enjoyment
of Christ; and cheerfully resting her eternal interest on this foundation. It
is acknowledged she is not the only witness. There have been thousands who,
living and dying, have borne the same testimony. And many such witnesses are
now living. But this excellent person is an eminent one, who is to be added to
the rest, and is an incontestible evidence, considered by itself, that
Christianity is from heaven.

And it will serve to strengthen and establish the faith of real christians to
find one experiencing, expressing and acting out, in a higher and more eminent
degree, those christian graces and exercises, which they have experienced in a
lower measure.

And when they who are not christians, observe the union and agreement of
christians, in their ideas and feelings, though they are more conspicuous and
eminent in some than in others: And that persons of different ages and
countries, agree in the same kind of christian exercises and experimental
religion; they have matter of conviction set before them that Christianity has
a divine original; and opportunity to learn in what it does most essentially
consist.

WE have, also, in this instance, a fresh and striking evidence of the
excellence, worth and importance of Christianity.

How does it enlarge and ennoble the mind of man, and raise it to the most
affecting and astonishing views of those infinitely grand and glorious objects
and truths, which are exhibited in the work of Redemption* Even the only true
God displayed in all the uncreated beauty and glory of his infinite
perfections, in this greatest and most wonderful work; suited to excite the
strongest, everlasting exercises of love, and wonder, of benevolence, delight
and gratitude; by which the soul is transformed into a real likeness to the
divine moral character; is united to the Savior, and brought into the real
enjoyment of God, which gives ineffable satisfaction and delight: Opens to view
the invisible world; and introduces a boundless, most agreeable and animating
prospect of unspeakable, endless felicity, in the eternal kingdom of God, in
the enjoyment of infinite, unchangeable objects, and in the highest and most
noble exercises, of which a rational, immortal mind is capable, without
cessation or weariness, but with increasing strength, vigor and enjoyment: At
the same time being in the midst of an innumerable company of most happy and
perfectly excellent fellow saints, enjoying all of them, they all partaking of,
and increasing the felicity of each other, in the mutual exercise of
benevolence and ecstatic delight.

And in these views, exercises and enjoyments, the christian is formed into a
most amiable and excellent character, it being necessarily implied in them.
Such a mind is clothed with humility, and bows with humble submission to God;
rejoices in his Being, character, laws and government; devotes himself to him,
in obedience to all his commands, in seeking and promoting his glory and the
interest of his kingdom; constantly admiring and adoring that sovereign, rich
and wonderful grace, which the gospel exhibits, and which is displayed in the
salvation of sinners: And being such an one, humbles himself before God, and
flies to the Redeemer as the only refuge, loving and delighting in his person
and character; and with great pleasure pours out his heart before him, in the
most sincere, ardent expressions of his feelings, affections and desires.

And in his affections and conduct toward men, he is humble, meek, patient and
longsuffering, forgiving injuries, innocent and blameless, just, benevolent and
kind toward all, even his greatest enemies, wishing and praying for the best
and greatest blessings on them. He is temperate in all things, not indulging
any bodily appetite to his own or his neighbor's hurt, or so as in any respect
to unfit him for the proper duties of his station, and the service of God, or
deprive him of the higher and more exalted exercises and pleasures of religion.

This is a brief sketch of the beautiful, excellent character, and of the
refined, soul satisfying enjoyments, to which Christianity forms, and which it
gives to all its sincere votaries, in a higher or lower degree: Which the
reader has seen exemplified in the preceding life and extracts, and in which
the character and enjoyments of a true christian are exhibited in a more
convincing, affecting and pleasing light, than can be done by any mere verbal
description. And the serious reader, who has properly attended to the Bible,
will see that such a character is there described and inculcated on all
christians, and set in a beautiful light; and that nothing is wanting in order
to form mankind to true (...) excellence and happiness, as individuals, or in
society, in this world, but to become real christians, though with a degree of
imperfection. How amiable and happy then will the world of mankind be, when
they shall become christians in a higher and more perfect degree, than any now
are, or have been, and shall flock with one accord to the church of Christ, and
put on her beautiful garments! The scripture is full of predictions of this
great and happy event; and at the same time gives a most lively, exhilarating
description of the glory and happiness of that day. But all this will be but a
shadow, and imperfect foretaste of the glory and everlasting perfect happiness,
to which the redeemed are going.

And now, let any one contemplate the character and enjoyments of those who
discard or neglect Christianity, and consider what is their highest excellence
and happiness, if they really have any; and whether they can be compared to
that which Christianity gives to all who cordially embrace it; or are even
worthy the pursuit or wish of a rational creature. Shall we go to heathen
idolaters, to Mahometans, or Jews, to find true happiness, or men really
amiable and excellent? The least attention to these is sufficient to convince
that neither excellence of character nor true happiness is to be found here. It
is therefore needless to go into particulars, in order to make the comparison.

Does the Deist possess, or can he have a prospect of any thing, which may be
compared with what the christian obtains; or which has any real excellence and
happiness, suited to a rational, immortal mind? He has no God, to whom he can
have access with confidence, or even without presumption. For how does he know
that God is accessible to creatures; especially, sinful creatures? No wonder
then, that persons of this character generally, if not universally, neglect
every thing that may be called piety, and live "without God in the world." They
therefore must be utter strangers to that noble, exalted happiness, which the
true christian has in the knowledge, love and enjoyment of God, and are ^^^ally
destitute of that beautiful, excellent moral character, which is implied in
this, and consequently have a contrary character, as deformed and odious, as
the other is beautiful. They have no certain prospects of any kind of happiness
in a future state: For they have no light by which they can know there will be
any such state. And if they consider themselves as going to such a state, they
have no reason to believe it will be a happy one. They are sinners: At most,
they cannot be certain they are not; and it is impossible they should have any
evidence that a sinner may or can be pardoned. They can therefore enjoy no
happiness in the prospects of a future state, or from any object that is
invisible. All their enjoyment therefore must be temporary and worldly. Their
true character, if examined with discerning, will appear to be composed of
ignorance of all those things which are truly great and excellent; of pride and
arrogance, and a contracted, worldly mind. All their exercises are stamped with
that delusion, pride and folly, which render their whole character truly mean
and despicable. How mean and low, yea, sordid, are all their enjoyments in
life, compared with those of a christian! The life and extracts, to which we
have been attending, serve to illustrate all that has been said in this
paragraph.

And what is the character and happiness of all those who neglect Christianity
in their affection and practice, though they may profess to believe it is from
heaven, and are seeking only a worldly good? The answer is easy, from what has
been observed above. They know not what true happiness is; and are enemies to
the true character of God, and all that is really good. Their taste is
perverted, and they are seeking for happiness where it is not to be found. They
are involved in strong delusion, and the greatest folly, and really miserable;
and if they continue in this character through life, they must be unspeakably
miserable forever?

The certain conclusion, therefore, is, If there be any true religion for man,
or any happiness for him, suited to his nature and capacities, Christianity is
from heaven. And if there be no truth in this, there is none to be found that
is true; and man must be miserable. It is impossible he should obtain that true
excellence, dignity and glory of which he is capable, by his natural rational
powers. But it appears from fact and experience, in the instance before us, and
in others innumerable, as well as from speculation and reason, that
Christianity, if cordially embraced, will raise men to a high, beautiful and
excellent character, and make them completely happy forever. Therefore, it is
the only true religion, and is divine.

II. THAT which is here recorded of Miss Anthony's life and exercises, may
serve to teach us what true religion is, as distinguished from all counterfeits.

We have here Christianity set before us by an example of it, as it consists in
doctrines or truths believed, and in the views, belief and affections of the
heart of a real christian. True christians may differ in the degree of
clearness and certainty, with which they believe and embrace the doctrines
revealed in the Bible; and consequently they may and do differ in the strength
and constancy of the exercises which they have in the view of divine truth: But
their creed is, as to substance, the same, and they agree in all the peculiar,
important doctrines contained in divine revelation. Therefore their views,
feelings and exercises of heart, are alike, as to the nature and kind of them,
having the same system of divine truth for the foundation on which they are
built, and in the view and belief of which the whole system of their religious
affections is formed. Therefore, though christians may differ in some
circumstances, in their belief, views, and exercises of heart, and some have
higher and stronger affections, and more free from any mixture of error and
mistake than others; yet the latter, when they have the views and affections of
the former set before them, will be conscious that their religious experiences
are of the same kind with those of the other, though they fall greatly short in
degree. And as in water face answers to face, so do the hearts of the latter
to those of the former; they having all "drank into the same Spirit," though in
different degrees. And this will naturally establish their hearts, and
strengthen their hope and confidence, that they do know and embrace the truth;
and that this is true religion, the religion which the Bible inculcates; when
they see it exemplified in such an eminent degree: And it will serve to humble,
encourage and quicken them.

And as the creed and religious views and exercises of true christians are so
much alike, as to their nature and kind, and they are so far of the same mind,
taste and judgment; this lays a foundation for a similarity in conversation and
conduct, in the practice of all the duties, and attendance on the institutions
commanded in the gospel, as an expression and testimony of their faith and
internal exercises of religion.

By these observations we are led to consider the creed, religious affections,
and conduct, exhibited in the life and writings of Miss Anthony; in which her
religion consisted.

She had a firm belief of the doctrine of the Trinity of persons in Deity, the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and of the divinity of Jesus Christ; that he is the
Son of God, in a sense which implies that he is the true God. No one can read
the foregoing extracts without observing, that much of her religious exercises
implied these truths, and was built upon them; so that the denial of them would
overthrow all her religion. This was the God she loved, and chose for her
portion, in the service and enjoyment of whom she placed her happiness.

The sovereignty of God in the exercise of his grace in the salvation of
sinners, and their absolute and entire dependence on his sovereign pleasure,
while he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and hardens whom he will, and
all the truths implied in this, were familiar to her mind, and constantly
acknowledged, explicitly or by implication; in all her exercises. In these are
included the doctrine of the divine decrees, respecting all things; and of
particular election; and a universal and particular providence, ordering and
directing every event, from the greatest to the least.

She had a very sensible conviction and belief of the universal apostasy and
total depravity of mankind, grounded on the testimony of the divine oracles,
and her own observation and experience. Her own moral depravity, the strength,
odiousness and criminality of it, was a constant burden to her, and the cause
of her humiliation, feeling that it was all her own inexcusable wickedness, for
which she deserved to be cast off by God, and perish forever: To which awful
destruction she considered every sinner as certainly going, who lives and dies
in impenitence. And she knew that none but a divine, almighty, infinitely wise
and gracious Redeemer could deliver from this state of depravity and guilt, and
form her to perfect holiness. And, in the view of this she saw, admired and
praised the infinite, wonderful grace displayed in the salvation of sinners.
The reader will see all these truths and exercises exhibited in a clear and
striking manner in her writings.

The view and sense she had of the exceeding, inexpressible wickedness of her
heart, and the strength and great degree of corruption of it, expressed in such
strong and striking language as she often uses, some may think to be
inconsistent with grace, or the new heart, which is described in the Bible;
that she was either deceived, and magnified her own depravity beyond the truth,
or was not a real christian. But such an opinion will doubtless appear to be
groundless, when it is considered that real holiness of heart is consistent
with a great degree of remaining moral depravity, which may at times most
sensibly exert itself, even in the heart of the most eminent christian, in this
life. "The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh:
And these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things
that ye would," is the character which the Apostle Paul gave of every
christian. And the greater degree of true holiness the christian has, the more
clear and painful discerning he will have of the remaining depravity and
corruption of his own heart; and the more hateful and dreadful it will appear.
Hence it follows, that the most eminent christian sees more of the sinfulness
of his own heart, and laments it more, than those who have not attained to so
great a degree of holiness. Miss Anthony's conviction and exercises of this
kind, therefore, were so far from being imaginary, or an evidence that she was
not a christian, that they are a testimony of her great proficiency in the
christian life, and that knowledge of her own heart, which they who have not so
much holiness, and consequently have less discerning, do not attain to; and
which might be reasonably expected in so eminent a christian; in which she
imitated that great saint, the Apostle Paul* in his expressions of the
depravity of his own heart, Romans vii. 13. to the end of the chapter; which
description, some, it is to be feared, from too little acquaintance with their
own hearts, have thought could no^ ^pply to any true christian, especially to
one so eminent as the Apostle Paul.

Under a clear and most sensible conviction of her infinite guilt and ill
desert, and the unspeakably great and awful depravity of her heart, she
cordially embraced the doctrine of pardon, justification and complete
redemption, by the atonement and righteousness of Jesus Christ, to be obtained
by faith in him. And on his mediation, power, wisdom and free grace alone did
she rely for salvation from guilt, moral depravity, and all evil.

She firmly believed that the covenant of grace does contain a promise to every
believer in Christ, that they shall be kept by the power of God, through faith,
unto salvation. And that, at the death of the body, the friends of Christ enter
into a state of perfect holiness and unspeakable happiness, which shall never
end; but shall increase to the time of the general resurrection, and the day of
judgment, and from thence forever. And that the punishment of all who die in
their sins, will be inconceivably dreadful, and without end.

Every one who shall read what has been produced from her writings will see
that all her religious exercises were in the view and belief of these
doctrines, and that the latter were the foundation of the former.

AND now the nature, kind and complexion of these exercises and affections must
be considered, as they appear and are expressed in her writings, in which the
genuine religious feelings and motions of her heart are exhibited.

At first view, they appear not to be felfish; but to consist summarily in that
disinterested LOVE which seeks not her own; and all those religious
affections which are implied in this -- In disinterested, benevolent regard to
God, and the Redeemer, his glory, interest and kingdom -- In complacence and
delight in the divine character, loving God for what he is in himself, as
exhibited in his word and works; in the exercise of which love she with
pleasure devoted herself to God, and gave herself away to him, with all she
was, and could do, to be used by him for his glory and the advancement of his
church and kingdom, making this her highest and only end, and placing her whole
interest and happiness in it.

And this disinterested, benevolent, complacential, grateful affection, to God
and the Redeemer, united her heart to the disciples of Christ, and his church,
with peculiar and strong affection, and filled her with good will and
compassion to mankind; accompanied with ardent longings to be conformed to God
in true holiness, and to have the most complete and uninterrupted knowledge and
enjoyment of him: At the same time acknowledging her own infinite unworthiness
of the least favor, humbling herself before God for her sins and depravity of
heart, in the exercise of deep repentance and brokenness of heart; feeling
herself to be a mean, contemptible creature; admiring the astonishing free
grace of God in showing mercy to such an one; accompanied with a humble,
unconditional submission to the will of God, being pleased with all his laws
and his government, and rejoicing that the Lord does reign.

AND in the view and belief of the doctrines which have been mentioned, and
others which are implied in them; and in the exercise, and from the influence
of those affections now briefly described, she made a public profession of
religion, and joined to a church of Christ, entering into a solemn covenant to
live in obedience to Christ; in attending upon all his institutions, and in the
practice of the duties which he requires of his followers. In which public
dedication of herself to the Lord, and union to a christian church, she always
rejoiced, as an inestimable privilege: And continued to walk in all the
ordinances of the Lord blameless, unto her death; adorning the doctrine of
Christ.

She excelled in the practice of devotion and prayer, and could not live
comfortably when deprived of opportunity and convenience for retirement and
secret devotion, in meditation, reading the Bible and prayer, and devoted many
whole days to secret fasting and prayer. She highly prized the christian
Sabbath, and attendance on public worship and the Lord's Supper; and was very
careful and diligent in her preparation for attendance on these important, and
to her delightful institutions. She diligently improved the advantages and
opportunities she had to study and read, and gain religious knowledge, in which
she made great advances.

She was temperate and abstemious in eating and drinking, carefully denying
herself of every thing of this kind, which she found had the least tendency to
unfit her for incumbent duty. And in her apparel she desired nothing for the
sake of show; but put on modest clothing, and sought no more than to appear
cleanly and decent; while her ornament was a meek and quiet spirit, attended
with good works.

She was not talkative; but free in conversation with particular friends;
especially on matters of religion. She was always on her guard against
backbiting and speaking evil of others, which she greatly abhorred, when it
took place in her hearing. She was a faithful friend, who might be safely
relied upon, that she would not betray the confidence reposed in her, by
divulging any secrets, or in any other way.

She was conscientiously concerned to perform all relative duties; diligent and
faithful in her proper business. Was kind and compassionate to the afflicted,
the poor and destitute; and not only prayed for them, but was ready and glad to
minister to their relief and comfort, so far as she had opportunity and
ability. She was forward to do all in her power for the support of the gospel:
And though she had not much to contribute for this end, yet she did more in
this way, doubtless, than most of the opulent, in the sight of Him who asserted
this of the poor widow contributing only one farthing. And her benevolence
extended to all mankind, even to her enemies. Witness her writings and prayers.

AND, now, who can seriously attend to all this, and not be sensible that it
must be true religion, if there be any such thing as religion, consisting in
doctrines and truths believed, and internal affections and exercises, and
external conduct, answerable to them? Surely there can be no opposite or
different sentiments, affections and conduct, which agree with the Bible, or
with truth and reason, or that can render a person truly excellent, amiable and
useful. These differ so essentially in nature and kind, that they may be easily
distinguished from all those religious appearances and pretenses which are
built on falsehood and delusion. They are of a different and opposite nature;
especially those religious affections, which are wholly selfish, and therefore
contracted and mercenary.

This example, which appears to be copied from the Bible, and shows in what
Christianity consists, when reduced to practice, as distinguished from all
spurious and false religion, does at the same time demonstrate the excellency
of it, and that it is indeed a divine institution, adapted, as nothing else is,
or can be, to raise depraved sinners from the depths of deformity, guilt and
woe, to all that perfection, glory and happiness, of which their nature is
capable.

III. THE example and character of this person is worthy of the particular
attention and imitation of young people.

She devoted herself to the service of Christ in her youth. And who is there
that can refuse to approve and applaud her choice? How amiable and happy does
she appear! Had she made an opposite choice, and neglected religion in the
pursuit of sensual gratifications, and the indulgence of pride and a worldly
mind, giving herself up to the levity, vanity, and folly, which commonly take
place in the companies and conversation of youth; without any concern for her
soul and future existence, or proper improvement of her mental powers, how
mean, despicable and miserable would she have been! Let young persons attend to
the contrast, and learn wisdom. The only way properly to enlarge their mental
capacities; to put on true worth and dignity; to be happy here, and forever, is
to devote themselves to the service of Christ. How amiable is early piety! What
a happy foundation does it lay for improvement in every worthy attainment, and
true enjoyment; which will issue in distinguished glory and happiness forever!
Can you begin too soon to be reasonable, amiable and happy, and to lay up this
everlasting treasure in heaven?

The course which Miss Anthony took from her youth, and the life she lived, was
attended with many pains and distresses, as the reader will observe; but as
these were necessary, and the way which her wise and kind Savior took to cure
her of her moral disorders, and fit her for heaven; and were attended with a
rear enjoyment and happiness, which unspeakably surpasses all the happiness
they do or can enjoy, who are strangers to true religion; these difficulties
and pains which attend it, do not afford the least reason or excuse for
neglecting it for a moment. Consistent with all this, the yoke, the service of
Christ, is easy, and his burden light.

It is also true that if youth devote themselves to religion, they may expect
to be overlooked, if not despised, by worldly people, as disagreeable to them,
and unworthy their company, who are pursuing only the pleasures of sense, and
the enjoyment of the things of this world, as the great and only good, and are
fond of the enchanting amusements, gaiety, grandeur and riches of this world.
But how little and light a thing is it to be wholly neglected or despised by
such deluded fools; when it is only for that character and conduct, for which
they ought to esteem, love and caress you; and for which you have the
approbation of heaven, and of all the wise and good on earth! And at the same
time you are feasted with a rich and delicious entertainment, and are going
into complete, endless happiness, while they are attempting to satisfy
themselves with husks, and are plunging into endless miseries!

If the gay, rich and great of this world, who are strangers to real piety, who
delight in show and parade, to glitter in costly array, and shine at balls and
assemblies, and know no higher good than the enjoyment of such companies; the
diversions of the theater, stage, or card table, reading romances, or idle,
senseless chat: If those of this character, whether men or women, should know
how much more real worth and excellence all those who are eminently pious do
possess, than themselves; how highly esteemed and beloved all such are in
heaven; and how mean, foolish and despicable they appear in the sight of the
Savior, and all his true friends; they would either be ashamed of themselves
and repent; or their hearts would be filled with envy, rage and blasphemy!

FINIS.

