INTERESTING STORIES, SINGULARLY ENGAGING EXTRACTS, AND Delightful Allegories.

To please, expand, and dignify the heart,
Nature our guide, and virtue for the chart.
PRINTED IN BENNINGTON, VERMONT, IN THE YEAR M,DCC,XCVI.

INTERESTING STORIES.
On the Reality, Beauty Importance, and Necessity of Religion.
A Few days after the archbishop of Paris and his vicars had set the example of
renouncing their clerical character, a rector, from a village on the banks of
the Rhone, followed by some of his parishioners, with an offering of gold and
silver saints, chalices, rich vestments, etc. presented himself at the bar of
the convention.

The rector, a thin venerable man, with gray hairs, was ordered to speak.

I come, said he, from the village of ******, where the only good building
standing is a very fine church. -- My parishioners beg you will take it, to
make an hospital for (...) sick and wounded of both parties, they being both
equally our countrymen. The gold and silver part of which we have brought to
you, they entreat you will devote to the service of the state, and that you
will cast the bells into cannon to drive its foreign invaders. For myself, I am
come, with great pleas-use to resign my letters of ordination, of induction,
and every deed and title by which I have been constituted a member of your
ecclesiastical polity. Here are the papers; you may burn them if you please, in
the same fire with the genealogical trees and patents of nobility. I desire,
likewise, that you will discontinue my salary. I am still able to support
myself by the labor of my hands; and I beg you to believe that I never felt
sincerer joy than I now do in making this renunciation. I have longed to see
this day; I see it, and am glad.

When the old man had done speaking, the applauses were immoderate. The rector
did not seem greatly elated with those tokens of approbation; he retired back a
few steps, and thus resumed his discourse.

Before you applaud my sentiments, it i^ f^^ you should understand them;
perhaps they may not entirely coin^^^^ with your own. I rejoice in this day not
because I wish to see religion degraded, but, because I wish to see it exalted
and purified.

By dissolving its alliance with the state, you have given it dignity and
independence. You have done it a piece of service -- a service which its
wellwishers would perhaps never have had courage to render it, but which is the
only thing it wanted to make it appear in its genuine beauty and luster.

Nobody will now say of me, when I am performing the offices of my religion, it
is a trade; he is paid for telling the people such and such things; he is hired
to keep up a useful piece of mummery. They cannot now say this,? and therefore
I feel myself raised in my own esteem, and shall speak to them with a
confidence and frankness, which, before this, I never durst venture to assume.

We resign without reluctance our gold and silver images and embroidered
vestments, because we have never found that looking upon gold and silver made
the heart more pure, or the affections more heavenly; we can also spare our
churches, for the heart that wishes to list itself up to God will never be at a
loss for a place to do it in; but we cannot spare religion, because, to tell
you the truth, we never had to much occasion for it.

I understand that you accuse us priests of having told the people a great many
falsehoods. I suspect this may have been the care, but till this day we have
never been allowed to enquire whether the things which we taught them were true
or not. I cannot but hope, however, that the errors we have fallen into have
not been very material, since the village has in general been sober and good;
the peasants are honest, docile, and laborious; the husbands love their wives,
and the wives their husbands; they are fortunately not too rich to be
compassionate, and they have constantly relieved the sick and fugitives of all
parties whenever it has been in their way. I think, therefore, what I have
taught them cannot be so very amiss.

You want to extirpate priests, but will you hinder the ignorant from applying
for instruction, the unhappy for comfort and hope, the unlearned from looking
up to the learned? If you do not, you will have priests, by whatever name you
may order them to be called; but it is certainly not necessary they should wear
a particular dress, or be appointed by state letters of ordination. My letters
of ordination are my zeal, my charity, my ardent love for my dear children of
the village: If I were more learned I would add my knowledge, but alas! we all
know very little; to a man every error is pardonable but want of humility. We
have a public walk, with a spreading elm-tree at one end of it, and a circle of
green round it, with a convenient bench. Here I shall draw together the
children as they are playing around me. I shall point to the vines laden with
fruit, to the orchards, to the herds of cattle lowing around us, to the distant
hills stretching one behind another, and they will ask me, how came all these
things? I shall tell them all I know, or all that I have heard from the wise
men who have lived before me; they will be penetrated with love and veneration;
they will kneel and I shall kneel with them; they will not be at my feet, but
all of us at the feet of that Good Being whom we shall worship together, and
thus they will receive into their render minds a religion.

The old men will sometimes come, from having deposited under the green sod one
of their companions, and place themselves by my side. They will look wishfully
at the turf, and anxiously enquire is he gone forever? shall we soon be like
him? will no morning break over the tomb? when the wicked cease from troubling
will the good cease from doing good? We will talk of these things, I will
comfort them. -- I will tell them of the goodness of God, I will speak to them
of a life to come; I will bid them hope for a state of retribution.

You have changed our holydays; -- you have an undoubted right, as our civil
governors so to do; it is very immaterial whether they are kept once in seven
days or once in ten: some, however, you leave us, and when they occur, I shall
tell those who choose to hear me, of the beauty and utility of virtue, of the
dignity of right conduct.

There is a book out of which I have sometimes taught my people; It says, we
are to love those who do us hurt, and to pour oil and wine into the wounds of
the stranger. In this book we read of a person called Jesus; -- some worship
him as God: others, as I am told, say it is wrong so to do: -- some teach that
he existed before the beginning of ages, others, that he was born of Joseph and
Mary.

I cannot tell whether these controversies will be ever decided; but in the
mean time, I think we cannot do otherwise than well in imitating him, for I
learn that he loved the poor, and went about doing good.

THE NEGRO
"Alas I am saint and feeble," said a voice which misery seemed to have
rendered almost inarticulate. They were the words of a poor negro, who,
oppressed by the heat of the sun, (for the day was hot and sultry) in a languid
posture, was enjoying a short respite from his labors. "Curse on European
avarice that deals in cargoes of wretchedness, and thrives by the traffic of
despair," I exclaimed the very moment my imagination caught the picture.
"Perhaps," said I, "this child of sorrow has been torn from a father -- a
mother." Nature must have pleaded very loudly against his captivity; for I
thought I could perceive the tears of affection standing in his eyes, "Or,
perhaps, he has looked forward, with eager expectation, to the days he seemed
destined to pass with the companion of his youth; and now" -- I thought on
thee, Eliza, the partner of my life, and I endeavored to divert my thought from
the gloomy read they were pursuing; but in vain. My captive spoke still louder.

"I once was happy," said he, "When I lived beyond these great waters, I heard
not the yells of despair; the gale rung not with the shrieks of the wretched.
Our but was in a cool valley, beneath the shade of the losty palm trees. My
labors then were sweet, for I feared neither stripes nor master. My work in
the fields provided my father with food, and he repaid with smiles the toil of
his sons. All was joy, all was pleasure. Strong and cheerful, I hailed the
breezes of the morning; at noon I bathed in the stream, and in the evening
joined the happy dance in the meadow. But now -- "I loved, alas! the beauteous
Yoncha, She was the theme of every song, the envy of surrounding virgins. For
her I sought and made two heroes bow at my feet. The maid of my heart trembled
for my safety, and hailed my victory with the smiles of rapture. I brought her
the clustered bannanas. From my hand, she said they were more luscious. For her
I climed the airy cocoanut tree, and threw into her lap the milky fruit. In the
chase, she nerved my arm with strength and inspired, my breast with courage. --
Then I smiled on danger; I heeded not death. I attacked the indignant foe in
his den. Though his eyes glistened with anger. I pierced him and he bled for
Youcha. I carried home the spoils of the battle, and placed them in her bower.
-- But now, alas! she bleeds for her lost warrior. She hears not his groans. He
pines in slavery, he lingers for the stroke of death. Ah, me? the deep ocean
divides us -- Methinks the breezes that play on the surface of the waters,
might waft her a sigh or a prayer. I have often asked them, but they seem not
to regard me.

"We were dancing on the green in the evening, and we dreaded not the hour of
danger. But the tall ship anchored in the stream, and treachery lurked for our
captivity. In vain we wept -- The whites heed not the sigh of the negro. They
know not the treasure I have left behind me. She may yet be safe! -- I recall
the scenes of pleasure I partook with her, and memory adds new horrorr to
despair. I have toiled till my hand is feeble. I must, therefore, expect more
lashes. The white men are very powerful; for their Gods are stronger than ours.
They are not appeased by the sighs of the negro. Our labors are bitt^es but
they furnish a rich sweet for our masters."

The IDLER.
An Oriental TALE.
AS Ortogrul of Basia was one day wandering along the streets of Bagdat, musing
on the varieties of merchandise which the shops offered to his view, and
observing the different occupations which busied the multitudes on every side,
he was awakened from the tranquillity of meditation by a crowd that obstructed
his passage. He raised his eyes and saw the chief vizier who had returned from
the divan, and was entering his palace. Ortogrul mingled with the attendants,
and being supposed to have some business for the vizier was permited to enter.
He surveyed the spaciousness of the apartments, admired the walls hung with
golden tapestry, and the floors covered with silken carpets, and despised the
simple neatness of his own little habitation.

Surely said he to himself this palace is the seat of happiness, where pleasure
succeeds to pleasure, and discontent and sorrow can have no admission. Whatever
nature has provided for the delight of sense is here spread forth to be
enjoyed, what can mortal wish or imagine which the master of this palace has
not obtained? The dishes of luxury cover his table, the voice of harmony lulls
him in his bowers: he breathes the fragrance of the groves of java, and sleeps
upon the down of the cygnets of Ganges. He speaks, and his mandate is obeyed;
he wishes and his wish is gratified; all whom he sees obey him, all whom he
hears flatters him. How different, Ortogrul is thy condition, who art doomed to
the perpetual torment of unsatisfied desire, and who have no amusement in thy
power that can withhold thee from thy own conviction. They tell thee that thou
art wise, but what does wisdom avail with poverty? None will flatter the poor,
and the wise have very little power of flattering themselves. That man is
surely the most wretched of the sons of wretchedness who lives with his own
faults and follies always before him, and who has none to reconcile him to
himself by praise and veneration. I have long sought content and have not found
it; I will from this moment endeavor to be rich.

Full of his new resolution, he shut himself in his chamber for six months, to
deliberate how he should grow rich: he sometimes proposed to offer himself as
counselor to one of the kings of India, and sometimes resolved to dig for
diamonds in the mines of Golconda. One day after some hours passed in violent
fluctuation of opinion, sleep insensibly seized him in his chair: he dreamed
that he was ranging a desert country in search of some one that might teach him
to grow rich; and as he stood on a hill shaded with cypress, in doubt whither
to direct his steps, his father appeared on a sudden, standing before him.
Ortogrul, said the old man, I know thy perplexity, listen to thy father. Cast
thine eye on the opposite mountain. Ortogrul looked and saw a torrent tumbling
down the rocks roaring with the noise of thunder, and scattering its foam on
the impending woods. Now, said his father, look upon the valley that lies
between the hills. Ortogrul looked, and espied a well out of which issued a
small rivulet. Tell me now, said his father, do thou wish for sudden
affluence, that may pour upon thee like the mountain torrent, or for a slow and
gradual increase, resembling the ^ill gliding from the well. Let me be quickly
rich, said Ortogrul let the golden stream be quick and violent. Look round
thee, said his father once again Ortogrul looked and saw the channel of the
torrent dry and dusty, but following the rivulet from the well, he traced it to
a wide lake which the supply, slow and constant, kept always full. He waked and
determined to grow rich by silent prosus and industry.

SELICO.
AN AFRICAN TALE.
By M. FLORIAN.
IF, as the Persians assert, we might believe that the universe is in
subjection to two principles, of which one does the little good which is
conspicious, and the other the evil every where so abundant, we would be
inclined to believe that Africa is the place where the evil principle, in a
particular manner, exercises his power. No portion of the globe produces such
variety of poisons, so many wild beasts and venomous reptiles. The little which
we know of the history of Morocco, of the Negroes of Adra, of Jaggas, the
native inhabitants of the coasts, as far as the country of the Hottentots,
bears a remarkable resemblance to the natural history of lions, panthers, and
serpents, which are so worthy of partaking this parching region with these
cannibal Princes which sell and eat the flesh of their prisoners. In the midst
of these disgusting and horrible scenes, where some sell their children, and
others eat their captives, we sometimes, may discover traces of natural
justice, of genuine virtue, of constancy in suffering, and a generous, contempt
of death. These examples, rare as they may be are sufficient to interest us in
this degraded part of the human species, to make us remember that they still
are men: just as in a barren desert, a few solitary blades of verdure, which
the traveller is from time to time delighted to discover, suffice to convince
him that he still treads upon the earth.

IN the kingdom of Juida, situated on the coast of Guinea, beyond the Cape of
three points, and not far from Sabi, its capital, there lived, in the year
1727, a poor widow, named Darina; she was the mother of three sons, whom she
had brought up with a tenderness fortunately common in human nature, but very
uncommon in the climates where children are considered as an article of trade,
and sold for slaves by their unfeeling parents. The oldest of these were called
Guberi; the second Teloa; and the youngest Selico. All of these were amiable
and sensible; they adored their good mother, who, now grown old and infirm,
lived only by their industry. The wealth of this family consisted only of a
hut, in which they lived together, with a little field contiguous, the maize of
which was their support. Every morning, taking it by turns, one of the three
brothers went to the chase, another worked in the field, the third remained at
home with their mother: in the evening they met, the huntsman produced his
partriges, parrot, or perhaps a little honey; the husbandman brought fuel,
whilst he who stayed at home provided their common meat. They supped
affectionately together, contending who should be most attentive to their
mother: they received her blessing, and reclining upon straw, by the side of
each other, they went to sleep expecting the morrow.

SELICO, the youngest of the brethren, went often to the town to carry the
first fruits of the harvest, the offering of this poor family, to the temple of
the great divinity of their country. This god, it is well known, is a huge
serpent of that species which are not venomous and do no injury; on the
contrary, they destroy those serpents which are venomous; and they are so
venerated at Juida, that it is considered as a horrible crime to put one to
death. Thus the number of these sacred serpents has multiplied without end, in
the midst of their towns and villages, and, even within houses, one meets, at
every step, these deities, who come familiarly to feel at the tables of their
worshippers, sleeping near their fires, and producing their young upon their
beds; which last is considered by them at the happiest of omens.

OF all the Negroes of Juida, Selico was the blackest, the best made, and the
most amiable. In the temple of their great deity he had seen the young Berissa,
daughter to the Chief Priest, who, by her figure, her beauty, and her grace,
was far superior to all her companions. Selico conceived a passion for her, and
was beloved in return. Every Friday, the day sacred amongst the Negroes to
repose and religion, the young lover appeared at the temple, passed the day in
the society of his dear Berissa, told her of his mother, his tender passion,
and of the happiness they should enjoy when united in marriage. Berissa did not
appear to conceal that she equally desired this moment to arrive; and the
venerable Farulho, her father, who approved of the connection, promised, with
embraces, soon to reward their tenderness.

AT length this period, so anxiously expected, drew nigh. -- The day was fixed;
the mother of Selico and the two brothers had made ready the hut for the young
couple, when the famous Truro Audati, King of Dahomai, whose rapid victories
have been celebrated even in Europe, invading the kingdom of Ardra,
exterminating the inhabitants, and advancing at the head of his formidable
army, was checked only by the great river which bounded the realms of the
sovereign of Juida. This last a week and timid Prince, governed by his women
and his ministers, did not think even of collecting a few troops to oppose the
conqueror. He believed that the deities of the country knew well enough how to
defend the entrance, and carried to the banks of the river all the sacred
serpents that could be got together. The Prince of Dahomai, surprised and
indignant at having only reptiles to combat, threw himself into the stream with
his troops, and gained the opposite bank, and very soon these gods, from whom
miracles were expected, were cut to pieces, roasted on the fire, and devoured
by the conquerors. Then the King of Juida, thinking that nothing else could
save him, abandoned his capital, and hastened to conceal himself in a remote
island. The warriors of Audati spread themselves every where, carrying with
them fire and sword. -- They burned the crops, towns, and villages, and
massacred without mercy all that they could find.

TERROR dispersed the few inhabitants who escaped the carnage. The three
brothers, on the approach of the conquerors, had taken their mother on their
shoulders and hastened to conceal themselves in the woods. Selico would not
leave Darina whilst she was exposed to the smallest danger; but the moment he
saw her in safety, trembling for the fate of Berissa, he flew to Sabi, to save
or perish with her. Sabi was taken by the Dahomians. The streets flowed with
blood! the houses were plundered and destroyed; the palace of the King and the
temple of the serpent were nothing but smoking ruins, covered with dead
bodies, whose heads, according to custom, the barbarian^ had carried away. The
wretched Selico in despair, and wishing for death, ventured many times amongst
the soldiers intoxicated with brandy and blood! Every where did Selico rush
(...) the (...) scenes, seeking Berissa and (...), pronouncing their names
sorrowfully aloud, and unable to recognize their bodies amongst so many (...)
trunks!

AFTER dedicating five days to this terrible search, doubting not but that
Berissa and her father had become the victims of the ferocious Dahomians,
Selico determined to return to his mother. He found her in the wood where he
had left her with his brothers. The fixed sorrow of Selico, his manner, and his
wild looks, terrified this unhappy family! Darina lamented his misfortune, and
tried various consolations; to all of which her son was insensible. He refused
all nourishment, and seemed determined to expire by famine. Guberi and Teloa
did not attempt to (...) him by argument and reason, but they pointed to their
venerable (...) who had neither house nor bread, nor any thing left her but her
children. -- They demanded of him. whether at that sight he had not the courage
to live?

SELICO promised that he would, and forced himself to think of nothing but of
dividing with his two brothers the tender attentions which they paid their
parent. They plunged in to the woods, went still farther from Sabi, built
themselves a hut in a remote valley, and thought of supplying by the chase, the
maize and the vegetables which they were without.

DEPRIVED of their bows and arrows, and of all their other necessaries, which
they had no time to carry away, they soon began to feel the extreme of misery.
Fruits were in these forests rarely to be found, where the prodigious number of
apes were always prepared to dispute them with the three brothers. The earth
produced nothing but (...). They had no instrument to turn, nor grain to plant
it. The rainy season came on, and the horrors of famine attacked them. The poor
mother always in misery, reclined upon a bed of dry leaves, was ready to
expire, but without a complaint. Her sons, exhibited by hunger, could no longer
penetrate the woods which were deluged every where: they laid traps for the
little birds which came near their hut, and when they took one, which rarely
happened, for they had no longer any (...), they carried it to their parent,
and presenting it to her, forced from her a fa^^e; but she would not eat it
unless divided with her children. Three months passed without any promise of
change to their miserable situation. Compelled at length to take some step,
they held a consultation at the desire of Darina. Guberi proposed first they
should penetrate as far as the coast, and sell one of their number to the first
European they might meet; and to purchase with the money, bread, maize, and
instruments of agriculture, with which they might support their mother. The
brothers replied to this, but with a melancholy silence -- To separate from
each other for ever! to become the slaves of white men! the Idea drove them
near to distraction. 'Which shall be sold?' cried Teloa, in a tone of grief.
'Lots must decide it,' replied Guberi. Let us place three stones of different
sizes in this clay vessel, shake them together, and he who draws the least,
must be the unhappy person. -- No, my brother,' interrupted Selico, the lot is
already drawn. I am the most miserable of all; you forget that I have lost
Berissa, and that you alone prevented me from dying, by saying I might be
useful to my mother. Confirm what you have said -- this is the time -- sell me!

GUBERI and Teloa attempted in vain to oppose the generous purpose of their
brother; Selico resisted their expostulations, refused to draw his lot, and
threatened to go by himself if they would not accompany him; at length the two
eldest gave way. It was agreed that Guberi should continue with his mother, and
that Teloa should conduct Selico to the Dutch fort, where he should receive the
price of his brother's liberty, and that he should immediately return with the
provisions which they wanted. When this was determined, Selico alone forbore to
weep, but he found it difficult indeed to restrain them when he was to leave
his mother, bid her an eternal adieu, embrace her for the last time, and what
is more, deceive her by promising soon to return with Teloa, saying that they
were only about to visit their former habitation, and to see if they could
again take possession of it. The good old woman believed them, yet she could
hardly tear herself from her sons arms; she trembled at the danger they were
about to encounter: and, by an involuntary motion, ran after Selico the moment
she lost sight of his person.

THE two brothers, of whom it could not be said which was most unhappy, in a
short time arrived at Sabi. Murder had then ceased, peace began again to smile,
the king of Dahomai undisturbed possessor of the States of Juida, wished to
encourage a commerce with Europeans, whom he invited to his city. Many English
and French merchants were received at the Monarch's court, who sold them his
numerous prisoners, and divided amongst his troops the lands of the vanquished.
Teola soon found a merchant who offered him an hundred crowns for his young
brother. As he hesitated, trembled in all his limbs, and disputed about this
horrible bargain, a trumpet was heard, and a public crier announced with a loud
voice, that the king of Dahomai promised: our hundred ounces of gold to whoever
would bring him alive a young Negro, who the night before bad dared to profane
the scraglio of the Monarch, and had escaped toward the cast, from the pursuit
of the guards. Selico heard the proclamation, made a sign to Teloa not to
conclude his bargain with the merchant; and taking his brother aside, spoke to
him thus, in a firm tone: You are come to sell me, and I wished that you
should, in order to support my mother, but the small sum which this white
offers you cannot prove of material importance; four hundred ounces of gold
will secure certain wealth for ever to you and Daria. You must get this my
brother; bind me this moment, and carry me to the King as the guilty person
whom he wants, -- Be not alarmed, I know as well as you do what punishment I
have to expect, I have calculated how long it will endure, it will not exceed
an hour, and when my mother brought me forth she suffered more.

TELOA trembling could make no (...) with tenderness and affection, he (...) at
the feet of Selico, embraced his knees, conjured him in the name of his mother,
of Berissa, by all he held dear, to renounce his terrible purpose. 'Of whom do
you speak,' said Selico, with a severe smile. I have lost Berissa, and I wish
to meet her again. I save my mother's life by my death, I make my brothers rich
for ever, and I escape a slavery which might be protracted for forty years. My
choice is made, press me no farther, or I go and surrender myself; you will
then lose all advantage by my death, and you will occasion misery to her to
whom we owe our lives.

AWED by the manner and the accent in which Selico pronounced these last words,
Teloa ventured not to reply; he obeyed his brother, went and got cords, bound
his hands behind him, bathing the knots with his tears, and, making him walk
before him proceeded to the King's palace.

STOPPED by the guards, he demanded an audience of the King: he was announced
and introduced. The King of Dahomai, covered with gold and precious stones, was
reclining on a fear let sofa, his head resting on the bosom of his favori^es,
who were dressed in rich brocaded silks, but were naked from the waist upwards.
His ministers and officers superbly dressed, were prostrate twenty feet from
him. The most valiant were distinguished by a collar of human teeth, each of
which testified a victory. Many females with muskets on their shoulders guarded
the door of the apartment. Large golden vases containing palm wine, brandy, and
strong liquors, were placed at some distance from the King, and the hall was
paved with the sculls of his enemies. 'Sovereign of the world!' cried Teloa,
prostrating himself on the ground, I come in compliance with your sacred orders
to deliver into your hands --. He could not finish, and his voice died away
upon his lips. The King interrogated him, but he could make no reply. At length
Selico began:

'KING of Dahomai,' said he, you see before you the guilty wretch who, induced
by a guilty passion last night, penetrated the recesses of your seraglio. He
who brings me here in chains was a long time my friend and I did not fear to
trust him with my secret. Zeal for your service has prevailed with him to
violate his friendship. He surprised me in my sleep, has loaded me with chains,
and comes to demand the reward; give it him for the miserable man has deserved
it.

THE King, without vouchsafing any answer, made a sign to one of his officers,
who, viewing the prisoner, gave him into the custody of the female guards, and
paid Teloa the four hundred ounces of gold. This last, taking the gold, the
touch of which agonized his soul, went and purchased provisions; and,
precipitately leaving the town, made hade to his mother.

ALREADY, by order of the Prince, they were making ready the horrible
punishment to which they are doomed who commit adultery with the wives of the
sovereign. Two large trenches are sunk at a small distance from each other. In
that which is intended for the guilty female, they fix the unfortunate culprit
to a stake, and all the women of the seraglio, clothed in their most sumptuous
dresses, carrying in their hands large vessels of boiling water, advance to the
found of tabors and flutes, to pour this water upon her head till she expires.
The other trench contains a pile of wood, upon which they place a cross bar of
iron, which is supported by two raised stakes. To this bar the criminal is
secured, fire is set to the pile and the wretched creatures pe^^sh after
protracted torments, being only reached by the extremities of the flame.

THE place was filled with people; the troops under aims formed a square,
beating their spears and muskets; the priests, in their dresses of ceremony,
waited for the two victims to lay their hands upon them and devote them to
death. They appeared from different corners, guarded by the armed females.
Selico, calm and resigned, advanced with his head raised up. When he came
toward the stake he could not avoid lifting his eyes toward the companion of
his misery. What was his astonishment and grief on beholding Berissa! He
uttered a loud cry, and would have darted to her, but was withheld by the
executioners. Soon his first emotion gave way to indignation -- 'Wretch! that I
am,' he cried, whilst I courted death, hoping again to meet her, she was
amongst these vile females who contend for a tyrant's affections. Not content
with her (...) in love, the was also faithless to her master; she deserved the
tide of adultress, and the punishment of her crime. Oh, my mother! for thee
alone I die -- it is on thee alone that I can bear to think!

At this instant the wretched Berissa recognizing Selico uttered a loud scream;
she called the priests, and declared to them aloud, that the young man they
were about to kill, was not he who had penetrated the seraglio. She swore this
by the heavens, by the mountains, the thunder and the most august of the sacred
serpents. The priests intimidated, ordered the execution to be suspended, and
ran to inform the king, who was himself present. Indignation and fury disturbed
the countenance of the monarch when he approached Berissa. -- 'Slave!' said he
in a terrible voice -- thou who contemnest the love of thy master, thou whom I
would have raised to the rank of my first sultana, and who in spite of your
refu^al, I have suffered to live, what is your purpose in pretending to deny
the guilt of your accomplice. Do thou wish to save him. If this be not thy
lover, name who he is -- deliver the guilty to my justice, I will release the
innocent!

'King of Dahomai,' replied Berissa, who was already secured to the fatal
stake, I cannot accept thy heart I possess not my own; I did not fear to tell
you so. Do you think that she who would not live to share a crown, would speak
a falsehood at the moment of death! No, I confess all, and repeat my refusal. A
man did last night enter my apartment, he did not leave it till the morning --
but this was not the man! You ask me to name him, I ought not, I will not; I am
ready to die; I know that nothing can save me, and I only protract the fatal
moment to prevent you from perpetrating a crime. I again swear to you, king of
Dahomai, that the blood of this innocent person will fall upon your head:
deliver him, and punish me! I have no more to say.

The king was struck with Berissa's words, as well as with her manner of
pronouncing them. He gave no orders, but reclining his head, was astonished at
the reluctance which he this moment felt to shed blood. But remembering that
this negro had accused himself, and attributing to love, the interest which
Berissa discovered for him, all his rage was rekindled. He made a sign to the
executioners; the pile was lighted, the women advanced with their vessels of
boiling water, when an old man out of breath, covered with wounds and dust,
burst through the crowd, and suddenly threw himself at the feet of the king.

'Stop!' said he, I implore you stop; I alone am the guilty person; it is I who
have burst through the walls of your seraglio, attempting the delivery of my
daughter. I was once the high priest of the deity who was here adored. They
tore my child from my arms, and conducted her to this palace. Since that time,
I eagerly have sought an opportunity to see her again. This last night I
penetrated to her apartment -- in vain did she attempt to follow me, for your
guards discovered us. I escaped alone, notwithstanding the arrows with which
you see me pierced. I come to offer you your victim! I come to expire with her,
for whom alone I desired to live!

He had had hardly finished when the king commanded the priests to release the
unhappy prisoners, and bring them before him. -- He examined Selico, wishing to
know what important motive could induce him voluntarily to seek so dreadful a
punishment.

Selico, whose heart panted with joy at finding Berissa again, and faithful,
was not afraid to reveal every thing to the Monarch. He related to him his
misfortunes, the distresses of his mother, and the resolution he had taken to
obtain for her the four hundred ounces of gold. Berissa and her father heard
him with tears of delight and admiration: the chiefs the soldiers, and the
people melted with tenderness: the king himself perceived tears to fall, which
never before had bedewed his cheeks. -- Such is the charm of virtue, that
barbarians themselves adore it!

After hearing Selico, the king gave him his hand, and bade him rise, and,
turning to the European merchants, whom this spectacle had collected, 'You,'
said he, to whom wisdom, experience, and the illumination of a long
civilization, have so long taught what is the specific value of a man, Of how
much value think you is this? A young Frenchman more bold than the rest,
exclaimed, Ten thousand crowns of gold! -- Which shall be given to Berissa,
said the king, with this she may purchase the hand of Selico.

This order was executed on the spot, and the king of Dahomai retired,
astonished at feeling a delight he had never before experienced.

Farulho the very same day gave his daughter to Selico. The young couple,
accompanied by the old man, departed next day with their treasure, to go in
search of Darina. She, as well as the brothers of Selico, were ready almost to
expire from joy. -- This virtuous family separated no more, but well enjoyed
their riches, and in a barbarous region, offered, for a long period, the
fairest example which heaven could give to the earth -- that of happiness and
wealth produced by virtue.

GOLDSMITH's Essay on the wisdom of Providence, in the construction of nature.
WHERE Taurus lifts its head above the storm, and presents nothing to the sight
of the distant traveller, but a prospect of nodding rocks, falling torrents,
and all the variety of tremendous nature; on the bleak bosom of this frightful
mountain, secluded from society, and detesting the ways of men, lived Asem the
man hater.

Asem had spent his youth with men, had shared in their amusements; and had
been taught to love his fellow creatures with the most ardent affection: but,
from the tenderness of his disposition, he exhausted all his fortune in
relieving the wants of the distressed. The petitioner never sued in vain; the
weary traveller never passed his door; he only desisted from doing good, when
he had no longer the power of relieving.

From a fortune thus spent in benevolence, he expected a grateful return from
those he had formerly relieved, and made his application with confidence of
redress: the ungrateful world soon grew weary of his importunity; for pity is
but a short lived passion. He soon, therefore, began to view mankind in a very
different light from that in which he had before beheld them. He perceived a
thousand vices he had never before expected to exist; wherever he turned,
ingratitude, dissimulation, and treachery, contributed to increase his
detestation of them. Resolved therefore to continue no longer in a world which
he hated, and which repaid his detestation with contempt, he retired to this
region of sterility, in order to brood over his resentment in solitude, and
converse with the only honest heart he knew, namely, with his own.

A cave was his only shelter from the inclemency of the weather; fruits
gathered with difficulty from the mountain's side, his only food; and his drink
was fetched with danger and to^^ from the headlong torrent. In this manner he
lived, sequestered from society, passing the hours in meditation, and sometimes
exulting that he was able to live independently of his fellow creatures.

At the foot of the mountain, an extensive lake displayed its glassy bosom
reflecting on its broad surface the impending horrors of the mountain. To this
capacious mirror he would sometimes descend, and reclining on its steep bank,
cast an eager look on the smooth expanse that lay before him. "How beautiful,"
he often cried, is nature! how lovely, even in her wildest scenes! How finely
contrasted is the level plain that lies beneath me, with you awful pile that
hides its tremendous head in clouds! But the beauty of these scenes is no way
comparable with their utility: from hence an hundred rivers are supplied, which
distribute health and verdure to the various countries through which they flow.
Every part of the universe is beautiful, just, and wise: but man, vile man, is
a solecism in nature, the only monster in the creation. Tempests and whirlwinds
have their use; but vicious, ungrateful man, is a blot in the fair page of
universal beauty. Why was I born of that detested species, whose vices are
almost a reproach to the wisdom of the divine Creator! were men entirely free
from vice, all would be uniformity, harmony and order. A world of moral
rectitude, should be the result of a perfectly moral agent. Why, why then, O
Alla! must I be thus confined in darkness, doubt, and despair!"

Just as he uttered the word despair, he was going to plunge into the lake
beneath him, at once to satisfy his doubts, and put a period to his anxiety;
when he perceived a most majestic being walking on the surface of the water,
and approaching the bank on which he stood. So unexpected an object at once
checked his purpose: he stopped, contemplated, and fancied he saw something
awful and divine in his aspect.

"Son of Adam," cried the genius, "stop thy rash purpose; the father of the
faithful has seen thy justice, thy integrity, thy miseries, and has sent me to
afford and administer relief. Give me thine hand, and follow, without
trembling, wherever I shall lead. In me behold the genius of conviction, kept
by the great Prophet, to turn from their errors those who go astray, not from
curiosity, but a rectitude of intention. Follow me, and be wise."

Asem immediately descended upon the lake, and his guide conducted him along
the surface of the water, till, coming near the center of the lake, they both
began to sink; the waters closed over their heads; they descended several
hundred fathoms, till Asem, just ready to give up his life as inevitably lost,
found himself with his celestial guide in another world, at the bottom of the
waters, where human foot had never trod before. His astonishment was beyond
description, when he saw a sun like that he had left, a serene sky over his
head, and blooming verdure under his feet.

"I plainly perceive your amazement," said the genius; "but suspend it for a
while. This world was formed by Alla, at the request, and under the inspection
of our great prophet; who once entertained the same doubts which filled your
mind when I found you, and from the consequence of which you were so lately
rescued. The rational inhabitants of this world are formed agreeable to your
own ideas; they are absolutely without vice. In other respect, it resembles
your earth, but differs from it in being wholly inhabited by men who never do
wrong. If you find this world more agreeable than that you so lately left, you
have free permission to spend the remainder of your days in it; but permit me,
for some time, to attend you, that I may silence your doubt, and make you
better acquainted with your company and your new habitation."

"A world without vice! Rational beings without immortality!" cried Asem, in a
rapture; "I thank thee, O Alla, who have at length heard my petitions: this,
this indeed will produce happiness, ecstacy and ease. O for an immortality, to
spend it among men who are incapable of ingratitude, injustice, fraud,
violence, and a thousand other crimes, that render society miserable!"

"Cease thine acclamations," replied the genius. "Look around thee; reflect on
every object and action before us, and communicate to me the result of thine
observations. Lead wherever you think proper, I shall be your attendant and
instructor." Asem and his companion traveled on in silence for some time, the
former being entirely lost in astonishment; but, at last, recovering his former
serenity, he could not help observing, that the face of the country bore a near
resemblance to that he had left, except that this subterranean world still
seemed to retain its primeval wildness.

"Here," cried Asem, "I perceive animals of prey, and others that seem only
designed for their subsistence; it is the very same in the world over our
heads. But had I been permitted to instruct our prophet, I would have removed
this defect, and formed no voracious or destructive animals, which only prey on
the other parts of the creation." "Your tenderness for inferior animals is, I
find, remarkable," said the genius, smiling. "But, with regard to meaner
creatures, this world exactly resemble; the other; and, indeed, for obvious
reasons; for the earth can support a more considerable number of animals, by
their thus becoming food for each other, than if they had lived entirely on the
vegetable productions. So that animals of different natures thus formed,
instead of lessening their multitude, subsist in the greatest number possible.
But let us hasten on to the inhabited country before us, and see what that
offers for instruction."

They soon gained the utmost verge of the forest, and entered the country
inhabited by men without vice; and Asem anticipated in idea the rational
delight he hoped to experience in such an innocent society. But they had scarce
left the confines of the wood, when they beheld one of the inhabitants flying,
with hasty steps, with terror in his countenance, from an army of squirrels,
that closely pursued him. "Heavens!" cried Asem, "why does he fly? What can he
fear from animals so contemptible?" He had scarce spoken, when he perceived two
dogs pursuing another of the human species, who, with equal terror and haste
attempted to avoid them. "(...) his," cried Asem to his guide, "is truly
surprising; nor can I conceive the reason for so strange an action," "Every
species of animals," replied the genius, "has of late, grown very powerful in
this country; for the inhabitants, at first, thinking it unjust to use either
fraud or force in destroying them, they have insensibly increased, and now
frequently ravage their harmless frontiers." "But they should have been
destroyed," cried Asem; "you see the consequence of such neglect," "Where is
then that tenderness you so lately expressed for subordinate animals!" replied
the genius, smiling; "I must acknowledge my mistake," returned Asem: " I am now
convinced that we must be guilty of tyranny and injustice to the brute
creation, if we would enjoy the world ourselves. But let us no longer observe
the duty of man to these irrational creatures, but survey their connections
with one another."

As they walked farther up the country, the more he was surprised to see no
vestiges of handsome houses, no cities, nor any mark of elegant design. His
conductor perceiving his surprise, observed, that the inhabitants of this new
world were perfectly content with their ancient simplicity, each had an house,
which, though homely, was sufficient to lodge his little family; they were too
good to build houses, which could only increase their own pride, and the envy
of the spectator; what they built was for convenience, and not for show.
"Atleast, then," said Asem, "they have neither architects, painters, or
statuaries, in their society; but these are idle arts, and may be spared.
However, before I spend much more time here, you should have my thanks for
introducing me into the society of some of their wisest men: there is scarce
any pleasure to me equal to a refined conversation; there is nothing of which I
am so enamoured as wisdom." "Wisdom!" replied his instructor, "how ridiculous!
We have no wisdom here, for we have no occasion for it; true wisdom is only a
knowledge of our own duty and the duty of others to us; but of what use is such
wisdom here? each intuitively performs what is right in himself, and expects
the same from others. If, by wisdom, you should mean vain curiosity and empty
speculation; as such pleasures have their origin in vanity, luxury, or avarice,
we are too good to pursue them," "All this may be right," says Asem; but
methinks I observe a solitary disposition prevail among the people; each family
keeps separately within their own precincts without society or without
intercourse." "That indeed is true," replied the other; "here is no established
society; nor should there be any: all societies are made either through fear or
friendship; the people we are among are too good to fear each other; and there
are no motives to private friendship, where all are equally meritorious." "Well
then," said the skeptic, "as I am to spend my time here, if I am to have
neither the polite arts, nor wisdom, nor friendship in such a world, I should
be glad, at least, of an easy companion, who may tell me his thoughts, and to
whom I may communicate mine." "And to what purpose should either do this?" says
the genius: flattery or curiosity are vicious motives, and never allowed of
here; and wisdom is out of the question."

"Still, however," said Asem, "the inhabitants must be happy; each is contented
with his own possessions, nor avariciously endeavors to heap up more than his
own subsistence; each has therefore leisure to pity those that stand in need of
his compassion." He had scarce spoken when his ears were assaulted with the
lamentations of a wretch who sat by the way side, and, in the most deplorable
distress, seemed gently to murmur at his own misery. Asem immediately ran to
his relief, and found him in the last stage of a consumption. "Strange," cried
the son of Adam, "that men who are free from vice should thus suffer so much
misery without relief!" "Be not surprised," said the wretch who was dying,
"would it not be the utmost injustice for beings, who have only just sufficient
to support themselves, and are content with a bare subsistence, to take it from
their own mouths to put it into mine? They never are possessed of a single meal
more than is necessary; and what is barely necessary, cannot be dispensed with."

"They should have been supplied with more than is necessary," cried Asem; and
yet I contradict my own opinion but a moment before: all is doubt, perplexity,
and confusion. Even the want of ingratitude is no virtue here, since they never
received a favor. They have, however, another excellency yet behind; the love
of their country is still, I hope, one of their darling virtues." "Peace,
Asem," replied the guardian, with a countenance not less severe than beautiful,
"nor forfeit all thy pretentions to wisdom; the same selfish motives by which
we prefer our own interest to that of others, induce us to regard our country
preferably to that of another. Nothing less than universal benevolence is free
from vice, and that you see is practiced here." "Strange!" cries the
disappointed pilgrim, in an agony of distress; "what sort of a world am I
introduced to? There is scarce a single virtue but that of temperance, which
they practice: and, in tha^, they are no way superior to the very brute
creation. There is scarce an amusement which they enjoy: fortitude, liberality,
friendship, wisdom, conversation, and love of country, all are virtues entirely
unknown here; thus it seems that to be unacquainted with vice is not to know
virtue. Take me, O my genius, back to that very world which I have despised; a
world which has Alla for its contriver, is much more wisely formed th^^ that
which has been projected by Manomet. Ingratitude, contempt, and hatred, I can
now suffer; for perhaps I have deserved them. When I arraigned the wisdom of
Providence, I only showed my own ignorance; hence for the let me keep from vice
myself, and pity it in others."

He had scarce ended, when the genius, assuming an air of terrible complacency,
called all his thunders around him, and vanished in a whirlwind. Asem,
astonished at the terror of the scene, looked for his imaginary world; when,
casting his eyes around, he perceived himself in the very situation, and in the
very place where he first began to repine and despair: his right foot had been
just advanced to take the fatal plunge, nor had it been yet withdrawn; so
instantly did Providence strike the series of truths just imprinted on his
soul. He now departed from the water side in tranquillity, and, leaving his
horrid mansion, traveled to Segestan, his native city; where he dilligently
applied himself to commerce, and put in practice that wisdom he had learned in
solitude. The frugality of a few years soon produced opulence; the number of
his domestics increased; his friends came to him from every part of the city;
nor did he recieve them with disdain: and a youth of misery was concluded with
an old age of elegance, affluence, and ease.

The history of Amelia Stanford, written by herself.
IT may probably be asked, by the gay witling, who skims over the surface of
things -- who speculates on life, without enquiring seriously into its nature
or design -- why mankind are so prone to dwell on the shades of a picture --
why, in a retrospect of life, the mind pauses on scenes that impart no gaiety
to the fancy, and awake no rapture in the heart? the answer is obvious: it is
the law of our nature. The wisdom of heaven has thought proper, so to
constitute the hearts of many, as to render them most happy in the indulgence
of that philosophic melancholy -- that tender pensiveness, which enobles the
soul, while it depresses the spirits, and gives, beyond any circumstance on
earth, a foretaste of those joys in heaven, "which the eye has not seen -- nor
the car heard -- neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive."
Influenced by this motive, it is, that I often wander back to past periods,
that I recall, in imagination, scenes which were ^^nce painful in the extreme,
and dwell upon them till my heart distends almost to bursting, and is only
relieved by a torrent of delicious tears. Daily experience proves to me the
truth of Moore's position, that -- Even the soft sorrow of remembered woe,
A not unpleasing sadness can bestow.


From the frequent endurance of this "sadness," produced by the recollection of
past events, in moments of retirement and dejection -- and finding the remark
of the wilest of men, justified by my own experience, "that by the sadness of
the countenance, the heart is made better," I have come to the (...), of
committing the substance of my (...) to writing. To some of those dear off
(...), who bear my likeness and my name, perhaps the written memorial, of what
they have often heard, may not be unacceptable. Perhaps some friends across the
Atlantic, may be interested in this literary bequest. And when they compare the
once cheerful Amelia Seymour, with the unfortunate Amelia Stanford, they will
commiserate the devoted girl, will sympathize in her misfortunes, and be
grateful on heaven for an exemption from similar calamities.

My father whose name was William Seymour, lived in the town of Bristol, in
England, and followed merchandise. In the early part of my life, he had been
successful in business, and had prudently deposited a competency in the funds,
in case of accidents (to which trade is proverbially exposed.) He married
early, and had several children, all of whom he lost young, expect an elder
sister and myself. While my father was in the full career of success, my sister
married a gentleman of fortune, family, education and benevolence. He lived on
his income at no great distance from my father's, on a small but highly
cultivated estate.

When the moment arrived in which my sister was to part with the home where she
had been reared, and from the dear connections who had hither to gladdened her
existence -- her heart sunk -- her resolution vanished -- she insisted on my
attending her -- and making one of her family, until she could, (...) degree,
lose the remembrance of home. I was young, but fifteen years of age, -- and was
pleased with the scene for its novelty. I accordingly took my leave of home to
stay a few weeks with my sister. Three months I passed with her in
uninterrupted happiness. Time then had the doves wings, we received the highest
attentions the neighbors could pay us, and, possessed as we truly were of
"health, peace and competence" the poet's definition of happiness: in reading,
conversation, visits and work, we enjoyed life as highly as mortals could do.

But the tide was now to ebb, the scene was to undergo a change, -- a change
which first brought me to an acquaintance with sorrow and misfortune. I was
suddenly sent for home, my mother was said to be dangerously ill -- she had
taken a violent cold which brought on a pleurisy, -- a high fever accompanied
it -- she became delirious, and her life was despaired of by the physicians. We
arrived in time to behold her a living mother. About the time we reached my
father's house her disorder seemed to take a favorable turn -- She became
herself, she recognized her children -- and possessed her reason enough to give
us her dying blessing and parting advice. "I feel, said she, my children,
taking us in her arms, as she sat up in her bed, and embracing us most
tenderly, I feel the powers of nature failing, -- my nerves are weakened, my
heart has that awful fluttering which assures me of approaching death." Our
sobs here interrupted her address, but resuming the subject with a tremulous
voice and an aspect in which heaven itself was seated, she continued, "the cold
hand of death is already laid upon me -- I feel an icy torpor creeping through
my veins: let me tell my daughters all my heart ere it be forever too late. --
To the goodness of God and the care of his divine providence I then recommend
you both -- the God who has protected and guided the parent from infancy to
mature age, will not forget the offspring. Trust in him my children; and he
will never betray your trust. Resort to him for (...) and comfort in moments of
distress, and he will not refuse his assistance. He has promised to be a father
to the orphan, and his promise is infallible. Commit yourselves to him and he
will amply supply the loss of that mother, whom I trust, he will in a few short
moments receive to himself.

"The period that has been allotted me in (...) has not been very long. I have
not yet reached my fortieth year. I trust, however, I have lived to some good
purpose; I have through life considered the love and service of the Supreme
Being as the first object to be desired and armed at -- and next to this, the
happiness of my fellow creatures. In these principles, I hope my dear children
will follow the example of an affectionate parent, and believe her (who has no
interest to disguise the truth) that through life, you will find the love and
service of your Maker the most delightful employment you can be engaged in, and
the surest road to solid happiness. In your intercourse with the world, you
will find the pleasures of sense the great objects of desire and of praise --
the serious and useful qualities of the heart, so warmly recommended by our
Savior, the topics of ridicule and too often of contempt. But aim at acquiring
an opinion of your own, formed on the word of inspiration, and the most
judicious moral writers. This will be an anchor to keep your barks steady and
firm, amidst the storms of controversy, and the currents of popular opinion.

"Be kind and charitable to all with whom you are in any wise connected --
endeavor to consider their interest and happiness as your own. -- Never lose
sight of our Savior's golden rule, "of doing to others as you would that they
also in like circumstances, should do unto you;" forgive their (...) and their
errors -- there is a noble and sweet satisfaction in forgiving which elevated
and refined souls only know. Never was there a more untrue maxim, than that
"revenge is sweet:" to little and malevolent minds it may be so -- it may seem
so in the first gust of passion -- but when anger has subsided and the mind
reflects on the past, nothing is more painful to a good heart than to remember,
that is has been the cause of an injury to another which it cannot repair.

"And believe me, my children, when you come to the situation in which you
behold your mother now, the only parts of your life to which you will look back
with pleasure, will be those in which you have relieved misery, and conferred
happiness by doing good: -- and rest satisfied -- but I feel a deadly sickness,
my God support me in this last trial." Here a faintness seized her -- she fell
back, and -- a general shriek of horror pervaded the chamber -- she opened her
eyes, -- they soon closed again -- and with one deep groan her spirit returned
to him who gave it.

The impressions made on the mind of us all, by such an event, may be
pourtrayed by fancy but never by language. My father who was a man of warm
feelings, and a most affectionate disposition was in a degree frantic. He was
still through the day: now and then he would break out into violent fits of
weeping, which would subside again and leave him composed and melancholy: but
at night he had no sooner closed his eyes than he became wild and flighty. We
were obliged to keep a light in his room and to have a servant with him all
night. He needed consolation but who could impart it? -- we were all so
depressed by the sudden misfortune, that neither could give comfort to the
other.

For my own part, I felt myself so overwhelmed by the stroke, that my heart
literally died within me. I felt for my own situation, but if possible I
suffered more for my father's -- I considered myself, indeed, as deprived of my
best friend and instructress, I foresaw the loss I should sustain in the want
of her advice and guidance: and I shuddered at the snares and difficulties I
might be exposed to in early life, thus destitute of her patronage, and society
-- but what were these, compared to my fathers feelings! to have the nearest
friend of his bosom thus torn away -- the friend he had early and long loved as
himself -- thus wrested from his arms forever -- was a state of forlorn
wretchedness from which human nature recoils and which he was not calculated to
endure. Indeed, such was the effect this had on him, that he closed his
accounts -- withdrew from business, and purchased a small country seat not far
from his son-in-law's, to which he immediately retired.

On his first retreat his spirits utterly abandoned him -- he lost the vivacity
which once distinguished him, became fond of solitary walks, and was much alone
in his chamber. Depressed as I was myself, I found it necessary to make
exertions to draw him into conversation, and to prevent his mind from ^^ring
over subjects that were too melancholy and dejecting.

My sister and my brother in law often visited us -- and by their conversation
and tenderness relieved my father's mind greatly of its depressive gloom --
Time however, did more for him than our exertions: the traits of grief faded
from his heart gradually -- till within the compass of a year, he began at
times to resume something of his former gaiety, and sprightliness yet shortly
after a turn of gaiety he would (...) into dejection. He was never sprightly
without being afterward proportionally grave. He now began however, to find
himself able to converse of my departed mother, -- to recall her memory -- to
praise her virtues -- and to recommend them to my imitation. Indeed this was
less necessary than he imagined; they had deeply impressed my mind, though I
knew it not till she was gone.

I was not the only person however, with whom he conversed of his lamented
wife. There was a neighboring widow lady who lived about half a mile from us,
to whom he used often to unfold his heart and to disclose its sorrows -- the
heard him with attention, assented to the praises he bestowed on his lost
consort -- admired his affection and sympathised in his distress. At first he
used to resort there but seldom: her society however, I found became every day
more necessary to him, -- little did I at first imagine what would be the
result of these visits: -- but when he began to request me to visit her with
him, I conjectured that his views extended further than ordinary, friendship.
Yet this idea was not an obvious one: for although the lady was apparently a
discreet, amiable manageing woman, yet the disparity between their ages, she
being the older by several years, her singular want of beauty, her having two
or three children, and being rather in low circumstances, would have led any
one to believe she never could be my father's choice: -- but heaven thought
otherwise -- my father had fixed his heart upon the matter: and reason was to
have the nothing to say on the subject. -- He accordingly one day as we sat
together at breakfast, in a very pensive mood, opened the plan and asked my
opinion of the matter.

Apprized as I was in my own mind of his intention. I felt myself suddenly and
extremely affected by the disclosure. I was obliged to rise and leave the room,
a gush of tears succeeded, and relieved my heart; as soon as I had recovered
myself, I returned and pursuing the subject requested he would pardon this
involuntary piece of weakness -- that I perfectly accorded with him in
sentiment -- "whatever, said I, will promote my dear father's happiness, I
shall always readily acquiesce in. One parent is all I have now on earth, and
should I not wish to see him happy* kind and affectionate as he has ever been
to me, what an ingrate should I be, in the smallest measure to obstruct his
wishes. No, my dear papa, though my tears would seem to express dissatisfaction
at your plan, that sentiment is the farthest from my heart. If mrs. L -- be
your choice, I will make her as dutiful a daughter as I trust I have been to
you" --

At these words, my father could restrain himself no longer -- he took me to
his arms -- he pre^s'd me to his bosom -- called me his dear affectionate
little girl -- we both wept profusely -- till our utterance was stopped and we
were both obliged to part, to conceal our mutual weakness. In a word, before
many weeks had elapsed, my father again became a husband, and brought home his
lady and her train, and was again, in possession (to all appearance) of as much
happiness as his heart could contain -- but widely different was the situation
of his daughter. Of little consequence in the family -- slighted by my mother
in law whenever my father was absent, and treated rudely by her children -- I
confined myself much to my books and devotions -- but would a^ any time have
cheerfully exchanged situations with the independent sempstress or mil^ner,
whose daily bread was earned by the labor of their own hands.

I will now go back a few years, to trace a series of events that interested my
heart, and became the innocent cause of all my subsequent misfortunes. Some
time before the marriage of my sister, (...) bec^me accidentally acquainted
with a (...) Stanford, who lived a few doors from my father's house. Our
disposition and taste being in a great degree similar, our frequent
opportunities of seeing each other rendered (...) in a short time romantically
intimate: a day could not pass but we must see each other: our hearts were laid
ba^e to each other. Whatever little attention or admiration either received,
was made known to the confidant^ -- our billets doux were all preserved, and
mutually communicated; in short it would have seemed like treason to friendship
and tenderness in either to have concealed any thought or weakness of the heart
from her friend. Among other testimonies of miss Stanford's affection for me
was the communication of the letters of a favorite brother. Their elegance were
such as pleased my fancy -- and their warmth of expression such as touched my
heart. My friend often gave me a description of her brother -- repeating many
little acts of his fraternal goodness -- and in the event raised my curiosity
highly to see him -- I envied her those affectionate, and unmerited attentions
she received. I though it nothing could be more agreeable than to possess the whole
heart of such a brother, and lamented that providence had denied me one from
whose society and correspondence I might derive the same benefits and
pleasures, that Julia Stanford did from those of her brother Charles. While
th^^ young man was every day rising in my opinion, and my anxiety to see him
increasing -- little did I imagine that Julia was endeavoring to transfuse into
his bosom all the warmth of friendship for me, which she herself entertained.

After many weeks of tedious expectation, the vacancy at length came, when the
students of the university were permitted to return to their respective homes,
to see their friends, and to procure whatever articles were necessary for use
or convenience at the ensuing session. Charles Stanford, at the time assigned
returned to his home. Julia his sister had been impatiently looking out for him
in the morning, but being disappointed in the prospects, she had requested me
to pass the afternoon and evening with her as an object on which to rest her
heart and rel^x her spirits. I must own that aware of her expectations, I took
more pains in the decoration of my person this evening than usual; and wished
secretly (though I durst not avow the sentiment of my own heart) that my pains
might not be lost.

When I went to mr. Stanford's I found Julia pensive and alone. Her father was
from home, and her mother up stairs: she had all things prepared for tea, and
was sickening with impatience at the delay of her brother. My presence was an
instant relief to her. We sat down and began to chat seriously together: but
were suddenly interrupted by a chaise s^opping at the door. Instantly a young
man's voice was heard in the entry: Julia in a moment recognized it to be her
brother's: she flew to receive him: they met at the parlour door as she opened
it -- their (...) seemed to be unbounded. When the first transports of
affection were over, and recollection had returned, she presented mr. Stanford
to me as her "dear brother" and mentioned my name to him. We gazed on each
other with a little confusion; and often as our eyes met each other's in the
course of the evening, a transient blush seemed to overspread he face of the
youth. We were able however to exchange a few words: but finding that I laid a
kind of restraint on the feelings of the brother and sister, I took an early
leave of Julia, not, however, with her ready acquiescence, nor without a
positive promise to come and spend the next day with her.

I was as good as my word; but I was in pain le^t I had assented too easily --
lest mr. Stanford should think my visit in part on his account, though I was
not dissatisfied to find the young man waiting to attend me to his sister's the
next morning when I came from my dressing room into the parlour. We this day
became more sociable; and I ^^und that the representation give^ by his sister,
was not beyond the truth. We passed our time, from this period till his return
to the university, very pleasantly: we saw each other every day. Many
delightful rambles we took round the town -- and to places of public resort --
and I felt happy in finding our satisfaction with each other daily increase.

As the day approached, on which Charles Stanford was to take his leave of
Bristol for some months: and to repair to Oxford, I could observe he began to
grow thoughtful and silent: he lost much of the cheerfulness he possessed on
his first return from college, and devoted himself much to grave company. Just
before he left home, he came to take leave of me, and as he said "to offer me
his best wishes for my health and happiness." He seemed much embarrass'd with
the task, and kne^ not how to proceed. When he rose to make his adieu, he could
say nothing -- his eyes were downcast as well as mine, once or twice we each
had resolution to raise them -- but on meeting both were confused and
embarrassed. Thus we stood for nearly five minutes. At length, taking my hand,
he raised it with some difficulty to his lips -- and at the same time left in
the hand he thus took, a beautiful locket set round with pearl; on the one side
of which, were the two letters C. S. worked I suppose with his own hair, on the
other a youth approaching an altar, on which was written "sacred to friendship"
-- with a heart in his hand as an offering, and on the small sold of paper in
which this present was wrapped, the following words were written -- Think not,
Amelia, that my heart
(Though fate my person may remove)
With thy blessed image ever can part,
Or cease thy merits to approve.
Thine eye can melt the coldest breast:
Thy smile can cheer the drooping soul:
The one can rob the soul of rest --
The other every care control.


Some time after Charles had gone, and the flutter of my spirits had subsided,
and when I was capable of reflection, I began to ponder on these strange
appearances -- I was painfully dubious whether I acted properly or not in
keeping this present -- I more than once was on the point of sending it to his
sister: but as this would have wounded the feelings of my Julia, and distressed
Charles -- and as it was intended only as a token of "friendship" I concluded I
might retain it. -- Often after his departure did I resort to the drawer in
which I had locked his gift, and many were the soft feelings it occasioned to
my heart.

After his return to the university, he wrote to his sister more frequently
than ever. In every letter he either made some enquiries concerning miss
Seymour, or sent some expression of friendship and recollection -- I was
pleased at heart with his attention -- but never discovered it farther than to
return him my compliments. With these at first he seemed satisfied -- but with
one act of attention, the wish for another arose, till at length he
commissioned Julia, if possible, to gain my permission for him to write to me
occasionally. This, however, I then refused.

During his stay this session at college, it was that my sister was married and
that I had left home to reside with her. When on close of his collegiate
course, he returned to B^^tol, and hoped to tread again the path he had pursued
a few months before, his disappointment was great, to fine our family in part
eloped and beyond the limits of frequent attentions. Julia, however, had
promised me a visit at my brother-in-law's, and as soon as Charles had
returned, she availed herself of his protection and company, and with him in a
post chaise performed her promise. They passed a few days with us delightfully:
our evening rambles -- our literary amusements through the day, the beauties of
nature, and the charms of vocal and instrumental music, often gave a brightness
to our spirits -- and a rapture to our bosoms, that language could never paint.

Time, however, rolled away rapidly -- our friends left us -- uncertain when we
would meet again. We met, however, much sooner, and on a more melancholy
occasion, than fancy had conjectured -- but a few weeks after this the sudden
illness of our mother called us home -- called us to a scene of the deepest woe
I had ever witnessed. During all our affliction, on this event, however, the
attention and sympathy of Julia Stanford and her brother, were a great source
of relief and comfort.

They called every day to enquire after our health, and showed a great degree
of tenderness which engaged my warmest gratitude. When my father (...) retired
into the country, after his severe loss, my mind softened by affliction, and
left vacant by solitude, was prepared to embrace any object which offered it
relief. Charles Stanford continued his visits to my father's as often as the
distance, to which we had removed from Bristol, would permit: nor will it be a
matter of wonder, that I was happy to see him -- left alone almost continually,
after my father's visits to our widow-neighbour commenced, and with a heart
alive to all the feelings of friendship, and preference, was it surprising that
I should, from gratitude, pass to esteem and tenderness for a young man of Mr.
Stanford's character and disposition? for though young, he was discreet, and
though he had mingled with the world, his manner's were free from levity and
vice. He was grave tender and polite -- he loved virtue and practiced it. In
point of address he was agreeable -- his person was good, and his face
expressed well the feelings of his heart. Of such qualities was mr. Stanford
possessed, when our acquaintance commenced -- with these he made a tender of
his heart and hand to the (...) partial Amelia, at a time (...) could make but
a feeble resistance. While I live, I shall never forget (...) circumstances
under which he (...) to me his sentiments -- nor the (...) then excited in my
bosom.

It was on one of those fine evenings of autumn, when (...) the warmth of the
day, the cool of eve becomes grateful to the sense -- the sun was just sinking
beneath the horrizon; and all was till and impressed on the mind the sweetest
pensiveness. The moon, now almost full, was just rising into view -- the clouds
of heaven were romantically diversified -- and a soft sweet breeze (...) the
cheek of nature, and conveyed the most pleasing sensations to the bosom --
under these circumstances, mr. Stanford requested me (...) ramble with him in
the garden -- we strolled down the main walk* at the end of which was a summer
house delightfully encompassed by (...) and honey suckle -- here, after one or
two turns through the garden, we rested ourselves. Taking my hand (...) the
most expressive and tende^^ (...) he seated me on one of the (...) which you
descend from the summer house into an extensive (...) -- he himself occupied
the step beneath that he had assigned to me -- before (...) lay a beautiful
stream of water, on which the moonbeams played -- around us the varied colors
of the wood^ just smitten by the frost, reflected on the eye by the soft beams
of retiring day, blending with the softer rays of Cynthia, filled the heart
with the most serene and elevated feelings. Mr. Stanford a while beheld this
scene in silence: he then gave a deep sigh -- and looking most tenderly in my
face "alas" said he, "that happiness should be so temporary and uncertain" --
"wherefore this reflection, Charles," said! -- "is your happiness exposed to
danger?" -- "Indeed," returned he, "it is -- it hangs on a slender brittle
thread. My peace of mind is suspended the good opinion of an individual -- who
can bid me be cheerful and of use to myself and others -- or can by a word rob
my heart of all it deems valuable in life." "Ave^" -- said I, looking down (for
I began from his looks and the (...) voice to suspect the drift of his
conversation) "and surely no one would intentionally impair your happiness." --
"No!" said he, his eye brightening as he spoke. "No, surely," replied I --
"there can be none ^o savage as to give pain to others unless to avoid it
(...)" "If ^^en the destroy o^ my life were in the power of the (...) miss
Seymour," -- (...) he -- (...) the same time pressing my hand which he still
held, most tenderly to his lip -- "would she sport with (...) it?" "That cannot
be," replied I withdrawing my hand from i^ -- "your happiness, mr. Stanford is
not in my power" -- "will miss Seymour believe me," he returned with an
earnestness of look and of (...) -- "when I assure her that it is -- (...) my
esteem -- my friendship -- my heart ^he has long possessed? but I feared to
un^old to her this truth. -- My life is of no value to me without her
approbation -- Oh commiserate the sorrows of a bosom, which is occupied by
(...) alone." I was too much affected and embarrassed, to support (...) scene
any longer. I hastily arose and (...) toward the house. He (...) my side -- my
heart was too ^ull (...) reply -- his (...) so. This prevented (...)
continuation of his sentiments. When I reached the house. I was obliged
abruptly to leave him -- retiring a few minutes to my chamber. I gave full vent
to the feelings of my heart, and presently returned to him quite composed. I
found him walking the room with (...) in his hand and the tear still (...) in
his eye. I seated myself on the (...) to which he immediately approached with a
look of anxiety and sorrow, and seated himself by my side. He delicately
enquired whether or not he might continue what he had introduced: I could not
return him an answer -- he then asked what construction he should put on my
silence -- "what you please, sir" -- was all I could utter -- he pressed my
hand again to his lips, with great ardour. Our further intercourse at present
was stopped by the sound of my father's ^oot on the piazz^ -- his entrance gave
a little blush to our cheeks: indeed I felt as if I had committed some offense
which merited disapprobation and punishment. Mr. Stanford's looks expressed the
same feeling -- his tongue was mute. Scusible of the irksomeness of his
situation, he presently after took his leave of us, and departed. All the
ensuing night was I kept awake in revolving the scene that had taken place.
Sometimes I was satisfied, and again out of temper with what had passed. On the
whole, however, I was of opinion, that of all the youth I had ever been
acquainted with, Charles Stanford was the one ^^st to my ta^^ -- that his
character, his talents, family and prospects in life were such as accorded with
my temper, and such as promised to render me as happy as the changing state of
humanity admits.

On his next visit, he found me in the garden alone with my work and my book.
He approached with his usual delicacy and diffidence: we talked sometime on
general topics, ti^^ the palpitations occasioned by such a meeting, had
subsided -- when he again introduced the subject, which, he said, "lay nearest
his heart" -- I now found myself more capable of expressing my sentiments than
before -- I told him that on a matter of such delicacy and importance as the
present, I had ever conceived a gentleman was entitled to a speedy and candid
explanation; that he must have observed, from my manner, that I had showed him
a preference, above an ordinary acquaintance -- that in candor now I would
acknowledge his merits had gained my esteem -- but more than this! dare not say
at present -- that my father had a negative on my choice of a friend for life
-- and that his approbation must be obtained, before any further step could be
taken.

Mr. Stanford understood me -- his eye, his voice and his manner expressed his
satisfaction -- he said he would take the earliest opportunity of obtaining a
parent's consent to his attentions, in which if he were successful, he would
indeed, be one of the most happy men in existence.

M. Stanford accordingly embraced the earliest opportunity of disclosing his
wishes to my father. His embarrassment, I doubt not, made him less eloquent in
his own, than he could have been in the cause of a friend. My father also, as I
discovered afterward, was not a little disconcerted -- he was taken by
surprise, and knew not what answer to make. To prevent any future
misunderstanding, he postponed giving a definitive answer -- signifying, (...)
ever, a general (...) of (...) Stanford's character -- but (...) to make an
enquiry into my friend's present situation, and future prospects. In these
particulars he was soon satisfied. He found mr. Stanford, both before and since
his return from Oxford, had been in a counting house; that his father designed
setting him upon trade, under the patronage of a rich uncle, who was concerned
in the East India (...); that with the money himself could advance, and the
advantages the uncle could put into (...) son's hands, he might make a voyage
to Bengal, and by residing there for a few years, might return with a complete
independency. This was the plan at first (...): and this was the plan our
parents, after consulting together, agreed to adhere to. They believed that
what they could both spare would be hardly sufficient to support us in the same
(...) in which we had been accustomed to live (...) and ^aving formed this
opinion, they would no^ depart from this first scheme. But in our apprehension,
how absurdly did they appear to reason and resolve^? We would have most
cheerfully denied ourselves many of the little superfluities to which we had
been accustomed -- We sighed not for opulence or distinction; a bare
competency, and a retirement from gay and fashionable life, was our mutual
choice. Our hearts found their happiness in their (...) society, and could
surrender any thing that clashed with a speedy union. -- Mr. Stanford, when he
was informed of the scheme proposed by our parents, immediately avowed his
disapprobation of it -- warmly, yet respectfully stated his reasons -- urged
the pain he should experience in parting with the single object that a^^^ched
him to life (...) a reason -- and declared his preference of living in
obscurity and indigence, rather than hazard his life, and be necessarily absent
from all his friends for a number of years.

These reasons, proceeding from the warmth of the heart, had little influence
on the minds of our parents, who called our attachment nothing but a wild and
foolish liking, that would soon be over, and leave us independence and in want
if we were now suffered to be united. They therefore insisted on Mr. Stanfords
setting off for India, by the first vessel that sailed for that quarter; and
told him that when he had accumulated a for^une^, he might return and expect
the hand of Amelia Seymour, with her parents approbation. -- This determination
was a sad bar to all our affectionate wishes -- it was discordant with our
opinions and our feelings. After canvassing the subject for several days, and
devising means of support in case we were abandoned by our parents, we at
length came to a conclusion, and resolved, whatever might be the consequence,
to be united in hand as in heart -- to live in a retired way -- to be frugal
and industrious -- and to trust in God for welfare and happiness. A resolution
of this kind, we were sensible would expose us to the derision of the
worldly-wise; but we were not to be frightened by a shadow, from the possession
of a reality. Nature had given us firmness enough to resist the influence of a
sneer -- and we had learned from observation and experience, that what the mass
of the world denominate happiness, is but misery in disguise. In truth, the
greater part of mankind, are a set of shallow dupes. They have not discernment
to distinguish between the semblance and the essence of happiness -- they make
it consist in sensual gratifications, and keen pleasures, which ever cloy by
frequent enjoyment, and mostly leave a poison behind. True happiness is seated
only in the mind: without peace of conscience and sound intellects, it is
impossible to enjoy real and permanent satisfaction: and with a due observance
of those duties we owe to our Maker, our neighbors and ourselves -- although
property be denied, happiness may be attained -- happiness of the most exalted,
pure, and substantial kind.

Impressed with these considerations we prepared for the private solemnization
of our naptials, as well as our circumstances would permit. I prepared all my
clothes, on various pretenses. I persuaded my father to advance some small sums
of money, which were expended on articles that I thought would be most useful
to me. Mr. Stanford had been les^ a sum of two hundred fifty pounds by a remote
relation: this he could command at any time, and this we believed would be
sufficient to support us comfortably for a while, in case we should lose the
patronage of our parents.

Thus circumstanced, I bribed one of the domestics to carry my trunk to a
neighboring tavern, and while my father and mother were out visiting one
evening, Mr. Stanford, agreeably to appointment, came to our house, and bore
off his willing captive. I had scarcely left my home, before my heart sunk, and
my conscience reproved me for the step I had taken -- I had abandoned a roof
that had long kindly sheltered me -- I had thrown myself from the protection of
a parent who had (...) crossed my wishes -- and had put my ho^^or and happiness
into the power of a young man, where principles might be at variance with his
past conduct, and who might, for all I could know, possess a disposition that
would thwart every hope of my soul. But my trust was in heaven. What I did,
could only be justified by the supreme law, which (...) Creator has implanted
in every human breast, of pursuing its own happiness by every lawful mean. I
conceived that I felt the hand (...) parental tyranny, not exercised in the way
of advice or remembrance, but in the way of a law with a sanction. That our
parents had a right to impose a command, under the penalty of displeasure, or
of withholding property, we did not dispute; but in our apprehension, a slender
livelihood, gained by labor and frugality, was preferable to a long and tedious
separation, and the hazard of life.

In a word, we were joined in the bands of matrimony, and hastened to each
other's affectionate embrace with an ardor proportioned to the risk we had run.

The day after the event took place, Mr. Stanford wrote to his parents and to
mine informing them of what had taken place, and apologizing for the abruptness
of the (...), from the strength of mutual attachment, and the fear of being
(...) from each other, by an immense distance, and an unknown length of ^^me.

How difficult a matter it is, for the aged to recall the feelings of youth! How
rare to meet with persons advanced in years, who can enter into the feelings
and views of the young, and make just allowances for the rashness of
inexperience! When this information reached our parents, all with one voice
seemed to condemn our conduct; they reprobated our disobedience in harsh terms
-- and by the bearer of Mr. Stanford's letter, assured us, it was their
determination to give us no manner of assistance; but, as we had provoked our
own fate with open eyes, to it they resigned us.

This answer, though severe and painful, was less so than it would otherwise
have been, from our preparation for it. All we had now to do, was to adopt some
plan, that would rescue us from the horrors of poverty, and enable us to
cultivate and constantly enjoy that interchange of affectionate endearments,
for which we had renounced almost every thing beside. The wide world was before
us -- its paths were many and various -- it was ours to choose one.

The best one we could adopt at present, was to set off immediately for London,
and if we could soften the heart of Mr. Stanford's uncle, to engage his
patronage, and thus to ensure a provision for necessary expenses. We
accordingly took our passage in a stage coach, and quickly reached the
metropolis of England. As soon as Mr. Stanford could put himself in proper
attire, he waited on his uncle, who received him graciously, and enquired very
kindly about his friends and the family. As yet Mr. Plunket (who was a maternal
uncle) had heard nothing of the step Mr. Stanford had taken, and therefore
cheerfully promised all the assistance that was in his power, whatever line of
business might be fixed on: but the following day, when Mr. Stanford called to
settle some way in which to employ his talents and attention, his uncle's
behavior was totally changed.

He had received a letter from his brother in law, in which mr. Stanford's
conduct was highly censured, and a positive request made not to supply Mr.
Stanford with money or any assistance. This was communicated to my best friend,
as well as his uncle's resolution to comply with the request. Mr. Stanford
could not hear this -- his heart filled -- he abruptly left the room -- and
returned to his lodgings. He had no (...) entered the chamber, where I had ^een
s^^ing all alone during his absence, than I perceived his heart was heavy, and
his spirits dejected. He walked the room with a sorrowful (...) and hurried
step, several times -- I asked him some questions which he but half answered.
On this I (...), gave him my hand, and (...) him to confide in me fully and to
tell me all his care. He pressed my hand, and seating me on a sofa which was in
the room, placed himself by my side, and resting his head on my neck,
unburdened and relieved his heart by giving vent to his sorrow for a few
moments. After this, he found himself able to communicate the grounds of his
distress. The weight of a father's displeasure he had prepared himself to
endure, but to find that displeasure pursuing him so far as to prevent him from
receiving any aid from an uncle, was beyond what he had suspected. I suggested
every consolatory argument I could devise, for composing his mind. -- I assured
him that very little of the world's goods would content me, while I retained his
affection and society -- and that instead of spending time in unavailing
complaints, we had both best put our shoulders to the wheel, and endeavor to
procure subsistence. Accordingly, the next day, mr. Stanford went in quest of
cheap and pleasant lodging, and of employment. He was fortunate in providing
the first, with an amiable, pious widow lady -- who was at once an instructive
and agreeable companion; the second he procured with an eminent printer, who
was just th^n in want of a man of literature to superintend and correct the
press; one who could compose with neatness, and correct with accuracy, and who
would attend to his business with punctuality and faithfulness.

For this situation mr. Stanford was well qualified by nature and education --
and uniting to talents great assiduity and integrity, he soon gained the
confidence and friendship of his employer; to his compensation were often added
liberal donations, such as enabled us to support our present style of life with
comfort and ease. Nay, finding our family likely to increase, we contrived ways
to lay up a small capital as a provision for a rainy day -- this we knew would
be constantly accumulating, and would one day be a help to the sweet little
pledge of love, which indulgent heaven presented us, ten months after our union.

On the birth of my lovely boy, new concerns occupied my ^^nd, and new
pleasures opened on my heart, that led me to forget the hardships of a
separation from the parents that gave me being -- Mr. Stanford's attention to
me seemed to (...) on this event. He devised pretexts for visiting home, and
found ways of accomplishing more of his business at our own little retreat --
in short, we both now seemed perfectly reconciled to our lot -- we pardoned,
and began to remember no more the severities we had felt. In our devotions, in
books, our own conversation, domestic endearments, and the society of a few
friends, who occasionally visited ^s, we possessed as many of the enjoyments of
life, as others who moved in a higher circle, and who plumed themselves on
their birth and fortune.

And here let me add my testimony, to that of many of the wisest and best of
mankind, in favor of a state of mediocrity, when connected with constant
employment, with peace and affection at home. Poverty is less dreadful, I (...)
believe, at hand than at a distance. -- While afar, it i^ seen through* a mist --
and bulks largely on the view: when i^ approaches nigh, it often lays aside its
terrors, and if it be not the (...) of sloth or crime, it is often so tempered
by the sympathy of the good, and by internal consolations, that it is by no
means difficult of endurance.

In this situation we continued upwards of two years, in which period
providence was pleased to give us two charming girls at a birth, in addition to
our dear firstborn. To provide for these was our pleasing employ, and to look
forward to their future improvement and happy settlement in life, afforded
ample room for fancy and hope: but ah! how dark and mysterious are the ways of
providence! how sudden and distressing many of the vicissitudes of life! one
unlooked for melancholy event, put a period to this state of contentment I
enjoyed, robbed me of my highest temporal happiness, and b^o't me to the very
brink of the grave.

It happened one day, that mr. Stanford was called to go a few miles from the
city, to receive a sum of money that was due to the person whom he served. He
hired a horse in the morning, and promised to be back early in the afternoon --
he was detained sometime longer than he expected -- it was late in the
afternoon before he set off -- on his return home, as he approached the city,
he was stopped by two ruffians, who demanded his money. -- He did not choose
tamely to submit to their demands, but with his whip attempted resistance. --
The villains, armed with bludgeons, attacked him with violence -- knocked him
down -- stripped him of his money and a great part of his clothes -- and left him
for dead in the highway. Some benevolent travelers, who happened shortly after
to be coming toward London, had him taken up and conveyed to the next public
house -- restoratives were applied; and through the influence of medical aid,
he was soon possessed of his senses, so far as to relate his name, place of
abode, business and misfortune -- he requested to be conveyed home as soon as
possible, and his requect was kindly complied with. He was brought to his home;
but oh, my God! in how different circumstances from those in which he had left
me in the morning -- from those in which I expected to meet him -- I execrated
myself for consenting to his leaving me -- I murmured at my lot, and in the
agony of my soul (I tremble at the remembrance) aspersed the goodness, the
justice of my maker -- I was frantic, I believe, for a considerable time after
he was restored to my arms: all the afternoon previous to the misfortune, I had
felt an unusual anxiety -- but I thought it arose from the timidity of my
nature -- little did I imagine, that in the place of a healthy and cheerful, I
should receive a bleeding husband -- All night did I sit by him, attend his
wants, and endeavor to alleviate his pains -- when the surgeon dressed his
wounds in the evening, he found his skull was fractured by the blows he had
received -- He recommended a consultation -- it was called -- and trepanning
was advised and resolved on -- I objected, but was obliged to submit; the
operation was performed -- but is was of little avail -- a high fever ensued,
and his reason forsook him -- He talked incessantly of his dear Amelia -- of
his darling babes -- and the cruelty of the ruffians -- Day and night did I
watch and weep over him -- His incoherencies alarmed -- and his many proofs of
a strong, though bewildered affection, melted and oppressed my heart -- freely
would I have surrendered mine to have restored his health -- but it was beyond
the reach even of medical skill -- I was flattered by friends and physicians
with the hope, that his disorder would take a favorable turn -- and it did --
the fever abated -- he became clear and rational, but oh, for how short a
space! he called me to the bedside, and desired to see his children; they were
brought: He looked at them with a peculiar softness; it seemed to be a look of
parting tenderness, a^ the last glances of parental solicitude: my agony and my
fears increased. I kneeled down by his bedside, and taking his hand which
began to feel cold, and was covered with a chill perspiration, "my dearest
Charles," said I, "what is the matter?" -- "Be not alarmed, my love," said he:
"but I must leave you very soon" -- "O my God, my God!" cried I; it was all I
could say -- my sight, my senses left me -- I swooned away; all that I can
recollect of myself afterward, is, that when I came to my senses I found I had
been conveyed to another chamber; that several friends stood around me in
tears: with my first returning breath I enquired about my dear Charles, they
replied, that they hoped a change had taken place for the better; that I had
best try and compose myself. I insisted on being conveyed back to my husband;
but while we were conversing on the matter, a child came hastily into the room,
and cried cut, "Mr. Stanford is dead." These words reached my heart like a
shock of lightning, and with the lightning's power: had it finished my being,
how grateful should I have been (i^ gratitude be known in the regions of
silence). Again my reason left me, and many days elapsed before it returned. I
still possess a faint recollection of some of the wild rambles of imagination I
experienced at this time, how much my heart and mind were fastened to the image
of my dear deceased Charles. In this situation I was, as I have since been
informed, when Mr. Plunket came to see me; he had attended the funeral of his
nephew, and compassionating my condition, directed me to be conveyed with my
^^bes to his own house. He wrote, to my father giving a state of facts, but
will it be credited when I say, that a father's heart had been so alienated by
^is present wife, from his suffering child, that he contented himself with
writing to Mr. Plunket, and lamenting my situation, but without any offer of
assistance, or even coming to see me? The parents of my poor Charles were more
compassionate. They could not endure to visit the fathe^^'s offense on his
innocent offspring: They took my two little girls hom^* with them: my boy they
left with Mr. Plunket, but insisted, as soon as my situation would admit, on
receiving us in their own house.

My Julia who had supported a constant though forbidden correspondence with her
brother and myself, came with her father, and remained some time to attend me.
Her affection and tenderness were of infinite service: by means of it, and a
strict observance of my physician's direction, I was in a few weeks, restored
again to myself: but from my delirium, to how dreadful a reality did I awake!
-- deprived of the excellent and beloved partner of my soul, on whom all my
affection and hopes of happiness had rested, I found myself a solitary widow,
with the charge of three poor little orphans on my hands -- I looked around for
some object of comfort, on which to lean: but all had deserted me. I was in the
barren desert, thirsty, yet without water. I was a pilgrim, cast on a strange
coast, with scarcely one sympathetic friend, that could minister to my wants;
all hopes and pursuits seemed to have come to a fatal, a final period. I felt
as if I had nothing worth living for, save my destitute babes, and often
notwithstanding this tie, has my forlorn heart most ardently prayed to the
supreme Being to reunite me to the departed object of my love -- oh! with what
extacy would I have laid down my life, and on the (...) wings of an ardent and
sublime affection, have ascended to the only one I ever loved supremely. But it
was the will of heaven, that I should continue here longer, to drink still
deeper of the cup of woe, and to feel the weight of accumulated distress -- I
n^w endured existence for the sake of the dear descendants of my Charles, and
had it not been for them, I felt no ^^e strong enough to bind me to the world.

My situation altogether was, however, as comfortable now as I had reason to
expect. From the attention of Mr. Plunket, I drew great relief, and from the
frequent communications I received from my beloved Julia, I felt the sincerest
pleasure. In some of her letters she h^ld out an idea of paying (...) a visit
-- this supported my mind, for some time, and the good girl at length performed
her promise. She was attended by a young American gentleman, who had resided a
considerable time ^n her neighborhood. -- He had paid her great and
uninterrupted attentions for many months -- and common report whispered, that
ere long they would be united for life. Deeply interested at I was for the
happiness of my friend, I took the earliest opportunity of learning the true
ground of the report. Julia, with her usual candor, immediately solved my
doubts. She told me Mr. Dalton had indeed been particularly attentive to her
for a series of time: that he had avowed his passion -- and gained her
affection; that she had hesitated a whole in consenting to be his, as a
necessary consequence of this, would be her removal to America -- that this was
the only objection with her parents; but they had been prevailed on to give up
this point -- and consent to a union, even on the terms of her relinquishing
her native country forever.

The bursting sigh, and the rising tear, showed how tenderly this circumstance
affected her; but her heart was Mr. Dalton's -- and what difficulties can (...)
^^oy a purpose, suggested by true female affection? She said she was aware of
the distress she should feel in parting forever from those friends, with whom
she had hitherto spent her life -- and from whose tenderness all her past
comforts had been drawn -- that it was a solemn parting, when relatives were
separated without a hope of meeting, till they met beyond the grave. However,
that she considered this sacrifice due to a man of merit, and to the affections
of her heart: that she complied with what she deemed the voice of Providence,
and was encouraged to expect happiness, when in the path of virtue: but she
entreated, that, while she left all her own family behind. I might not be of
the number -- she urged me affectionately to blend my fate, and the fate of my
little ones with hers -- to leave a country, where I had few ties to bind me,
and to become an adventurer with her beyond the atlantic; that she would be
married privately in a very short time; but she insisted on my being present at
the ceremony; and as soon after a^ possible, she expected to take her passage
in a vessel bound to America.

The proposition of leaving my friends and my country, I must own, at first
startled me much: and in the apprehension of the moment, I suggested that I did
not think I could comply with her benevolent request; but at her solicitation,
I agreed to consider the matter seriously. But as to being present at her
marriage, I told her whatever pleasure I might once have taken in a
circumstance of that kind, at present it would recall too many painful scenes of
memory, and at once give me distress, and render me a damp to (...) enjoyment
of others. A few days after this, when my friend had returned to her father's,
I pondered seriously on the prospect ^he had opened to my view. On the one
hand, I pictured to myself the pain of parting forever from many (...) I loved,
although some ^^d treated me unkindly -- the dangers of the ocean -- the
uncertainty of my fate when I reached the other side of the ocean -- and the
forlorn situation, in which I should be left, if my Julia were to die. On the
other hand. I recollected the cruelty I had experienced from some of my nearest
relations; that my own father had abandoned me; that even were he to receive me
beneath his roof -- there I could take no comfort, with a rough unkind
stepmother; that dependence was therefore my lot, and that I could endure this
state with no one so well as with my sister and friend.

My health was declining -- my spirits were gone -- and I was induced to
believe, that a voyage across the ocean would restore both. At any rate, I
thought a change of place could not subtract from my happiness, for that was
gone too effectually ever to return, in a place which daily obtruded on my mind
recollections of past enjoyments, which death had snatched away and buried with
my Charles. On these grounds I concluded, that if urged again by Julia, and by
her future companion, I should consent to attend them. A few days after this,
my dear friend's marriage was announced to me by a letter from herself, and one
from Mr. Dalton, in which argument and entreaty were used to persuade me into a
compliance with their request. I did not keep them long in suspense -- but
signified my acquiescence as early as I could, in their benevolent plan.
Shortly after the adoption of this resolution, I communicated it to Mr.
Plunket, with whom I still was -- and to my father. The first remonstrated
against the plan -- but in such a way as led me to believe, that the kindness
he had hitherto shown me, was rather from a compassion, that every mind of
ordinary sensibility must experience -- than from a peculiar affection for
myself; and that if I could be decently provided for, without giving the world
occasion to reflect on him, as a man of inhumanity, he would feel no great
regret in parting with me.

To my father I communicated my purpose, by the following short letter --

Dear sir,
The affection and gratitude due to my only parent, as the instrument of my
being, and the source of much of my happiness in early life, have led me in
this way to inform him of my intention to fail in a few days, in company with
Mr. and Mrs. Dalton, for America. As I expect never after my departure to meet
my father or sister on earth, it would be a great consolation to me, once more
to see them ere we part for life; to ask forgiveness of my past offenses
against their wishes -- and to receive their blessing, and their prayers for my
happiness. But if this request should be deemed unreasonable, and I should not
be gratified with one last interview -- you will accept, my father, and will
present to my sister, my ardent wishes for your mutual health and peace, and
that you may never feel one pang like any of those daily experienced by your
afflicted, but affectionate daughter.

A. S.


This letter I gave to a special messenger, with an injunction to deliver it to
my father himself -- and to wait an answer, if any should be offered. On his
return which was immediate, he told me, that on hearing from whom he came --
and perusing the contents of the letter, my father raised his eyes and hands to
heaven, and breaking forth into a torrent of grief -- he said, "he had wronged
his poor daughter -- his dear Amelia -- and while there was yet room for
repentance and amendment, he would fly to her, and give her that relief which
was yet in his power," I must own I was much affected at this information -- I
could see the violence of my father's returning affection, I thought I could
observe the sorrow that would fill his heart at the idea of having forever
exiled from her home and her country, a child ^e reared and loved -- and who
had never designedly offended him in her life. -- My resolution ^aultered --
but it was staggered more, when presently after, as I sat in my chamber, I was
asked if I could bear to see my father and sister. In a tremulous tone, I
hastily answered, yes: but I was too weak for the interview -- my breath grew
short -- I felt a violent throbbing at my heart: a little time however
recovered me in a degree -- but when I heard my father's well known voice,
below stairs, enquiring, "in which room he should find his daughter Amelia,"
and when I heard his and my sister's foot ascending the stairs, all my senses
left me -- and I swooned in the arms of the maid who attended me. The first
objects that struck me when I recovered my faculties, were my father bending
over me with a look of piteous tenderness -- my sister kneeling by my side,
bathed in tears, with my little son in her arms, and the domestics around using
restoratives for my recovery -- I extended my arms to my father and sister
alternately, and from each received an embrace of the tenderest affection. When
we were able to converse, we talked over many events, till finally, we glanced
on the one that had produced the present meeting -- they (...) I was not
serious in the scheme of leaving Britain for America. I assured them that I was
-- and that nothing now I believed could alter my determination. They entreated
me not to think of such a thing -- they argued -- they pleaded with me -- they
wept: -- during three days they stayed with us, the subject was often renewed
-- my father offered all ^e could do for my assistance, and that of my
children. But I had now made up my mind: I was not to be diverted from my
purpose: they had influence enough over me, however, to prevail on me to leave
one of my girls to be educated by my sister, who as yet had none.

Things being thus arranged, I began to prepare industriously for my voyage.
Every convenience my father could furnish me with was provided, and the day set
for our departure. On the one previous to this, my father and sister come down,
and remained with us. We passed it in gloom and sorrow -- after a night of
weeping, the morning of embarkation arrived -- with streaming eyes and bleeding
hearts, we took our last farewell of each other -- we were soon under way --
and on the broad tempestuous ocean. No material occurrence happened till we
reached America.

As soon as we had landed and made enquiry into the state of things, Mr. Dalton
found that it was not a time to enter largely into trade -- the peace between
England and America had been concluded for some time, and a vast inundation of
goods was pouring into the United States from every quarter; he therefore
wisely resolved to retire from business, and fix himself in one of the small
towns of Connecticut, near which his father lived on a large and productive
farm. Accordingly here we removed -- and here we now live -- we have an
intelligent and genteel society in the town -- we are punctual in our devotions
in the family and at church -- the manners of the people are congenial with our
own -- and although we subsist on little, we live very comfortably: -- for my
own part, I have little to expect from this world -- affliction has led me to
regard religion as the supreme and only source of happiness in life. In my
devotions to God -- in the education of my children -- and in little charities
to my neighbors, I find my chief happiness and employment. I pass a proportion
of every day in reading, or in writing to absent friends, from whom, in return,
I hear frequently.

Thus passes time -- thus am I hastening to that "undiscovered country from
whose bourne no traveller returns." Soon shall I reach the end of my pilgrimage
-- soon shall this spirit meet and mingle with the spirit of my dear departed
Charles -- we shall meet -- O rapturous thought! and never be parted more -- we
shall together bask in the effulgence of deity -- we shall live in the
tenderest amity throughout the long, long ages of an endless hereafter.

From Dr. FRANKLIN's WORKS.
On Luxury, Idleness, and Industry.
From a letter to Benjamin Vaughan, Esquire. member of the British Parliament
written in 1784
IT is wonderful how preposterously the affairs of this world are managed.
Naturally one would imagine that the interest of a few individuals should give
way to the general interest; but individuals manage their affairs with so much
more application, industry and address, than the public do theirs, that general
interest most commonly gives way to particular. -- We assemble parliaments and
councils, to have the benefit of their collected wisdom; but we necessarily
have at the same time, the inconvenience of their collected passions,
prejudices, and private interests. By the help of the^e, artful men overpower
their wisdom, and dupe its possessors; and if we may judge by the acts, arrets,
and edicts, all the world over, for regulating commerce, an assembly of great
men is the greatest fool upon earth.

I have not yet, indeed; thought of a remedy for luxury. I am not sure that in
a great state it is capable of a remedy: nor that the evil is in itself always
so great as it is represented. -- Suppose we include in the definition of
luxury, all unn^essary expense, and then let us consider whether laws to
prevent such expense are possible to be executed in a great country, and
whether, if they could be executed, our people generally would be happier, or
even richer. Is not the hope of being one day able to purchase and enjoy
luxuries, a great spur to labor and industry? May not luxury therefore produce
more than it consumes, if without such a spur, people would be, as they are
naturally enough inclined to be, lazy and indolent? to this purpose I remember
a circumstance. The skipper of a shallop, employed between Cape-May and
Philadelphia had done us some small services, for which he refused to be paid.
My wife understanding that he had a daughter, sent her a present of a new
fashioned cap. Three years after, this skipper being at my house with an old
farmer of Cape-May, his passenger, he mentioned the cap, and how much his
daughter had been pleased with it. "But (said he) it proved a dear cap to our
congregations," -- "How so?" -- "When my daughter appeared with it at meeting,
it was so much admired, that all the girls resolved to get such caps from
Philadelphia; and my wife and I computed that the whole could not have cost
less than a hundred pounds" -- "True, (said the farmer) but you do not tell all
the story. -- I think the cap was nevertheless an advantage to us; for it was
the first thing that put our girls upon knitting worsted mittens for sale at
Philadelphia, that they might have wherewithal to buy caps and ribbons there;
and you know that industry has continued, and is likely to continue and
increase to a much greater value, and answer much better purposes." Upon the
whole, I was more reconciled to this little piece of luxury, since not only the
girls were made happier by having fine caps, but the Philadelphians by the
supply of warm mittens.

In our commercial towns upon the seacoast, fortunes will occasionally be
made. Some of those who grow rich will be prudent, live within bounds, and
preserve what they have gained for their posterity: others fond of showing
their wealth, will be extravagant and ruin themselves. Laws cannot prevent
this; and perhaps it is not always an evil to the public. A shilling spent Idly
by a fool may be picked up by a wiser person, who knows better what to do with
it. It it therefore not lost. A vain, silly fellow builds a fine house,
furnishes it richly, lives in it expensively, and in a few years ruins himself:
but the masons, carpenters, smiths, and other honest tradesmen, have been by
his employ assisted in maintaining and raising their families: the farmer has
been paid for his labor, and encouraged, and the estate is now in better
hands. In some cases indeed, certain modes of Luxury may be a public evil, in
the manner as it is a private one. -- If there be a nation, for instance, that
exports its ^^^f and linen, to pay for the importation of claret and porter,
while many of its people live upon potatoes, and wear no shirts; wherein does
it ^ister from the (...) who lets his family starve, and sells his clothes to
buy drink? Our American commerce is, I confess, a little in this way. We sell
our victuals to the islands for ruin and sugar; the substatial necessaries of
life for superfluities. But we have plenty, and live well nevertheless, though,
by being soberer, we might be richer.

The vast quantity of forest land we have yet to clear, and put in order for
cultivation, will for a long time keep the body of our nation laborious and
frugal. Forming an opinion of our people and their manners, by what is seen
among the inhabitants of the sea ports, is judging from an improper sample. The
people of the trading towns may be rich and luxurious, while the country
possesses all the virtues that tend to promote happiness and public prosperity.
Those towns are not much regarded by the country; they are hardly considered as
an essential part of the states; and the experience of the last war has shown,
that their being in the possession of the enemy, did not necessarily draw on
the subjection of the country, which bravely continued to maintain its freedom
and independence notwithstanding.

^

It has been computed by some political arithmetician, that if every man and
woman would work four hours each day on something useful, that labor would
produce sufficient to procure all the necessaries and comforts in life; want
and misery would be banished out of the world, and the rest of the 24 hours
might be leisure and pleasure.

What occasions then so much want and misery? It is the employment of numbers
in works that produce neither the necessaries or conveniences of life, who with
these who do nothing, consume necessaries raised by the laborious. To explain
this:

The first elements of wealth are obtained by labor, from the earth and
waters. I have land, and raise corn. With this, if I feed a family that does
nothing my corn will be consumed, and at the end of the year I shall be no
richer than I was at the beginning. But if while I feed them, I employ them,
some in spinning, others in making bricks, etc. for building, the value of my
corn will be arrested and remain with me, and at the end of the year we may be
all better clothed and better lodged. And if, instead of employing a man I
feed in making bricks, I employ him in fiddling for me, the corn he eats is
gone, and no part of his manufacture remains to augment the wealth and
convenience of the family; I shall therefore be the poorer for this fiddling
man, unless the rest of my family work more or eat less, to make up the
deficiency he occasions.

Look round the world, and see the millions employed in doing nothing* or in
something that amounts to nothing, when the necessaries and conveniences of
life are in question. -- What is the bulk of commerce, for which we fight and
destroy each other, but the toil of millions for superfluities, to the great
hazard of many lives, by the constant dangers of the sea? How much labor is
spent in building and fitting great ships, to go to China and Arabia for tea
and coffee, to the West Indies for sugar, and to America for tobacco? These
things cannot be called the necessaries of life, for our ancestors lived very
comfortably without them.

A question may be asked; Could all these people now employed in raising,
making, or carrying superfluities, be subsisted by raising necessaries* I think
they might. The world is large, and a great part of it still uncultivated. Many
hundred millions of acres in Asia, Africa, and America, are still in a forest;
and a great deal even in Europe. On a hundred acres of this forest, a man might
become a substantial farmer; and a hundred thousand men employed in clearing
each his hundred acres, would hardly brighten a spot big enough to be visible
from the moon, unless with Herschel's telescope; so vast are the regions still
in wood.

It is however some comfort to reflect, that, upon the whole, the quantity of
industry and prudence among mankind, exceeds the quantity of idleness and
folly. Hence the increase of good buildings, farms cultivated, and populous
cities filled with wealth, all over Europe, which a few years since were only
to be found on the coast of the Mediterranean; and this notwithstanding the mad
wars cotin^^lly raging, by which are often destroyed in one year the works of
many years peace. So that we may hope, the luxury of a few merchants on the
coast, will not be the ruin of America.

One reflection more; and I will and this long rambling letter. Almost all the
parts of our bodies require some expense* The feet demand shoes; the legs
stockings; the rest of the body clothing; and the belly a good deal of
victuals. Our eyes, though exceedingly useful, ask* when reasonable, only the
cheap assistance of spectacles which could not much impart our finances. But
the eyes of other people are the eyes that (...). (...) all but myself were
blind, I should want neither fine clothes, fine houses, or fine furniture.

PROSPERITY AND ADVERSITY
An agllegorical tale
Two of the daughters of Providence were sent to the house of a rich Phenician
merchant, named Velasco, whose residence was at Tire, the capital city of the
kingdom.

Prosperity, the eldest, was beautiful as the morning, and cheerful as the
spring; but Adversity was sorrowful and ill-favored.

Velasco had two sons, Felix and Uriano. They were both bred to commerce,
though liberally educated, and had lived together from their infancy in the
strictest harmony and friendship; but love, before whom all affections of the
soul are as the traces of a ship upon the ocean, which remain only for a
moment, threatened in an evil hour to set them at variance; for both of them
were become enamoured with the beauties of Prosperity. The nymph, like one of
the daughters of men, gave encouragement to each, by turns: but to avoid a
particular declaration, she vowed a resolution never to marry, unless her
sister, from whom she said it was impossible for her to be long separated, was
married at the same time.

Velasco was no stranger to the passions of his sons, and dreading every thing
from their violence, to prevent ill consequences, he obliged them by his
authority to decide their pretensions by lot, each previously engaging in a
solemn oath to marry the nymph that should ^^ll to his share. The lots were
accordingly drawn, and Prosperity became the wife of Felix, and Adversity of
Uranio.

Soon after the celebration of these nuptials, Velasco died, having bequeathed
to his eldest son, Felix, the house wherein he lived, and the greatest part of
his large patrimony and effects.

The husband of Prosperity was so transported with the gay disposition and
enchanting beauties of his bride, that he clothed her in gold and silver, and
adorned her with jewels of inestimable value. He built a palace for her in the
woods; he made rivers in his gardens, and beautified their banks with temples
and pavilions; he entertained at his table the nobles of the land, delighting
their cars with music, and their eyes with magnificence; but his kindred he
beheld as strangers, and the companions of his youth passed by him unregarded.
His brother also became (...) in his sight; and, in process of time (...)
commanded the doors of his house to, be (...) against him.

But as the stream shows from its channel, and loses itself among the valleys
(...) moun^^^^ to also will the current of fortune ^he dissipated, unless
bounded by economy. In a few years* the estate of Felix was wasted by
extravagance; his merchandise failed him by neglect and his effects were seized
by the merciless hands of creditors. He appl^^d himself for support to the
nobles and great men whom he had sea^^ed, and made presents to: but his voice
was as the voice of a stranger, and they remembered not his face. The friends
he had neglected derided him in their turn; his wife also insulted him, and
turned her back upon him and (...) -- yet was his heart ^o bewitched with her
sorceries, that he pursued her with entreaties, till by her haste to abandon
him, her mask fell off, and discovered to him a face as withered and deformed,
a^ before it had appeared youthful and engaging.

What become of him afterward, tradition does not with certainty relate. It is
believed he fled into Egypt, and lived precariously on the scanty benevolence
of at few friends who had not totally deserted him; and that he died in a short
time, poor, wretched, miserable, and an exile.

Let us now return to Uranio, who, we have already observed, had been driven
out of doors by his brother Felix. Adversity, though hateful to his heart, and
a spectre to his eyes, was the constant attendant on his steps; and, to
aggravate his sorrows, he received certain intelligence that his richest vessel
was taken by a Sardinian pirate; that another was lost upon the Lybian straits;
and, to complete all, the banker, with whom the greater part of his ready money
was entrusted, had deserted his creditors, and retired into Sicily. Collecting,
therefore, the small remains of his fortune, he bid adieu to Tire, and, led by
Adversity, he passed through unfrequented roads, and forests overgrown with
bushes.

He came at last to a small village, at the foot of a mountain; here they took
up their abode for some time; and Adversity, in return for all the anxiety he
had suffered, softening the severity of her looks ministered to him the most
faithful counsel, weaning his heart from the immoderate love of earthly things,
and teaching him to revere the Almighty, and to place his whole trust and
happiness in his government and protection. She humanized his soul, made him
modest and humble, taught him to compassionate the distresses of his fellow
creatures, and instructed him to relieve them.

"I am sent (says she) to those only, who are the favorites of Heaven; for I
not only train them up by my severe discipline to future glory, but also
prepare them to receive with a greater relish all such moderate enjoyments as
are not inconsistent with this probationary state. As the spider, when
assailed, seeks shelter in his inmost web, so the mind, which I assist,
contracts its wandering thoughts, and flies for happiness to itself.
Prosperity, my smiling, but treacherous sister, too often delivers those whom
she has seduced, to be scourged by her cruel followers, Anguish and Despair;
while Adversity never fails to lead those who will be guided by her to the
blissful habitations of Tranquillity and Content."

Uranio listened to her words with great attention (...) and as he looked
earnestly on her face, the deformity of it seemed insensibly to decrease. By
gentle degrees his aversion to her abated, and at last he gave himself wholly
up to her counsel and direction. She would often repeat to him the wise maxims
of philosophers, that those who want the fewest things are the happiest. She
admonished him to turn his eyes to the many thousands beneath him, instead of
gazing on the few who lived in pomp and splendour; and instead of supplicating
for riches and popularity, to pray for a virtuous mind, and a quiet state, an
unblameable life, and a death full of good hopes.

Finding him every day more and more composed and resigned, though neither
enamoured with her face, nor delighted with her society, she^at (...) addressed
him in the following manner:

"As gold is (...) and refined from the dross by the fire, so is Adversity sent
by Providence to try and improve the virtue of mortals. The end obtained, my
task is finished and I now leave you, to go and give account of my charge. Your
brother, whose lot was Prosperity, and whose condition you so much envied,
after having experienced the error of his choice, is at last released by death
from the most wretched of lives. Happy has it been for Uranio that his lot was
Adversity; and, if he remembers her as he ought, his life will be honorable,
and his death happy."

As she pronounced these words, she vanished out of his sight; but though her
^eatures, at that moments instead of inspiring their usual horror, seemed to
display a kind of languishing beauty -- yet, as Uranio, in spite of his utmost
efforts, could never prevail on himself to love her, he neither regretted her
departure, nor wished for her return. But, though he rejoiced in her absence,
he treasured up her counsels in his heart, and grew happy in the practice of
them.

He afterward be took himself again (...), (...) and having, in a short time,
acquired a competency sufficient for the real enjoyment of life, he retreated
to a little farm which he had bought for that purpose, and where he determined
to (...) ^he remainder of his days. Here be employed his time in planting,
gardening, and husbandry; in quelling all disorderly (...) his mind by ^he
(...) took great delight in a little cell (...) in his garden, which stood
under a tuft of ^trees, encompassed; with eglantine and honey suckles.
Adjoining to it was a cold bath, formed by a spring issuing from a rose, and
over the door, in large characters, was this inscription: Beneath this
moss-grown roof, within this cell,
Truth, Liberty, Content, and Virtue dwell.
Say, you, who dare this happy place disdain.
What splendid palace boasts so fair a train?
He lived to a good old age, and died honored and lamented.


THE FAIR PENITENT.
A Fragment.
How unhappy are the fair, who, from mistaken motions of happiness, seek the
alluring paths of pleasure! Deluded indeed! -- Here a sigh burst from her
bosom, at the recollection of past folly -- a tear fell from its orb, and
rested on the cheek of the fair Euphrosyne.

Cease, said she; -- The dew drops of contrition, what avail they now? Are not
the years of dissipation fleeted away like the sunbeams of the morning, without
one reflecting moment! they sported till my fortune was exhausted -- and my
friends with fortune fled.

For what is friendship but a name,
A charm that lulls to sleep:
A shade that follows wealth and fame,
And leaves the wretch to weep!"
I must now find some solitude, and perhaps close the evening of my life in the
lap of penury: But stop, methinks some kind power bids me not despair though I
have deviated from prudence, I never have from virtual. Notwithstanding this
reverse of fortune I may yet be happy; the rectitude of my heart shall be my
consolation; Here she paused -- Yes it must be so. Tomorrow, at Aurora's dawn,
when the feathered songsters are chanting forth hymns of gratitude to the
Supreme Author of the universe, I will commit myself to his care, -- quit this
town forever, and endeavor to blot out the remembrance of the part I have acted
in it.

The ruddy fingers of the morn had just unbarred the gates of light, when
Euphrosyne bade adieu to the place of her birth.

The melancholy of the birds, the softness of the air, the universal stillness
that reigned around, spread a serenity over her mind, and calmed all her
sorrows. --

She stopped to take a survey of the surrounding landscape. How happy exclaimed
the fair, are the inhabitants of yo^ lowly cottage, now enjoying the sweets of
balmy slumbers. This is a felicity the virtuous only know! Sleep on ve children
of innocence, and may your repose be uninterrupted! she finished her
ejaculation with a sigh, and walked slowly forward, till she arrived at a litte
village, where she enquired her way to the next; and with the small remains of
her fortune purchased a cottage.

The lofty elm overshadowed her dwelling, and the lowly evergreen crept around
her door. Here the once gay Euphrosyne, that lately shone in all the circles of
the beau monde, was obscured as in the shadowey vale; but in the vale she was
convinced that happiness does not dwell on the (...) grandeur.

A FRAGMENT.
*** Her words, her looks, and the flood of tears which she shed affected me
deeply -- I dismounted from my horse and tied him to a twig -- I sat me down on
a bank beside her.

She held a laurel in her hand, and when I asked the cause of her affliction,
she pointed to the flower, shook her head, and renewed her tears; -- Perhaps,
said I, a stranger may be able to bind up thy wounds. Alas! Sir, replied she,
they are beyond human art -- He, in whose hand are the issues of life and
death, can alone heal the anguish; -- He will, I trust, soon bind them up
forever: -- Has fortune then proved unkind, has friendship grown cold, or has
love betrayed thee?

This flower, said she, when the morning sun exhaled the dew from its bosom,
might have been regarded as an emblem, of what I was; in its present state,
plucked from its branch, and (...) fast away, it is an emblem of what I am --
then (...), as it were, from her grief, she looked me earnestly in the face,
and exclaimed, in a stern tone of voice, it was -- that undid me -- I listened
to his fabricated tales -- they fanned the glowing passions into a flame that
consumed my virtue; having lost that, which can alone make a woman charming, I
(...) unworthy of my father's (...) he drove me fiercely from it, and shut his
ears -- nay, his heart, against the voice of my contrition; had not my mother
been in the grave, she might have preserved me from destruction; at least she
would have pitied me, and not have suffered her child to wander, sad, forlorn,
and friendless: --

And who is thy father? Ah! me, said she, he indeed lives who was my father,
but I am now an orphan; I will not tell the name I have dishonored.


