A TREATISE ON MORALITY: Chiefly designed for the INSTRUCTION OF YOUTH.

To blend improving Morals with Delight,
And with kind Precept set the Heart aright.
BY THE REVEREND RENE HOUDET.

PHILADELPHIA; PRINTED FOR THE AU^^^^ (...) DOBSON, No 41, S. SECOND (...) 1796.

[Copy-Right secured according to Law.]

PREFACE.
I MUST inform the reader, that the following pages, offered to his perusal,
have not been undertaken with a view of being made public. They are no more
than the result of some private lessons, dictated from memory, to a worthy and
respectable family of this city, whose education has been entrusted to me. As I
have had the satisfaction of observing that it has produced the happiest
effects in the minds of the children, for whom only I designed it, I have
reason to believe, that it will be equally useful and instructive to all those
who shall carefully peruse it. The moral it contains is really good and
excellent; and Oh! what finer moral than that, which tends to form the mind,
the judgment, and the heart of young people! What finer moral than that which
makes them discover the advantages and necessity of a good education; which
brings before their eyes those ideas which, in all ages and in the best
governments, have been entertained on this subject! What finer moral than that,
which manifests and explains to them their duties; not only the duties which
are imposed on them in youth, but even those which they shall have afterward
to discharge at the different periods of life; not only the personal duties
which concern themselves, but even the relative with respect to God, society,
and the different classes of men with whom they have connections, and are
obliged to live! What finer moral than that, which teaches them to think, to
reflect, to know themselves and others; which gives them a just conception of
the intrinsic value of things, and demonstrates to them in what real merit
consists! What finer moral, in short, than that, which represents virtue as it
really is, that is to say, amiable and desirable in its very nature; which
makes their attachment to their duties, even their interest and happiness, by
evincing, that to be happy, we must be religious, prudent, wise, humane,
gentle, moderate, patient, just, disinterested, temperate, magnanimous, etc.
and rendering this great truth obvious to them, that virtue is the only road to
felicity.

Such, in few words, is the idea which the reader may form of this production;
and such is the subject of it. It is neither a plan, nor a system of public or
private education. Nothing systematic can be discovered in its composition. It
is a simple, concise explanation of the fundamental truths, and evident
principles, which should be at all times the great spring of the actions and
conduct of every good man, and which, consequently, it is extremely important
to inculcate and engrave on the hearts of youth. It is, as the Title describes
it, A compendious Tract of Morality, the scope of which is, to teach the
noblest of all arts, that of becoming a good man, or a virtuous woman.

Finally, It is not so entirely confined to the instruction of young persons,
as to become unprofitable to those more advanced in years; especially to
fathers and mothers, who can never be sufficiently convinced of the great
obligations they have contracted, as to the education of their children.

A desire of being useful to the public, is the motive which stimulates me, in
presenting them these pages. My wishes will be accomplished, if I can obtain
this end.

R. HOUDET.
PHILADELPHIA, November 21st, 1796.
A TREATISE ON MORALITY, etc.
WHAT is the chief advantage which children may receive from their parents?

A good education.

Is not education the basis on which depends the fate of their whole life?

It is so said, and with justice.

Is not the happiness or misery of human life entirely owing to education? that
is to say, to the principles we receive in youth?

It absolutely is.

Does not the strength and solidity of a building totally rest on the firmness
of the foundation which sustains it?

Most undoubtedly.

Can an edifice, built on a weak foundation, long exist? Is it not threatened
with approaching ruin?

Such an edifice cannot long exist; it must certainly fall in a little time.

Is it not the same with respect to education? If it is vicious, if it does not
tend to impress our minds with good, generous, and virtuous sentiments, can we
ever hope to become prudent, discreet, respectable, and capable of fulfilling
with dignity the duties of that station in life which Providence has allotted
us?

Without a good education a child can scarcely afterward acquire the qualities
which render man good and virtuous.

An ancient has observed, that youth is the most respectable of the different
stages of life: Is the observation just? and, In what sense should we
comprehend it?

The remark is just; because that age commonly decides the happiness or misery
of future life.

Do we not frequently compare a child to a young plant?

Yes -- we are accustomed to make that comparison.

Is not a young plant, newly received into the bosom of the earth, susceptible
of every form we wish to give it?

That it is, without the least difficulty.

If it is not straight; if it is bent and crooked, or inclined downward; can we
not easily make it erect, in the first stages of its growth, and remove all its
imperfections?

This is done with facility, and continually practiced.

If we wait till it has grown up, and gathered strength with its growth, will
it then be as pliant, as manageable, and as fit to receive a new form?

By no means -- we should then have more difficulty in making it receive new
impressions.

Will not the task become more difficult in proportion as it is delayed, and as
the plant increases and grows larger?

That must naturally be the case.

Should we wait till it becomes a great tree, would it then be possible to
change its stubborn inclination? Would it not, on the contrary, always preserve
it, whatever pains we may take, or desires we may have, to subdue it into new
habits?

It is certain the plant we treat of will ever remain in this defective state,
from which no human exertions will be capable of altering it.

Do not these different conditions of the plant give us a lively idea of the
different stages of human life, namely, infancy, youth, and mature years?

Perfectly well -- and it is easy to make the application.

Do not the defective forms observed in some plants represent to us the defects
perceived in some children?

The comparison is simple and natural.

By the same mode of reasoning, as we may easily remedy the defects in tender
plants in the first season of their growth, is it not likely that we may, with
the same facility, remedy the imperfections of youth, when reason begins to
dawn on the infant soul?

To me it seems so -- and I believe that early youth is the most proper season
to amend the defects which then begin to appear.

Do you not imagine, that if, at such a period, young people are neglected,
their imperfections will increase, strengthen, and take a new and wayward turn,
like the plant in its second state; and that afterward it will be infinitely
more difficult to reform them, should such an arduous task be undertaken?

It is true, no doubt, and daily experience confirms it.

What would you think if those very young people constantly practiced the
errors of youth, and persevered in them to an advanced age?

I must think they would certainly become habitual; and habit to man is a kind
of second nature.

Do you suppose that a tree can produce good fruit, if neglected and left to
itself?

In order that a tree should yield good fruit, it is very necessary to attend
to it, especially when it is young.

Do we ever see good seed sown in the ground till it is first ploughed and
tilled?

No -- the earth must be tilled if the wish to reap the harvest in the season.

What does the best soil produce, when it is not prepared by the labor of man?

Soil thus neglected, yields nothing but brambles, thorns, and noxious herbs.

What does the brightest genius produce when it is not cultivated with
diligence, and enriched by the advantages of a good education?

The brightest genius without the assistance of a good education, can hardly
ever yield any good, noble, great, or generous sentiment.

To what should a young person apply, who has received the benefit of a good
education?

To the study of virtue, science, and good manners.

Which of these two advantages, virtue or science, merits the preference?

Virtue is preferable to all things.

Is not the man to whom virtue is allotted, to be esteemed at all times, and in
the eyes of the whole world?

Yes -- virtue alone is sufficient to render a man each moment valuable, and in
every age.

Does not science, unaccompanied by virtue, deserve our esteem?

Not at all -- science has no intrinsic worth, but when combined with merit and
virtue.

Are there not some literary characters, possessed of much erudition, who are
at the same time, dangerous, obnoxious, and contemptible?

We discover some of that tribe in every country, age, and government.

Does the good and virtuous man sometimes seek to do harm?

No -- he endeavors only to do good; and the instant he begins to do hurt, he
ceases to be good.

Have we always the same ideas of goodness and virtue?

We have.

Are these ideas common to all nations of the globe?

These ideas are generally diffused, and are common to the inhabitants of
Europe, as well as to those of Asia, Africa, and America.

Upon what are these notions of good and virtue founded?

Upon the eternal and unchangeable principles which God has engraven on the
heart of man.

By what means are we to become good in mature years, and during the whole
course of life?

By beginning in time, or in early youth.

Can we learn the principles and art of virtue, as we do the other arts, for
instance, that of medicine?

Yes -- there is a method and art of teaching the rules of virtue, as well as
of acquiring the other sciences.

Was this art known to the ancients, and practiced by them?

History informs us, that the ancients well knew and practiced this art.

Could you quote some passages from history on this subject, to show us by
example, how they formerly instructed the youth of Persia, Lacedemonia, Athens,
and Rome? -- begin with Persia.

Formerly in Persia, the education of youth was considered the most important
duty, and essential province of government: it did not depend on the attention
of parents, whom a blind and partial tenderness often rendered incapable of
this care: the state was entrusted with it: the youth were educated in common,
after an uniform manner by which all were regulated: the scene and continuance
of their recreations; the time of their meals; the quality of their meat and
drink; the number of their masters; the different modes of chastisement.

In Persia the youth went to school to learn justice, as elsewhere they go
there to acquire literature and the sciences. The crime they punished most, was
that of ingratitude.

There were some in a class from childhood till they were sixteen or seventeen
years old, at which period they entered the class of young men; and then the
strictest authority was exercised over them, because that age, above any other,
has need of the guardian eye of vigilance to watch over it. They remained ten
years in this class, under the direction of four different masters,
distinguished for their science, but much more for their merit. It was the
province of each of these to instruct them in a particular virtue: one taught
religion; another justice; the third pointed out the unruffled serenity
proceeding from temperance; and the fourth instilled the principles of courage.

The third class was composed of those arrived at the state of manhood. Places
and preferments were granted in the state to those only who had passed through
the different classes, and given proofs of their application, merit, and
abilities.

Falsehood was severely punished, and any one inclined to this vice was
considered as infamous.

The object of the Persians in their wholesome laws respecting education was,
to prevent evil, persuaded that it was better to do so than to punish it: And
whilst in other states, punishments were decreed to be inflicted on criminals,
they endeavored to act in such a manner, as that among them, there should be
no guilty persons.

What was the authority of parents over their children?

It was very great -- they had the power of life and death over them.

How did they educate their children at Lacedemon?

Much the same way as at Persia: they did not commit to parents the education
of their children; the state took charge of them, and caused them all to be
brought up in the same manner. The great principle of the legislature of
Lacedemon was, that as children belonged to the commonwealth, they should be
educated by the commonwealth, and for the public weal.

The grand science which they taught them, above all other things, was, an
entire and implicit obedience to the laws, to magistrates, to their parents,
and in general, to all those who were older than themselves. In fact, their
obedience was not confined to their own parents alone, but all others had
equally a right of commanding them; so that if any parent had detected a child
in error, he was obliged to reprove, correct, and chastise him: if the child
happened to complain to his own parent, it would have been considered shameful
in him, did he not inflict the same punishment which was already felt from the
hands of the stranger, who was the subject of complaint.

They inured them early to hardship, to enable them to support all sorts of
fatigue and labor: from the age of seven years, they were set to work in order
to invigorate their bodies: they were accustomed to different exercises
suitable to their years and growth: they always had some elderly person among
them, who presided at their exercises; and in his absence the most prudent
youth was made guardian over the rest, who were subject to him.

They were obliged to sleep on hard beds, composed of a kind of reeds, which
they collected with their own hands, without the help of any implement: their
apparel was always of the same stuff, and they had not the liberty of changing
it according to the seasons: they were not suffered to use nightly lamps to
light them through the streets.

They were admitted to public feasts, which, it is known, took place in this
republic. Thither they daily went to dine with their fathers. When they entered
the hall, the eldest pointing to the door delivered to them these words, "Let
nothing that is mentioned here be conveyed hence through that gateway." This
was done in order to accustom them to keep secrets. Those feasts were to them
an excellent school of instruction, for sobriety, temperance, wisdom, and
modesty. Here they heard serious discourses on politics, government, and
morals; eulogiums on good and virtuous actions; and severe strictures on those
which were unworthy. Hence they became acquainted with the characters of great
men, and those virtues which had endeared them to the state.

In order to form the heart and judgment, several questions were proposed to
them, such as follow: Who was the most honest man in the republic? Which were
the necessary virtues to form a good magistrate, a good general, etc.? they had
to reply immediately to these interrogatories; and he who failed to do so was
instantly punished. Their answers were concise and pertinent; for they were
accustomed to say little, but to convey much in few words, because their
language was lively, short, and comprehensive; and on this account the
Lacedemonian language is termed laconic; so that we still say, when we speak of
a person who expresses himself with brevity, that his style is laconic.

Could you quote some examples of this brevity of style?

Among others the two following are related: Philip, king of Macedon, being at
war with the Lacedaemonians, informed them by letter, that if he entered their
territories with his army, he would lay all waste before him. They answered him
by this single monosyllable, if. -- The same monarch having addressed them in a
long letter, in which he required to know of them, whether he should enter
Laconia as a friend or enemy? They replied, neither.

Could you introduce here any instances of the courage and patience of the
Lacedemonian children, in supporting their ills?

History offers us the two following: A Lacedemonian child being employed in a
religious ceremony, it happened that a burning coal fell on his sleeve which
took fire and burned his hand: he endured the pain without shedding a tear, or
making any attempt to extinguish the fire; and all this not to interrupt the
order of the sacrifice.

They report that another child, having stolen a fox, concealed it inside his
shirt: the ferocious animal tore out his bowels, without the child's
complaining, who dreaded his theft might be discovered.

In what manner did the philosophers, particularly Socrates, instruct and form
the youth at Athens?

The custom of the ancient philosophers at Athens was to assemble, at stated
times, and collect their disciples; to discourse familiarly in their presence
on the different branches of philosophy; to examine them often on the most
important points in morals, politics, and government, and minutely expound
these different subjects. Thus Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and many others,
educated their followers. Plato held his school in a garden at Athens, called
academy; from thence we derive the same name which we use in the present day to
denote the different societies of learned men.

When any of their scholars had a lively desire to pursue the sciences and an
ardent ambition to become a philosopher, he chose one who was most eminent in
that part of literature which he was so emulous to acquire; he became attached
to him in a particular manner; he constantly followed him for whole years, and
applied himself the entire time to learn his lessons, to study his principles,
and to form his conduct after his example.

In such manner was Archelaus the disciple of Anaxagoras; Socrates of
Archelaus; Xenophon and Plato of Socrates; Xenderates and Aristotle of Plato;
besides many others. There were some even who undertook long voyages, in order
to find out some distinguished literary character, under whom they studied many
years. Among those different philosophers, there is one who merits our
particular attention, and whose name is highly worthy to be made known to you
here; I mean Socrates, who may be justly considered one of the greatest sages
among the heathens. This great man devoted his chief labors, and almost his
whole life, to the instruction of youth. We cannot express what important
services he rendered the state by his instruction, and the great number of
pupils he had formed. Never had master so many, nor any more illustrious. It
seems, says Libanius, that he was the common father of the republic, he was so
watchful over the welfare and interests of all.

Before his time, the philosophers studied natural objects; they had warm
disputes about matters which they could not fathom; on the manner in which the
world has been formed; on the cause of phenomena which happen in the heavens
and on the earth. Socrates deemed such researches of no utility, and considered
those who introduced them deficient in true wisdom and solid understanding.
What gave him a great disgust to the different sects who lived in his time was,
particularly the infinite diversity and inconsistency of the opinions which
they taught. For, said he, even amongst madmen, we find some who are not
intimidated at the appearance of things which are really terrifying, and others
who are scared at the sight of the most common and well-known objects: even
among the philosophers of our days, there are some who blush not publicly to
indulge their disciples in principles the most repugnant to the common ideas of
reason and decorum; while others, who fall into opposite errors, scarcely
suffer them to leave their dwellings, or to do the most simple and innocent
actions: we observe some who ridicule temples, altars, and the Divinity
himself; others who give into the most extravagant superstition, and go so far
as to adore statues of, wood, and even those of brutes.

As to those sects who study the nature of the universe; one party asserts that
there is but one world; another pretends that there are an infinity. Those
would maintain that all the parts of the world are in perpetual motion; these
that it remains in a state of perfect and unchangeable repose, etc.

From his observations on such contradictions and inconsistencies in the
schools, he was estranged from them, and sought a more certain and useful
method. He pursued a track of philosophy comprehending more generally received
and established principles, of some advantage to his scholars, and infinitely
more valuable, solid, and permanent; a moral and practical philosophy, which
tends to make man better.

He was the first, says Cicero, who made wisdom descend from above, to dwell in
the habitations and in the midst of families. He kept no open school, like the
other philosophers, not set hours for his lessons. He was a philosopher of all
seasons and all hours: he taught in every place, and on every occasion: on his
walks, in conversation, at meals, in the army, the midst of the camp, in public
assemblies of the people or the senate, even in the prison, and when taking a
draught of hemlock, he philosophized, says Plutarch, and instructed mankind.

At Athens, his custom was, to go every day into the streets, squares, and
assemblies; he there familiarly and simply treated on subjects relating to
government and the conduct of life: he spoke of piety, impiety; honesty,
dishonesty; justice, injustice; wisdom and folly; courage and cowardice; on
government, the republic, politics, magistracy, and all things of which the
knowledge is necessary to man.

His method of teaching was to make many interrogatories; hence it was
remarked, that he was himself ignorant of things he professed to teach others,
and that he thereby sought to improve himself. There was, however, such
exquisite art in his questions, and he proposed them in such a manner, as to
render the truths so clear and precise, that it was impossible for his hearers
not to consent to them.

He accompanied his instructions with a great number of comparisons, which were
very plain, and drawn from the most common and simple subjects. He knew
extremely well how to adapt himself to the capacity and wants of his hearers,
pointing out to each the duties of his station and years: he began, by
impressing on their minds the principles of religion; above all things
recommending to them, never to undertake any thing without consulting the will
of the gods, and endeavoring to render them propitious, by offering up the
sacrifices used in his time. From thence he entered into a detail of the
obligations of civil life, admonishing the men to be good husbands; the women
to be discreet, modest, wise, and virtuous; both to be good fathers and
mothers; to give their children a turn for labor; to teach them the practice
of virtue, and inspire them with a love of their country: directing the
children also to be respectful to their parents, docile and submissive to their
superiors. He strenuously recommended to all his fellow-citizens a zealous
attachment to the commonwealth, an entire submission to the orders of
magistracy, and the laws of the state. He expatiated much on these different
subjects, pointing every sentiment to the feelings of the heart, more forcibly
than to the understanding; displaying truth with that simple, natural
eloquence, at the same time animated and pathetic, which renders virtue truly
amiable, and could not fail to produce the most happy impressions on his
hearers. It is not then astonishing, that he so happily succeeded in luring
from the paths of vice such a vast number of youth.

Socrates never instructed his pupils in the precepts of eloquence, till he had
first given them a taste of the moral and political virtues: he saw plainly
that virtue should be the foundation of eloquence; and that we should be good
and virtuous before we are eloquent. As to eloquence, his opinion was, that
whoever conceives a thing justly, can easily explain it, and give an account of
it to others. On these principles he was assiduous in giving his scholars
clear, just, and distinct notions of things; which he did by explaining them in
the most circumstantial manner. The better to accomplish his views, he made use
of dialogue, and proposed questions, which threw light on the subject, and
rendered it obvious to every capacity. If he entered on any discourse, he began
by laying down sure and evident principles, deeming it the best mode of
convincing. Likewise, says Xenophon, he was of all I ever knew, the man, who,
without contradiction, had the happiest knack at persuasion.

The following examples, which Xenophon has offered us, may give us an idea of
the manner in which Socrates taught the virtues he so diligently recommended to
his disciples; and abhorred the vices, for which he implanted in their minds
the utmost disgust and aversion.

He asked them, Whether liberty was not one of the most invaluable blessings
which man could enjoy? Yes, undoubtedly, replied they. Do you think him free
who suffers himself to be hurried away by sensual gratifications, inordinate
passions, and their despotic sway, that iron bar to the practice of virtue? No
-- he cannot be free. What opinion have you of those masters who divert us from
good, and lead us into evil? They are, in our judgment, the most wicked of all
mankind. Do not all the world agree, that the passions, and especially that of
intemperance, hinder man from the exercise of virtue, and urge him to evil? It
is an unquestionable truth. What would you think of a prince, who would deprive
his subjects of their property, the state of its citizens, society of its
members, and families of their support? of a prince, who, having no law but his
tyrannical will, would condemn to misery, to torture, to disease, to violent
and sudden death, those who would acknowledge his authority? of a prince, in
short, whose laws would be much more injurious to his subjects, than salutary
or advantageous? What idea must you entertain of such a prince? He would truly
appear, in our eyes, the most cruel of all tyrants. This barbarous tyrant,
returns Socrates, is intemperance, who suddenly whelms, in every calamity,
those who submit to his laws. He strips them of their rights, in order to
enslave them to customs which religion, honor, and reason unanimously reject.
He deprives the state of citizens, by rendering them incapable of becoming
useful to it; society of its members, to which they are a plague, by the
contagion of their bad examples; and families of their hopes, to which they
prove, by the baseness of their conduct, a scandal and infamy. This frantic
tyrant plunges his victims into a sea of troubles. He never ceases to level his
empoisoned arrows in order to wound them in every part; in their person,
property, mind, conscience, honor, and reputation. This vice is the source of
sufferings and diseases; the cause of shameful and untimely deaths; the ruin of
families, children, and friends.

What we say here of intemperance, we can equally say of the other vices and
inordinate passions, of anger, pride, gluttony, avarice, and ambition. These
cruel masters command, with such authority, the slaves, which are once subject
to them, that during the labors of their youth and age, they compel them to
devote their whole time to their service; to yield them the entire produce of
those labors; to undergo many hardships and difficulties; and at last, even to
sink into poverty and wretchedness, for the gratification of their desires. But
at length, when they are worn out in the service, and incapable of being any
longer useful to them, their masters forsake them, suffering them to languish
in old age, and drag on a miserable existence, in despair and unavailing
pensive reflections on the past.

He thus makes them perceive that they are blindfolded by this vice, and
prevented from distinguishing what is good and profitable; that the heart is
vitiated by it, and drawn from the love of virtue; that it pollutes all the
powers of the soul, and gives it an evil tendency in all things. To this
passion he contrasts the virtue of temperance, which he paints in beautiful
colors: he proves to them that it procures infinite advantages; that it is the
source of true pleasure, and the parent of real happiness; that it alone gives
liberty to the soul, and leisure to indulge in the practice of good morals;
that it always preserves the body in health and the mind in tranquillity; that
it makes union and prosperity reign in families; that it procures the esteem
and friendship of all worthy people; that it places man in a condition of
becoming useful to his friends and his country; and that, in short, it renders
youth healthful and vigorous, and old age pleasant and respectable. He
concludes, that we should then be attached to this virtue, love and practice
it, and, on the contrary, that we ought to combat the opposite vice with the
same zeal and courage with which we attack an unjust enemy, who attempts to rob
us of liberty.

Is it not true, observed he at times, that in order to succeed and improve in
any science whatever, we must study a long time its principles and rules; learn
from the best masters, and be formed in their schools? Could we be so weak as
to believe that we must not follow the same plan in acquiring the most useful,
great, and noble of all professions, that of knowing how to live well? Is it
not astonishing to remark, that those who wish to become physicians, or to
learn any other science, apply to the best masters respectively, and that the
generality of mankind neglect to have recourse to those masters which they have
most occasion for; such as could teach them the rules of life, the principles
of good morals, the knowledge of their duties, the science of virtues, and the
good qualities of the soul, which alone constitute the dignity and happiness of
man?

It is not, still continued he, gold nor silver, which makes some men better or
greater than others; it is the precepts of philosophy, the lessons of wisdom,
that enrich the mind, and put it in possession of the treasures of virtue,
which are far preferable to the wealth of worlds.

Socrates took particular care to give his scholars a high idea of the power
and goodness of the gods: you may judge of it by the admirable conversation
which he held with Euthydeme, on Providence. Xenophon has preserved it for us,
and Mr. Rollin relates it in his Ancient History.

Have you never reflected, says Socrates to Euthydeme, how the gods have taken
care to give mankind all that is necessary? Never, I assure you, replies he. Do
you see, returns Socrates, how useful light is to us, and how precious that
gift bestowed us by the gods? Indeed, replies Euthydeme, we should be like
blind men without it, and all nature would be lifeless. But because we have
need of rest, they have given us night for repose. They have decreed that the
sun, that brilliant and luminous planet, should preside by day, to distinguish
the different parts thereof; and that it serve, not only to unfold the wonders
of nature, but to bear life and heat throughout the universe. They have also
ordained, that the stars and the moon illuminate the night, which is in itself
obscure and gloomy. Can there be any thing so admirable as this variety, this
alternate change of night and day, of light and darkness, of labor and rest;
and all designed for the good of man?

Socrates, in like manner, related the infinite advantages we receive from fire
and water, in supplying the wants of life. Continuing his observations on the
wonderful attention of Providence to all that regards us, What say you,
enquired he, on perceiving that after winter the sun returns to us; and that as
the fruits of one season decay, he ripens those that succeed? that having
rendered this service to man, he retires, as it would seem, from an
apprehension of incommoding us with his heat? Afterward, when he withdraws to
a certain boundary, which he cannot exceed without putting us in danger of
perishing with cold, he returns back again, to take up his quarters in that
region of the heavens where his presence proves most beneficial to us; and as
we cannot suffer excessive cold on heat, should the transition be sudden from
one to the other, is it not worthy of admiration, that this luminary approaches
and retires from us so slowly that we arrive at either extreme, in a manner
almost imperceptible? Would it be possible not to acknowledge, in this
regularity of the annual seasons, an overruling Providence, not only attentive
to our wants, but even to our comforts?

All these circumstances, says Euthydeme, make me doubt whether the gods have
heaped such benefits on man only? One point alone staggers my credulity, which
is, that inferior animals participate in all the good things of this life as
well as we. Yes, replies Socrates, but do you not see that these animals solely
exist for the use of man? He subdues the most powerful and unwieldy of them,
tames them, and employs them, with the utmost advantage, for war, labor, and
other purposes.

What must we think, if we survey man on the scale of being? Here Socrates
examined the different senses, by the exercise of which man enjoys all that is
noble and excellent in nature; the vivacity of his wit, and the strength of his
reason, which raise him infinitely above all other animals; the wonderful gift
of speech, by means of which, we mutually communicate our thoughts, publish our
laws, and regulate the commonwealth.

From what has been advanced, says Socrates, it is easy to infer the existence
of the gods, and that they shelter man under the wings of their protection,
though he cannot discover them through the medium of his senses. Do we perceive
the thunderbolt crush all before it? Do we distinguish the winds which, before
our eyes, make such dreadful ravages? Do we ever see our soul, which is so
intimately blended with our existence, which actuates and animates us? Is it
not the same with respect to the gods, none of whom become visible in order to
distribute their favors. Even the Great God [these words are remarkable], this
Great God, I say, who has created the universe, and who sustains the great
work, whose parts are perfected in excellence and beauty; who decreed that they
should not grow old with time, but ever flourish in immortal youth; who also
ordained, that they obey him with a celerity of motion which imagination cannot
trace; this God is visible enough in the wondrous works of the creation, of
which he is the author; but always invisible as to his person. Let us not then
withold our belief from what we do not see; but instead of our corporeal
eyes, let us use those of the soul; and above all, let us endeavor to render
proper homage to the Divinity, who wishes to be known but by his beneficence.
This homage, this worship, consists in pleasing him; and we cannot please him
but by performing his will.

After this manner Socrates instructed youth; and such were the principles and
sentiments with which he inspired them.

He frequently repeated in his discourses, that the gods watched all our words
and actions; pierced the deepest recesses of the soul; were present at our
deliberations, and inspired us in all our affairs. Dead or living, said he, the
good man is never forgotten by the gods.

Socrates also taught his disciples the mode of preserving health. He held it
as a maxim, that man should become acquainted with his own constitution, and
with those things which either agree or disagree with it; that he should make
use of the one and avoid the other, and become his own physician. He
particularly recommended sobriety to them, advising them carefully to shun
those luxurious dishes and agreeable draughts, which only tend to provoke a
false appetite, unsolicited by the calls of nature, in the pressing demands of
hunger and thirst; and added, that nothing, so much as excess in eating and
drinking, contributes to disorder, all at once, the stomach, the head, and the
understanding.

The ardour of the young Athenians, in following his philosophical principles,
was incredible. They quitted father and mother, and renounced all parties of
pleasure, to adhere to him, and listen to his doctrine. We may judge of it by
Alcibiades, one of the most lively and impetuous young men of his time. The
means, Socrates used, to check his pride, merits a place here. This young man
was boasting one day of the vast riches and property he possessed, when
Socrates laid a map before him, and asked him where Greece was situated? The
space which this country occupied was too small to be readily discerned: he at
length, however, discovered a glimpse of it, and pointed it out; but on being
requested to show his own territories therein, It is a matter of too little
importance, said he, to be set down in so narrow a space. This, then, replied
Socrates, an imperceptible point of the globe, is what turns your brain.

The lessons which Socrates gave, made the greater impression, because he
himself practiced the virtues which he inculcated.

The limit of this production do not permit me to give his history; I beg leave
to refer those who wish to become acquainted with it, to Rollin's Works, or
Xenophon's Memoirs.

How were children educated at Rome?

In turning over the pages of Roman history, we have had frequent opportunities
of remarking the care taken at Rome in the education of youth; we have observed
it particularly in the person of Paulus Emilius. This illustrious Roman, who
had a perfect knowledge of the art of forming the mind, procured for his
children the most eminent masters of the age he lived in. Notwithstanding the
important duties of his station, he often assisted at their different
exercises, in order to encourage them by his presence. You may recollect that
his children strove, by a noble emulation, to fulfill the desires and
expectation of so good a father, by their application to study and their
progress in the sciences. Their taste for literature was so great, that when he
conquered the kingdom of Macedon, they would not deign to bestow a glance on
the immense treasures of the king; they were only tempted by a view of the
library in his palace, to request it of Pauius Emilius, who granted their
desires.

You have also seen how refined was the education of Scipio Africanus; how it
tended to form his mind and heart; what advantages he derived from it in the
execution of those great enterprises which he afterward undertook; how much it
contributed to render him famous in war and in peace; to inspire him, not only
with political and military virtues, but even with moral and private. The happy
sentiments which he discovered in the historian Polybius, attached this great
man to him in a particular manner, and powerfully stimulated him to acquire
that high reputation which has rendered his name immortal.

In Rome, the province of education was not confined to the men only; the women
took a part in it, as we may judge from the following passage.

A Roman lady having gone to pay a visit to one of her friends and neighbors,
the toilet was the topic of their conversation. The strange lady said a great
deal on the subject, and entered into a minute detail of the various jewels she
had in her possession, and also of those ornaments which served to embellish
the sex. Her friend let her go on, without interruption, until her children,
who were at school, came home: when she saw them enter the door, she resumed
the conversation, and introducing them, said, I have not shown you my jewels,
because I had them not; here they are now, and I may speak to you about them:
These children you see are my diamonds, and the ornaments most dear to my
heart: my delight and my glory consist in polishing and adorning their minds,
by a solid and virtuous education: the joy I feel in observing their progress
in science and virtue, is to me preferable to the possession of the most rare
and precious jewels.

What must we infer from the premises, respecting the attention paid to the
education of youth in the various ountrie have mentioned?

We must conclude, that at all times, and in every polished nation, the
education of youth was esteemed an essential and indispensable duty; and that
the ancients were always persuaded that the prosperity of states, the happiness
of families, and the public as well as private welfare entirely depended on it.
They were ever of opinion, that what made a distinction between men, and
rendered them truly worthy, did not result from riches, honors, rank, and
dignity, but from piety, merit, and virtue.

But these sentiments cannot be firmly established and impressed on the hearts
of youth, without the advantages of a cultivated and virtuous education,
pursued with unremitting application; of an education which makes us fill with
honor the station to which we are called, the sphere of action we are destined
by Providence to move in; of an education, in short, which brings us early
acquainted with the duties we have to practice, and which form the whole
economy of human life; which induces us to love and cherish those duties, by
inculcating this truth, that we cannot be happy or deserving in the sight of
God or man, unless we faithfully discharge them.

You ask me what those duties are, and you desire that I should expound, at
least, the fundamental ones, which serve as a basis to all the rest. Nothing
more laudable than such a desire, and I consider it my duty to gratify it.
Reflection and the following particulars will assist you in your pursuit. The
duties imposed on man, and which we have to fulfill at all times, in all ages,
and in every condition of life, are of three kinds: the first relate to God;
the second to society and private life; the third to ourselves, and are
personal.

That we have to perform certain duties to God, is an indisputable and
generally receive truth.

In fact, if God has created heaven and earth; if he has formed the world out
of nothing; if he has made man, and endued him with reason to distinguish
between good and evil; if he has molded him after his own image, by animating
him with a soul capable of knowing, loving, serving, and adoring him; if he
destines him for immortality; he cannot then leave him to chance in this world:
He must therefore have manifested his will; prescribed duties; appointed a mode
of worship; and ordained a religion for man to regulate his actions; to put him
in constant mind of the author of his existence; and the end of his creation;
to give him a sense of his obligations to the Deity; and keep him in a state of
persevering submission and dependence on that Great Being.

This religion then is divine, since it has God for its author; it existed at
all times, since, by its nature, it can be traced back to the beginning of
things: it is also as ancient as the world: it is practiced in all countries,
and for all men, since it is the work of the Sovereign Master of the whole
world: it is the only true one, as God who founded it is the only true God: it
is holy, as it flows from him who is holiness itself: it is necessary and
indispensable, since its end is to direct us on earth, and make us happy
hereafter.

This truth, that religion is absolutely necessary and indispensable, has been
acknowledged in all ages, and even by the heathens themselves. You will find in
the course of human affairs, says Plutarch, some cities without walls, without
schools, without a king, without a theater, and without any of the amusements
usual in our republics; but you will not find any which do not acknowledge a
God, call upon him as a witness, address him in prayer and sacrifices to obtain
some blessings, or avert some calamities: such cities man has never seen, nor
ever will. It appears to me more possible to build a town without a foundation
and ground to support it, than to establish a government without religion; it
is that which sustains, and makes human society flourish; it is the basis and
the very sinews of the laws.

This would be a proper place to treat the present subject more fully; to
describe to you the different religions; to make you distinguish between those
invented by man, and that which has God for its authors; to point out the
novelty or recent date of the former, and the antiquity of the latter; and to
explain to you, in an ample manner, the motives which should determine our
choice, and induce us to embrace that only true religion in preference to all
others: but as we have already a number of excellent authors on this subject,
which you can procure, I must refer you to their works, and request of you to
read them with an impartial judgment, and a sincere desire of coming at the
truth. If it be the part of candor and rectitude of soul to seek it, and make
it the rule of conduct, it should certainly be our province, in a more exalted
point of view, where our dearest interest, those of time and eternity, are
concerned.

After these reflections on our duties toward God, we shall next discuss those
we have to perform in society toward mankind and ourselves.

After our duties toward God an religion, what others have we to fulfill?

Those naturally follow which we owe our parents: to know the nature and extent
of such duties, it is sufficient to call to mind the obligations we are under
to them. The following reflections will serve to present them to the mind.

We are first indebted to them for our birth; should they have no other claim
to our gratitude, the voice of nature cries aloud that we should testify it in
the most sensible manner during our lives.

But this favor, however great it may be considered in itself, is nothing,
when compared to those for which we are indebted to them since that period.

Were we to trace back the first season of life, and the time which has elapsed
since our birth, What were we then capable of, and what cares and anxieties
have we not occasioned? Weakness and ignorance were our portion. Destitute of
every thing except numerous wants, and unable of ourselves to supply them;
deprived of the means of making ourselves understood; possessed of no language
but that of tears and cries; incapable of using our limbs; apparently suffering
in our helpless situation; and finding no repose but in the arms and on the
bosom of our mothers; what anxiety they then endured, what uneasiness, toil,
and trouble they underwent?

Among the numerous necessities inseparable from our condition, how must it be
with those children who seem repugnant to nature, and the general aversion for
whom can only be subdued by the love and tenderness of fond mothers, whose
sufferings on this occasion are the more poignant, as they are not limited to a
short time, to a few weeks or months, but protracted for whole years; each
hour, each moment of the day is not only devoted to misery, but the night, that
calm season of repose, is consumed in weeping vigils over their froward
offspring, whose ceaseless cries can scarcely be lulled to rest even by the
nourishment they seem to demand.

What shall we say of the trouble and solicitude we have occasioned during the
lingering hours of sickness, to which infancy is so frequently exposed? And
really in proportion as our tender limbs expand, as we advance in growth, we
appear in more danger of dropping out of existence; for every effort which
nature makes in unfolding our corporeal faculties, seems as if she would
deprive us of the little life which feebly animates us. What uneasiness we give
them, when our teeth (the smallest appendages of the body) begin to pierce
through the gums, and collect consistence: At this crisis we are reduced to a
state of rapid decline and weakness, which awaken every apprehension for our
safety. While we were thus suspended between life and death, what could equal
the sorrows of our parents, or what lively pencil could have even sketched
their feelings? Overwhelmed with grief, bereft of every consolation, they had
only power to wring their hands; to raise their dim eyes toward heaven; to
implore the Divine Assistance; and offer up the most ardent and sincere
petitions for our safety.

After having miraculously escaped the numberless dangers which attend our
infancy, we arrive at an age in which the faculties of mind and body demand new
vigilance, and cares of a more elevated and noble nature; I mean those which
relate to the soul, to the understanding, and which have for their main object
our future education. What new and infinite obligations we contract at this
period with our parents? especially if Providence has given us parents truly
worthy of this name: Parents, who, besides supplying us with food, and
bestowing that attention we stood in need of in our helpless years, consider
these as no more than a small part of their duty, should they neglect to
improve our minds with necessary instruction in youth: Parents, who, convinced
of our real interest, embrace betimes the means of making us happy: Parents,
who, persuaded that all the wealth they may leave their children is, by no
means, to be compared to virtue and a good education, have nothing so much at
heart as forming their principles: Parents who continually inculcate these
important truths, viz. that not all the advantages of fortune, person, or
figure, an render us truly happy and meritorious, without the virtues of the
heart and good qualities of the mind: Parents, in fine, who, imitating the
example of the Roman lady, whom we had occasion to mention, look upon their
children as their ornament, their pride, and their glory: If, I say, Providence
has given us such parents, then we should esteem ourselves happy indeed, and
return perpetual blessings for our highly favored condition: it is then we
should acknowledge the extent and magnitude of the benefits for which we are
indebted to them: it is then they establish the basis and motives of a
gratitude which our whole life is not capable of repaying them. This gratitude,
in fact, should arise from the services they render us: the more noble and
generous these services are, the greater and more extensive should be our
acknowledgments. But as the soul, the reason, and understanding are infinitely
superior to the body, it follows, that our gratitude for benefits which relate
to them, should be as much more eminent, as they are exalted above the body.

And truly our parents, in giving us life, in taking care of our infancy, in
supplying us with the necessary food for the maintenance and preservation of
existence, have only acquitted themselves of the duties which are common to all
parents respecting their children; but by ministering to our reason and
judgment the proper food of the mind; by presenting us with the means of
instruction; by laying within our hearts, foundations which only can support
the edifice, and cement the happiness of our lives, I mean the valuable
advantages of a solid and virtuous education, they gain an ascendancy over our
feelings, and claim a right to our acknowledgments, which, under such
circumstances, we cannot withold; a right as just and indisputable, as the
motives upon which it is founded are pure and unchangeable. The care they take
to cultivate our understanding, and form our reason, is a kind of second birth,
for which we are infinitely more indebted than for the first.

It is evident then, from every reason which we are about to explain, that we
are under great obligations to our parents, and that we have certain duties
toward them to fulfill. Before we enter into a detail of these duties, in order
to give them more efficacy, it is expedient to treat on the power of parents
over their children, and point out the foundation and extent of their
authority, with respect to us. Let us begin by consulting the historic page,
and see if at all times, and in all governments, the same ideas have been
conceived on this subject.

The Lacedaemonians, we have observed, gave, according to their laws, the
greatest authority to parents, not only over their own children, but, in
general, over all others whatsoever; so that, in this republic, the children
were under the jurisdiction of all fathers, who had the privilege of reproving,
correcting, and chastising them, without making any complaint to their real
parents.

We read in Persian history, that fathers had the power of life and death over
their children. At Rome, the law granted them the same right; and also that of
selling and disposing of them as they judged proper.

If in our modern governments, the laws do not grant such an unlimited
authority to parents, it is not therefore to be imagined that they aim at
diminishing a tittle of that authority which is proper and essential to them.
They are granted such sufficient powers and privileges as entitle them to
instruct, to command, to reprove and correct us by every means which they may
deem fit and necessary. Such an authority justly belongs to them: nothing can
deprive them of it, or prevail on them to give it up: they hold it from God,
who has entrusted them with it, and ordained that they should exercise it over
us. Hence it follows, that the duty of children toward their parents is, to
love, honor, and obey them; to show them, on all occasions, every mark of
submission and respect; to repay their cares; to testify to them their
gratitude; to assist, succor, and procure them every comfort and consolation
in their power.

The duty of respect toward parents is not only imposed on us by man, but God
himself hands it down to us as an absolute command; so that we cannot fail
therein without offending, at the same time, against both divine and human
laws. If we open the Scriptures, we shall there see that of all the precepts
which God has laid down for man, there is none so particularly recommended to
him as filial duty; nor is there any of such importance if attended to, nor of
such fatal consequences if neglected. It is the only one to the observance of
which even temporal happiness is annexed: Honor your father and mother,
declares he, that your days may be long in the land; so that a long and happy
life is promised us, as the fruit and reward of the honor and respect rendered
our parents. The same principle generally prevails in the Holy Scripture: this
duty, throughout that sacred volume, is enjoined us, and absolutely commanded:
we every where observe there the most copious blessings promised to children
who are dutiful, and the most dreadful curses pronounced against those who are
disobedient to their parents. Even in this life we often see these maledictions
fall on the guilty head, for we seldom observe youth thrive or prosper, who
have given sorrow and affliction to their parents by a spirit of obstinacy,
want of subordination, and indocility. It is commonly remarked, that this
froward disposition is a source of bitterness and misfortune which make them
unhappy during their lives, unhappy in their marriages, unhappy in their wives,
unhappy in their husbands, and particularly unhappy in their children, who
pursue, with respect to them, the same line of conduct which they pursued by
former perverseness and irreverence to their parents; and who also, like them,
are untractable, disobedient, undutiful, ungrateful, enemies to labor and
application, and addicted to the company of libertines and spendthrifts.

To be convinced of the truth of the subject we here treat on, let us reflect
on the manner we may be disposed, when we enter the habitation of a family. --
What ideas do we naturally conceive on the occasion, and what objects occupy
our attention? We first cast a glance on the parents and children; examine
their situation; see if order and duty are observed by them; if the father and
mother are in possession of that authority which belongs to them; if they are
respected, beloved, and obeyed; if the children keep within the bounds
prescribed them; if they keep their conduct equally remote from servile fear,
and that freedom which degenerates into licentiousness; if they preserve a
demeanor which at once declares both respect and filial love; if, in the whole
tenor of their behavior they are influenced by duty, and dread nothing so much
as giving them the least cause of umbrage or displeasure; if they establish the
empire of order, peace, harmony, and reciprocal love; if they show good
example, excite an emulation to labor, and the study of virtue; if they pursue
the paths of decency, honesty, and rectitude of manners, which are the effects
of a good education; if all this is presented to my view, the delightful scene
awakens my sensibility, flatters my finest feelings, and charms the purest
sensations of my soul; I enjoy it with secret satisfaction, and dwell on it
with ineffable delight. Retiring with the utmost esteem and respect for this
family, I offer up the most favorable orisons for its welfare, and earnestly
pray that the blessing of heaven may descend on each individual belonging to it.

If, on the contrary, the reverse of the above, unhappily meets my view; if the
parents are without authority; if the children have thrown off obedience, and
disregard the parental voice; if each wishes to become his own master, and
follow the dictates of his own will and caprice; if peace, union, and
friendship do not reign among them; if the voice of discord and anarchy is only
heard in the house; if they become inattentive to the admonitions they receive;
if they manifest an aversion to study, employment, and application; if they
have no taste but for pleasure and dissipation; if they take no pains to reform
their lives and mend their manners; if, I say, such a scene strikes my view, it
instantly disgusts me; I find myself in a situation that wounds my feelings,
and I hasten to quit a house in which I see nothing but the gloomy reign of
disorder and distraction.

All concur to establish the noble and great precept of respect and obedience
to parents: there is no difference on this subject between one nation and
another, or between the polished and savage; all men have the same ideas on
this head; it is nature that speaks to the human heart; and if we find some
individuals who refuse to listen to, and acknowledge her voice, they are
monsters in human shape.

Having spoken of the duties we owe our parents, we may proceed to examine
those of brothers and sisters, to one another. -- We may recollect here, that
Socrates had been accustomed to compare brothers and sisters to the twin
members of the human body; that is to say, to the eyes, to the hands, and to
the feet. This comparison is well adapted to the subject under discussion, and
gives us a just and natural idea of the manner in which the children of a
well-regulated family should conduct themselves to one another. The meaning of
Socrates is clearly expressed by this comparison. He gives us to understand,
that the same harmony, dependence, and agreement which nature has established
between our members, should subsist between brothers and sisters; as we cannot
conceive a greater union than that of the hands or the feet; so nature,
religion, and reason also combine to impose on brothers and sisters the duty of
a strict, sincere, and indissoluble union. As there is but one master or head
in a family to direct and conduct it, so in like manner the members of our body
are subject to one and the same head to regulate and govern the whole: they
should, therefore, like the hands and feet, have but one and the same
inclination, concord, object, and manner of acting.

Friendship as pure, as unchangeable as the ties of kindred which bind them to
one another, should reign amongst them. Look around, and you may observe this
union kept up throughout all nature. If we are naturally disposed to form
connections with persons with whom perchance we have passed our juvenile days;
if the recollection of them presents to our minds some pleasing ideas; and we
are overjoyed and transported at seeing them, when opportunity offers; How much
more fond and endearing must be the connection between brothers and sisters!
Children of the same parents; reared on the same bosom; fed at the same table;
and lodged under the same roof: they have passed their happiest days together,
the days of innocence and simplicity: the first office of their tender limbs
was to embrace one another: they communicated their dawning sentiments of joy
and friendship at an early season: they passed entire days in sports and
pastimes suitable to their age: they mutually felt the same pleasure, pain,
joy, and melancholy: their sorrows were diminished from the consolation they
administered to one another, and their joys increased from the satisfaction
they felt in sharing them: they had the same friends and the same enemies: they
united with the former, and defended themselves against the latter, to whom
their union rendered them formidable. They have been educated in the same
principles, in the same religion, in the same precepts, in the same schools,
and under the same masters.

What more powerful motives could combine to establish a solid and permanent
union among mankind! From this friendship, which should subsist between
brothers and sisters, naturally proceed other duties; for instance, they should
support and assist one another by their reciprocal kind offices and good
counsel, with candor, charity, and tenderness. This conduct will at once
ensure them success, and strengthen their powers. The following relation proves
the justness of the assertion. "A king, at the point of death, sent for his
children, who were very numerous: he presented to them, in turn, a bundle of
small sticks, desiring each to break them all together: it was attempted by
every one of them individually, but could not be done. The father took the
bundle in his hand, untied it, and easily broke the sticks one by one. He then
embraced the opportunity of telling them their situation might be compared to
the bundle of sticks: while they were united they would be strong and
invincible; but the moment they were disunited, they would become feeble, and
the mere butt of their enemies."

In fact, there is nothing equal to unanimity, and a good understanding between
brothers and sisters. By that bond, one of them acts with the vigor of all;
for if there be two or seven united, each of them is no more than one
individual; and in these seven you will find but one, and in one you will find
seven. Should one be in need of assistance, he is not therefore in distress; he
is powerful in the greater party, namely, the six others; and the party that
falls, is instantly supported, the weaker by the stronger. Each of them sees,
not only with his own eyes, but even with those of others; he not only walks on
his own feet, but also on those of others; he not only works with his own
hands, but with those of others; he is not alone the guardian of his own
affairs, others also attend to them. It is thus that union cements society, and
that one individual becomes many.

Such is the beauty of this virtue, that it renders happy and prosperous those
families which possess it; and that it contributes infinitely more to their
felicity than their wealth and riches. Wherever it exists, there is order,
peace, and harmony; where it is not, there is trouble, confusion, and disorder.
The essential duty of brothers and sisters is, to establish union and fraternal
happiness among themselves, and carefully to avoid every thing that may disturb
or overturn them. In a family, every member should consider himself as a part
of the whole, to which he belongs; and the beauty and strength of the whole
essentially consist in the union and agreement of the parts which compose it,
and which should all tend to the same purpose, that of peace, utility, and
public prosperity.

One of the most effectual means to preserve this union, is to suppress, in
time, disputes, controversy, and bickering in a family, which, from trifles in
the beginning, might end badly, and terminate even in open and scandalous
ruptures. We should recollect that as great rivers flow from small sources, in
like manner mighty affairs arise from trivial causes. If these strifes and
divisions which are raised in certain families, and which appear to have been
always a wall of separation between them, be traced back to their first origin,
we should be justly astonished to see such weak motives produce such dire
effects. As those diseases of the body which communicate, and gradually
approach its neighboring parts, attack and corrupt them, are the most
dangerous, and instantly demand the assistance of the physician, in order to
preserve the sound members; so, in like manner, when any offense is given, or
misunderstanding takes place between families, they should suppress it in time,
by checking its progress, and stifling it in its birth, to prevent the evil
from increasing, and to preserve the union of the whole.

What we advance here concerning brothers and sisters, may be equally applied
to others, as we shall find it to be the case, in pointing out the duties we
are obliged to perform as members of society, and according to the custom of
the world. These duties are comprised in two plain precepts, which are the
foundation and summary of all morality: Do unto others as you would they should
do unto you; and Do not unto them what you would not they should do unto you.
These two maxims, well considered, give us an idea and knowledge of the
obligations we have to fulfill in the commerce of civil life. One is in the
affirmative, and commands; the other is negative, and forbids. By the first, we
are enjoined to do unto others what we would they should do unto us; that is to
say, we should procure for others every good which we wish they should render
us; treat them as we desire they should treat us; act on the same principles
toward them, as we expect they should act to us; and have the same regards,
cares, officiousness, and attentions for them, which we require they should
have for us. By the second, we are forbid to do to others what we would not
they should do unto us; that is to say, by putting ourselves in the situation
of others, and judging of them by ourselves, we should avoid doing them any
injury which we would not have done to ourselves; or committing the same
offenses, and doing the same wrongs to them, which we would not wish them to do
unto us. These principles are certain, simple, and natural; they are the
foundation and cement of all human society; they should then be a rule of
conduct to govern us in our intercourse with mankind in general, and
particularly those with whom we live and have the most intimate connection.

Before we proceed further in the explanation of these precepts, it would be
proper to examine here the nature of society, and what is signified by the term.

Society is an union of many individuals, who preserve their existence by the
mutual assistance they lend one another, and the connections which unite them
together. God, the great author of our nature, having formed it in such a
manner, that it is insufficient in itself, or in a solitary state, he has
ordained, that it should be supported by other aid. He has so wisely disposed
all things, that the mutual helps derived from society make ample amends for
all our wants and insufficiency. He has therefore given us this one world
solely for our habitation: he has created one sun to give light to the world:
he has extended the heavens as one spacious canopy to cover us. Wherefore do we
build cities, houses, and public squares, but to be united together, not only
by the same habitation, but still more by the ties of fraternity, and like the
constituent parts of one and the same body. The moral is justly assimilated to
the natural body of each individual, which is composed of many members that aid
and support one another, by the faithful discharge of that duty which
Providence has assigned to each: the feet sustain; the hands act; the eyes see;
the ears hear; and so on. Let us now suppose that these different members deny
the services which nature requires; that the feet remain in a state of
inaction; the hands without motion; the teeth without discharging their
function; What would be the consequence of such disorder, if not certain death
and a total destruction of these different parts? Thus it would be with the
body of society, if all the individuals, who are its members, should refuse
their reciprocal aid, and interrupt the mutual communication. They would remain
in a state of torpor and inaction. Such a derangement would necessarily
occasion the dissolution of the whole body. As edifices are built with stones
fastened by the cement which unites them; and as the moment a chasm is made by
the failure of the stones, the whole structure tumbles into ruins; in like
manner, the preservation of the human species entirely depends on the union,
agreement, and assemblage of the parts. Without union and good order, no
government can be well administered, no city can be well governed, no houses
well arranged, and no family well reguated. The spirit of union and peace is
then the first duty imposed on us in society. This spirit is the more necessary
to us, as our interests are connected with those of the public, and so blended
with them, that when these are injured, ours suffer in the same proportion; so
that our private advantages and welfare oblige us to be peaceable, humane,
gentle, patient, generous, moderate, friendly, just, benevolent, and, in short,
to possess every quality which contributes to good order, and maintains the
union of society; that is to say, we ought to do unto others as we would they
should do unto us; and we ought not to do unto others what we do not wish they
should do unto us.

From these general principles, we now enter into a detail, which will render
these truths more obvious, and give us a more particular and practical
knowledge of the duties which we have to perform to others. Let us begin by
acknowledging here what is unhappily too true, that we all have our foibles. Of
these, humanity, in its nearest approaches to perfection, is by no means
divested. The great and low, the rich and poor, the young and old, have, all,
their imperfections. Notwithstanding any encomiums that may be bestowed on us;
any adulation we may swallow; any prepossessions we may have concerning our
pretended merit; and the favorable opinion we may entertain in our own behalf;
notwithstanding all these we really have vices and imperfections. Perhaps we
may not be thoroughly acquainted with them; we may not perceive them, as they
really are, because self-love and pride, of which we have an abundant stock,
prevent us from knowing ourselves. But those with whom we have connections in
the commerce of life, and with whom we live, are perfect judges of our foibles,
errors, and evil propensities.

Suppose that we have all to reproach ourselves with certain faults and
imperfections; that we are subject to some passion, either of pride or anger,
envy or fa slander, calumny, or any other imperfection whatever: What follows,
and what thence should we conclude for our conduct in life? It follows thence
that human indulgence has every right to make an allowance for human failings:
We should all mutually assist, pardon, and excuse one another. The glimmerings
of reason are sufficient to convince us of the necessity of this rule. There is
nothing indeed more natural than to believe we should be treated as we treat
others. If we judge without mercy, we will be judged with severity: if we make
the faults of others the subject of our censures, they will not spare us in
their animadversions: if we are not inclined to render them any kindnesses,
they will be ill disposed to show any to us: if we are bitter to them, can we
expect they will be pleasant to us? The spirit of sweetness, moderation,
prudence, discretion, charity, patience, goodness, and humanity, is necessarily
the spirit which should actuate us in society; we must therefore make it our
business to acquire it.

Nothing can contribute to inspire us with this spirit so much, as the
knowledge of the human heart, and especially that of our own. Because when we
perceive in others those errors, of which we can trace the source in ourselves,
we should therefore feel disposed to grant them that indulgence which we, on
our part, require, and thereby conduct ourselves toward them with a sweet,
affable, gentle, modest, and social temper.

As this knowledge of the human heart is the consequence of reflection and
experience, of which youth is not capable, it is of some moment to assist you
here in a pursuit so necessary in the course of life. You will ask perhaps, Is
every one unacquainted with himself? Have we occasion to study the knowledge of
ourselves? You believe not; but you are mistaken; for the proposition is
exactly true, that the generality of mankind to not know themselves. In fact,
there are few who direct their attention inwardly, who study themselves, who
examine their inclinations, characters, feelings, and passions of the heart,
which are the chief rulers of their actions and their entire conduct. We have
eyes to see what passes abroad, and seldom consider what passes within us.
Hence it has been wittily remarked by a certain philosopher, that we carry a
sack on our shoulders, in which are contained our own faults, and those of
others: the latter are in that part of the sack which is exposed to view; the
former are behind, and concealed in such a manner that we cannot perceive them.

Self-love, which domineers over us, conceals from us the secret avenues to the
soul; makes us blind to our own failings; and prevents us from seeing ourselves
as we are, or discovering the faults which are really existing in us. It is
sometimes carried to such an extreme, and gives the mind such a bias, that some
of our passions, which are really vicious, and deemed so by all those who know
us intimately, derive the name of virtues from ourselves.

Interrogate the avaricious man on the subject of avarice: ask him what he
thinks of the passion which renders him insensible to every pleasure, but that
of accumulating riches; which makes him gather wealth, not to use, but solely
to hoard up in his coffers, and bury in the earth; which compels him to deprive
himself of common necessaries, through a fear of touching his money; and which
renders him callous and insensible to the miseries of others: question him on
this passion, which debases and degrades him, and you will perceive that he is
very remote from knowing himself; that he considers himself a prudent and wise
economist, who provides for future wants.

Interrogate the prodigal, who ruins himself and family by silly, thoughtless,
and extravagant expenses, and you will be surprised to find that he aggrandizes
his passion with the elevated names of generosity, liberality, and greatness of
soul.

Interrogate the choleric and passionate man, who, in the height of his
phrenzy, spares neither women, children, relations, nor friends, and he will
tell you that in him it is the overflowing of a soul fraught with candor,
courage, and firmness.

Interrogate the rich man, who affects haughty, proud, disdainful, and arrogant
manners, and you will find that he imagines these manners correspond with his
rank, fortune, and consequence; and that they give him an air of grandeur in
the eyes of the world.

Interrogate a young lady upon her immodest behavior; her desire of pleasing,
by studied and affected cares; by the finery of her toilet, where the rules of
decency and virtue are laid aside; and by proceedings and conduct which breathe
too much freedom and licentiousness: she will tell you, that it is thus they
live in the world; that what is fashionable cannot seem offensive; and,
finally, that too much reason and wisdom are not adapted to her years, which
prove the season of pleasure. If you mention that the world speaks of her; that
her character suffers; that modesty, decency, and virtue are the ornaments of
the sex; and that she only becomes respectable by the practice of these
virtues; your arguments will make little impression on her; she will continue
her course of life; and perhaps prepare to travel the thorny road of
affliction, which she might have avoided, had she followed your counsels.

Continue to examine this same young person on her different defects; for
instance, on her aversion for study and application. Tell her frequently that
nothing is more necessary than to form in youth her taste for every thing
useful, good, great, honorable, and generous; that the happiness or misery of
human life absolutely depends on the manner in which we have spent our youth.
Tell her that nothing can be compared to the advantages which a solid and
well-supported education procures; that it tends at once to form the heart and
judgment; that it enriches the understanding, and furnishes us with useful and
agreeable information, which remains with us during life, and accompanies us
through every vicissitude; that it is the ornament of youth and the consolation
of age, and equally advantageous to us in society or solitude: in society, by
placing us in a situation of conversing with well informed men, and vendering
our mutual intercourse more pleasant: in solitude, because it teaches us, with
the instructive aid of books, to live alone. Tell her that reading essentially
contributes to soften our manners, and give us a sweet, gentle, polished turn
of behavior, which endears us to society; that there is no better companion
than a good book, which conveys the language of truth, makes u acquainted with
our imperfections and lays down rules of conduct and good morals. Represent all
these to the young person of whom we speak; examine her situation; enquire into
he cause of her indifference to those objects so worthy of fixing her
attention; and you will discover that the source of evil is derived from her
ignorance of herself, because she does not judge of herself from the truths
which you dictate to her, but rather from the falsehoods of some soul-deceiving
flatterer who insinuates, and incessantly repeats to her, that she is beautiful
and amiable; that she is, in an eminent degree, possessed of wit, talents, and
graces, and surpasses in charms every female of her age. She swallows this
gross adulation; betrays herself into an idea of virtues she has not; grows
confirmed in the vices she has; and thus commences the career of her future
misfortunes.

Judge yourself, and you will agree to the truth of these remarks. Though they
were not presented to your mind before the present times, they will become more
intelligible to you as you advance in years and experience.

In order to facilitate the means of your becoming acquainted with yourself, it
remains for me to give you a few remarks relative to the reasons, why the bulk
of mankind do not know themselves.

By reflecting a moment on the cause of such an effect, we shall perceive that
it derives its source from that inexhaustible fund of self-love which we feel
within us; from the interior disposition, by whi admire, and applaud ourselves;
and from the favorable opinion we entertain of every thing relating to self,
which induces us to prefer ourselves to others; to exaggerate our virtues in
our own eyes; and to conceal our imperfections and vices.

As youth is the time in which the mind is most subject to be led astray, it is
also the season in which self-love rules with most despotic power, and
consequently the period in life in which we are least acquainted with
ourselves. It is this self-love, with which a young person is prepossessed,
that makes her conceive so high an opinion of herself, and her pretended merit;
and of certain personal advantages, merely exterior, which nature has given
her. It is this self-love which so strangely betrays her into the opinion she
fosters on the subject of her beauty. It is this which makes her prefer trifles
to solid and real virtues: which puts it into her head, that superficial
ornament should be substituted for every thing else, and take place of all
other qualities. She imagines, because she is handsome, that she has no
occasion to be modest, reserved, diligent, and devoted to the cares of a good
education; but that she may, with impunity, be dissipated, indiscreet, fickle,
coquettish, trifling, immodest, and extravagant. It is this self-love which
renders her so studious in the arts of pleasing; attentive to the charms of her
person; and regardless of the beauties of her mind. A prudent and experienced
mother, a wise and virtuous friend, strive in vain to expostulate with her, and
explain her duties: in vain they tell her what renders a young person amiable
and deserving; not exterior advantages, nor the graces of form and person, but
interior qualities, those of the heart and understanding; sweet, open,
innocent, and natural manners. In vain they endeavor to give her a taste for
study, application, and useful employments. Regardless of this doctrine, she
wholly abandons herself to the suggestions of self-love, and to the poisonous
discourses of some youth, who preaches up contrary tenets; who studies to
please her, by telling agreeable things; and who feeds her fancy with a
thousand chimeras equally false and pernicious. It is thus that self-love
misleads her; deprives her of the knowledge of her imperfections; and prevents
her from embracing the means of correcting them. It would not be a difficult
task to prove that it produces the same effects in a more advanced age, and
that mankind in general are, in a great degree, possessed of it.

From what has been premised, follows this truth, that the knowledge of
ourselves is of the highest importance to us, in order that we should set about
the work of reform and regulation of our conduct and morals. In fact, it is
with the maladies of the soul as with those of the body. Why is a physician
called to a sick person, and how does he begin to exercise his art? His first
care is to study the disease which he wishes to conquer; to discover the
origin, cause, and progress of it; afterward, by means of this preliminary
information, he applies those remedies which he deems fit and necessary. This
mode of treatment is much the same as that which we should observe with respect
to the distempered soul, whose maladies are the vices and passions which govern
us inwardly; beset the understanding; and hold it in a sort of captivity and
infirmity. Now, I say, if we wish to undertake their cure, the first thing we
have to do is, to discover the nature of them. But how shall we come at this
knowledge? By examining what passes within us; by studying the propensities,
inclinations, and dispositions of the heart; by judging ourselves without the
partiality and illusions of self-love; by erecting a tribunal within, to
determine on all our actions; by finding out, in particular, our ruling
passion, or the chief and main spring of all the rest. When once we have made
this investigation, and come to the knowledge of ourselves, it will be easy to
make use of them toward the regulation of our conduct, and correct what we
find imperfect, defective, and vicious in ourselves.

This study of ourselves has been judged so necessary in all ages, that the
only inscription to be met with in one of the most famous temples of Greece was
this; Know thyself: Nosce te ipsum. It would be endless to enumerate all the
advantages this knowledge procures, and the influence in has on the happiness
of our lives.

Among these advantages, there is one I shall observe to you here, and which
demands, on your part, a particular attention. It is, that the knowledge of
ourselves contributes essentially to that of others: it renders us capable of
judging their actions, and valuing them according to their worth. In fact, we
have all nearly the same inclinations, and the same mixture of good and evil.
The different good and bad qualities are modified more or less in every
individual, according to circumstances; but the feelings, the recesses of the
heart are the same; so that the knowledge of our own passions summarily
represents to us those of others, and makes us capable of judging them. Observe
that I do not speak here of a certain description of men, who seem born for the
commission of crimes, and are a scandal and disgrace to humanity. Such beings
are monsters in nature; and it is not by monsters that we are to judge of a
whole species.

I repeat to you, that the subject which is here offered to you, namely, the
knowledge of mankind, merits your attention; and the observations you are about
to receive, may be of great utility in the practice of life; in forming your
judgment; enabling you to distinguish real merit from appearances; and giving
you a just idea of virtue.

Let us begin by advancing, that we are not to consider man in the same point
of view we do a picture. The beauty of the latter, the proportion, the
judicious blending of light and shade, are almost discovered at the first
glance: We should be grossly mistaken to judge thus of man, on our first
interview. It is the heart we must sound and fathom; but the bottom of it we
seldom can reach on our first attempt.

We may consider man here in a twofold capacity: in one, as confined to private
life, in the company of his wife, children, and domestics: in the other, as
mingling with society, for business, for pleasure, (...) fulfilling the
exterior obligations of his office, or discharging the duties of decorum. The
premises being admitted, in order to come to a knowledge of him, in which of
these two conditions is he to be examined? Is it in the latter, that is to say,
when he appears in public? No -- not at all: That is not the proper time for
forming an idea of his character. Why so? Because it often happens, that we
only then see his exterior or outside. He is, as it were, out of his sphere,
and so little like himself, that if you compare him in these two situations,
you will rather suppose that there are two distinct individuals in question,
than one and the same man placed in different points of view. Let us explain
our meaning, and endeavor to render this truth obvious. Man, when exposed to
the public eye, puts on the appearance of virtues he does not possess. He
studies his manners, frames his discourse, culls his words, and acts in such a
manner as to give his whole exterior an air of virtue: he practices every art
on himself: he masks and conceals his real character: she imposes silence on
his passions; affects a countenance which prepossesses, and disposes the mind
to judge favorably of him: so that if you examine him only in this point of
view, and without going further, you cannot help forming of man in general, the
most advantageous ideas. You will confound, in your own opinion, the good man
with the wicked, because both speak the same language, that of virtue; both
express the same sentiments of piety, gentleness goodness, benevolence,
humanity, justice, modesty, temperance, and love of the public good; and both
resemble each other in words. No comparison, however, can be made between them;
and the distance which separates them is as immense as that between heaven and
earth; because the one acts the hypocrite, and plays a part which is not his
own; the other acts naturally and from principle, and proves that his exterior
corresponds with his interior, by the agreement of his and sentiments. But this
difference, however great, will not become sensible to you, if you consider
them only under certain circumstances, and by their discourse; as in reality
all men are nearly similar to each other in these particulars. But in what are
they unlike each other, and in what do they essentially differ? In their
actions, their conduct, and their morals.

It is only in this point of view we should judge of a man, in order to know
him, and estimate his real merit. Hence we have but to examine him, when he is
restored to himself, and moves in his natural sphere; for instance, when he is
at home, in his house, in the center of his family, conversing, eating, and
drinking with his wife and children, and ordering his domestics. It is there,
as Plato remarks, that he acts either well or ill: it is there the mask falls
off, the heart and inclinations appear without disguise, and the man as he
really is. Why so? you will say. Because a man, when at home, has nothing to
check, restrain him, or alter the features of his character. He practices every
art in the presence of strangers; but that restraint ceases in the society of
those with whom he resides, and who are accustomed to see him, to hear him, and
observe his daily actions.

This method of proceeding, in order to become acquainted with the human heart,
is the result of reason and experience, which point it out as the one most
certain, and least subject to error. Yet it is not the mode which is commonly
followed. The generality of mankind judge from exterior, deceitful, and false
appearances. Prepossessed as we are in favor of honor and riches, we are
naturally disposed to conceive advantageous ideas of those who enjoy them. We
are apt to believe that a man's merit is in proportion to his fortune; and that
the opulent have claims to our esteem, to which the lower orders have no
pretensions. When your mind takes such a wrong bias it concerns you to be
undeceived, and to acquire just ideas of the intrinsic value of things. A
little reflection is sufficient for this purpose.

Is it not truly astonishing, that in the estimation of men we follow a course
quite different from that which serves as a standard, by which we value all
other things existing in nature, and that man is the only being we judge of
from false principles? When we have occasion to buy any thing for our own use,
what qualities do we require in the sort we want? Are these qualities merely
exterior? Do we consider interior excellence as nothing? If, for example, we
have occasion for a horse, how do we proceed in our choice? Do we examine only
the finery of the bridle, saddle, and trappings? On the contrary, do we not
strip him of all these, in order to see him naked, and such as he really is? Do
we not make trial of him? Do we not observe his gait in walking, trotting,
pacing, etc. in order to be assured of his qualities, and to find out those
which constitute a good horse? Take a view of every object which occurs in the
commerce of life, and you may observe, that we constantly pursue this mode of
proceeding which is dictated by the most common sentiments of wisdom, prudence,
and good sense. We never say that a sword is good, because it has a fine
scabbard; nor that a house is solid, because it has a handsome outside. We do
not buy, as they say, a pig in a bag. Why do we not follow the same rule with
respect to man? He is rich, you say; he is powerful; he has high birth and
dignity. Agreed: but all these do not constitute himself: they are merely
exterior. In order to know him, I should strip him of all these; examine
himself only, and such as he is, exclusive of all that surrounds him, his pomp
and titles. I shall therefore consider if he possesses the virtues of his
condition; if he fulfils the duties of his station; if he fills it with honor
and intregity; if he is a good husband, a good father, a good friend; if
prosperity does not render him proud and insolent; adversity, creeping and
servile; if he is religious, good, friendly, modest, prudent, patient, and
moderate. If he has, in short, the qualities of a meritorious man. If I find
that his soul is endued with these virtues, he is then in possession of real
riches; riches which are preferable to the world's wealth. If, on the contrary,
I perceive in him a soul plunged in vice, and debased with passions, low
sentiments, and a continual opposition to the principles of virtue, goodness,
justice, and moderation, then he appears to me poor indeed, and truly
contemptible, if he had all the opulence, grandeur, and treasures of Croesus.

Were I to speak of the conduct of a female, I would canvass it in the same
manner. I do not ask if she is fond of appearing in society and in polite
circles; of showing away in public; of displaying her pomp, luxury, and
expense; if the cares of the toilet take up a part of her time; or, if she is
rich in jewels and exterior ornaments? I do not ask these things, nor any other
question of this nature. I only enquire if she has the virtues of her
condition? If, sincerely attached to her husband, she limits all her desires to
please him? If, attentive to the employments which nature assigned her, she
orders and governs her domestic affairs, at the same time that she attends to
those abroad? If, in her family, she has an eye to every thing becoming her
sex, and acts in such a manner as to produce order, union and prosperity, and
that the different members which constitute it, perform their respective
duties, and contribute to the harmony and beauty of the whole? If, confined
within the domestic circle, she knows how to inspire her children with awe,
reverence, and filial live? If she devotes her most precious moments to the
care of their education? If she considers this care as the first and most
indispensable of all duties? If she makes her happiness, glory, and highest
consolation consist in these? These are the points upon which I should examine
her; these her obligations, and the virtues which form the merit of her
character.

I shall treat a young lady in the same manner. I shall not consider if she is
handsome, or in what degree she possesses the charms of person; if she is a
coquette, and only employed in the vanity of dress, and the arts of pleasing;
or, if she attends every assembly and party of pleasure? but I shall consider,
if she has qualities becoming her years; if she receives a good education; if
she profits thereby; and, if chastity, modesty, evenness of temper, solid
understanding, reflection, and application fall to her lot?

Such is the rule which leads me to the knowledge of any person whatever, high
or low, rich or poor, young or old. I will judge and value him according to his
peculiar and personal qualities, and not by apparent and supposed virtues. I
shall therefore examine, if he properly discharges the duties of his station;
the obligations which relate to his age, situation, talents, and rank; for in
this line of conduct consists the dignity of man. It constitutes his merit;
distinguishes him from others; and renders him truly estimable. And what is
virtue, but the accomplishment of the duties of that state in which Providence
has placed us.

What follows from these observations, and what conclusions should you draw
from them for your conduct in life? You should infer, that since they are the
only virtues that can render us praiseworthy, you should, in your judgment,
give them the preference to all other advantages. You should endeavor to
acquire and practice them; and not to be content with their appearance, but
really to possess them; not to pass for a virtuous character, but to be truly
so; and, finally, to become thoroughly acquainted with your obligations, and
faithfully discharge them.

You are sensible that this article treats of the third class of duties which
we have to perform here below, those which regard ourselves, and are personal.
God grant that I may here inspire you with those duties, impress them on your
minds, and deeply grave them on your hearts. That you may benefit thereby, I
shall endeavor to give you a just idea of virtue; and after you have been
convinced that it is the only quality which renders us truly worthy, I will
also prove to you, that it is the only one that makes us happy even here on
earth.

I flatter myself that you will be convinced of it, if you will favor me with
your attention. What motive more powerful to attach you to your duties, than
that of your own interest and happiness. The generality of children consider
them as a hard and painful task. The very name of virtue fills their minds with
gloomy and unpleasant ideas: they suppose it to be a nauseous and bitter
draught, made up of a medley of ingredients. As the conduct and government of
life almost entirely depend on first impressions, and the sentiments formed in
youth, it is of the highest importance to remove the prejudices you may have
conceived on the subject of virtue, to bring you acquainted with it, and to
convince you that far from being bitter or unpleasant, it is, on the contrary,
the source of true felicity, the parent of solid pleasures, and the road which
leads us to true enjoyments, to peace and tranquillity of mind and heart.
Follow me, I entreat you.

We all wish to be happy: it is the first desire of every reasonable creature:
it is the common ambition of all men: it is the end of their labors, and the
main object of their pursuits. Yes: Mankind sigh after what they call
happiness, and strive to obtain it. But do they discover this happiness they
are in quest of, and do they all equally enjoy it? By no means. And why not?
Because few seek it where it is; but many pursue it where it is not. Some
indeed imagine that it solely consists in the possession of wealth, and use
every means to obtain riches. Some placing it in the pleasure of the senses,
give themselves up entirely to the gratification of their passions. Others, in
fine, persuaded that virtue alone can make them happy, are entirely devoted to
it, and make it the rule of their conduct. I now ask you, Which are they who
appear to you the most wise and prudent in their pursuits? Are they those
votaries of fortune, or these slaves of their pleasures and passions? Not at
all; they are neither the one nor the other, though you might have supposed so
sometimes. But it is time to undeceiv give you some just conceptions of these
matters.

And first, I must remark, that riches cannot of themselves constitute real
happiness. In fact, whatever prepossessions we may have for wealth and honors,
they are, notwithstanding, no more than a vapor that vanishes, a mere shadow,
that attracts but to mock us in its sudden flight. Riches are not centred in
us; neither are they the whole, nor a part of us. They are outward appendages,
merely accidental to us. We may be men of integrity and virtue without
possessing them. Wealth may fall to the lot of the wicked; and too frequently
they purchase it at a dear price, the price of innocence and probity. It cannot
communicate to us those qualities which alone are essential to man, I mean,
piety, justice, prudence, goodness, etc. These virtues are independent of
riches: they may be met with in the cottage of the poor, as well as in the
palace of the great. To render the truth of these principles more obvious to
you, let us make this simple and natural supposition.

Suppose two youths, the one the child of wealthy, the other of indigent
parents; conceive the former, a haughty, arrogant, untractable, ignorant, idle
young man, without piety toward God; without respect to his parents; addicted
to swearing, lying, and every vice which springs from a bad heart and corrupt
soul. Suppose the latter a virtuous youth, who fears God; is submissive to his
parents; docile to his superiors; modest in his conversation; regular in his
morals; fond of industry, study, and application; endued with every virtue
adapted to his age; and worthy to be considered as a model to all his
acquaintance. The comparison admitted, I now ask you, which of the two would
you wish to imitate? Does the condition of the fortunate youth, with his vices
and imperfections, appear to you preferable to that of the poor lad, with his
virtues? Does the one, on account of his riches, seem to you more estimable,
more happy, or a greater object of envy than the other, on account of his
poverty? In short, were you to be one of them, and the freedom of choice to be
given you, in whose favor would you determine? In favor of the poor young
man, you reply, without hesitation. I thought so beforehand, and you are in the
right of it; because he enjoys the only true riches, those alone which
establish the merit of a man; those alone which are worthy of our praise and
esteem. Instead of these, the other, with all his wealth and pretensions, is no
more than a coxcomb, who only claims our contempt and indignation. It is
evident, you see, that riches do not make us happy.

I do not, however, mean to say, that riches are intrinsically evil. This is by
no means the idea I wish to convey. But I would give you to understand, that
they are in themselves of no moment. Like beauty or bodily strength, they are
the instruments either of good or evil: they are not sufficient to make us
happy and respectable; they can only be rendered so, when converted to good
purposes.

If riches cannot procure happiness for man, the pleasures of the senses are
still less capable. In fact, God, in creating us, has mingled in our very
existence the principles of equity, modesty, and the different virtues
necessary to conduct us to that end for which we were intended. We were born
with a taste and disposition for order and virtue: hence it happens, that when
we abandon ourselves to our unreasonable and unruly passions, we overturn that
order established by nature and God himself; we act in contradiction to
ourselves, and consequently we become unhappy. This is truly the case, and it
is confirmed by daily experience. The disorderly passions, far from
contributing to our felicity, are even the source of our sorrows. Vice is
attended with trouble, anxiety, and uneasiness. It subdues the soul but to
banish peace and repose. It is like a running ulcer, which corrodes the heart.
The guilty are punished in the very commission of their crimes, by the pangs of
endless remorse, which wring the tortured soul. Man, in a criminal state, is
his own executioner; and in proportion as he indulges in lawless pleasures, he
creates within his own bosom, as it were, an opposite chagrin, which dashes the
cup of joy with bitterness, and torments him in a thousand shapes.

But if it be thus as you tell me, that neither pleasures nor riches can make
us happy, where then must we seek felicity?

Where seek it? In piety, virtue, and the practice and performance of your
duties. This is the great secret of happiness; learn it then here; engrave it
deeply on your hearts; and never forget, that our happiness is placed in virtue
only, and that a pure conscience is the source of true pleasures, the parent of
real felicity, and the remedy for all troubles; because it puts us in
possession of solid and permanent advantages. Riches delude us with ideas of
apparent good, and at best are perishable. The malice of man may deprive us of
them; the passions may swallow them up; the vicissitudes of fortune may turn
them into other hands; and death at least, sooner or later, will compel us to
part with them. But piety, justice, goodness, charity, modesty, etc. are the
only riches which truly belong to us; the only wealth we can acquire and
preserve; our only shield against misfortunes and the malice of man; and our
only companions through every change of life, in adversity, in prosperity, in
sickness, in health, in old age, in youth, in death, and even beyond the grave.
O happy state of virtue, why not better known to man!

O youth, of every denomination, in riches or poverty, if you wish to be happy,
become virtuous; and you will then be as completely so as it is possible in
this life. But then remember, you must begin your career on the present moment.
Consider (I cannot too often repeat it to you) that youth is the period which
determines our success in life, and the season in which we should lay the
foundation of futurity: that it is in vain to pretend we mean to become good
hereafter, if we do not now give some proofs of our intention. Begin then in
time to sow the seeds of virtue in your hearts, if you would wish to reap their
fruits in season. Reflect that you have to conduct your whole life; a lingering
space, perhaps, to travel over. Imitate then the wise and prudent man, who has
a long voyage to make. He ponders thereon, and employs a considerable time in
providing every thing necessary to render his voyage comfortable. Do you also
make your preparations, and dispose of every thing in such a manner, as to
enable you to shape that unerring course which you have to steer through the
ocean of life. You will meet with rocks and shoals in your passage, but you
must take care not to split on them. Imitate the wisdom of the pilot: he does
not wait till his vessel is battered by the storm, to provide what is necessary
against it: he takes advantage of the calm, and makes his preparations in time.
My children, the youth which you enjoy is precisely the calm: it concerns you
much to benefit by it. Shortly indeed the tempest of the passions will rife in
your souls, and rage through all your senses. The approaching hurricanes will
sink you, and reduce you to a melancholy wreck, if you have not the precaution
to prepare in time against the violence of their attacks.

If you already feel the first approaches of the passions; if your heart begins
to feel their first emotions; what must it be when they present themselves?
Labor then to bar their passage to your soul; or destroy them in embryo, if
they are near their birth. Do not wait therefore till they have taken root, and
collected vigor; for then you would have much difficulty to dislodge them;
and, almost in spite of your efforts, they would domineer and tyrannize over
you.

This moral you have conveyed to us, you will probably say, is good and
excellent; we agree to it. The picture you have drawn of virtue renders it
lovely, and removes the prejudices which might disfigure it in our eyes. We now
paint it in the most lively colors. We are persuaded, with you, that virtue
alone makes man a praiseworthy being, and greatly contributes to his
happiness. The explanation you have given of the different duties we have to
perform toward God, mankind, and ourselves, is sensible and just: it has made
an impression on our minds: it has instructed us, and may be of infinite
service to us for the present, and the time to come. We have been particularly
struck with the force of your reasoning, on the influence which youth has on
future life, and the consequences of the principles we receive in youth.
Coinciding with you, we are entirely convinced that these principles cannot be
inspired or impressed but by edution. Hence we conclude, that a good education
is absolutely necessary; that it is every thing; that on it depends the fate of
life; and that nothing in the world can be compared to the advantages resulting
from it. We consent to all these; and we confess that children, who have the
opportunity of receiving a good education, should embrace every means of
benefiting by it. But here is one obstacle in our way; a bugbear which
terrifies us, discourages, and checks our ardour: we mean the painful cares of
education, which demand, on our part, labor, assiduity, study, application,
and a thousand things which are repugnant and unpleasant to youth. We must
labor, you say, to be formed by a good education and virtue.

You certainly must; I agree with you in that assertion; and I expressly
declare to you, that labor is the duty imposed on you, as the condition,
without which you cannot derive any solid benefit from your education, were you
possessed of the finest natural abilities, and the most eminent masters. But
permit me to ask you, in my turn, what could you do or accomplish in life
without labor and application? Is not the whole course of human life, from the
cradle to the grave, one continued scene of labor, cares, and fatigue?

Let us consider man in his infancy at the very period in which his ideas begin
to dawn, his reason to expand. Does it not cost him some pains to know the use
he should make of this reason. Wrapped in the deep gloom of ignorance, surrounded
on every side by objects he is unacquainted with, does it not cost him infinite
trouble to learn the name of each, its use, connection, convenience, and
properties? All nature is astonishing and mysterious to his view. He is to
himself an impenetrable enigma. He has only language to enquire, and to ask
questions. The senses, those admirable vehicles of information, discover and
manifest themselves to him but at his own expense, and by the dint of repeated
disagreeable and painful experiments. Arrived at the season of youth, is it not
irksome to him to acquire that profession which he made his choice? Is he not
obliged to devote a part of his time to study at those schools which have been
appointed him? Must he obey them in every thing, and give himself up diligently
to all the exercises and different kinds of study which they prescribe and
assign him? If he refuses to listen to them, if he shows himself an enemy to
labor, can he ever advance or make any progress in the knowledge of their art?
Is it not by constant imitation, by long and painful efforts, by daily
assiduity, that he ceases to be a scholar, and commences a master? In a riper
age, if he wishes to derive any advantage from the employment he follows, to
exercise it with honor, and merit esteem and confidence, should he not
persevere and double his labors; give proofs of his talents, capacity,
emulation, patience, fidelity, and probity; and surmount every difficulty
annexed to his situation? If he is settled in life; if he is married; if he has
a family; what new cares and endless troubles is he involved in? To pay the
same attention to his children, which he himself has experienced from his
parents; to feed them in their infancy; to protect them from a thousand dangers
which encompass and threaten them; to be attentive to all their necessaries; to
procure them education; and to settle them in the world; all these are but a
part of the duties which he has to perform on their account.

You are now going to mention what prevents you from following the practice of
virtue, and attending to the care of your education; because it is too painful
and troublesome a pursuit. It is, you say, too laborious to acquire education?
But do you not know, that such is the order of Providence in the dispensation
of all his gifts, that he does not grant us any of them without requiring a
portion of labor from us in return? The very bread we eat, observe what a
tedious process it must go through, to bring it to the state in which it
becomes our food? Have you considered, that it is the fruit of the toils, the
watchings, the patience, and sweat of the labourer? Have you reflected on the
changes and alterations it has undergone? This gold, this silver, which mankind
in general are so enamoured with, do you know rightly what it is? Have you
pondered on it? Do you know that we must enter the very bowels of the earth,
and pierce into its deep and gloomy recesses, to seek it? That thousands of our
fellow-beings are deprived of the light of day, and in a manner buried alive,
in the very womb of the earth, there to procure these metals, for which our
excessive thirst parches and consumes us? Those delicate dishes, those choice
viands, which sometimes crown the festive board, do you know, that to obtain
them, we must traverse the seas to remote distances, in the midst of rocks and
dangers the most imminent? Those silks with which we are so fond of clothing
and adorning our persons, are they not the spoil of worms, the most
contemptible infects?

I should exceed the limits of these pages, were I to analyze all the wants of
man, and the pains it costs him to satisfy them. Labor is the condition and
appendage of our nature; and without this condition, you could not obtain any
enjoyment. If you wish to have friends, you must be interested in their
welfare, love them, and render them service. If you mean to distinguish
yourself in the city you reside in, you must become useful to your
fellow-citizens. If you have an ambition to excel in your profession, you must
give proofs of capacity, talents, and merit. If you are desirous that the earth
produce fruits, you must cultivate it. If you propose to enrich yourself by
commerce, you must be acquainted with your business, be attentive, active, and
persevering. In short, any profession you embrace, you cannot practice without
trouble, toil, and difficulty. Would you suppose, then, that virtue is the only
good on earth to be acquired without exertions? Virtue, which is the most
precious of all gifts, and infinitely surpasses all other things? Could you
then henceforth love it as much as it is amiable, by making it the object of
your addresses, the end of your education, and your whole conduct!

Plutarch, in the portrait he draws of the true philosopher, represents him
practicing virtue for its own sake; and from the conviction of his reason,
placing it above the possession of all other advantages; showing his firm
attachment to its principles, even in the supposition that he had lived in a
country without prince or magistrate to watch over the actions of men, or
without laws to direct their conduct, and teach them to be just, moderate,
good, and temperate. Would to God that this picture were realized in you! That
you would follow no other philosophy than that of a man truly religious, and
truly virtuous! You would then, by practicing the works of virtue, enjoy that
happiness and those blessings which are its fruit and its reward.

THE END.
TRANSLATED BY MICHAEL FORTUNE.

