THE OBLIGATIONS OF A GRATEFUL PEOPLE TO SPEAK THE PRAISES OF GOD FOR HIS
ABUNDANT GOODNESS; ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON, DELIVERED AT CHELSEA IN NORWICH,
December 24th, 1795 BEING THE DAY OF PUBLIC THANKSGIVING, AND DEDICATION OF A
HOUSE OF WORSHIP, LATELY BUILT IN THAT PLACE.

BY WALTER KING A. M. Pastor of the second Congregational Church, in Norwich.

NORWICH: Printed By THOMAS HUBBARD. M,DCC,XCVI.

THE OBLIGATIONS OF A GRATEFUL PEOPLE etc. A SERMON.
BRETHREN and FRIENDS,
OUR assembling at this time, and place, speaks the occasion important -- Among
other designs of a more usual nature one principal object, is, to record the
name of Jehovah in this House, which has lately, been erected for his praise.
And now, for the first time, we are called upon to enkindle upon this Altar,
through the aids of the holy Spirit, those holy and devout affections toward
GOD, which may reach his throne as sweet incense perfumed in the Blood of the
Lamb. And how happy should we be, were these affections, we are now to offer, a
prelude to our standing in the presence of GOD above, and joining with the
heavenly hosts, and all the redeemed, in their more pure, and eternal effusions
of love, adoration and praise. But while we present our sacrifice here, we are
to offer to GOD, our devout acknowledgments -- as for all his other mercies, so
in particular for this -- the gift of so convenient an edifice, which of his
own free bounty and providence he has enabled us to accomplish -- And finally,
We are here to leave our vows with GOD -- that we avouch the Lord Jehovah for
our GOD, confessing our entire dependence upon him, for all the present
temporal and spiritual favors we enjoy -- and all which we hope for, in the
world to come.

That we may perform these exercises, in a becoming manner, may the Holy
Spirit, who dwelt in the temple of old, descend into every heart, enlighten,
guide, and direct us, that at the close of this service, and the close of life,
we may find to draw near to GOD is good, and that his loving kindness is better
than life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

To assist in the duties before us -- the words of the Psalmist: Psalm cxlv. at
the 7 th -- are chosen.

They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness.

WE find that this inspired Penman, opens his most excellent Hymn, with the
sense which he had of the divine Majesty, wondrous works, and greatness.

I will extol thee, my GOD, O King, and I will bless thy name for ever and
ever. -- Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy name for ever, and
ever. -- Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness is
unsearchable. -- He then gratified the feelings of his heart, in contemplating
the unceasing praises of his GOD, by after generations -- One generation (said
he) shall praise thy works unto another, and shall declare thy mighty acts. --
They shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts. -- And then he introduced
the words of the text, They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great
goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness. He then proceeded to mention the
subjects of gratitude which rushed into his mind, which in their number and
extent, were almost boundless -- But in the particular words which are selected
for our present improvement, are noticeable the following things.

1. That the goodness of GOD is very great toward his people -- Thy great
goodness.

2. That the instances of GOD's goodness are treasured up in their memories --
The memory of thy great goodness.

3. That the people of GOD feel an ardent disposition to dwell upon, and
rehearse over the instances of GOD's great mercy and kindness -- They shall
abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness -- and

4. This is according to the will of GOD -- They shall do thus -- The words
imply, not merely, a prediction of what would be, but the pleasure of GOD in
it, that they should do thus, in a way of duty, and grateful praise --
agreeably to the close of the Psalm, My mouth shall speak the praise of the
Lord -- and let all flesh, bless his holy name, forever, and ever.

It appears therefore to be the duty of GOD's people, to utter abundantly the
memory of his great goodness toward them.

From these hints, it is proposed to comprise no more in the following
discourse than may be included in this general Enquiry in two parts (viz.)

Wherein is the great goodness of GOD manifested toward us, as a nation in
general, and an individual society --

From which, in the conclusion will be induced the duties of this day.

1st. Then, our subject leads us to enquire, in what instance the goodness of
GOD is manifested to be great toward us as a nation --

IN a field so wide where can we with propriety begin or end?

The blessings which we have experienced, and still enjoy, come nearer within
the power of a speaker to enumerate, than illustrate.

Shall we in the

1st. Place look back to the protection and blessings of GOD's hand which
rested on the Fathers, the first settlers of this country? The page of history
is here replete, in recounting the hardships -- sufferings and death which many
of them endured: but withal, recounting an overbalancing sum of almost
miraculous divine interpositions and salvations -- from hunger -- beasts of
prey, and an host of men, more savage if possible, than the wolf of the
wilderness -- While the European world persecuted the Woman, the pure church of
Christ, and wasted its members by cruelty -- outrage and death. -- A few of
them sought an asylum on these shores -- GOD was with them and gave them
success -- He established them as a people, and from them he has reared up his
American Israel -- Could we view the footsteps of divine providence in the
gradual settlement and growth of this country up to the commencement of our
independence, what an infinite variety of distinguishing blessings would arrest
our attention? The good providence of GOD, has ordered the seasons --
overruled and succeeded the exertions of every class of men, for the public
prosperity of this people in a worldly view -- Shall we again,

2dly. Take a glance at the great goodness of GOD in carrying this people
through the struggles of a civil war with Britain -- When oppressed and doomed
to slavery, we asserted our independence and GOD was pleased to establish it --
But who can count the blessings, and almost miraculous interpositions of GOD's
hand in this affair -- In the view of man our cause appeared gloomy -- to many
desperate. -- Without money, without warlike implements -- without disciplined
troops we engaged -- On their side was power of every human kind. -- But as an
answer for all our weakness, and for all their strength, The Lord was on our
side -- The language of the people of GOD is put into our lips -- If it had not
been, the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel say -- Had it not been the
Lord, who was on our side when men rose up against us -- Then they had
swallowed us up quick -- when their wrath was kindled against us -- then the
waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul -- Blessed be the
Lord, who has not given us a prey to their teeth -- Our soul is escaped as a
bird out of the snare of the Fowler: the snare is broken, and we are escaped;
Our help is in the name of the Lord who made Heaven and Earth. -- His mighty
acts -- his terrible acts, were made known in the judgment inflicted on our
foes, and his great goodness manifested toward us as a people --

3dly. Shall we again take but a cursory view of GOD's goodness toward us
since the conclusion of peace -- As a nation, how greatly blessed have we been
in the formation, adoption, and establishment of a Federal Government -- The
good hand of GOD, formed men for council, and wisdom, brought them forward as
the Fathers of the people, and guided them to unite the interest of
individuals, with the good of the whole, in the formation of our general
constitution.

Through the guidance of God's good providence, this constitution, has gone
into the most benign operation, without the loss of any man's life, and made
us, in respect to our civil privileges, one of the happiest people on the Globe.

To awaken in us a sense of GOD's great goodness in this particular, we need
only turn our eyes, across the Atlantic, and behold the anarchy, rage of party,
and flowing blood of an allied nation: What could have rescued us, from the
horrors they experience, but that same good providence which has nourished and
brought us up as children -- But whose heart is not smitten, and whose eyes do
not gush with tears, to hear of the scenes of woe and blood, transacted in the
capital of France, and her other great cities, through means of civil discord.
These scenes by contrast may ever teach us, the distinguishing goodness of GOD
toward us, and make us prize our liberties and civil blessings.

As to our increase in population and wealth, what nation has exceeded us? In
the year 1783, at the conclusion of peace, the number of inhabitants in the
United States were computed at 2, 389, 300 -- The last year they were computed
upon a pretty accurate scale of calculation, taken from the Census of 1791, and
the number was found to be 4, 784, 983 -- which makes an increase since the
war, of 2, 395, 683 -- which is some thousands more than double. Our internal
wealth likewise has had a rapid increase -- Our shores are lined with ships --
Our commerce is large and extensive -- and for this two years, been greatly
enriching to the country. Our Lands yield their increase by handfuls, through
the blessings of GOD on the labors of the husbandman. Our country does much in
feeding the Islands of the sea, and even many on the eastern continent. Our
granaries are full; affording all manner of store. The present year in a
special manner, the earth has afforded us, rich and liberal supplies of every
necessary and valuable fruit -- The ways of God drop marrow and fatness to us
-- Although in some instances loss has been experienced, still the blessings of
GOD have been so abundant in general, that even the appearance of complaint
would be criminal.

In addition to these instances of GOD's great goodness toward us, as a
people, we have to notice the continuation of the important life of our chief
Magistrate, The President of the United States -- Many things in the peace,
order, and happiness of our country have seemed to depend much upon his wise
and energetic management -- And none can foresee, what a righteous providence
may suffer to take place when he falls. Our confidence ought to be in GOD, who
is able to form another of equal wisdom to fill his place -- The lives also of
most of our chief Rulers have been continued.

We are to notice likewise the continuation of general health. Although some
places have been visited with sickness, the people in general have had occasion
to rejoice in GOD, their Preserver. We might still go on to enumerate mercies,
such as the peace with the natives on our frontiers -- The suppression of
tumults -- The peace likewise with the regent of Algiers -- The treaty with
Great Britain -- The blessings of GOD in societies and families: but where
would the growing numbers end? These hints must suffice to bring into view
GOD's great goodness toward us, as a nation, in a temporal view.

And shall we in the

4th And last place, hint at our religious privileges -- their nature, and
importance? But who can speak of the instances of GOD's goodness in these? -- A
theme like this would be exposed in the hands of an angel -- How much more in
the hands of a potters vessel! -- But let us just observe; the word of the ever
blessed GOD, is in our hands. It is given in our own language, and we have
abundant time, and opportunity to peruse it -- No religious tyranny pretends to
interfere, to deprive us of any part of this inestimable treasure -- No
inquisition usurps the authority, of giving law to conscience; or disturbs our
religious exercises -- more still, we have no religion established by civil
Iaw, or one man permitted to domineer over the conscience of another -- But
every one is protected in his devotion by the civil arm, and not permitted to
disturb his neighbor.

One day in seven is immediately assigned for the worship of GOD. This day, as
yet, is reverenced more generally, by the people of these States, than in any
other country -- though in many cases as a christian people, we ought to feel
the depth of shame, yea, horror, at our profanation of it -- Still, the Lord is
good -- He makes it a day beyond conception better, than is enjoyed in most
countries. In addition to this, how highly favored are we, in the enjoyment of
religious information. The Sun of righteousness has blessed us with the richest
supply of his cheering beams. How full is our land of the judicious labors of
pious men. The truths of GOD's word, the law and gospel, are made to shine all
around us. No time perhaps can be pointed out, when a people have enjoyed a set
of teachers more sincere, enlightened, and evangelical than the present. -- We
have line upon line given us, and are urged to duty and happiness, by infinite
motives from reason and the word of GOD -- These privileges show the great and
distinguishing goodness of GOD toward us: But when we come to view properly,
the nature and importance of the law and gospel of GOD, as they respect our
ruined race -- and the blessings to be enjoyed in the kingdom of the Redeemer;
we are completely swallowed up with the prospect.

Man by nature is a rebel against his GOD -- By turning enemy to him, he has
imbibed the Spirit; and has the black character of his Seducer. By this revolt,
the whole race of men are sentenced, by the holy, just, and good law of GOD, to
death temporal, spiritual, and eternal -- They all lie under this just and
awful sentence -- But in the infinite compassion of GOD, he sent his only
begotten Son, that whosoever should believe in him should not perish, but
should have eternal life. The gospel is this good news of life to a perishing
world -- Christ Jesus has actually come, fulfilled the law -- died on the cross
-- lay in the tomb -- and rose again the third day -- ascended to Heaven, and
sent down gifts for men, even for the rebellious, that GOD might dwell among
them. -- The plan of the gospel is such, that while it provides the way, it
invites, entreats, and beseeches perishing mortals, to repent and live -- It is
the voice of the ever blessed GOD to men, Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye
die; O miserable sinners* Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters --
and he that has no money; come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk
without money and without price. How great, how infinite is God's goodness
toward us in these offers of grace! -- When it is considered what is our moral
character by nature -- When it is realized, we have immortal souls of vast
capacity -- and of inestimable value, which if they continue as they are, must
be cast into Hell, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched --
and when it is considered, what GOD has done for our Salvation, and now is
offering us freely the gift of eternal life -- the mind is lost in admiration!
No wonder the Angels desire to look into these mysteries of GOD's goodness.
Realize further, that it is the whole business of the Heralds of Salvation, to
persuade us to be reconciled to GOD -- and to set forth all the arguments which
an eternal paradise can furnish, to sweeten the persuasion -- and on the other
hand, all the terrors of eternal perdition, to enforce the reconciliation: and
when it is considered, that GOD sends these for our own benefit -- how great is
his goodness? But we cannot enlarge here, eternity only will be sufficient,
fully to contemplate this grace.

Again -- GOD is infinitely good to us, in a spiritual view -- not only in
offering mercy, but in absolutely giving power to his blessed gospel, and
saving a multitude of precious souls from destruction. The church of Christ is
spread through our land -- There are a multitude, we have reason to think, of
vital christians in the midst of us, who are born of GOD -- who have eternal
life begun in their souls -- and who have publicly and sincerely, dedicated
themselves to Christ, We have reason to think there are more of this
description in these States, than on any spot of equal extent on the globe --
The Lord's people are here scattered among the multitude, as the salt of the
earth -- the church is as a city set on an hill -- and is the moral light of
our land, and nation.

In this blessed kingdom of the Redeemer, how many and rich are our privileges?
time and eternity will not exhaust their illustration -- We cannot forbear to
mention a few.

Here GOD himself dwells in this spiritual house, and holds communion with all
who are his people -- Says the Apostle to his brethren, Ye are no more
strangers, and foreigners, but are fellow citizens with the saints, and of the
household of GOD -- and are built upon the foundation, of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all the
building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord -- In
whom ye also, are builded together for an habitation of GOD, through the Spirit
-- Here, GOD himself dwells in his habitation -- Here Christ walks amidst his
golden candlesticks, and holds his stars in his right hand -- and says in the
language of his own Spirit, This is my rest forever, here will I dwell for I
have desired it: and he loves the gates of (this) Zion, more than all the
dwellings of Jacob -- Now, the privilege of meeting Christ and enjoying the
manifestatations which he makes of himself to his disciples, are esteemed by
them, of infinitely greater value than all things beside. Here, all the people
of GOD, see him; and to behold the King of Glory in his beauty, is pleasant
beyond description -- Said the Psalmist, O GOD my soul thirsts for thee -- my
flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land where no water is -- to see
thy power, and thy glory, so as I have seen them in the sanctuary -- A sight of
the glory and power of GOD, in his spiritual habitation, is so ravishing to the
hearts of GOD's people, as hides the luster of all other objects -- The
communion also; which they hold with their GOD, is pleasant -- Thy loving
kindness says one, is better than life. To pour out the heart before him, and
receive the communications of his grace, makes the communion blessed.

Out of this Zion also, the perfection of beauty, GOD shines by his truth, and
illuminates every pious soul: Here the wonders of redeeming love, refresh them
continually, and cause their souls to burn within them, as the disciples going
to Emmaus. Here likewise, they find every needful word, of instruction and
comfort. Says the Holy Ghost, speaking of the church, I will abundantly bless
her provision, and I will fill her poor with bread: I will also clothe her
priests with Salvation, and her saints shall shout aloud for joy -- How great
is this privilege of divine light, instruction, and comfort?

Here also, in this household of GOD, Christ seals his covenant with his
people, by his sacraments. By these outward solemn transactions, between GOD
and their souls, they grow confirmed in the precious blessings of the gospel,
and live upon the hidden manna. They nourish their spiritual life, by that
bread, which came down from Heaven; which gives life to all who partake of it.
Indeed the divine satisfaction, of supping with Christ, and he with them, is a
most glorious anticipation of the Heavenly felicity -- those who have never
tasted this communion cannot judge of its privilege.

In the light of this dwelling of GOD, souls are also, created anew, in the
image of him that created them -- Says the Holy Spirit -- Of Zion it shall be
said, that this and that man, were born in her -- and when he writes up the
people, that this man was born there -- How unspeakable is this privilege, as a
glorious mean, of bringing lost souls to life, and the eternal enjoyment of
their GOD and Savior? In view of these spiritual privileges, enjoyed in the
blessed kingdom of the Redeemer, we cannot but see, that here is the place
where the people of GOD on earth, hold the greatest communion, with the saints
above. In these sacred ordinances, Heaven and Earth are united. Christ and his
people are united, and the latter are here made meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the saints in light -- This doubtless made the Psalmist express
himself with exultation and say -- Blessed are they that dwell in thy house --
Blessed is the man, whose strength is in thee, they go from strength to
strength, every one in Zion appears before thee -- A day spent in thy house,
is better than a thousand -- I had rather be a doorkeeper, in the house of my
GOD, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness -- Now, of these divine
blessings, all who are the people of GOD, partake in great perfection -- and
multitudes of our fathers, mothers, brethren and sisters, friends and
relatives, are doubtless preparing for eternal felicity in Heayen. But it is
likewise obvious that the perfection of these social blessings, in the kingdom
of Christ, could not be enjoyed, without the accommodation, of external temples
made with hands: In different ages of the church therefore, GOD has directed
his people, To build him Sanctuaries, that he might dwell among them, and
confer upon them these infinite blessings. He has promised that in every place
(or temple) where I record my name, I will come unto thee and bless thee. In
this respect finally, as a christian people, we are almost universally
accommodated and blessed -- How manifold are GOD's mercies? But as this
external accommodation, has been provided for us particularly, the present
year, and as the good providence of GOD, has assembled us here, in his sanctary
which is now dedicated to his worship, on this anniversary festival -- With
great propriety as we hinted in the beginning, we may contemplate GOD's great
goodness toward us, as a society in this single particular.

But at what period shall we begin? Our minds are naturally carried back, to
that desolating scene in which our former house was laid in ruins In Nov. 26
1793 -- A fire broke out in a store in this city, owned by Messrs. Hubbards and
Green, about six in the evening -- and burnt with much fury. It continued to
increase, baffling all efforts to suppress it, till it had consumed fifteen
buildings, among which was the Meeting House -- Through a kind Providence, the
wind suddenly shifting carried the flames back from its first course -- and by
the vigorous exertions of the citizens, were suppressed. No lives were lost.
The loss of property in the whole was estimated from eight to ten thousand
pounds.
-- The frown of GOD, lay upon us for that moment; many of us have felt the
rebuke, till this hour -- the judgment was terrible, though mingled with mercy.
Our feelings as a society, received a sensible check, in respect to our worldly
prospects -- but did not sink. The Lord was kinder to us than we deserved, and
spared the most of our dwellings from the flames. Soon the cloud of GOD's
displeasure, began to dissipate, the first meeting which was called, for the
purpose of rebuilding an house of worship, evidenced the good hand of GOD
toward us. The union, prudence, and mutual kindness, which appeared was
singular. All as one, expressed their wishes to attempt the execution of so
important a design; and leave to the decisions of providence, whether means
could be obtained by gratuity, for the accomplishment of it. As is was the Lord
who put it into the hearts of the people of old, to give for the building of
the temple; subscriptions for this purpose, far surpassed our expectations. The
attempt likewise to raise supplies from our neighboring friends by lot,
succeeded perfectly -- beyond what might justly be expected, especially in the
case of those donations which were generously given These were by Thomas Shaw
Esquire. of New London, 262 Dollars, and Col. Joseph Williams of Norwich, 131
Dollars. Being their shares in the highest Prize in the Lottery.
and every successive attempt has been prosperous.

We are next to notice that the goodness of GOD has appeared great -- in the
procuring the materials -- the location of the house -- the hazard of rearing
of it up, and the laborious task of finishing. These have been accomplished
with dispatch -- without any calamitous events, such as wounds -- divisions or
unfriendly feelings on any side, which events frequently happen, as a sore
evil, and greatly to be lamented. And now, the blessing of GOD, has crowned our
wishes, in the complete enjoyment of this convenient and pleasant sanctuary.

You will suffer me therefore in the conclusion of this discourse just to hint,
the duties to which we are called this day -- and

1st. It becomes us to treasure up in our memories, these various instances of
GOD's goodness toward us, as a people, and as a society -- To forget the
loving kindnesses of GOD, as soon as experienced is ungrateful -- it argues the
basest unchristian temper -- one which a grateful people must abhor.

2dly. As the people of GOD, we are called upon this day to express the
grateful feelings of our hearts, in uttering abundantly the memory of his great
goodness toward us. We are to acknowledge GOD in all his kindnesses -- we are
to speak and rehearse over his mercies, which our memories have treasured up --
We are to meditate and talk of his mighty acts, which he has done for our
fathers and country in general -- and show forth his praise in public, and
private. Particularly we are to praise GOD for his goodness toward us the
current year, in our temporal interests -- that he has blessed us in general,
in our basket and store -- that he has so far preserved our health, and
dwellings from destructive judgments: But especially we are to praise GOD this
day for his goodness in blessing our exertions toward his kingdom and cause,
and for giving us this his temple -- that he has given to the people of this
place, such union, and harmony from the first to the present -- that he has
given so much wisdom and prudence in all our deliberations from time to time,
as to create no discord -- we are to praise him likewise for all his goodness
in the various steps, by which it has been accomplished, even from the
foundation. And in praising GOD for his mercies in this respect, we are to
thank those public servants who have given their time and attention to the
oversight and direction of the work; and those also who have deserved well in
the manual performance of it. But above all we are to praise GOD, for those
divine and blessed privileges to which by this sacred altar we are admitted --
Here my Friends, do we not hope to meet in an humble, devout, and joyful
manner, the Great GOD himself, and yield up our souls to him? Do we not hope to
hold communion with the Father and with his son Jesus Christ upon our soul's
eternal concerns? Do we not hope to receive the blessed light of the gospel,
and be sanctified by the truth -- and the divine influences of the holy spirit?
Do we not hope to sit around the sacred board, and seal our covenant with GOD,
by eating and drinking the cymbals of the death of our Divine Jesus? Do we not
expect to be refreshed with the bread, which wisdom has prepared, and the wine
she has mingled? -- And finally do we not expect in the use of these
privileges, to hold intercourse with the heavenly word? Nay, do we not hope to
be prepared for death; and to stand before GOD in his temple above, and sing
his praises eternally? -- O, then, if you entertain these hopes as the people
of GOD, then rehearse his mercies now; utter the memory of redeeming love, and
sovereign grace. Further -- Be not partial in these hopes and praises; think
not attendance here once, is sufficient, but be constant -- be persuaded to be
constant in your sacrifices before GOD -- Said the Psalmist, One thing have I
desired of the Lord -- that will I seek after, that, I may dwell in the house
of the Lord, all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and
enquire in his Temple. Let it be real that you delight in the service, and
delight in drawing near to GOD: then shall you not be disappointed: Then my
dear friends, let us now, dedicate ourselves to GOD through the blood of the
Lamb, and offer our bodies as living sacrifices of praise to his name, in this
place, which is now consecrated to him -- Let us here live in mutual love and
peace, and the GOD of peace will be with us -- and finally we shall meet in his
presence, where is fullness of joy, and join in the seraphic anthems of
redeeming love -- and now while we view the great goodness of GOD on every
side: Let us join in the language of the Psalmist. Thy mercy O Lord is great
unto the Heavens, and thy truth reaches unto the clouds -- I will extol thee
my GOD, O King: I will bless thy name forever and ever -- I will speak of the
glorious honor of thy majesty and of thy wondrous works -- All thy works shall
praise thee, and thy Saints shall bless thee -- they shall speak of the glory
of thy kingdom and talk of thy power -- Sing praises to the Lord, which
dwells in Zion, declare among the people his doings. Sing unto the Lord O ye
saints of his, give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness -- sing unto the
Lord a new song -- play skillfully with a loud noise -- Praise ye the Lord from
the Heavens: Praise ye him in the heights -- Praise ye him all his angels --
Praise ye him all his hosts -- Praise ye him Sun and moon -- Praise him all ye
stars of light -- Praise him ye Heavens of Heavens, let them praise the name of
the Lord -- for he commanded and they were created -- He has also established
them forever and ever.

Praise ye the Lord from the earth -- Kings of the earth and all people,
princes, and all judges -- Both Young men and maidens, old men and children --
Let them praise the name of the Lord, for his name alone is excellent, his
glory is above the earth and Heavens -- He also exalts the horn of his
people, the Praise of all his saints.

Finally -- Praise GOD in his sanctuary -- Praise him for his mighty acts --
Praise him according to his excellent greatness -- Praise him with the sound of
the trumpet -- Praise him with the Psaltery and harp -- Praise him upon the
loud cymbals -- let every thing that has breath, Praise ye the Lord.


