CALVINISM IMPROVED; OR, THE GOSPEL ILLUSTRATED AS A SYSTEM OF REAL GRACE,
ISSUING IN THE SALVATION OF ALL MEN. A Posthumous Work of the late Reverend
JOSEPH HUNTINGTON, D. D. Minister of the First Church in Coventry,
(Connecticut.)

"WHO WILL HAVE ALL MEN TO BE SAVED, AND TO COME UNTO THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE
TRUTH. FOR THERE IS ONE GOD, AND ONE MEDIATOR BETWEEN GOD AND MAN, THE MAN
CHRIST JESUS, WHO GAVE HIMSELF A RANSOM FOR ALL, TO BE TESTIFIED IN DUE TIME."

APOSTLE PAUL. PRINTED AT NEW LONDON, (CONNECTICUT.) BY SAMUEL GREEN. M, DCC,
XCVI.

Entered as the act directs.

INTRODUCTION.
THE AUTHOR, TO ALL HIS FELLOW-SINNERS, PARTAKERS IN COMMON WITH HIM IN GUILT
AND WOE.
OUR great and common Parent has been pleased to give us a place among his
rational, and immortal creatures, and made us capable of great and everlasting
happiness or misery. Which of these shall be our lot to all eternity, depends
on his good, holy, and sovereign will alone. Not many of us are ordinarily much
attentive to either, except in regard to the present life and world; yet were
we wise, our main concern and attention would be conversant with our interest
in a future state, and we should make the present life wholly subservient to
that interest.

But however inattentive most are to these things, there are in the world, and
always have been, many individuals scattered here and there, whose minds have
been deeply impressed with a sense of eternal things. They of this description
and no other, will pay much attention to what I here offer.

The author has often been too precipitate and hasty in many things; but in no
wise so in embracing the doctrine here advanced. He is now passing the meridian
of life; and this opinion of the way of salvation is the result of his most
careful enquiry from the days of his early youth.

His first idea of the way of salvation, was this, viz. That by the grace of
God, and by a diligent use of means, he must obtain some valuable distinction
between himself and other sinners. That when God saw this, his heart would be
moved thereby, to give him regenerating and converting grace, and then would be
holden thereby in a way of mere grace, by gospel constitution, to confer
eternal salvation.

Upon this plan he labored much in early life, but the result was not as he
expected; it ended in total despair. For the more he labored for a good hope in
this way, the more he was convinced of his awful destitution of all such
distinctions and qualifications. He was then led to take refuge, and found
great relief in that grace, which he saw to be absolutely sovereign, flowing
out of the very nature of God, through Christ; not moved by any distinctions or
previous qualifications in sinners; but from the nature of God, wholly
self-moved, according to the free electing love of God. A view of which might
bring a joyful sense of salvation to the most vicious, stupid, hardened sinner,
as well as to himself. Yet still he had no idea of any salvation beyond the
more common, and much limited idea of God's election and salvation.

Being much disposed to a studious life, and always delighting greatly in
books, he spent much of his time in reading and enquiry, in the early periods
of life. Amidst all the vanities and follies of youth, yet acquainting his
heart with wisdom, even while he too much laid hold on folly. Being also much
favored, by a kind Providence, with regard to the best means of instruction,
and a pious example from his parents in his early days, and afterward with a
more public education; the disposition of his heart inclined him, in great
preference to all other employments, to the study of divinity, and to become a
preacher of the gospel.

He was now in those principles which we call Calvinistic; and met with some
acceptance in his public performances, and soon took the pastoral charge of a
kind and respectable people, from whom he has ever since received as many
kindnesses as most of his brethren in the ministry have. Living in a series of
harmony and love, excepting only with respect to a very few individuals, at one
time and another, who yet have given him no great trouble.

He, for several years, understood the way of salvation taught in the word of
God, (which he always regarded as the only decisive rule of faith and life,)
agreeably, in all essential matters, to the explanations of Mr. Calvin, Dr.
Owen, Mr. Willard, President Edwards, and the great body of puritan divines
since the reformation from popery. Not as yet thinking of any extent of the
divine decrees, or God's eternal purposes of love to a lost world, beyond the
common orthodoxy of his country; or what, for want of a more significant word,
he would call the limitarian plan. By degrees, he began to be pressed more and
more in his own mind, with regard to the full consistency of it.

He preached, as did other divines, the atonement of Christ, a full and
complete sacrifice for the redemption of every sinner in the world; and the
divine law wholly satisfied in the obedience of Christ unto death; that every
sinner on earth, was alike invited, and most solemnly commanded to believe on
Christ to the saving of his soul; that it was the greatest of all sin and
rebellion against God, not to believe unto salvation, and alike so, in every
sinner that heard the gospel; and, that saving faith did not create, or in the
least change the object or foundation of it, but was wholly grounded on an
object and foundation forever immutable.

These doctrines he urged, from the nature and attributes of God; the covenant
of redemption; and the dying love of Christ, as displayed in the book of divine
revelation. And, on the same principles, always enforced holiness and virtue,
as a native and genuine consequence of a cordial belief of them; and also as
being most reasonable and happifying in the very nature of things. Meanwhile
often denouncing the dreadful wrath of God, revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men. His preaching was of this tenor, with
all the uses of it, and inferences that might be drawn from it; on the idea of
a limited decree, and a limited scheme of redemption and salvation.

The author holds all these doctrines of grace and of duty, more firmly now, if
possible, than ever before; except only with regard to the limitation of the
covenant of redemption, as not according to the eternal purpose of God.

What has lain on his mind with increasing pressure is this. When he had
exhibited to his audience the infinite fullness and all sufficiency of Christ to
save sinners, both by price and by power; and the great duty of every sinner to
believe it to the salvation of his soul, then to tell them; Many sinners, many
alas! are left out of the covenant of redemption; many for whom Christ never
died. A part only are comprehended, a very few in comparison (...) we have
reason to believe, or at least to fear. How many we cannot say, nor who they
are, God will certainly make such as are elected, to believe, by his own
almighty power and grace; and he will most certainly leave all the rest to
eternal damnation as their sins justly deserve for they were never comprehended
in the decree of God or the covenant of redemption and salvation. I have been
more and more pressed and perplexed in my own mind, with regard to the
consistency of this manner of preaching with itself, or with the word of God. I
have often taken up the objections that have been brought against it, and have
attempted to remove them in the common way, and done it to as general
satisfaction, perhaps, as other preachers.

The arguments used to silence these objections are so trite and familiar with
every one, that I need only hint at them now. I have told my audience that we
all justly deserve to be eternally miserable; that God was not obliged to save
any; that he is a just, absolute sovereign: the reprobate, or non-elect have no
cause to impeach God of any injustice; they shall receive only the due reward
of their deeds; that they may believe if they will; that it is the wickedness
of their hearts, their wills, and dispositions that hinders them; the heart at
enmity with God; and that this is so far from being their reasonable excuse,
that it is their just, and most awful condemnation; that they have no business
with God's secret, eternal decree, or the extent of the covenant of redemption,
and the number given to Christ therein, and for whom alone he died; that they
must attend only to what God has revealed; that he will have all men to be
saved; that he takes no pleasure in the death of him that dies, but that he
would turn and live; that he plainly commands all men every where to repent,
and believe to the saving of their souls; that the secret decree of God can
have no influence on their wills, and ought to have none on their conduct. So I
have gone through with all the common arguments as other ministers of the
gospel have so often done. These the reader has all by heart, if he has paid
any tolerable attention to the common preaching of calvinistic divines.

My audience have generally almost to a man set down satisfied. Yet, at
evening* much perplexity has invaded my own mind; thoughts have thus returned
upon me. I have this day told my audience, making no difference, and without
the exception of a single person, that if we do not believe that God has given
to us eternal life in his Son, we make him a liar; and quoted the evangelist
John in support of it. I have told them, that they have, every one alike, all
the warrant, that the God of truth can give them, to believe to eternal life;
and that it is the greatest of all sin not thus to believe. I have told them
that their acting this faith on the Son of God, can lay no foundation at all,
but is wholly built on an eternal foundation already laid, the immutable truth
of God in his Son. I have told them they must so believe; they have right to,
they ought to do it; and then every one of them shall be saved. When upon the
limitarian plan, I know not that one tenth part of them, or even one of them
was ever included in the covenant of redemption, or given to Christ, or that he
ever died for one soul of them.

Ought I not to have known for whom among them Christ did indeed die, before I
gave out this doctrine; and then to have addressed the same to them only? or
ought I not, at least, to have spoken hypothetically and said; if you are of
the number of the elect, you have full warrant and ground to believe to
salvation. Otherwise there is no foundation laid in Christ for your faith; but,
on the contrary, you will make God a liar in so believing, as you will believe
what he knows is not true, viz. that every soul that hears the gospel has a
foundation for his saving faith, laid in Christ?

I have told my audience that the number given to Christ, and for whom he died,
is a secret that belongs to God only, and not at all to them. And, that it is
their great duty to make their calling and election sure. I have quieted their
minds, but not my own. For I cannot avoid many thoughts which have never
occurred to their minds, on the limitarian plan. I cannot help seeing, that
although, on this plan, the number and the names are a secret with God alone;
yet the principles are what I have been preaching. I have asserted them as
revealed in the word of God, I have proclaimed them aloud, as the will of God;
and now how, alas! shall I reconcile them in harmonious truth?

I can very willingly let alone the number and the names; that sits easy on my
mind. But what shall I do with the principles I have advanced as things
revealed and belonging to every sinner in the world? How can I, on these
principles, these revealed doctrines, invite and command every sinner to
believe to salvation, and in the name of Christ too, tell every one, without
exception, that Christ has laid a foundation for this universal faith and
salvation; when I believe he did, in his death, lay a foundation only for a
part; that only a part are given to him, and that "other foundation can no man
lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ?" Many similar thoughts have
unavoidably pressed into my mind, after I have been preaching the gospel in the
limitarian line.

The learned reader will readily recollect the way that several learned and
pious divines have taken to free themselves from this perplexity. They assert,
that all sinners are commanded to believe that which has no truth in it,
antecedent to their believing it; and that in the devout and obedient exercise
of their minds in believing, that is turned into a glorious, saving truth,
which had no truth in it when their minds first began to work upon it. This
they say is a most inconceivable, astonishing mystery. I think so too, and can
get no relief to my own mind in that way. If I could believe without previous
truth, and make truth by believing, I should believe myself into the enjoyment
of many agreeable things, temporal as well as spiritual: Yet even men of no
less worth than, Messrs Boston, Marshall, Hervey, and others I might name, have
taken that refuge; and merely, no doubt, because they could not possibly
reconcile the limitarian doctrines of salvation in any other way.

These embarrassments in my mind, have induced me to look, most attentively,
into all opinions that have ever been found among all sects that embrace divine
revelation; and especially the neonomian and the arminian tenets. But, on the
most thorough investigation, I find these inconsistent with divine revelation,
and the necessary attributes of God; also with the relation of man to his
Maker; and with his entire, absolute, and everlasting dependence on God. Still,
the evidences, and even demonstrations of the truth, and divinity of the sacred
oracles are so clear, that I can never renounce my firm faith in them. I also
find, in reading all books of divinity that ever I saw, that the main, leading
sentiments in them, will most inevitably infer the same extensive doctrine of
grace and salvation that is here advanced: were all just and necessary
consequences drawn from those foundation principles which all unite in. But,
few just consequences have been drawn, and many things said by limitarians, of
all denominations, in full and plain opposition to the foundation principles
which they hold.

After all researches, I have recurred to the word of God alone. There I find a
most glorious, and astonishing system, and exibitions of divine wisdom, power
and love; most harmoniously consistent with itself, and with all the divine
attributes, with pure reason, and with God's conduct in the universe; and in a
most blessed way, accommodated and adapted to guilty, miserable man, in all the
depth of his entire impotency and guilt: A complete Savior undertaking to
deliver him alike from both; and that in such a merciful and glorious extent,
that I can in the name of Christ, command every human creature, under heaven,
to believe in such a Savior, and promise him, on the same authority, he shall
be saved by him.

I can now preach the gospel to every creature; i. e. I can tell every human
creature under heaven, Good news to HIM. I can tell every creature of a Savior
as complete to give him the qualification, as to make the atonement; to give
repentance as well as forgiveness of sins, alike engaging and ensuring both, by
covenant with his Father. A blessed Savior, that has made his salvation sure,
before lost sinners ever thought any thing about it; and that did all the work
alone without their doing any thing. That, by the power of his own spirit, he
sets sinners to work out their own salvation with fear and trembling: not at
all to make it more sure, than he has made it in the covenant of redemption,
and the atonement; but only, to communicate the knowledge, and comfort of it to
them, and to apply the benefit, by working in them a moral capacity to enjoy it.

Hence I can bid them, in the name of Christ, to work out their own salvation
with fear and trembling: for it is God that works in them both to will and to
do, of his own good pleasure. I can tell them that the grace of God, alone,
brings salvation to their fight and trust; and that this, in a way of native
consequence, teaches them to deny ungodliness and every worldly last, and to
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Because this is
God's way, and the only fit way in which God brings them to the final, heavenly
inheritence, and makes them meet to be partakers of it. Also, because it is
most reasonable, and an exceeding great pleasure and delight to them while on
the way: And as in all respects it is most agreeable to the natures God has
given them; to their moral agency; and to the honor of his own name, to bring
them to the enjoyment of all the sure benefits of redeeming love and grace in
such a way.

On this ground, I can assure them that God has given to us fallen man eternal
life, and this life is in his Son; and he that believes not this record,
whosoever he be, has made God a liar. So I can charge any unbeliever with the
greatest blame, for not believing immediately to the saving of his soul, i. e.
to a sense and enjoyment of gospel salvation. And I can pronounce every
unbelieving sinner damned, i. e. most justly and awfully condemned while in
unbelief. But on the limitarian plan, I can charge no sinner with any thing
amiss, for not believing to his own salvation; unless I first know, that he is
one that is comprehended in their partial and much limited covenant of
redemption; or one of the few, or the party, be it more or less, for whose
eternal salvation Christ died.

The more I have thought on these things, the more I am convinced of the utter
inconsistency of the general preaching of protestant divines, on any other
ground than this. Christ died alike for all. And all mankind are alike included
in the most glorious and merciful covenant of redemption.

I suppose, at the same time, that it is not expedient that gospel preachers
should dwell much on this point, viz. proving that God will indeed bring all
the fallen race, in his own time, out of their blindness, guilt, and misery, to
the knowledge and enjoyment of salvation; or that Christ will in his own way
and time, draw all men unto him, in the plainest sense of the words. But rather
to dwell much, and mainly, on the nature and character of God, and that of
fallen man, and the way of salvation for such a miserable race; with all the
duties, and obligations, hopes, and expectations resulting from these thoughts.

The great things we want to know, are what God is; and what we are; and how we
may please God; and in what way we may be saved. Merely to know how many, or
how few, shall be brought to glory is no part of our saving knowledge. But to
know the way to heaven, by saving experience, is the great thing we all need.
This is just the same in my view of salvation; as on that of the protestant
world in general, ever since the reformation from popery. Nor should I think it
expedient to publish the following sheets, at least at this time, were it not
that I find I cannot vindicate divine revelation on any other plan. I likewise
find many inquisitive minds, deeply concerned about things of eternal
consequence, pressed with the same embarrassment.

I am well aware, that such an open advancing step to pour light into the minds
of men; though it is no other, in the nature of it, than what has been many
times done, may, as in former times, in all probability, be an occasion of
great alarms in the minds of many pious, good people. Among the rest, (which is
to me most disagreeable in prospect) several of my dearest and most valuable
friends and connections will probably be more wounded by this publication, or
at least more aggrieved, than any other persons on my account.

But there is a wonderful force in important truth, pressed home on the human
mind with fall conviction. When HE who rules the spirits of all men, is
determined to make it appear to the world, he always makes the truth press so
hard on the human mind as to find vent. Witness the case of Elihu, Jeremiah,
Paul, and many others. Job, 32. Jer. 20. Acts, 18. The most of those, whom God
has made instruments to give additional light and guidance to his church and to
the world, have felt much reluctance on the part of human nature and worldly
considerations, from the days of Moses to the present day. BUT almighty God
always finds an effectual way to draw out of their souls, whatever he is
pleased to pour in with special design for the benefit of mankind. It is
doubtless by connection and acquaintance with the people of God, that the
gentiles, in every part of the world, got this idea of their prophets, sybils,
and augurs, in all ages. The celebrated Roman poet, as the learned will
recollect, paints this thought most beautifully in the case of his prophetess,
in the sixth book of his Aencid. And I apprehend, we may well maintain the
doctrine of such a forcible energy on the mind, in these cases, without giving
any countenance to enthusiasm, in the more common acceptance of the word.

What now appears, is a small part of a SYSTEM of DIVINITY, which the author
has been meditating more than twenty years. A critical view of the religion of
the covenant people of God, in every age, and in every part of the world, where
divine revelation has been embraced; and also of the mythology of all the
nations of the earth that have not been favored with the sacred oracles, fell
naturally in the way of his contemplations, as he was proceeding on a very
extensive scale. What he undertook was with no other view, than for his own
improvement; as he has ever found the use of the pen of very special service to
his own mind.

Innumerable criticisms on the original languages in which the sacred oracles
were first written, are left out in this publication. Because our English bible
is so well done, in the last translation, that there is not one verse, or
sentence in it, that will misguide any common, English reader, in any material
thought. And because, on the contrary, the author did, and does still suppose,
that such a number of criticisms, as he found his own thoughts naturally led
into, would, if inserted, much bewilder the minds of most of his readers. And
lastly, this would much swell the volume, and embarrass any printer in this
country, for want of proper types, and practice.

The following TREATISE is not divided into chapters and sections according to
the more common way in later times; but is on the plan of the more ancient
compositions. Moreover, the reader will find in many places, that a particular
thought, or argument, is taken up and pursued as far as the present connection
required; then laid aside for the present, and resumed again, in another
connection, and enlarged upon in separate parts of the volume, with distinct
views, and in various connections. This is no more repetitious, than if each
thought, or argument had been wholly finished in one place by itself. This
method, was chosen because the author's desire was to help the reader, as much
as possible, to carry along in his mind to the end of the whole, every material
idea, without the loss of any.

The author is quite beyond a doubt, in his own mind, with regard to the solid
truth of his leading principles and arguments; though he supposes that
inaccuracies may be discerned by the more critical part of his readers. With
respect to the due time of advancing this step forward, and so explicitly
pouring in this additional light, he is not so positive.

There are, however, several considerations that have weight in my mind, to
make the publication without further delay; such as these. I have spent more
than twenty years in the most careful reading and attention to every thing
relating to this subject; and, I think, with a single eye, and ardent desire to
know the truth, and to avoid all false reasoning, and every groundless
conclusion. I have no interest but in the truth. I am in the same predicament,
with regard to the due time of publication, that all men since the days of
inspiration have been. Any author may misjudge, after his greatest possible
exercise of judgment in the matter. Some have done it, as the great and learned
Huss, who was one century before the due time, in attempting to pour in a flood
of light upon the world. He offered nothing to the public but what was advanced
in the next century by Luther, Calvin, and others with glorious success. I
consider that if all students will refrain publication, in advancement of light
and knowledge, until they are quite certain the most proper time is come; every
thing of this kind must be at an end. Also that when God's own time is come,
for new acquisitions of knowledge, even then, it is his wise and holy pleasure,
that truth should beat its way through very considerable opposition, and that
the leaders in it should meet with little thanks, and no comfortable reward,
from the world in general.

Besides all this, I regard the mavelous hand of divine providence, since my
own day of observation, as leading into new acquisitions of every kind more
rapidly than in any former period of time. A spirit of enquiry, of light and
liberty, does wonderfully increase. And it has been my steadfast opinion, with
the venerable Edwards and others, who, as I apprehend, have written best on the
prophecies, relating to the latter day glory, that the glorious millennium is
now dawning, and has been ever since the reformation from popery; and that
when six thousand years from the creation of the world are completed, the sun
will fairly arise, even the sun of righteousness in all his divine glory. That
time now draws near. The second or third generation from us may, some of them,
behold that blessed day.

I am farther fully persuaded, that the glorious and universal revival, and
power of true religion in that day, will not be brought on so much by the awful
thunderings of divine wrath, and threatenings of hell and damnation, as by
leading the blind fearful minds and guilty souls of men to see and know the
true character of God, and the Savior. When the world shall know the living and
true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; then a sense and enjoyment of life
eternal will abound, and the cords of love will effectually draw dead sinners
to holiness and virtue.

The reader may naturally expect that I should take notice of several writers
of late, and some former writers, on the subject of the universal redemption
and final salvation of the human kind; both in support of the sentiment, and in
opposition thereto. I suppose I have read them all, from the great Augustine
(who advanced the foundation arguments in support of this doctrine, with
greater strength of mind, than any have done since) down to the present day.
Several learned men have written on the subject, in Europe and America; some on
one side of the question and some on the other. I have purposely omitted any
particular remarks on either: principally because it appears to me, that none
of them ever sufficiently attended to the subject to write with full pertinency
upon it Though, at the same time, the author regards them as much greater and
better men than himself, and would think himself honored to set at their feet,
to receive instruction in any matters they have fully attended to.

THE LEADING THOUGHTS, on which the following TREATISE is built, may be divided
into the following particulars. The attributes of God. His own fixed eternal
purposes. His covenant of redemption with the Son of his love. The full and
proper contrast between the first, and second foederal head of mankind. The
doctrine of a true and proper imputation of guilt and righteousness. The
co-extensive offices of Christ, as prophet, priest, and king. The just desert
of sin. The voice of God's holy law, and that of the gospel, sounding
throughout the whole of divine revelation. The law wholly satisfied in Christ.
The GOSPEL announcing these GLAD TIDINGS. The nature and office of
regeneration, saving faith, and repentance unto life. The indispensible
necessity of internal holiness. The awful damnation of all while unregenerate.
The only way, in which God will save sinners, and the infinite reasonableness
of it. The great power of a real acquaintance with the salvation of God, to
move the heart to all holiness and virtue; and to regulate the whole life. The
absolute, and everlasting dependence of all the human race on him that made
them. And the everlasting glory that will redound to God alone, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, in this great salvation.

The above are the principal, leading thoughts, illustrated by a variety of
arguments; which are indeed but a very small part of all those that might have
been adduced, with equal force, from the nature of God and from his word.

The author has one request to make to all that may see, or hear of this book.
He asks that none would either approve or censure it, until after a careful
reading. And that all, who may have read it with attention, and then speak
freely their own opinion concerning it, as every one in that case has good
right to do, would also communicate this humble request from the author, to all
such as have knowledge of it only by report. This is a just claim, which every
man has on his fellow-men; and which every humane, candid mind will readily
grant. The author is the more emboldened to make it, as he never could endure
to violate the same principle himself, with regard to any writings he has ever
seen or heard of. Having intimated these things as introductory, the reader is
now led to a direct and immediate consideration of the subject.

A TREATISE ON UNIVERSAL SALVATION.
THE sacred scriptures, or the two testaments, are certainly the very dictates
of God to men, on the most interesting matters. God has spoken as became
himself to speak, things most important to the human kind; and things in the
most perfect consistency, through the whole of divine revelation. The great
design of it is, that the divine Being and character may be manifested, in the
clearest possible manner, for the display of his own glory; and mankind guided
thereby to the true end of their existence, even the knowledge and enjoyment of
God the supreme and consummate good. The duty and happiness of man are
inseparably united in the sacred oracles.

IT is of the utmost importance to the comfort of man, to have his mind open,
and unbiassed with regard to the truth, heartily engaged to find the very
truth, and embrace it with supreme love, for its own sake. This is "a good and
honest heart." This is "receiving truth in the love of it." Alas; how hard an
attainment for man in his present state!

NOW any man that can read the word of God with open candor, will see, that
there are two capital points of instruction running through the whole of it, as
things to be believed; and that every where virtue, or holiness of heart and
life is enjoined upon us, as matter of practice, enforced with the strongest
reasons and motives.

THE two great doctrines we are taught to believe, are, First, What it is just
and right for God to do with us, considered in our own personal character, and
desert. This I shall call the pure voice of justice to man, without regard to
an atonement, or a mediator. Secondly, What God will in fact do with mankind,
as united to a mediator, and one with him by divine constitution, in a foederal
sense: Or how, in very deed, God has promised to deal with man, in that union
with the second Adam: What his condition shall certainly be, in this life, and
the life to come. This I call pure gospels; or tidings from God, which never
could have been known but by his own revelation.

IT will also appear that these two capital points are, throughout the whole
bible, kept in constant view, running side by side, in open sight, from the
beginning to the close of the sacred oracles. These points are very different
from each other, yea directly opposite, except only as harmonizing in Christ,
which is the most wonderful mystery of the gospel, and the grand distinguishing
doctrine of divine revelation.

TAKE a few instances of this direct opposition of sentiment, if literally
understood, in an immediate and direct import, without any regard to a
mediator, an atonement, or a foederal constitution. -- "In the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely die." "And all the days that Adam lived were nine
hundred and thirty years." "Every man shall die for his own sins." "Christ died
for our sins according to the scriptures." "God will by no means clear the
guilty." "I, even I am he that blotteth out your sins, for mine own sake." The
reader that is well acquainted with the book of divine revelation, will think
of thousands of plain assertions, as much to the purpose as these; and every
fair reasoner will own that words and ideas cannot be set in more full
opposition, if taken in one and the same, plain, immediate, literal sense. Yet
we find not the least difficulty in reconciling all these with each other, and
with the truth, when we bring them into one proper analogy: We easily see one
harmonious, perfectly consistent scheme, running through the whole.

BUT, it will abundantly appear in the sequel, that we must keep our ear open
to the voice of pure justice to man, as he deserves out of Christ; also to the
voice announcing what shall in very deed, through infinite grace, take place
with respect to man in Christ: Or it will be wholly in vain for all the wit,
and art in the world, to make any thing better of the holy scriptures, than a
long, solemn, series of the most palpable contradictions. I have, with the
utmost caution, and deepest attention, long consulted the sacred oracles; and,
perhaps, all of essential consequence, that has been written on them, since the
christian era, in various languages; and I freely confess that, without the
clue, just named, I must set down in deism: But, with it, the whole book of
God, how true! how beautiful! how glorious!

THE whole word of God, centers in Christ, and is sealed in his blood; the law,
and gospel, otherwise opposite, are brought into perfect union; righteousness
and peace embrace each other; and this display shines, in perpetual and
glorious symmetry, through the old and new testaments.

BUT now, to resume the capital argument already alluded to.

WE begin with the first threatening ever denounced against man, on condition
of his rebellion. Genesis ii. "In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely die." I believe the more common construction of this commination, by
protestant divines, is right, viz. that total death, temporal and spiritual,
was to take place on all human nature, on that very day; and eternal death then
begin, and be confirmed and made sure to all human nature, without the least
intimation of remedy or relief, to endless duration. I fully believe this
construction is just, and abundantly supported in the holy scriptures.

HOWEVER, as I am acquainted with many learned, and ingenious criticisms on the
words, needless here to remark upon, I will take a construction in which all
agree as far as it extends; and which will answer what I am now aiming at, as
well as that which is more agreeable to my own mind. It is certainly true, as
far as it goes; though I suppose it does not contain the whole truth. "In the
day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die." Let the sense be allowed as in
the paraphrase: viz. "In the day thou eatest of the forbidden fruit, thou shall
become mortal, even thou Adam, and all human nature now in thee. Thy soul also,
shall sustain great damage and unhappiness, that is, spiritual death, in some
awful degree, without the least ground of hope that the case shall ever become
any better with thee, (with the human kind,) to endless duration. Be assured of
no felicity for thee; nothing better than sorrow and woe; or, at the utmost, no
greater relief than extinction of being." I grant this explanation of the
words, at present, for two reasons; the one is, it is certainly true as far as
it extends; though it by no means comprehends the whole: And the other is,
because all that regard the word of God, will acquiesce in it thus far, while
most will carry it much further. It will plainly appear, that whether this, or
the more common idea be taken from the words, it will have one and the same
aspect, in support of the following argument: Inasmuch as there can be nothing
plainer than that the threatening never did fully take place, on mere man in
his own person, and never will; and that God never designed it as the voice of
certain fact, on mere man; but as the voice of pure justice alone.

I HOPE, that I cannot be misunderstood in the use of these phrases, " the
voice of justice," and " the voice of fact;" or, " language of law, and
language of gospel," with respect to man: Or, " what ought in justice to be
done, and what, in God's sovereign mercy, harmonizing with justice, shall be
done." I can think of no terms more accurate, and I find the distinction
frequent among civilians and divines, viz. " De jure, and de facto," which
distinction has been found necessary in many cases; and is, as will appear
throughout the whole of this essay, quite essential to a right understanding of
divine revelation, or even maintaining it with any possible consistency.

NOW if any will say, that the threatening did take place on the day of the
rebellion, in full, according to the plain sense in which God made Adam to
understand him, when he uttered the words; or agreeable to pure justice in the
law alone, or ever will take place, on mere mankind personally, or just as Adam
expected; their minds are, at present, not in a condition to be reasoned with.
God had a most glorious and merciful reserve in his own mind, on the
preconcerted plan of eternal, redeeming wisdom and love, which he did not
communicate to man when he placed him under his holy law; and which he did
begin to intimate "in the cool of the day," at the very time when Adam expected
the full threatening would have taken place. There was no other possible way
for God to have suspended the immediate execution of it, consistent with his
own most holy nature and character. He had provided a way, in which all he had
said, might and certainly would be verified on man in a vicar, a substitute, a
second Adam, or covenant head, in due time to be dignified by personal union
with the eternal LOGOS, or WORD. That, on him, the whole weight of the curse
should fall, vindicating the truth of Deity in threatening, though never
executed on mere man as Adam expected, and as the plain voice of justice
denounced; which Adam then thought was inseparable from the voice of fact;
having not the least intimation, when he was placed under the holy law, that
there could ever be any separation of pure justice, from very fact, with regard
to man: Nor would any man, or any angel ever have thought of such a
distinction; or any possible way to make it, consistent with the immutable
truth of God, if God himself had not contrived and revealed it. Here we have
the two grand pillars of divine revelation. God displayed in an absolute
character, without any intimation of a mediator; this is moral law and
all-glorious. And God displayed to man in a mediator; this is gospel, pure
gospel, and exceeds in glory.

IN a right understanding of these grand points, we are led into a harmonious,
and consistent view of the whole word of God. We find the law and the gospel
displayed side by side, through the whole. The law every where sounds with
awful terror in accents of pure justice, toward man, without a Savior. The
gospel is all mere news, and good news, glad tidings, through a mediator, which
man would never have heard or thought of, if God had not made the proclamation.
The moral law every where speaks to man in his own personal character; the
gospel in that of the Messiah. The law tells what man in justice deserves, in
his own personal character; the gospel, what the Son of man, the Son of God
deserves, and that he is by divine constitution "a covenant for the people, and
God's salvation to the ends of the earth;" and that the head of every man is
Christ. This intimation began on the day of the rebellion, and at that time was
but dark, and for wise reasons, which will appear in the sequel.

THE divine law enjoining perfect obedience, on pain of endless misery, runs
through the whole of divine revelation from beginning to end; and so does the
gospel, exhibiting a salvation fully tantamount. There is as much of the gospel
in the old testament as in the new; and as much of the law in the new testament
as in the old. The latter dispensation has the whole substance of the former,
and nothing for the matter of it new: The former has, in like manner, the
whole of the latter, and nothing for substance has ever been done away, or ever
will be, until the mystery of God shall be finished. The new testament is only
a new edition of the old, in much greater clearness.

FOUR things are obvious in the grand design of divine revelation, viz. To
manifest, and hold clearly in our view the absolute and rectoral character of
God. The character of fallen man. His duty. And God's eternal, fixed and
gracious purpose concerning him, through the whole of his interminable
existence. The three former of these pertain to the law of God; the last to the
gospel; and is all pure gospel, or good news.

IN the law we see God's all-glorious, and infinitely perfect character as law
giver; as also the infinitely hateful, and most abominable moral character of
fallen man; and the reasonable duty of man to be wholly conformed to the moral
image of God, and keep his whole law, without any deficiency; and what he
deserves, and what the voice of justice is concerning him, if he is found
wanting in the least. "Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
written in the book of the law to do them," is the invariable sentence of the
law every where.

NOW this manifestation of God, and of man's duty, and his guilt, runs through
the whole bible, old and new testament; just as much in the one as in the
other; but much more conspicuous, for the manner of discovery in the latter.

ON the other hand, the gospel begins in the third chapter of divine
revelation, (as the law does in the second,) and runs through all the old
testament, in types, figures, prophecies, etc. The gospel is all mere news, and
good news; and it tells what man never would have thought of, if he had not
been told it; nor believed, when told of it, had it not come with sufficient
authority. The gospel is pure tidings (...).
; and more, it is good tidings. (...).
Whatever is law, in any part of sacred writ, is founded on the nature and
character of God, adapted to man's nature, and his relation to God. Whatever is
gospel, in any part of the bible, is founded wholly on Jesus Christ, his
character and offices, and adapted to the condition of man, in all his guilt
and misery, and in all his desperate impotency.

IT has pleased infinite wisdom, always to make out his promises to mankind in
a covenant way, or under a foederal head, or representative.

THUS it was in the first man, and thus in his contrasted antitype Jesus
Christ, as is most evident from Romans chap. 5, and many other parts of sacred
scripture. Thus it was in Noah, Genesis chap. 9, and with Abraham, Genesis 17. And
with David as a type of Christ, Psalm. 89. Never, since the fall, can any
individual take hold of any promise of spiritual good, but in a foederal way;
and certainly the grand curse including in it virtually all other curses, came
in this way: As the reader will see to full demonstation in its proper place.

IT has been observed before, that God keeps up the language of justice toward
man in his awful guilt. He keeps the voice of strict justice sounding in his
ears, through the whole book of divine revelation, and that, no doubt, that man
may know and feel what he is, and have an heart to receive the voice of grace,
as grace; or feeling himself infinitely vile, may bid a becoming welcome to
mere, sovereign mercy. The law speaks in righteousness; every where denounces
what is just and equal toward man. It thunders aloud the true desert of man.
But it speaks not what shall in fact take place on man, and his surety both; or
on man at all, in faith and union with Christ; or any otherwise than in his
surety; any more than the original curse did, in the garden of Eden, which was
noticed before. Yet it is manifest, that the wisdom of God saw fit, for a time,
to leave man in such ignorance and darkness of mind, that he should mistake
that which was spoken only as the voice of justice, for a declaration of very
fact, which should inevitably come upon himself. Man most naturally fell into
this misunderstanding, from the inward sense of horrible guilt, in his own
soul, and so was exercised with great torment, in a way of servile fear. Great
sense of guilt will make an object of fear which has no other existence; "the
wicked fear where no fear is."

IT is not for man to account for all the reasons of the divine conduct, though
it is well for us, with humble adoration, to go as far in this way as we can.
It is a certain fact, however, that God has chosen to give light and comfort
to miserable, blind sinners of mankind, by slow degrees.

THERE was some light, some comfort, derived to our first parents from what
they heard God say to the serpent, relative to the opposite seed, and the
victory announced. The law, and the gospel were both promulgated in paradise.
The voice of law then sounded much the loudest; but it has been the manifest
will of heaven, that the sound of the gospel should gradually gain upon that of
the law, from that day to the finishing of the mystery of God.

BY the institution and import of sacrifices in paradise, and clothing the
naked, shameful, pair in their skins; and by the sacrifices continued down to
the flood; and by the preaching of Enoch and Noah; and by oral instructions,
etc. the light and comfort of divine grace had some gradual increase, while the
law, as we know, still sounded very terrible. See the epistle of Jude.

BY the type of the ark; the salvation of the church therein; the covenant made
with all mankind in Noah; and by the rainbow as a token sealing the whole, the
good report was considerably louder and clearer than ever before.

IN the covenant made with Abraham, the light of the gospel increased. For all,
of this nature, was very gospel from the first; in nature the same with that
preached after the descent of the Holy Ghost at pentecost, only much more
obscure, in manner and degree. God's promise of a son to that patriarch, to be
given in such a wonderful way; and of the church, a numerous seed, through him;
the promise of the land of Canaan, etc. all gave further instruction, with
regard to that most interesting concern of man, the redemption and salvation of
the guilty soul.

AT the giving of the law on mount Sinai, and the institution of all the rites
and sacrifices of the mosaic economy, both law and gospel were made much
plainer than before: the moral law, or ten commandments, to enlighten and
awaken God's people, teach them their duty, convince them of their awful
deficiency, the justice of their condemnation, and their utter impotency and
absolute dependence on God: And the ceremonial law, all the rituals,
sacrifices, types and shadows, pointing to Christ, the great antitype, "the
end of the law for righteousness, to every one that believes." This exhibited
the gospel, or doctrine of atonement and free grace, with increasing
perspicuity; and is well called "a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ."

FROM this time down to the fullness of time, in which Christ came, God sent
among his people a great number of prophets, every one of whom cast some light
on the law, and gave some further knowledge of the gospel. Among these, David,
Isaiah, and Daniel, were very eminent. The light of divine revelation, both law
and gospel, was much augmented, by John the harbinger of Christ. The Messiah in
his own person, doctrines, deeds, and sufferings, made the whole will of God,
relating to a guilty world, the methods of his grace, and all the purposes of
his love, still far more conspicuous; so clearly expressive, that "his name is
well called the word of God."

THE light of the same gospel which had been, by degrees, exhibited from the
days of paradise, was much increased in the apostolic times, by the more
abundant effusion of the holy spirit; by the preaching of the apostles, far and
wide; by their writings, filling up the sacred canon. So that the least teacher
under this new dispensation, was better instructed than the greatest under the
old; and understood the doctrines of the kingdom of heaven, better than John
the promised Elias. Matt. xi.

AND, when the gospel door was set open to all nations of the earth, as well as
to the Jews, the doctrine was so strange, so far beyond all the notions of
grace and salvation, ever entertained among the covenant people of God; and so
exceedingly mortifying to the pride of their hearts, that it was abhorred and
rejected. Just as it now would be, should one assert in the most obvious and
plainest sense, that "God will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth:" Or, as if a modern believer should assert without any
construction of his own, and with all the simplicity of an old patriarch, that
Christ died, "not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD."
Indeed, when Jesus first gave this intimation, they who had just been gazing at
him with pleasing wonder, were so chagrined at the idea that a whole world of
heathen dogs should be set on a footing, as respectable as themselves, that
they wished him nothing better than instant death. Luke iv. They could not bear
the thought of losing their fancied monopoly, on which they so much valued
themselves.

THE motive, why the Jews were more malicious persecutors of Christ, and the
primitive christians, than other men, was quite natural to all mankind. It was
not because they were worse than other men, or more malicious by nature; but
they had been so long honored of God, and distinguished by peculiar privileges,
that they felt them in their hearts as a monopoly: Even as a man descended from
an ancient, noble family, has no idea that it is fit, in the course of
providence, that the children of beggars immemorial, should ever become as rich
and noble as himself and his posterity. This is human nature in every age. Any
doctrine, that will place poor, shameful creatures, who have in time past been
most neglected of God, in the holy, sovereign dispensation of his providence,
on a level with us, with regard to grace and favor yet to come; and would break
down all barriers which enclose us in the palaces of distinction and honor,
will set on our hearts, just as like doctrines did on the hearts of the favored
children of Abraham, in days of yore.

IT has pleased infinite wisdom, however, to cause the light of salvation to
increase, down to the present day; though not in every age, or every period of
time alike. There have been remarkable aeras, in which something like a flood
of light has poured into the world, and, at certain times, darkness and
ignorance have rather gained ground. But, on an average, light has been
growing, in all sciences; and the light of the gospel, the light of salvation
in particular.

I HAVE already observed remarkable periods and dispensations, down to the
close of the sacred canon. After that, there was a gradual increase of
knowledge for about three hundred years. Then, for a time, the darkness in
general, seemed to gain upon the light; and sometimes gross darkness seemed as
if it would overspread the world. Yet God kept up, in his church, some
luminaries at all times. There never passed one century, without some great,
godly, learned man who, perhaps advanced somewhat further than his fathers;
witness the Waldenses, and Albigenses, in the darkest period; also, Huss,
Luther, Calvin, etc. And, since the days of these eminent luminaries, there has
been an unremitting advancement of knowledge. I believe I may say, not one year
has elapsed without some increase of gospel light, as well as of every other
science. "Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased."

THE last, and present centuries have been productive of many great and learned
inquirers after truth, who have been happily successful. At the head of them we
may place, in Europe, the incomparable Owen, and, in America, the immortal
Edwards; men of the same turn of mind, and much the same channel of thinking.
These men grasped the whole circle of science in a remarkable manner. And, by
the way, every careful reader will see, that they held all the foundation
principles of salvation, on which this treatise is supported, just as I do;
though they drew not the same consequences, however fully and fairly implied:
And like all others, that have advanced forward and beat the way, they met with
vast opposition. For the moral world is like the natural; he that breaks up new
ground, meets with great resistance from the hard bound, stubborn soil; after a
few years cultivation, the plough runs easy.

I MAY now further consider the law, and the gospel. They were first
promulgated, as I have said, very near together, in the garden of Eden, and
they run through all the sacred oracles. side by side. God keeps them both,
every where, in full view; yet they are as distinct in their natures as any two
things in the universe.

WHATEVER is law, wheresoever found in sacred scripture, is a rule of absolute
perfection, as high as the natures of moral agents can rise, in heart and
conduct; on supposition they are wholly without any moral disorder, any want of
perfect holiness, in the temper of their minds. This law every where denounces
the infinite and everlasting wrath of God, and endless misery to man, in case
of the least failure. The law knows nothing of mercy, or of mitigation. This is
law, and it is "holy, just, and good."

THE gospel, on whatever page of sacred writ it is found, either in the old
testament or new; whether in types, sacrifices, prophecies, epistles, or any
other way; knows nothing at all of misery, or torment, or the punishment of any
creature under heaven, I should have said, any mere creature. It speaks much of
the distress, sorrow, pain, and punishment, of Jesus Christ, God-man; by the
appointment of the Father, and his own free consent, set apart to suffer and
die for the sins of the whole world; the antitype of all the types in the
ancient church; "the lamb slain from the foundation of the world!" "The Lamb of
God that takes away the sin of the world." On this one head, the gospel tells
us of just as much "indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish," as the
whole law of God does from the beginning to the end of the bible. But, as to
any mere man, the gospel says not one uncomfortable word; quite the reverse.
Every word is a word of comfort, it is every where " glad tidings of great joy,
which shall be to all people." So Jesus as the prince of peace, and as the
great preacher of it, and as mediator between God and sinners, says, "do not
think that I will accuse you to the Father; there is one that accuses you,
even Moses in whom ye trust."

THE voice of the whole law, and the voice of the gospel, are exceedingly
distinct, and diametrically opposite. The law demands perfection; curses for
want of it; and cries vengeance. The GOSPEL points out perfection; highly
approves of it, and the imputation of it; and PROCLAIMS SALVATION. The law says
do well, and thou shall live. The gospel says thou shall live, because Christ
lives, and shall do well. The moral law is no news at all; it is what our
reason dictates and approves. The gospel is all news. We never should have
thought of it, had it not come in a way of tidings from heaven. It is all good
news; and there is not one word of bad news in it. (...), may be bad as well as
good; but (...), cannot be bad.
It is all good news to sinners, to creatures that might never have expected a
word of that kind. It is wholly glad tidings to hell deserving rebels, who
could expect from God no tidings but very bad; even as bad as their nature and
ways, and as horrible as all their guilt.

HENCE it appears, that, when we are told of a gospel law, the meaning (to make
any sense of it) must be the law spoken of in Jer. xxxi. 31, etc. and
afterward quoted by the apostle, Heb. viii. Even a living principle of
obedience, wrought and excited by understanding and believing the gospel; which
will ever be the case, as will appear in the sequel. But, in a strict and
proper sense of the phrase, (which is however not found in the bible) a gospel
law signifies the condemning power of good news: Which, at best, carries an odd
sound with it.

THE gospel tells us of the most important facts; things of infinite weight and
everlasting importance; and things, in all respects, as independent of us, as
any things we ever heard of transacted in Asia. The news that comes from
heaven, is as independent of us, as if we should this day hear some news from
the planet Saturn, well attested. All news makes its way into our minds, and
commands our belief; not according to our choice, but, by the weight of its own
evidence. Thus it is with this emphatically, good news. God brings it to our
souls with evidence enough when he pleases, and it has its effect, according to
its nature and importance, as all other information has: The heart being first
prepared by almighty power.

IT appears fit and worthy of God, to keep his law every where in our sight, in
his revealed will; that we may see the true character of Jehovah; and our own
character; and our whole duty; with the just consequences of departing from it,
ever endless misery, as great as our natures are capable of. Rebellion against
such a God, violation of such obligations, justly merits this, or nothing.

IF our obligations to obedience, are not infinite; God is not a Being of
infinite perfection and worthiness. To assert which, is equal to atheism; for
if there is not such a God, there is none. Our sin can be an infinite evil only
in one sense; as opposed to a Being of infinite perfection: For finite natures
are not capable of dispositions, or deeds infinite in themselves. Our
punishment can be infinite only in one sense, viz. endless duration: For finite
natures are not capable of infinite pain, in any given time.

THUS, endless duration of torment, appears obviously just; no more than we
deserve; and not in the least cruel for God to inflict. Should we, in fact,
fall under it, every mouth would be stopped, and every soul would be convinced
of such guilt before God, as to render this punishment equal, in reason and
justice. And this must have been our doom, if another had not, by divine
appointment, come in our place. Now, as I hinted before, it is necessary that
we know and feel this conviction, deep in our own souls, that we may receive
grace as grace; and have proper impressions affecting all the powers of our
souls, in the reception of mere, sovereign, infinite mercy.

TO argue, as some do, that it is not just for God to punish us eternally, for
transient sins in this world, is the perfection of absurdity; and arises from a
total ignorance of God and ourselves, in the true character and relation of
each.

WE proceed now to consult the word of God a little more attentively: Not what
we imagine God ought to have said; but what he has verily said. The sacred
oracles came from God, and he has said in them a great many things, which we
should not have put in, had we made a bible. Many things in it appear, not only
above my reason, but as opposite to it, as my command does to my little
children when I tell them not to eat a certain fruit, which to them appears
exceedingly pleasant, and greatly excites their appetites, and they have no
sense of any harm in it, though I know it is poison. Or, when I bid them go to
school, and not play, when, to all their sense and understanding, play is far
more eligible.

THEY, who read sacred scripture, only with a view to make it speak what they
judge it ought to speak, and that, after they have owned that it came from God,
seem to me rather wanting in common sense, or honesty. I am quite satisfied
with what God has said, in its plainest meaning; and as well satisfied with it,
if it is quite above my reason, as if it is otherwise. Yea, if wholly opposite
to my best reasonings, I only thence infer my own ignorance and weakness, and
fully believe and obey my God: even as I will have my little children believe
what I tell them, and do what I bid them, though extremely contrary to their
puerile ignorance and perverseness. There never was uttered a sentiment more
just than this, " The foolishness of God is wiser than men."

NOW, does the bible plainly say that sinners of mankind shall be damned to
interminable punishment? It certainly does; as plainly as language can express,
or any man, or even God himself can speak. It is quite strange to me, that some
who believe that all mankind shall in the end be saved, will trifle as they do
with a few words, and most of all with the original word, and its derivatives,
translated forever, etc. (...).
All the learned know that this word, in the greek, signifies an age, a long
period, or interminable duration, according as the connected sense requires.
This word, with all its repetitions, sometimes signifies no more than a long,
limited time; ages of ages; and sometimes, endless duration, when applied to
the existence of Jehovah. Rev. iv. 9. -- (...).
But there is not the least need of any criticism on this word, or any other
single word, Or phrase, in the bible.

THERE are express propositions and assertions enough, in the word of God, to
exclude any possible termination of the misery of the damned, as well as to
assure us, in the plainest manner, that mankind shall be damned. Matt. v. Luke
xii. Mark ix. In which chapters we are plainly taught, that sinners shall abide
in hell until they can pay the debt they owe to divine justice; which we know
is forever impossible; and that the fire shall never be quenched. Plain
assertions of this tenor, are almost innumerable. They, therefore, who would
deny that the endless damnation of sinners, is fully asserted in the word of
God, are unfair in their reasonings and criticisms. Beside, all common sense
indicates that if sinners deserve any punishment, they deserve an endless one.
Their misery will be as everlasting as the happiness of the saints, and is
expressed in the same words, Matt. xxv. Here it is plainly declared, that when
final judgment is closed, they shall then "go away into everlasting punishment."

AGAIN; does the bible plainly tell us that all the human race shall certainly
be saved, and be happy forever, through the merits, power, and faithfulness of
the Son of God? It does; as fully and plainly, as it is possible for any
language to express; and that in several places. John i. 29. "Behold the Lamb
of God, which takes away the sin of the world." John iii. 17. "For God sent
not his Son into the world to condemn the world; BUT THAT THE WORLD THROUGH HIM
MIGHT BE SAVED." John iv. 42. " -- the Christ, the Savior of the world." John
vi. 33. "For the bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives
life unto the world." John xii. 47. "And if any man hear my words and believe
not, I judge him not: For I came not to judge the world, but to save the
world." 1. John ii. 2. "And he is the propitiation for our sins: And not for
ours only, but also for the SINS OF THE WHOLE WORLD." 1. John iv. 14. "And we
have seen and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the
world." All these are taken from only one of the sacred writers. It is certain,
neither he, nor any other man could have spoken plainer, on supposition his
only intention was, to assert the final salvation of every human creature. And
never any person in the world, would have thought of putting a different
construction on any of these passages, had it not been for a previous opinion,
fully settled, that sinners of the human race shall personally, not vicariously
be damned to all eternity. They build on as plain scripture assertions as are
in the power of language, in case a vicar or substitute be excluded. But
personal misery being a truth not in the least to be examined or scrupled by
them; they have put a construction on whatever is expressly opposite, as
foreign to plain, common understanding, as the power of sophistry can invent.
Not knowing any other way to make the whole of the bible true: It being
referred by infinite wisdom to later times; at least to be uttered with less
reserve than in former times.

BESIDES plain assertions, as direct and brief as words are capable of, the
doctrine of the personal salvation of all men is clearly taught more at large,
and quite as fully, in many parts of divine revelation; if we will only attend
to them with a fair unbiassed mind.

WE should be likely to conclude, that if the people of Sodom, are finally
saved, all sinners will be; but their final salvation is fully asserted, though
not as the ancient people of God understood the covenant of redemption and
grace. Ezekiel. xvi. 53. "When I shall bring again their captivity, the captivity
of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters,
then will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them."
Ver. 60, to the end of the chapter. "Nevertheless, I will remember my covenant
with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an
everlasting covenant. Then thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when
thou shall receive thy sisters thine elder and thy younger: And I will give
them unto thee for daughters; but not by thy covenant. And I will establish my
covenant with thee; and thou SHALL know that I am the LORD: That thou may
remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy
shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou have done, says the
Lord God."

AND though, in the true sense of divine revelation they suffer the vengeance
of eternal fire, as all sinners must; yet in this chapter it is plain enough,
without any comment, that infinite, sovereign power and grace will finally
triumph over the utmost guilt and wretchedness of Sodom. Not as man had
thought; not as the Jews had ever understood the covenant of redeeming love.
"NOT BY THY COVENANT."

IN the prophet Isaiah, salvation is fairly extended as far as the human race
extend. Read chap. xi. and his prophecy at large. So it is in several passages
in the other prophets. The point may be fairly inferred from the prophet, where
God expressly tells us his will and disposition is the damnation of none, but
the salvation of all: Since we know that by his own Son every obstacle, every
claim of justice, every possibility of staining his own character, by saving
whom he will, is wholly removed out of the way. Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11. "Say unto
them, as I live, says the Lord GOD, I HAVE NO PLEASURE in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live: Turn ye, turn ye from
your evil ways; for why will ye die O house of Israel?"

WHAT would I have more, to secure my salvation, than the infinite power,
infinite benevolence, and express will of God: Being assured, by the same God,
that he can save me if he will, fully consistent with his own honor, and glory;
or that the way is clear and open, in and through Christ, for his infinite good
will and all his attributes natural and moral, to be everted and displayed to
the highest advantage in my salvation? I take this reasoning from Paul. When he
would engage as in the great duty of prayer, for the salvation of all men,
heathen persecuting kings, and all men in authority, though many of their hands
were daily stained with the blood of the saints; he tells the church, they had
a good foundation to pray for the final salvation of such men, and every
vile-sinner, on the face of the earth. It is that which is the only foundation
of all our says, and all our prayer; the express will of God. 1. Tim. ii. at
the beginning. Paul in the sixth verse tells us, that the time infinite wisdom
had appointed for a free preaching, and a general understanding of this
glorious doctrine, was future. " To be testified in due time."

HE well understood God's wise method of gradation, in giving light and comfort
to such miserable sinners* In the case of a poor, distressed criminal,
condemned to die, and shuddering at his impending fate; if there is a pardon
for him, through the mercy of the Judge, it is kind to open to him the good
news gradually; lest the sudden shock be too mighty for him. Paul had no
direction from his master to speak out clearly all he knew to be true;
therefore he ordinarily used milk, and not strong meat; though he had great
store of it.

IN the fifth chapter to the Romans, Paul sets up Adam and Christ, each as a
foederal head of the human kind, as plainly as words can express; and
repeatedly declares, that salvation by Christ shall be quite as extensive, as
ruin by Adam. No man in the world would ever have thought of any other
construction of that chapter, had it not been for an antecedent, settled
prejudice, that most of the human race shall certainly he damned in their own
persons. Any one that will read the chapter, divested of such a prejudice of
mind, will acknowledge the above representation is indisputable. But what will
not a firm, fixed prejudice do? It will even make us say, that " all men,"
signifies a few men; and that " much more," means much less. Or it will lead us
to read the 21st verse thus, "That as sin has reigned unto death, even so
might grace NOT reign, through righteousness, unto eternal life, by Jesus
Christ our Lord."

I HAVE no idea that Paul could have spoken plainer than he did, 2. Cor. v. On
supposition his design had been to announce the final salvation of all men,
through the almighty power, and grace of God, and the infinite merits of
Christ. 2. Cor. v. verse 18, to the end. "And all things are of God, who has
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the ministry of
reconciliation; to wit, that God was in Christ, RECONCILING THE WORLD UNTO
HIMSELF, NOT IMPUTING THEIR TRESPASSES UNTO THEM; and has committed unto us
the word of reconciliation. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you by us: We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to
God. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him." No man can make a comment on this; for
no words can make the passage plainer. Here is the all-sufficient atonement;
here is the infinite love of God, and his grace and mercy infinitely free, his
purpose fixed, and his power wholly irresistible; and all so of God, that no
creature, nothing found in any creature, can in the least set aside his
immutable decree.

I HAVE discoursed with several that believed in the sovereign grace of God, in
the widest extent; but never saw one that was able to express the idea with so
much precision, perspicuity and majesty, as Paul does, Coloss. i. 19, etc. "For
it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell; and (having made
peace through the blood of his cross) by him to reconcile ALL THINGS unto
himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.
And you that were sometime alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works,
yet now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present
you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight: If ye continue in the
faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel,
which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature which is under
heaven; whereof I Paul am made a minister." Perseverance is necessary to
salvation; that we know. God will take care of that. Lest there should be a
possible idea of limitation, Paul assures us, that this gospel "was preached to
every creature which is under heaven," i. e. to all mankind; every other
creature receiving as much advantage by their salvation, as disadvantage by
their apostasy. And this is explanatory of Romans viii. 19, -- 23. where the
whole lower creation appears groaning under the total lapse of human nature,
and obtaining full deliverance, in the universal restoration of the human kind.

IT is exceedingly clear, that all who hear the gospel, are commanded to
believe it; that all who believe it, have life eternal, and have a witness of
their title thereunto, on their believing; that their believing, does not make
the foundation of their faith and salvation more true than it was before; but
their faith is built on previous truth. This is the foundation, which neither
faith nor infidelity in man, had any hand in laying, or can have any power to
remove. For "if we believe not, yet he abides faithful; he cannot deny
himself." 2. Tim. ii. 13.

IF we do not believe that to be true, the belief of which centers in a sure
title to salvation, we make God a liar. Any man in the world does this, that
does not believe. But if God had not laid a sure foundation, for the sure
eternal life of all; some would make him true in not believing; and a liar in
believing it. John lets us know, that he that believes not a record, or
testimony, which if believed, would give him a witness, make him sure of
eternal life, makes God a liar. Now, if faith does not create its own object,
or lay its own foundation, what can be plainer, than that God has made
salvation as sure to sinners, in the object and decree, before they believe, as
afterward? But I cannot speak plainer than one divinely inspired. See 1. John,
v. 10, -- 13. "He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in
himself: he that believes not God, has made him a liar; because he believes
not the record that God gave of his Son. AND THIS IS THE RECORD, THAT GOD HAS
GIVEN TO US ETERNAL LIFE: AND THIS LIFE IS IN HIS SON. He that has the Son
has life; and he that has not the Son of God, has not life. These things
have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may
know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son
of God." The apostle here assures us, that we cannot have the sense, comfort
and enjoyment of life, until we have the Son of God, in our souls, the object
of our faith, and fountain of our life.

BUT, it is clear that neither our faith or hope, can have any influence on the
previous object of our faith, or foundation of our hope; both these are
immutable and eternal. Let the state of our minds, at present, be whatever it
may, "nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the
Lord knows them that are his." And when we come to know the truth, then will
follow, as a fruit and consequence, all holiness and virtue. "And let every one
that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity."

THE apostles, in all their preaching, commanded every one of their hearers to
believe saving truth, on pain of damnation, knowing, at the same time, that
their belief, or unbelief, would not in the least alter that truth. Yet their
comfort in the truth, depended on their acquaintance with it, and belief of it;
and without belief they must be damned. But Christ has engaged for their
knowledge and belief of the truth, in his own time, as surely as he has laid
the foundation for it, or become the object of it. For his three great offices
apply to every poor sinner alike. To whomsoever he is a priest, to him also he
will be a prophet and a king. Illumination, regeneration, sanctification and
perseverance to eternal life, are as absolutely from God as the atonement was.
"All things are of God." "Of him, and through him, and to him, are all things,
to whom be glory forever, Amen." The Redeemer of sinners, so fallen as we are,
says it not in vain, "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the
first and the last. "Let him that is athirst come: And whosoever will, let him
take the water of life freely." He has engaged to give the appetite, as well
as its object: "Him has God exalted, with his right hand, to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins, i. e. to all
given to Christ in covenant, all families of the earth in Abraham. Repentance
and pardon, faith and justification, holiness and heavenly glory, are all alike
the gift of the Son of God, and alike within his divine commission and
engagement.

HERE the reader may wish to see the extent of the covenant, or engagement
between the Father and the Son; whether it extends to all mankind, or only to a
part. This shall be most carefully, and impartially attended to, in a proper
place; as I would, at present, continue my chain of thought, on the apostolic
manner of preaching, as well as the matter of it.

THE whole which the apostles preached, as gospel, was the atonement of Christ,
and its whole import; with all things connected with it, and all the fruits and
consequences of it. Indeed they kept the law every where in view, in all their
preaching. The design of this was, that the hearts of men might be well
disposed to receive and obey the gospel.

THE pure gospel which they preached, was just what I have now mentioned;
"nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified," i. e. the character and offices
of Christ, with his obedience unto death, and the whole import of it. They held
up Christ as a complete Savior, in whom God shows mercy to sinners. They
excluded every thing in man, from having any, the remotest share in the matter
of his justification, or reconciliation to God: Every thing, I say, good as
well as bad; grace after the implantation of it, as well as enmity before. They
considered justification and acceptance with God, not as any real change in the
sinner, but a change wholly relative. "To him that works not, but believes
on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness."

FAITH is, in the nature of things, necessary to an experience and enjoyment of
the benefit, as well as by express divine appointment. But faith does not
create the benefit; or change the divine purpose; or make any alteration in the
previous certainty of any thing in the universe: As my hearing any piece of
news from afar, well attested, and believing it, makes no alteration as to the
fact, which is the object of my belief.

SUPPOSE, my kinsman in Judea died ten years ago, and left me all his large
estate, by will, well authenticated. I never heard of his death or good will to
me, until two years ago, and then I did not believe it. The evidence I then had
did not command my assent. Ten days ago, the intelligence came with such
demonstration and weight of evidence, that I could not help believing it, and
was much affected with the wonderful love and rich kindness of my good kinsman.
For I knew I had always been a most injurious, ungrateful wretch to him; and
had always dishonored him as much as was in my power; and would have killed
him, many a time, had I been able. I was certain that he knew all this. Which,
by the way, was the grand reason why I could not before believe the good news,
on former reports; and continued to wander about starving, in rags, beggary and
shame. But the evidence, at last, was attended with such light of truth, and
the power of demonstration, that it commanded my entire belief.

I NOW enjoy the comfort of a rich inheritance, and my whole soul is much moved
with the kindness of my abused kinsman. I think of him and all his goodness,
and of myself, and all my horrid wickedness, very differently from what I did
in the days of my vile enmity and malice against my best friend; and it affects
all my conduct. Yet the inheritance was as surely mine two, or ten years ago,
or even at the moment of my kinsman's death, as it is now, or ever will be.

BEFORE I believed this news, I was condemned, or damned to beggary and infamy,
and should have been so all my days, had I not heard and believed it; but now I
am rich, and abound in all things, through my blessed, good benefactor, and in
full opposition to all my deserts. I have no heart, now, to feel toward him,
or speak of him as I once did. So "the grace of God that brings salvation,
has appeared to all men; teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly, in this present world;
looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and
our Savior Jesus Christ: Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works." Titus ii.

THE apostles every where preached, as pure gospel, God wholly reconciled, but
sinners not. Romans v. 2. Cor. v. Coloss. i. Heb. ii. 17. In preaching the pure
gospel, they always affirmed, that God has nothing, nothing at (...) against
any sinner, in the world, to effort his final condemnation; that all he ever
had against them, was fully satisfied by their surety; that he had borne all
their sins, in his own body on the tree; that "he was bruised for their
iniquities, and wounded for their transgressions; that the chastisement of
their peace was upon him, and that by his stripes they are healed;" "that
Messiah was cut off; but not for himself." Many a glorious hour they sounded
the gospel in this very strain; but then, as a proper introduction of it as a
message of grace to the hearts of men, they always seasoned it with the fiery
and dreadful law. Yet this was no part of the gospel; but quite the counterpart.

THUS, the preaching of all the prophets, that of Christ and all the apostles,
was mixed preaching. The law and gospel were carried along together, though
distinct, and even opposite in their natures. Thus all skilful preachers do, in
these days, and will to the end of the world. The propriety of it is very
great, for the reason I have mentioned. Yea, I say further, that the same thing
will be kept in view in heaven to all eternity; the law and the gospel, both in
full life and vigor, on the minds of all the redeemed of mankind. This will be
necessary to keep up their emotions of gratitude, and their warmest sense of
the infinite obligations they are under to their God and their Redeemer. They
will often name their Redeemer in their anthems and hallelujahs; but cannot
call him by that name, without calling to mind what they once were, and what
they were redeemed from. Their song will be in this divine strain, "Thou art
worthy; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood." Rev. v.
9.

SAINTS in heaven, to all eternity, will feel themselves in themselves, as
worthy of damnation, as the devils in hell. They will know that they themselves
have made no amends to justice, because infinite power and grace has made them
holy. They will see, and feel, that separate from their head, the lowest hell
is their just due: They will see and feel this, deep in their souls forever
more; and in this sense "the smoke of their torment will ascend up forever and
ever." And this view of the damned, in the glass of justice, will give them the
keenest relish of grace, free grace, mere mercy, sovereign mercy, and forever
animate the body of Christ, with raptures of love unutterable.

THE apostles, in what they preached as gospel, good news, glad tidings, to all
people; never made any the least distinction between the certain salvation of
one sinner and another. They, every where, mixed in the law; and this again
made no distinction: For every word of it damned the preacher, and all his
hearers. It condemned every thing short of absolute perfection. With one just
and awful voice, it always damned all human nature; and even the human nature
of the Son of God, in a way of suretiship, or imputation. "He who knew no sin
was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him."

BUT, the apostles always made a great and clear distinction, between one
sinner and another, as to present privileges and enjoyment, and also with
regard to the degree of future blessedness. The penitent, believing sinner,
they declared justified, pardoned, entitled to eternal life, and a blessed
degree of comfort, even now. The impenitent sinner, and the unbeliever, they
pronounced unpardoned, unjustified, condemned already; and affirmed that the
wrath of God did abide on him.

THEY every where asserted, that early piety, and eminent holiness in this
life, would have a great advantage over a long life of sin, or later piety, or
less holiness and usefulness: Not only in regard to peace and tranquillity,
comfort and delight of soul, in this world; but even with respect to the weight
of glory in the world to come. Yet, they always, as gospel, affirmed the final
salvation of all mankind alike. Paul, and his brethren were indeed very earnest
on this head; and ready to labor this point effectually; and to suffer any
reproach they might meet with, on the account of this glorious doctrine. 1.
Tim. iv. 10. "For therefore we both labor and suffer reproach, because we trust
in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, specially of those that
believe; these things command and teach;" i. e. build on this principle, with
such degree of explanation as the divine spirit may direct, at the present
period of time: It being the will of God that light shall yet increase. The
difference beforementioned, is very special, very great indeed, between those
who now believe, and repent, and obey the gospel, and delight their souls in
all the consolations of it: And those who are now in unbelief under the
damnable power of impenitence, and every hateful lust. Christ is the Savior of
the former especially,, but, if Paul is not mistaken, he is the SAVIOR OF ALL
MEN, at last.

THE interspersion of the law with the gospel, is exceedingly manifest, through
the whole word of God. This consideration is necessary, to vindicate the holy
scriptures against the charge of contradiction. There is no other possible way
to do this; neither is their need of any other way. It is so common every
where, that it is scarcely expedient to single out any passages in particular.
I will refer, however, to one or two, as a general specimen. Isai. xliii. 21,
etc. "This people have I formed for myself; they shall show forth my praise.
But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou have been weary of me, O
Israel. Thou have not brought me the small cattle of thy burntofferings,
neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices. I have not caused thee to
serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with increase. Thou have brought me no
sweet cane with money, neither have thou filled me with the fat of thy
sacrifices; but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me
with thine iniquities. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
FOR MINE OWN SAKE, and will not remember thy sins. Put me in remembrance: let
us plead together: declare thou that thou may be justified." See also, Isai.
lvii. 13. to the end. Isai. lxiii. throughout.

INDEED, all the prophets abundantly use this method of keeping law and gospel
in view; and would be guilty of the grossest contradictions in the world, upon
any other supposition. The apostles do the like. The same well connected scheme
runs on to the final judgment, with an aspect to endless eternity. For, when
judgment is closed, and the mystery of God, in this world finished, this same
thought extends into eternity, and, as I said before, shall forever be kept in
full view. "These shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous
into life eternal." Matt. xxv. i. e. The voice of law and justice is
everlasting punishment to sinful men, considered in their personal character;
but in the righteous character of their atoning Sponsor, the gospel proclaims
life eternal. Two different characters are the very things here in view. And
this is not at all uncommon in laws and rules, divine and human. The character
is often named, and the person omitted, though some person always stands
connected with the character, and is understood in that connection.

MANKIND, in the passage just quoted, are considered in two characters: In
their own personally; and then the voice of the righteous law is, "these shall
go away into everlasting punishment:" And, in Christ, the righteous, by union
of faith, (and all shall certainly have this before the judgment day, as will
appear in its proper place,) and, in this character, the gospel speaks, and the
law also, as satisfied in the atonement: "But the righteous into life eternal."
The person is designated by the character, which is frequent in the common
language of mankind, as when we say, the ruler, the judge, the subject, the
king, the creditor, the debtor, etc. some person is always understood, to whom
the character applies.

I KNOW that a character cannot suffer pain, or enjoy happiness, separate from
the person; and an objector may here say, "this destroys the force of the
argument." But I think it does not at all: For the person designated by the
character, can enjoy, or suffer. All mankind will sustain both of these
characters, at the day of judgment; that of the wicked in themselves
personally; and that of the righteous, in the Son of God, by union and
imputation.

THE objector may say, "this doctrine as much proves that all shall go to hell,
as that all shall go to heaven; or, that all shall go away into everlasting
punishment, and also into life eternal, which is impossible; for the person can
go but one way." It is true, the person can go but one way, and the person only
can suffer, or enjoy; but the wicked character is capable of remaining an
everlasting object of wrath, shame, contempt, and damnation, or condemnation,
and will so, in the view of God, and all holy intelligencies. The righteous
character will remain an eternal object of approbation, worthy of life eternal.

BUT which way shall the persons of mankind go? They are designated both ways,
and opposite ways, by their opposite characters, and they can go but one, and
they are all, you say, to go together; by the voice of the law and justice to
hell; by the voice of redeeming love in Christ, to heaven. Which way shall they
all go? Which shall get the victory? The sentence of personal justice; or the
declaration of grace through the atonement? Which voice, or sentence shall
triumph? Which shall reign? It is a weighty, all important question; the man of
inspiration shall decide it. "But where sin abounded grace did much more
abound: that as sin has reigned unto death, even so might GRACE REIGN THROUGH
RIGHTEOUSNESS TO ETERNAL LIFE. BY JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD." Romans v. 20, 21.

WHOEVER will, with a mind entirely unbiassed, read the whole chapter with due
attention, will see this grand point fairly stated, fully discussed, and as
fairly decided, as the power of language can express. There the first and
second Adam, each a foederal head to all men, are set in full contrast: Justice
and grace, the law and gospel, death and life, condemnation and justification,
obedience and disobedience. The approved term has all along a " much more"
affixed to it; and every where triumphs over its opposite. Christ and the
gospel, grace and life, justification and obedience, every where abound, reign,
and triumph, over all the rebellion and guilt of the first Adam, and that of
all his race, even, in the deepest colors, most awful malignity, and widest
extent of it.

AND the general tenor of divine revelation, bears this uniform aspect;
exhibiting and ascertaining the universal victory of the seed of the woman,
over that of the serpent. "As I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to
me, and every tongue shall confess to God." "Look unto me and be ye saved, all
the ends of the earth; for I am God and there is none else. I have sworn by
myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not
return; that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. Surely
shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength; even to him shall
men come, and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed." Isai. xlv.
22, etc. "Being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore, God also has
highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name; that, at
the name of Jesus, every knee should bow; of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess, that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father." Phil. ii. 8, etc.

WHENEVER the apostles preached to a mixed multitude, as they often did, they
commanded them by divine authority to believe, every one the self same truth.
And it was the duty of every one to believe the same, and a great sin for any
one not to believe. The warrant of faith was the same to all; the object, the
foundation the same, as presented to all. They, who believed, rested on sure
salvation; yet their faith made nothing true that was not true before, as to
the foundation on which their whole dependence rested. Had they not believed,
at that time, "nevertheless the foundation of God would have stood equally
sure, and with the same seal." "And what if some did not believe? shall their
unbelief make the faith ( faithfulness) of God without effect? God forbid: yea
let God be true and every man a liar." Romans iii. 3, etc.

NOW reader, turn to the bible and read that chapter to the end. You will see
the salvation of all the human kind alike secured, in the firm decree, and
sovereign love of God, and in the atonement, power, and faithfulness of his
Son; and all distinctions among men removed out of the way, as fully as words
can possibly express. The preaching is mixed, as usual; the law, in all its
infinite purity and amazing terror, condemning all mankind alike; and the
gospel, in all its triumphant glory with the same aspect of sure salvation to
every child of Adam. This idea being every where attended to by the inspired
writers, viz. that faith alone gives every poor, apostate sinner, sense,
enjoyment, and final assurance of salvation, in his own soul. The law is
established, and the gospel triumphant in the final redemption of human nature.

IT is manifest enough, that all could not take the benefit, in case they did
believe, unless there was a previous, sure foundation, alike for every one. No
one lays the foundation by his faith; but all build upon it. "Other foundation
can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ." Faith,
agreeably to every just idea we can form of it, never had, never can have, any
other province than this; to give us sense and enjoyment of an unalterable fact
or object, if comfortable; or distress, if the reverse. Opposite objects are
equally the objects of our belief. Two men are destined to certain death, by an
enraged band of furious assassins, in close pursuit. The one can see and hear
well, and knows he must die immediately, and is in awful terror; the other is
totally blind and deaf. Is not the death of the latter as surely impending as
that of his fellow? The one has sense, the other not; but the dreadful decree
is alike sure to both.

I PROCEED now to consider the decrees of God, or doctrine of election,
according to reason and divine revelation. It manifestly stands thus.

THERE was a period in eternal duration, which God inhabits, or fills up, (as
in scripture phrase he is said to inhabit eternity) in which there was no
existence but God only, and when deity had in full view all possible existence.
Out of which infinite comprehension, or view of all things, he might create
what he pleased. He saw what was best to be brought into actual existence, and
what not; or what would form the wisest, best, most perfect, and most
benevolent system of creation. This his wisdom and goodness moved him to
determine to bring into actual existence, in the fittest time and manner. On
this choice, his knowledge of all actual, future existence was founded,
according to our best manner of conception. He determined what should be, when
he might as well have determined otherwise, if he had seen it best; and, in
that case, would have otherwise decreed. Then the system would have been
different from what it now is, or ever will be; also, he would have foreknown
it as a different system. But, seeing as he did, with infinite wisdom and
goodness, what would be best, he eternally determined what should, in due time,
take place in the scale of existence.

ON this, according to all the rational conceptions of man, was founded his
certain foreknowledge of all real, future being, or existence, in the universal
system; I say his foreknowledge of every thing, without the least exception,
from the greatest world and highest creature that ever he did, or will create,
to the very least and lowest; from the highest angel to the minutest reptile or
insect; and from the greatest world to the least particle or atom of dust;
including every thing of a moral nature, every thought, volition or inclination
of all moral agents, that should ever come into being; all their different
measures, capacities, powers, talents, motives and dispositions; and the
universal connection and result of the whole, as well as every single and
particular operation. In a word, he eternally foreknew all actual, future
existence, moral and natural, without a possibility of mistake.

THIS knowledge was founded in his own infinitely wise choice, and unalterable
determination or decree: Or, if you please, his infinitely wise and good
election. And every thing moral and natural, every being and mode of being,
every circumstance, every connection and consequence throughout the whole scale
or system of being, did originally, absolutely depend on the choice, election,
decree, or predestination of the eternal, immutable Jehovah. And all things, in
actual being, have now the same entire, absolute dependence, and ever will have
to all eternity.

I CAN conceive of no God at all, but in the above view. If I recede in the
least from this idea, I fall into complete atheism. Divine revelation is plain
upon this subject. "Of him, and through him, and to him, are all things." "He
is of one mind and who can change him? and what his soul desires that he
does." "Of whom took he counsel?" "He does according to his will, in the army
of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand,
or say unto him, what do thou?" I might recite a thousand sentences full to
the same purpose; but it is needless. Read the whole book of Job, and you will
see every argument there founded on the doctrine of the divine determinations,
and the infustrable accomplishment of them all; and the infinite fitness it
should be so. Indeed there can be nothing more conspicuous every where, through
the whole bible. And in the reasonings of man, there can be no step between
this idea of God, and atheism.

I HAVE said, that God's predestination, foreknowledge, election, choice,
decrees, (or whatever name by which you indicate the same thought) are alike
concerned with all existence, and all modes of existence, both natural and
moral, to all extent of space, and to all endless duration. This is indeed
true, and thus far gives us a becoming view of God. But I am now to apply this
grand truth to the concerns of our salvation alone, according to the plain word
of God. Therein the doctrine of God's fixed election, or choice; his
determinate counsel and foreknowledge; his sure, unfailing predestination; his
purposes in himself before creation began, are expressed as plainly as any
thing can be expressed, and exactly agreeable to all our rational ideas of a
Supreme Being.

IN divine revelation, we find the election, decree, predestination, or
appointment of God, with respect to several objects; but in every case alike
fixed and certain. It may suffice to consider the doctrine only in four
respects; from whence we may easily make application to every other case. In
regard, First; To particular men. Secondly; To some particular events. Thirdly;
To particular communities of men. Fourthly; To the eternal salvation of men.

IN God's revealed will, his election, or predestination has sometimes special
regard to some particular men, in distinction from others; and is always
sovereign, and becoming God, who never can foresee any distinctions among
creatures, but what, from all eternity, he was determined himself to make.

THUS, he elected Abraham to be a favorite of his, the father of his covenant
people, rather than Nahor. Thus, for wise and holy ends, he chose that Pharaoh
should be an example of great obstinacy, rather than Moses. Romans ix. Thus he
elected Jacob to many blessings rather than Esau; David, rather than Shimei, or
Saul; Cyrus, rather than Nebuchadnezzar; Paul to know and enjoy the
consolations of the gospel, in early life, and, for a happy season in this
world, rather than Pilate. It is needless to multiply particular instances. In
a word; it is founded on God's election, choice, or predestination, that any
man in the world, is, in this life, in circumstances more eligible than his
neighbor, or any other man. All these things are wholly of God, and of his
eternal purpose, however they may be effected by the instrumentality, or
different conduct of moral agents: For even all their different conduct, and
every different inclination in the universe, has an equal and absolute
dependence on the eternal, fixed purpose and plan that was unalterable, in the
mind of Jehovah, before creation began. This may serve as a specimen of what is
intended by election, or the choice of God, as to all distinctions among men in
this world.

WITH regard to God's eternal election, or choice relative to all events that
take place in time, predestination is of the same general consideration.

THUS, it was predestined that the deliverance of Israel, and the overthrow
of their enemies, should be at the time, and in the manner it was at the red
sea, rather than at a different time, and in another manner: That the
deliverance of God's people from their captivity in Babylon, should be in all
circumstances as it was, when it might have been effected with a thousand
different circumstances, had Jehovah seen fit, and so determined. There was the
choice and election of God in all this. Isai. xlv. and xlvi. So with regard to
the crucifixion of Christ, the time, manner, and whole instrumentality, was
eternally fixed, in the divine purpose. Acts ii. 23. "Him, being delivered by
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked
hands have crucified and slain." It is just so with all events, from the
greatest to the least, and all distinctions among them.

THE same reasoning applies with regard to all communities of mankind in the
world, and all their distinctions. The eternal choice or election of God,
before there was any creature, established the future certainty of all these
things; and thereupon was God's foreknowledge of all these then future events
sounded.

THUS the Jews were elected to enjoy the special privileges of divine
revelation, for a long season, in distinction from all their fellow-men beside.
Also, a few among them were elected to know and enjoy inward saving
consolation, in this world, in distinction from the great majority of that
nation. So the Greeks and Romans, in ancient times, were elected to enjoy the
many blessings of civilization, learning, and extensive empire, in distinction
from the ignorant and barbarous nations of the world. Thus also, many
particular persons of those learned and polite nations, were predestined to
special acquirements and blessings of knowledge and usefulness, in distinction
from the body of those nations. Innumerable instances of the like kind, in a
greater or less degree, have been found among men, and bodies or communities of
men, wherein the eternal predestination of God, has, in due time, appeared.

NOT only all particular persons that are wise and virtuous, holy and good, in
this life; but also all churches or holy communities, that, as such, sustain
the character now mentioned, enjoy also, all the privileges and comforts
connected with such a character, in this life, in consequence of the eternal
election, or free, sovereign choice of God. And they are, in this proper and
very important sense, the elect; in contradistinction from those that yet live
in blindness, and are tormented by the cruel power of unsanctified nature, and
distressed in the awful slavery of sin. They likewise, as holy, virtuous and
useful communities, are elected to a superior and distinguished reward of grace
in the world to come.

IN this view, they stand distinguished from those that yet live in ignorance
of God and salvation, and without usefulness in the world; those that are yet
haters of God, and opposed to the highest good of his creatures. From all such,
I say, those who now know God, love and serve him, and serve their generation
by his will, are greatly distinguished, by the election of God. This is
abundantly taken notice of in the word of God; for a specimen, read Ephesians. i.

WHENEVER election, or predestination, in sacred scripture, does distinguish
one person, or one community, or description of persons, from another, it never
has the least regard to any thing beyond the grave; excepting a difference in
degree of felicity.

IN the last place, the doctrine of predestination has, in the sacred oracles,
great and frequent respect to our everlasting salvation after death.

IT is a mistaken apprehension, in some, that election, decree, predestination,
etc. necessarily implies distinction between some and others of mankind. The
words do not necessarily, or even naturally, imply any such thing. It may, or
may not be included in the idea, or signified by any of those terms, with equal
propriety. This distinction is signified, as I have shown, as to advantages and
disadvantages in this world, and degrees of happiness in the world to come.
But, the words, decree, predestination, election, and the like, might be used
with equal propriety, were there never any distinction at all to be made
between one man and another, either in this world or that to come. All words of
this import, only signify a firm and fixed purpose; an immutable determination
of God; an establishment irreversible; an unalterable plan of conduct, laying
out what shall take place and what not.

IF God had chosen, decreed, or predestined that never any evil should exist,
either moral or natural; the whole plan would have stood upon God's election,
predestination, or decree, as much as it does now. It is therefore wholly a
mistake, to suppose the words carry in them naturally any idea of distinction.
If all the other planets in the solar system, are full of rational inhabitants,
as is very probable, and if they are all holy and happy, which may be the case;
yet their condition is founded on the eternal choice, decree, and
predestination of the Creator as much as ours. The eternal plan, whatever it
be, whether more simple or mixed, is alike built on God's election, decree or
predestination. On any supposition, it is just what God determined it should
be, in every relation and circumstance.

TO know what the decrees of God are, or what his election, choice, or
predestination is, in regard to mankind after this life, we must consult what
he has told us, and abide only by what he has revealed to us in his word. I
have before said, that there is not one thought of distinction between one man
and another, intimated to us in the whole bible, with regard to their certain
salvation, in the life to come; though, as to the different degree of
happiness, the distinction is manifest.

THE divine will, puprose, election, decree, predestination, or by whatever
term you would signify the eternal, immutable plan of Jehovah, does, every
where in his word, fully secure the certain happiness of ALL the human race,
after death. This assertion is bold, the reader may say; I therefore now appeal
to God's own word for the truth of it.

THE words, decree, predestination, purpose, and election (which, the learned
will bear me witness, are terms promiscuously used in translating the same
original hebrew and greek) with their derivatives, are brought to our view one
hundred and twenty four times, in the old and new testament. They mostly refer
to things of a temporal kind; and in this sense, a distinction between one man,
or one body of men and another is generally clear enough. Some are elected to
privileges and enjoyments, in this world, either civil or religious, and others
omitted. This is frequent, as to temporal matters, or enjoyments during this
life, or any period of time pointed out. Of this description is the case of
Esau and Jacob; in which nothing at all is included but what is of a temporal
nature with regard to them and their posterity: Also, that of Abraham and his
seed; in which nothing after death is made peculiar to them, only, as Abraham
and his seed were typical of Christ and the church universal. In this view, all
mankind share alike in the election of that patriarch, and that people, as will
soon appear. So in the election of Cyrus, for great purposes in this world; and
almost every where in the sacred oracles, these terms denote only what was to
begin and end in a certain period of time. And, it is always so, when any
distinction is made between one man, or one description of men and another,
excepting the decrees of future happiness.

WE now further attend to the divine purpose, or election, only as it respects
the eternal salvation of mankind, after this life. Here, every reader, that
has that rare attainment of reading and thinking wholly without previous bias
of mind, will see there is no distinction at all, as to the certain salvation
of the human kind. In this view, God has one elect head and no more; and one
elect body and no more. The elect head is BEN-ADAM, the Son of man, in equal
connection with all human nature. The elect body is all human nature.

THE forgetful reader may here cry out, where then is the distinction which
election implies? But have I not sufficiently shown, that the term implies no
such thing necessarily, or even naturally. There may be a distinction, or there
may not, consistent with the natural meaning of this word, or any other word of
like meaning, as predestination, purpose, decree, determinate counsel, etc. All
these phrases import a certain, fixed, unalterable plan of Deity; whether that
plan contains many distinctions, or none at all. The reader will pardon this
sudden repetition, as the idea is of essential importance.

I NOW say again, that election, or predestination, as it respects mankind,
after death, centres in one head, CHRIST the Son of God, the Son of man, the
only mediator between God and man; and all human kind, as his kindred body.
This head is in a like natural and foederal connection with the whole body of
human nature. Hence we find the Messiah never calling himself the Son of
Abraham, or the Son of David, (though others might sometimes call him so) but
Ben-Adam the Son of man. We find some of the prophets frequently so called of
God, as types of Christ. The mediator, in his person and in his types, is
pointed out by this epithet, about one hundred and fifty times, in the prophets
and in the new testament; and almost every time he speaks of himself, he uses
this term. I do not recollect that he ever called himself the Son of Abraham,
or of Noah, or the Son of David, or of any man that ever was, except the first
Adam.

THE reader will remember, as I have intimated, (and the learned all know it
well) that the Son of man is in the hebrew, literally the Son of Adam, and the
meaning the same in the original greek. This is the phrase our Savior generally
uses, when speaking of himself; and manifestly for no other reason, than to
keep in our view his relation to, and connection with human nature, in the
universal extent of it, without any distinction, or any more connection with
one man, or one description of men, than with another.

IT is true, he is pointed out sometimes by the prophets, as the seed of
Abraham; the branch of Jesse; the son of David, etc. But these descriptions of
him are only to direct the church or people of God, and all that waited for the
Messiah, how to know when the true Messiah did indeed come. And the tribe of
Judah, and town of Bethlehem are mentioned for the same end, with many other
descriptions, that we may know the true Messiah, and be guarded against all
impostors. But Christ, in his human nature, never had any more intimate
connection with Abraham, Judah, or David, in contradistinction from human
nature in general, than he had with Judea, or Bethlehem, in contradistinction
from any other country, or town in the world. We know he had none with those
places, that made him a peculiar Savior to them, in distinction from other
parts of the world; though he was born in that country, and in that town.

INDEED, human nature is identically one now, just as much as it was, when all
were in Adam. Eve was of him, and all human nature is so. The shooting out of
many branches, does not, in the least, alter the nature of the tree. We have
had no intermarriages with any other species to divide or alienate the blood.
All human flesh is called " thy own flesh." All human blood is one blood. "God
has made of one blood all nations to dwell upon the face of the earth." Hence,
with me, there is no doubt, that the second man, the Lord from heaven has
chosen this epithet, when speaking of himself so many times, both typically and
personally, to impress on our minds a sense of his common, equal union and
connection with all human nature, as our Goel, or kinsman Redeemer.

NOW, I say this Son of man is God's only object, as an elect head in regard to
our eternal salvation; and all human nature is his one entire elect object, in
union with Christ, as a body with a head. The Savior expressly says "he came to
seek and to save, not some of those that were lost; but" that which was lost,
that humanity; that nature; that complex body; which he so often by the spirit
of inspiration calls the world; the whole world; all men; all nations; all
people. "Glad tidings of great joy shall be unto all people." But I may speak
more of the elect body, after I have further attended to the elect head. The
second man, or the Son of man is often called God's elect, or chosen, by way of
emphasis; and the fountain of life to all men; and a substitute, or surety in
the place of a whole fallen world; or covenant head of all human nature.

NO believer, I think, ever will doubt but that the Son of man, the Savior of
the world is spoken of, under the type of David. Psalm. lxxxix. 1, -- 37. There
we find him God's elect, or chosen, connected with all the world, by way of
command and subjugation. This all allow, in Christ, denotes spiritual conquest
and victory. There we find God has entered into covenant with him, as one he
has chosen out of the people. The Father speaks to him as Son of man; and
speaks to him some things peculiar to the divine nature, and many things to him
as mediator and redeemer. Particularly, that the heavens shall praise his
wonders; that none in heaven or among the sons of the mighty can be compared
with him; that the heavens are his, the earth also and the fullness of it; that
the people are blessed, who become acquainted with him, or know the joyful
sound of his grace and love. God gives him full dominion to the utmost extent
of the earth; to every sea and every river; and makes every mountain to rejoice
in his strength, i. e. the power of his salvation; attributes to him a
redeeming power, equal and extensive as his creative power. Here is God's elect
head of mankind, God's chosen, and here is described the extent of his dominion
in the world. In the second psalm, he is set up with like elective appointment,
and extensive dominion; with power to break and dash effectually, until all bow
to him, from the loftiest king, to the most obscure peasant in the uttermost
parts of the earth.

IN the lxxii. psalm it is declared that his saving power shall be extended
over the whole earth. All nations, the greater with the less, it is said, shall
partake of his peace and righteousness, and bring forth the fruit of the same.
"The mountains shall bring peace to the people and the little hills by
righteousness." "They shall fear him, as long as the sun and moon endure,
throughout all generations." "He shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from
the river to the ends of the earth;" including the most barbarous and obscure
inhabitants of the world. "They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before
him; all shall be subdued to him," "his enemies shall lick the dust." All
rulers and potentates; all distant princes shall bring him tributes of praise
and obedience. "His name shall endure forever, be continued as long as the sun,
and men shall be blessed in him; all nations shall call him blessed." It is
declared that from a very small beginning, like the confined discoveries of
redeeming love, then among the Jews, its blessings should be, in due time,
extended as the grass of the earth, and the fruit be copious and astonishing.
In metaphor thus expressed, "there shall be an handful of corn in the earth,
upon the top of the mountains; the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and
they of the city (i. e. the city or people of God, extended all over the world)
shall flourish as the grass of the earth." Read the whole Psalm and view the
elect head and elect body.

I KNOW, that in all declarations of God's eternal decree, the idea of
distinction and limitation among the elect body, is kept up: Some shall sooner
become acquainted with these things, and some later: Some in a higher, and some
in a lower degree: Some more happily affected than others, and bring forth more
fruits of holiness, and enjoy more consolation in consequence thereof. But all
these distinctions and limitations are confined to the present world a none
reach beyond.

THE Son of man says, "all that the Father has given me shall come unto me,
etc." The question is, how many? The answer is "He shall give thee the heathen
for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession." i. e. To be in due time subdued and conquered, by the king
anointed on the holy hill of Zion; and made to serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling, and to kiss the Son. Here also, the idea of the holy
and dreadful wrath of God is displayed, and the voice of justice announcing
terrible destruction.

I WISH the reader cautiously to keep in mind what I have observed before, that
the whole of divine revelation is every where mixed from beginning to end, law
and gospel side by side; the voice of justice and that of grace; and that the
latter, by the sure decree of heaven, and by the merit and power of the Son of
God, is to get the final victory. "Grace shall reign through righteousness unto
eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord."

THIS elect head is fully equal to his great work of saving all men, taking
away the sins of the world. As he died, not only for our sins, who are now
distinguished from others by an early sense of his grace, and early
manifestations of his fullness; but also for the sins of the whole world. He can
and will extend, in due time, his all efficacious offices, and exertions of
prophet and king, co-extensive with his work as a priest. He will seek and save
that lost thing. The utmost perverseness of human nature will be overcome,
until "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover
the sea." This elect head of human nature "shall stand for an ensign of the
people, to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be glorious;" read
Isai. xi.

AGAIN, the elect of God in whom his soul delights, shall manifest to all
nations the judgment of the law, or justice of God, wholly satisfied in him.
All, that his obedience unto death has merited, his power and faithfulness
will apply to the human kind, in the most distant times and regions. In spite
of all opposition he will not fail nor be discouraged, until the most distant
islands in the world have bowed to the all commanding power of his grace, the
almighty energy of his spirit; so that they shall sing to the Lord a new song,
and his praise from the end of the earth. The wilderness and the cities thereof
shall lift up their voice; the inhabitants of the rock shall sing, and they
shall shout from the top of the mountains. Read Isai. xlii. from the beginning
to the 16th verse.

THIS glorious head and the elect body are one, in the predestination of God.
"I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, (i. e. Christ) and out of Judah an
inheritor of my mountains, and mine elect (that is; the body of Christ) shall
inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there." Isai. lxv. 9. "For thus says
the Lord I will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the gentiles
like a flowing stream," it is again said in the prophet "as the days of a tree
are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their
hands." "The Lord shall be king over all the earth; in that day shall there be
one Lord and his name one:" i. e. All people shall be united in his character.
We might compile a volume of citations from the prophets, all of the same
tenor, as pure gospel; and, at the same time see many limitations and
distinctions among mankind, of a present different character, and the voice of
justice every where intermixed, and crying aloud for vengeance; but the voice
of grace and the blood of Christ speaking better things. "Lo the lion of the
tribe of Judah, the root and offspring of David has prevailed."

I COULD wish that every reader might attend to Paul's discourse on the
doctrine of election, especially in the ninth, tenth and eleventh chapters of
his epistle to the Romans. There we find an eternal, fixed plan of Deity,
insuring the final salvation of all the literal, or natural seed of Abraham;
all the Jews. Yet, in the course of this life, in the course of time, and God's
dispensations on earth, with that nation, the apostle takes notice of as great
and sovereign distinctions, as between Jacob and Esau, in temporal matters; and
makes the latter an emblem to illustrate the former.

HE bewails, from his own former bitter experience, hardness of heart, and
enmity against Christ; the miserable case of that nation as a body. They wished
themselves at the greatest distance from Christ and all his offered grace, as
he once did, or could do, in his blindness and enmity. He could sympathize with
them, and greatly pity them, from his own experience. He saw but a very few of
them reconciled to their Messiah, or in the knowledge and enjoyment of the
benefit; only a remnant possessing the knowledge, sense, and comfort of
salvation.

MANY more gentiles had come to the knowledge and comfort of eternal salvation
than of the Jews; though they were very zealous, and followed after
righteousness in their own blind way. They rejected an all-sufficient
atonement, and eternal life, on the same footing that any publican might have
it, or any poor, scandalous, filthy dog of the gentile world. For they gave
other nations no better epithet. They did not at all understand how, in Christ
(the only character that God has the least respect unto, in the final
salvation of all men, or any man) every valley was filled, and every mountain
and hill made low, and all crooked things straight, and all rough things plain,
and the Lord alone exalted: How all boasting was cut off, and God would stain
the pride of all glory. These things they did not understand; therefore they
sought salvation by ways of distinction, or as it is expressed by the works of
the law." They supposed that they must, some how, be marked different from
other men; before, any thing God had ever done, would be a sure foundation and
a sole foundation of their hope.

THE apostle tells them that this was a most miserable state of mind to be in,
and a most comfortless condition; that they were awfully blind, as to all
present knowledge, love, and service of God, or consolation; and that the
present temper of their hearts involved in it wickedness, injustice, demanding
eternal damnation, in their own persons. He labors with the utmost concern, to
bring them to know better, to enjoy the comfort of hope, and to love and serve
God in consequence of it. Yet he fully asserts that God had secured, and, in
his own time, would certainly effect the final salvation of every Jew that ever
had existence. He declares that although their blindness was so awful at
present; yet it should not finally prevent their salvation.

AFTER all he says against their most abominable obstinacy, and the doleful
effects of it, in this world; he asserts that the final salvation of his whole
kindred nation, stood on a foundation very different from any thing in them, or
in any creature. "And so all Israel shall be saved: As it is written, there
shall come out of Zion a deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob:
For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins. As
concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes;" i. e. they are left in
awful blindness, for the present, and will be for a season, that the gospel may
have a greater spread among you Gentiles, "but, as touching the election, they
are beloved for the fathers' sakes." i. e. Their salvation is secured in the
elect body of Christ, together with, and as fully as that of their fathers, the
patriarchs and prophets, who walked ever so humbly and uprightly before God,
and enjoyed great consolation: "For the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance." Romans xi. 25.

GOD never rested one atom of his eternal plan and fixed purpose, on any
creature, or any thing that should ever, at any particular time, be found in
creatures. They all rather subserve the accomplishment of it. Indeed, they can
by no means frustrate "the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God," in
any one instance.

GOD cuts off all mankind, wholly, in every view, but in his own Son, Jews and
Gentiles alike, and there is not the least difference. He concludes, or shuts
all mankind up together, in total wickedness and unbelief; and even in that
very predicament, ascertains their salvation, and that of all alike. "For God
has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all." Romans
xi. 32. This is most astonishing; but, I wish men would not cavil about it, and
quarrel with it as they do. Let them rather feel in their hearts, toward the
great God and his sovereign will, wisdom, and grace, as Paul did; and say, with
him; "O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments (i. e. decrees) and his ways past finding out!
For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things: To whom be glory
forever, Amen. I wish the reader carefully to attend to the Epistles to the
Romans and Galatians, in particular, although all the writings of Paul, and the
whole sacred scripture center in the same great point; Christ, and the
salvation of his mystic body.

IN a word; the doctrine of God's election, or eternal, fixed choice, decrees,
predestination, by what name soever you are pleased to call it, as it respects
his grace to the human kind in this world, and their salvation in the world to
come, stands exactly thus, in all the reason we are capable of, and in all the
sacred oracles. All is fixed and immutable, in the mind of Jehovah, from
eternity to eternity; involving innumerable distinctions among men,
communities, and nations of men; and, as many in regard to privileges, light,
comfort, influence and effect, in the present world; and great, and innumerable
distinctions and differences in the life and world to come, in regard to
different degrees of happiness, dignity, and glory. Yet the divine purpose
alike secures all men in Christ alone; in his union with, and covenant for
human nature, as a covenant for the people, and Gods salvation to the ends of
the earth; and by the exertion of his office of priest, prophet, and king, in
equal extent with each other. In this way, I say, alike secures every part of
human nature, from any pain or sorrow in the world to come: And alike secures
real happiness and glory to every one, in that proportion of grace, which
infinite wisdom and goodness has appointed.

WE now look into the atonement, the source of all hope to guilty man. Some
have, in late years, imbibed a sentiment concerning the atonement, exceedingly
different from that of the prophets and apostles, that of the primitive fathers
in the christian church, or that of our christian fathers in later times, such
as Luther, Calvin, Owen, Flavel, Watts, Hooker, Edwards, and indeed every man
in Europe and America, that has past under the denomination of a calvinist,
since the reformation.

THEIR idea is, that the atonement is nothing of a vicarious nature. They admit
nothing like a substitute; nothing like a legal transfer of guilt and
righteousness, by divine constitution and appointment; nothing like a bondsman
paying for an original debtor; nothing like a redeemer, under the Jewish law,
stepping into the place of his kinsman, and redeeming by price his forfeited
inheritance; nothing like a good character presented and accepted, in law, in
the room and stead of a bad one, etc. etc. But these have been uniformly, the
sentiments of those I before mentioned, since the christian era; and the
uniform sense of the Jewish church, with respect to the great atonement pointed
out by all the sacrifices, substitutes, propitiations, and atonements of that
economy; and have ever been the invariable sentiments of all nations of the
earth, so far as they have made use of propitiations and atonements.

THOSE ideas, and indeed, the idea of any proper atonement, or legal transfer
of guilt and righteousness, is now wholly discarded by some. They have, to the
great astonishment of many, boldly asserted that all the oblations and
sacrifices of the ancient church, had no direct meaning in them; but that they
are a vague and indefinite kind of premonition, that a Messiah should, in due
time, suffer, not however, as an oblation, vicar, or substitute, for any man.
Hence according to them, he did not bear any man's sins in his own body on the
tree, in any direct and proper sense; was not wounded for our transgressions,
or bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace, was not upon him,
nor are we healed by his stripes: Only as in a mere metaphorical, indirect, and
improper sense.

HAVING denied the transfer, and every thing of the nature of a direct and
proper imputation, they explain the whole import of Christ's obedience unto
death, in the following manner. "That God being in his free sovereign goodness,
determined to save sinners, of his own mere mercy, was yet equally determined
to vindicate his law, and give the highest possible testimony of his
everlasting approbation of it, to all intelligent creatures. Therefore, with
the free consent of his own Son, brought him under this same law, in human
nature, and then exacted the whole demand of it. Hereby showing, that God so
highly esteemed the law, as to honor it, at the greatest possible expense; and
that he was willing to do nothing, but as he would be done by. But in the like
predicament, he was willing his Son should suffer just as his law demands of
man: And having given this greatest demonstration of the infinite excellency of
his law, he now pardons and saves whom he pleases, of his own sovereign grace
and mere mercy." This they call the atonement; though in full opposition to all
propriety of language, as will fully appear.

THEY have no idea of setting this atonement to the account of man; or laying
the iniquities of men on Christ, by any legal transfer, or any vicarious
covenant of redemption, or any thing like imputations on either side. They only
say, that the door is now wide open for God to save sinners, and fully maintain
all the honors of justice, and that God now acts, according to the free
propensity of his own nature, in this great affair.

THIS doctrine, if true, would, at first sight show us that the eternal
happiness of all sinners is made sure. For what will not infinite love (GOD IS
LOVE) joined with infinite power do, when there remains not the least claim of
justice, or any other divine attribute in the way? We may safely abide by what
God has so often, and so clearly told us; that nothing but the claim of
justice can stand in the way of our happiness. All his moral attributes are on
the side of our happiness, this only excepted. All his natural attributes are
ready to carry into effect all that his infinite grace, mercy, and love point
out; saving only that the honor of his law, the copy of his infinite holiness
and justice, stands in the way.

THAT the moral nature of God is infinite love, is most certain: That this love
pleads infinitely for sparing every sinner from eternal death, he has often
said, and confirmed by solemn oath, Ezekiel. xviii. and through the whole tenor of
his word. Now what can any desire more, to insure their own salvation, than the
declaration and oath of God, that his whole disposition is infinitely opposed
to the final destruction of any man: being also assured, that every attribute
of his nature, may appear infinitely glorious and honorable, in the salvation
of all; and that infinite, uncontrollable wisdom and power, are ever ready to
accomplish all the divine will?

I THEREFORE say again, that, if the aforementioned, new notion of the
atonement were just, the final salvation of all mankind would be as sure, as
infinite love and power can make it; and there would need no more to be said on
the subject. But I would not avail myself, at all, of this principle: For it is
entirely opposite to all reason, and the whole word of God.

THE TRUE DOCTRINE OF THE ATONEMENT is in very deed this. A direct, true, and
proper setting all our guilt to the account of Christ, as our foederal head and
sponsor: And a like placing his obedience unto death, to our account. In the
covenant of redemption and divine constitution, God regards both parties, just
as though the Son of man had personally done all, man has done; and man had
done and suffered all that the second man has himself done and suffered. Romans
viii. 3, 4. "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh: That the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit." In the
atonement, JEHOVAH looked on his Son, in the glass of foederal stipulation, in
the very character of sinful man, and, for him a true and proper substitute;
and treated him in justice as such; and took complete satisfaction of him, for
all sinful man deserved. This being done, he looks on sinful man in the true
and proper character of his substitute or vicar, even the Son of man, and will
be sure to treat him accordingly. The assertion is most astonishing, and far
from what man or angels would ever have thought of, had it not been revealed by
God himself. This, agreeably to the divine oracles, is a constant mark of the
truth.

HERE some may cry out and say, guilt and righteousness is of a personal
nature, and cannot be transferred. But I now promise, that in its proper place,
I will fully demonstrate, that although both these are personal, they may be
transferred, fully according to reason and common sense, as well as agreeably
to the divine constitution. But first, I must adduce my evidences to show that
the scripture doctrine of atonement is exactly as I have stated.

HERE are four english terms, frequent in the bible, which promiscuously convey
the same idea, viz. atonement, ransom, propitiation, and redemption. The
learned will bear me witness, that the same original hebrew and greek words,
with all their compounds and derivatives, are promiscuously translated by these
english words, with the derivatives and compounds of the same. The substantives
are used seventy two times in the old and new testament, in the original, and
also in the translation. They, every where, either directly import, or fairly
allude unto a true and proper transfer, or setting the doings or sufferings of
one, to the true and proper account of another; or dealing with one, not in his
personal character, but in the personal character of another, by him assumed.

I MIGHT fill many folios, should I bring up to view distinctly, every passage
in scripture that is to the purpose, and make only a brief comment of each. I
shall only adduce a few, and leave the reader to add many more, at his leisure,
if he please. The plain import of all the sacrifices and oblations, which God
appointed by Moses, first meet our view. Their whole meaning centers in the
antitype, which all, that pay any regard to revelation, allow to be Christ.
There is no figure no metaphor in a type, any more than in the most plain and
simple proposition. All types only speak in the most direct manner to the eye,
what the most simple proposition does to the eye, if read, or to the ear if
pronounced. Our mouths speak words; types speak things more directly, and admit
no metaphor.

THE term is first used, to give us the true and proper idea of a propitiation,
ransom, etc. in Exodus xxi. 30. "If there be laid on him a sum of money, then
he shall give for the RANSOM of his life whatsoever is laid upon him." Here the
money mentioned, comes directly and properly into the place of the man's life;
one or the other must be laid down. Again Exodus xxx. 12, 16. "And thou shall
take the atonement-money of the children of Israel, and shall appoint it for
the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; that it may be a memorial
unto the children of Israel before the LORD, to make an atonement for your
souls." An atonement is called atonement-money, the whole idea of which is
negotiable, or transferable. In the case of the redemption of an inheritance
that has been alienated, the word is often used to signify a proper price.
Levit. xxv. 23, 24, 25. Paul, with the plainest allusion to this chapter,
comments upon it, applying it to the redemption by Christ. Ephesians. i. 14. "Which
is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
possession, unto the praise of his glory." How directly is the victim put in
the place of Isaac? See Genesis xxii. No language can possibly speak plainer than
the type of the two goats, Levit. xvi. The high priest killed one goat for the
people; showing that they all deserved to die, and that the antitype should
indeed die for them. Then, by a plain signal, with full confession of all their
sins, laid them on the head of the escape goat, to be carried away into
everlasting oblivion, as to any punishment that should come on them in another
world, for their sins; though the very symbol, so often repeated, would keep
them in perpetual remembrance, for a proper effect on their own minds.

DAVID applies the direct and proper import of all these types, to redemption
by Christ, and makes use of the same words, Psalm xlix. 7, 8. "None of them can
by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him: For the
redemption of their soul is precious, and it cease forever." Solomon
understands the same term to mean one thing directly for another, Prove. xiii.
8. "The ransom of a man's life are his riches." Read Paul's comment on the
import of all these terms, centering in Christ, Romans iii. 21. to the end. The
apostle here and every where, notices the abundance of grace connected with our
justification: and also shows us that there is much more of grace and mercy
connected with our justification, by a true and proper imputation, than could
be in any other way, which I shall fully confirm in its proper place.

IN the fifth chapter of the epistle to the Romans, Paul considers the
atonement in this view: That Jesus paid the whole price for us, or exhibited
his own character to God in the room and stead of ours, when we were in our
worst state, without repentance, without faith, in all our enmity, and in every
view most unworthy: That he did justify us, not as penitent; but as impenitent;
not as believers, but as unbelievers; for penitence and faith are exercises of
a new heart, and godliness; not as godly, in the least degree; but as wholly
ungodly: And then brings the knowledge and comfort of this previous transaction
to our souls, by giving us a heart prepared to have light and full evidence
operate properly upon; also, communicating to us full evidence of what he has
done, so that we receive a previous atonement, and "know the things that are
freely given us of God."

JOHN tells us, if any man, any of the human kind sin, we have an advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: that they who at present are convinced
of this, have present special comfort in it; but that the propitiation and the
advocate would surely extend to all, in due time. For he declares that this
advocate for any man, "is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD." He also declares, that a man must
have a good and obedient heart given him, in order to take this comfort. "And
hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments." 1. John, ii.
1, 2, 3.

JESUS tells us, Matt. xx. 28. and Mark x. 45. what the end of his death was;
"to give his life a ransom for many." He does not, in these places, tell us how
many. The word many, may comprehend a part, or all of the human race. In John
i. 29. the extent of the ransom is declared. "John sees Jesus coming unto him,
and says, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the SIN OF THE WORLD."
Paul understands this ransom for many, to signify just as many as there shall
ever exist of the human kind, and so calls it " a ransom for all." 1. Tim. ii.
6.

THE same apostle speaks of the exceeding comfort resulting from
predestination and adoption, as first communicated to present believers, and
equally sure in God's time, to extend to all the children of men. Ephesians. i. 4,
-- 14. "According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love: Having
predestined us unto the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved: In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches
of his grace; wherein he has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence,
having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good
pleasure, which he has purposed in himself: That in the dispensation of the
fullness of times, he might gather together in one ALL THINGS in Christ, both
which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in him: In whom also we have
obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the purpose of him
who works all things after the counsel of his own will: That we should be to
the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ. In whom ye also trusted
after that ye heard the word of truth, THE GOSPEL OF YOUR SALVATION: in whom
also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise."

THE whole book of divine revelation gives us the same idea of the
propitiation, atonement, ransom, redemption; by whatever term is imported our
meritorious justification, ascertaining our final salvation. Meritorious, I
say; for never was there a clearer distinction in the word of God, than the
three different significations of the term justification: 1st, By the atonement
meritoriously: 2. By faith instrumentally, for comfort and enjoyment: 3. By
works, declaratively, or as evidence of our justification. If the reader reads
as he ought on such a subject, he will certainly have his bible before him: I
will therefore only further refer to a few passages, which he may consult and
comment upon for himself. John i. 29. -- iii. 16, 17. -- iv. 42. -- vi. 33, 51.
-- viii. 12. -- xii. 47. -- xvii. 21, 23. Romans iv. 13. -- xi. 12, 15. 2. Cor.
v. 18, to the end, compare Psalm. lxiv. 9, with John xii. 32. Ephesians. iii. Titus
iv.

IN these last two chapters referred to, the infinite; sovereign, all
conquering grace and power of God appear most astonishing. Here the apostle
considers the whole preaching of the gospel, and faith wrought in the soul, as
having no other concern with their glorious objects; but only by comfort in
them, and personal improvement: Not at all altering God's purpose and grace, or
Christ's merits, or his sure determination to apply them to sinners; but only
giving them an apprehension and sensibility of all these things, and so laying
a foundation for meet fruits.

PAUL speaks of the whole as completed by God, in Christ, and nothing more
remaining to be done, but the communication of it to sinners by regeneration,
repentance, faith, and every grace; which are all, wholly the gift of God.
"Unto me who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given, that I
should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; and to make
all men see, what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of
the world, has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ." "That
Christ may dwell in your hearts, by faith; that ye being rooted and grounded in
love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth and length,
and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge,
(i. e. far beyond all that mankind have hitherto conceived, otherwise there
would be a flat contradiction) that ye may be filled with all the fullness of
God." Ephesians. iii. "For the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared
to all men, (i. e, presents one and the same aspect to all the human kind, and
the influence when known is alike on the hearts, and in the lives of all) viz.
teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; looking for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ: Who gave himself for us, (with as fixed a purpose of effectual
application, as ever he had of meritorious impetration) that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people (standing in such a
relation to him, as neither angels, nor any other creatures do) zealous of good
works;" i. e. as grace appears, and salvation is brought to the soul by
evidence of faith, a zeal for good works does follow. Also those men who, have
manifestations of this grace and salvation, are distinguished from those who
are not as yet acquainted with it, " a peculiar people zealous of good works."
Titus ii. 11. etc.

IT has been often said, that guilt and righteousness being of a personal
nature cannot be transferred; and that the word of God confirms this, in that
it is said, "the soul that sins it shall die."

IT has been with wonder and astonishment, that I have heard some very sensible
men make this remark. Guilt and righteousness are of a personal nature, we all
allow; but the consequence does by no means follow, that they cannot be
transferred by order of JEHOVAH. Nor can there lie one argument against such a
transfer, but what will lie with equal force against any transfer of property,
ever made in this world. What gives my neighbor a right to transfer his goods
to me for money, or some other valuable consideration? certainly nothing but
this, viz. the goods were his property, and the money mine. God gives us the
whole warrant and right of contract, transfer, and disposal, and it is the same
in every case. The disposer must be the proprietor, so far as the disposal is
made; this will make it warrantable in every case in the universe, and nothing
else can. "May I not do what I will with mine own?"

NOW a creature cannot be an absolute proprietor in any thing: This is peculiar
to God. Yet creatures have delegated property, within God's limitations. They
have no property in opposition to the claim of the Creator; yet they have in
opposition to the claims of their fellow creatures. Thus, this paper is mine,
and not my neighbor's: But I cannot say it is mine, and not my Maker's. This
applies to all that ever can be called the property of any creature. All our
property, all that we are owners of, is ours only, in opposition to the claim
of our fellow creatures. God is still as much the owner and proprietor of all
things, as if he had never given any property to any creature, under any
directions or limitations whatever.

I HAVE a right to dispose of my horse, my labor, my land, etc. and my neighbor
has no right to control me. Yet herein, and in all my conduct, I am bound to
obey the will, and attend to the orders of the great, and absolute Proprietor
of all things. Under this limitation, so far as any thing is my own, I may
transfer or dispose of it as I please; and so may every creature of God, in
like manner. Has not God himself the same right without limitation of a
superior? most certainly. It is only then to show that God has as real property
in all things, moral and natural, temporal and eternal, as I have in the pen I
now hold in my hand; and this will prove he has an equal right of disposal, by
transfer or any other way. I can easily demonstrate this and much more.

THERE are several ways, in which mankind acquire property, in the limited
sense aforesaid, or such property as we are capable of; particularly by
discovery and occupancy, by purchase, labor, free gift, etc. In these ways we
have a right of disposal and transfer, under the direction of the great and
absolute Owner of all things.

BUT we see in a moment, that no property or right we claim, in any of those
ways, is in any measure equal to the right arising from creation, or the right
of one who gives whole, entire being to what he claims. God has this right in
every thing without possibility of exception; in every existence natural and
moral; in all creatures, and in all done by creatures; and in every disposition
found in creatures, evil as well as good. All guilt and all righteousness are
the absolute property of the great God. He is the origin and fountain of all
holiness, goodness, righteousness; "there is none good but one, that is God."
As all creatures are his absolute property, so are all their dispositions and
actions. Whether good or evil, it alters not the case.

IN this view of God, as being the absolute proprietor, and having the sole
right of absolute disposal; the devil with all that pertains to him, moral and
natural, are as wholly and entirely God's property as Gabriel is. A man may be
owner of bad property as well as good, and so may God.

YOU have two sons in their minority, the one the best, and the other the
vilest in the world. They are both alike yours, and at your disposal. One of
your hands is wounded and in extreme pain, the other perfectly well; yet they
are both alike your own. You have a flock of sheep in your pasture, and there
is also a den of serpents on your land, which you bought with all its
appurtenances. You are the owner and proprietor of those venomous serpents, as
much as of your sheep, and have an equal right to kill them both; the one for
the supply of your table; the other for the sake of being out of danger from
their poison. You have an equal right to transfer them both. Some eminent
physician may appear, who knows well how he can turn that den of venomous
serpents to more advantage, and greater good to mankind, than he can all the
sheep you possess. They are yours; and you may transfer them to him.

SO far as man is owner and proprietor of any thing, whether that thing be good
or evil, it alters not the right of disposal in the least. If I could exercise
true benevolence to my fellow men, in healing them, and in furnishing them with
sure antidotes against mortal poison, by keeping a den of the most deadly
serpents, under proper restraint; I would do it. No man would say I did wrong:
Or that I was not the proprietor of them, and had no right to transfer them;
because they are such evil, hateful creatures. Thus, the MOST HIGH turns his
whole cave of devils to good account, and to the greatest perfection of
benevolence, in a system replete with love. And so he does all the moral evil
in the universe. He makes use of creatures and things of the moral kind, which
are infinitely hateful to him, in their nature, to answer great and good ends,
in the whole system.

BUT God never made sin. Who did? The devil and wicked men. Be it so. Yet this
devil and all his associates, and all wicked men, are God's property,
absolutely and wholly so; and of consequence all their doings are equally his
property, Sin is a property infinitely hateful in its nature; but it is not
therefore the less at God's disposal, as his own property, by transfer, or any
other way he pleases. God is an absolute sovereign in disposing of it just as
he pleases. "May I not do what I will with mine own?"

ON the other hand. As to all righteousness; God is the original fountain of
the whole, that ever did, or can exist in himself, and in all creatures. It is
all absolutely his own property, as much after communication as before. And all
the creatures to whom it is communicated, are in like manner his own. All the
holiness found in their temper, character and conduct is so in every view; and
Christ, as mediator and savior of the world, is as absolutely his, as any
creature he ever made. " Christ is God's."

NOW, in the name of reason and common sense, what hinders a transfer, if God
pleases? does he meddle with any thing but his own absolute property; to which
no other Being in the universe has any opposite claim, any more that I have now
a right to claim Godhead, as my own? Show me, that JEHOVAH is dealing in
something that is not his absolute property; and I will then, and not till
then, deny that he has a right to transfer guilt and righteousness, at his
pleasure.

BUT if God is such a sovereign as this comes to, where is the safety of
creatures? where is the safety of man? Be patient, kind reader, I will open to
you a glorious foundation of safety, in its proper place. Take only this hint
for the present. All the safety, hope, and happiness of man, and of the whole,
intelligent system, lies in the nature, moral character, eternal decrees, and
sovereign will of JEHOVAH alone. But this is a digression, to be resumed in its
proper place.

IT is expedient here, that I show what it is that ever induced any man, that
has acknowledged divine revelation, to draw a consequence so palpably
erroneous, from a position that is very true. " Guilt and righteousness, say
they, are of a personal nature: Certainly, therefore, God himself has no right
to transfer them"!!! That is to say, God has no more property in the moral
system than I have! JEHOVAH has no more right to give law to his creatures,
than any one man has to another. The MOST HIGH has no right to covenant for his
creatures, his own absolute property; though I have a good right to covenant
for my children in many things, and effectually bind them to abide by what I
have done.

IT is true, a man has ho right to covenant for his own children, in matters of
a moral nature, matters of guilt and righteousness. What is the reason that he
may not do this, as well as in pecuniary matters? It is only because God has
given him his limits. Man is an absolute proprietor of nothing. He has a
limited property, within certain bounds, and that under divine regulation; and
thus far he may plead the general warrant of disposal, " may I not do what I
will with my own?" Beyond this he may not presume. The same may be said of the
highest angel; but not of God. He is wholly without limitation, with regard to
his own absolute property, in all things moral, as well as all things natural.
And in regard to righteousness and guilt, they are in all reason, and by every
dictate of revelation, as absolutely, and justly at his disposal, as a sparrow,
or a single hair of your head.

IF any should here say, This makes God a guilty being, and his nature like the
nature of sin. The cavil would be worthy of no other answer than this; If you
own a very wicked servant, whose temper and conduct is hateful to you every
day; you are certainly as wicked as he.

WE now conclude, that God may according to reason and common sense, transfer
and impute guilt and righteousness. His word declares abundantly that he has
this right, and that he has exercised it, to the most benevolent and glorious
purpose. This is the grand distinguishing doctrine of divine revelation, which
Paul considered as comprehending the whole. This, with its glorious corrections
and consequences, claimed his whole attention. "For I determined not to know
any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified." "God forbid that I
should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified unto me and I unto the world." "God has laid upon him the iniquity
of us all." "He was wounded for our iniquities, he was bruised for our
transgressions, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes
we are healed." "Christ our passover is sacrificed for us." "He who knew no sin
was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him."
"Thou shall make his soul an offering for sin."

REASON does most fully warrant or support a salvation by a proper vicar, by
substitution, transfer, imputation of guilt and righteousness. Not a single
reason can be offered against it, but what will lie, even with greater apparent
force, against your right of transferring one shilling for a supper; or
redeeming your own brother out of prison, by the vicarious transfer of one
pound. Reason, I say, tells us in the clearest, possible manner, that God may
so redeem man, if he pleases. But we are wholly indebted to divine revelation,
to know that he has so done. If he has not there told us so; it is utterly
beyond all the power of language ever to communicate that idea. Give up this
doctrine, and we may still reckon the bible among good books, and even call it
the best on the whole. Yet there will be nothing left, to distinguish it from
the works of Plato, Cicero, Seneca, etc. otherwise than as any one good writer
may somewhat excel another. If all mankind would abuse all words as they do
some terms, who deny that the salvation of sinners is founded on a proper
substitution; all use and benefit of language would be forever at an end.

THE reason why any run so wild in this matter, is, because they have not a
true knowledge of JEHOVAH. They reason about "the possessor of heaven and
earth," who is under no limitation, "and who works all things according to
the counsel of his own will;" just as they would about the conduct of
creatures, who have no absolute property, and are capable of none.

HERE, many have found fault with that most clear doctrine of divine
revelation, that God constituted Adam a foederal head for all his race; in
language like this. "I was not present;" "I knew nothing about it;" "I did not
agree to it;" therefore it is unjust that I should be holden by it." Unthinking
man! Do you not so far as you have property, make bargains and covenants to
bind your heirs and successors, and those unborn too? Will you not hold fast a
privilege acquired in a covenant way, by your great grandfather, or any
predecessor at the distance of many generations, and descending to you by right
of heirship? What if your neighbor should come and claim your farm, and say,
this was my grandfather's; and he sold it; and I was not present. I never gave
my consent; and I will not be holden by what he did. I will have the farm.
Would you not tell him that his predecessor did nothing but what he had a right
to do; and bid defiance to his claim?

BUT God has a better right to the disposal of all things, moral and natural,
than ever any man had to that of his land. Besides, he covenanted only for his
own children, his own offspring. In this view, all mankind stand in a much
nearer relation to the common Parent of all, than ever any child did to an
earthly parent. And we can no more dissolve this relation by all our sins, than
the wickedness of your son, can make him cease to be your son. Moreover, the
covenant God made with Adam, was infinitely better than we could have made for
ourselves, had we been present; as will abundantly appear in the sequel.
However, God had full right to make it, and confirm it, and that on both sides
too, upon the ground of absolute and universal property.

WHEN you covenant with your neighbor it is proper for you to say, I will if
you will: I propose, and wait for your consent. Otherwise there can be nothing
binding. You make one part of the covenant, your neighbor the other: for you
are equals. It is not so with you, and that Being, "of whom, and through whom,
and to whom, are all things." He every where makes both parts of the covenant,
and would descend infinitely beneath his right and dignity if he did not. His
language to man is, I will, and you shall; and never leaves it at the election
of man, to comply with his covenant, or refuse with impunity.

BUT, some have imagined that this idea of justification, by a true and proper
atonement, substitution, or ransom, is inconsistent with free justification by
grace, or free salvation by mere mercy, so often spoken of in scripture. This
is so far from being a just remark, that I am bold to affirm, that free grace
and mere mercy abound to sinners in this way, more than could be possible in
any other way. It is all grace, displayed and communicated to sinners, in the
most gracious way. Was it not infinite, sovereign grace and mercy in God that
first moved in this grand affair? in the Father, to give the Son of his love to
suffer and die for sinners, and in the Son to consent, and undertake? Is not
the whole purchase, all of mere, sovereign grace and mercy as it respects
sinners, in all their guilt and enmity against God? "While we were without
strength, in due time, Christ died for the ungodly." "God commends his love,
i. e. displays it to the very best advantage, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us." Hence the apostle argues the certainty of the
application of the salvation thus purchased for sinners, while in their very
worst condition. Because they were even then justified, by the blood of Christ,
before they knew any thing of it; before repentance, or faith, or regeneration,
or any change in their hearts toward God: Justified, I say, by Christ their
surety and Redeemer, in the presence of God, long before they had any knowledge
of it by faith; or any comfort in the great work that the second man had
finished. What can be plainer than the following words? "Much more then, being
now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. For if,
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son; much
more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life." Romans v. 8, etc. Thus the
atonement is so far from any thing inconsistent with free grace and mere mercy,
that God thereby displays and communicates it to the utmost advantage, "
commends his love."

MEN often greatly derogate from the free grace which they bestow, by the
manner in which they communicate it. Your neighbor received from his father, as
good an inheritance as you did from yours; and in both cases, the gift was of
mere parental love, or free grace. Whenever he petitioned his father with
regard to the expected plantation, he was answered with frowns, and kept much
in suspense, for forty years. His father used often to tell him; "Son, I will
have you to know, that I will make you sure of nothing; I will keep you
doubtful, and will do as I please." After forty years, his father, at his
death, left him the estate; but he might rather thank death for the comfort of
his fortune, than his father.

YOUR father gave you just as much, of his free grace likewise; but in a
different mode. When you was twenty two years of age, he called you to him, and
with a paternal complacency in his countenance, addressed you thus. "My son,
you are sensible God has blessed me with a plentiful estate, for which I wish
ever to be thankful. One half of my estate is more than I can use to any
advantage, otherwise than to communicate comfort to others. You, my child, are
in the bloom of youth, and I wish to make you as useful and happy as I can, in
early life, and all your days; I have therefore given and confirmed to you my
house in the next street, and the five hundred acres of land adjoining. The
deed was executed last year; and that you may have the comfort of your estate,
and every encouragement and motive to industry and usefulness, I now give you
the deed, by which I have made the whole sure to you." Then he gave you the
instrument under his hand and seal, well executed: Adding; "paternal affection
is a mighty principle in the human soul; I wish divine Providence may give you
experience of it ere long, in domestic connection." You went immediately into
the possession of your fine estate; and have had great comfort in it these
forty years.

YOUR neighbor is now at last, as wealthy as you are; but he has been in
doleful suspense and anxiety this forty years, often surmizing he should die a
beggar. He has not enjoyed the comforts of life as you have; nor had those
encouragements and motives to industry; nor loved his father half so well as
you have yours. True, at last, when covered with gray hairs, he has received
the same free grace from his father that you have from yours; but in a manner
very different. You had a title, by firm covenant in early life, founded on
mere grace: He was kept at sovereign mercy, in distressing suspense until he
was an old man, and then was made rich by free grace likewise. Now, my reader,
is there not as much grace in the conduct of your father toward you, as your
neighbor has experienced from his father? Was not the manner of communication
as gracious, and much more so? Just so, our heavenly Father not only makes us
rich by mere grace; but in the most gracious manner, giving us all possible
sense of his infinite good will; and all possible comfort in the enjoyment; and
every motive to gratitude and usefulness. And, the exercise of goodness through
his own Son, in foederal capacity* does much enhance and commend this grace

NO person of ingenuity, will cavil at a similitude; because it is not in all
respects a resemblance. None are so. If they illustrate the point aimed at, it
is enough. The above is intended only to illustrate this truth. viz. Much of
mere grace lies in the manner of bestowment.

IN the great affair of our justification; though it is is (...) due from the
Father to the Son, in consideration of the atonement he has made; yet the grace
connected with it, is, in every view, infinite, and displayed in a manner
gracious in the highest degree. It is grace, free, sovereign grace, in the
eternal counsels of heaven: All grace in the decree: Grace in the gift, and in
the undertaking: Infinite grace in all Christ has done and suffered, as it
respects sinners: Sovereign grace in their regeneration, conversion, the gift
of repentance, faith, holiness, consolation, perseverance, eternal glory: All
grace, free grace, sovereign grace, unsearchable riches of grace, from God to
man; though the Son has a claim of righteousness on the Father, and pleads for
the unjust and the ungodly, on the ground of the covenant. From the foundation
to the top stone thereof, all is "brought forth with shouting; crying grace!
Grace! unto it."

IF we attend to the threefold office of our SAVIOR, as Priest, King, and
Prophet; we shall find the final salvation of every human creature made sure in
him.

THAT Christ does sustain these three distinct offices, as our Redeemer, I
suppose, none will deny; since he is expressly designated by each of these
appellations, in sacred scripture, in a great many places; and since kings,
priests, and prophets, as types of Christ, speak of his doings and sufferings
as their own, "They pierced my hands and my feet." "They shall look on me whom
they have pierced, and shall mourn for him." "A priest forever, after the order
of Melchisedec." "Give thy judgments to the King." "A King shall reign in
righteousness." "King of Kings." But I suppose it wholly needless to adduce
proof of this matter, and would only exhibit the demonstration arising from the
character of Christ, as prophet, priest, and king. It is manifest that all
these offices are equal, as to their extent and operation. Christ is just as
far, and as extensively a King over mankind, as he is a Priest and a Prophet;
and as far as he does exercise these offices at all, among the human kind, he
does exercise, and engage to exercise them all unto perfection.

NOW, it is universally allowed that Christ is a Prophet, Priest and King, in
some respect and in some degree, to all mankind; that the world enjoys many
common favors through his atonement, and government of the world; and that all
the light, knowledge and instruction mankind enjoy, is through him as his gift.
But then, the limitarians would make one office of Christ, much less extensive
than another. "His atonement, say they, is abundantly sufficient for all. As a
Priest, he wears an equal aspect to all, presenting his infinite atonement to
every man alike. As a King, he governs and will govern all creatures, by his
almighty power, with uncontrouled effect, according to his own will; either to
make them dutiful subjects, or to punish them as rebels. He will dispose of all
men, and all things with an irresistible arm; saving only, that the moral
dispositions of most of the children of men shall be exempt from his kingly
government, and remain unconquered. He will subdue some things, but not all
things, to himself. He will make some knees to bow, but not every knee. He will
bring down some high thoughts, but not every high thought." Thus they extend
the sacerdotal far beyond the regal office of Christ.

AS to his prophetic office, they restrain and limit that very much indeed.
They allow that he gives common light and knowledge to mankind in general; but
not that saving light which is, by way of distinction, called the true light.
They allow that he is the common light, but not the " true light, that lights
every man that comes into the world." They will make a great distinction, or
limitation, where the inspired Evangelist makes none at all. They will not
allow that "in him was life; and the life was the light of men," without a word
of limitation. John i. 4. But make the three offices of Christ aforementioned,
quite unequal, as to their extent and efficacy.

PAUL represents the offices of Christ as co-extensive. Effectual calling is by
virtue of the prophetic and kingly office of Christ: Justification pertains to
the sacerdotal, or priestly office, by the atonement: The sanctification,
perseverance, and glorification of sinners, result from all the offices of
Christ alike. This apostle tells us that where one of these offices is
exercised, the other two are, in every instance. Romans viii. "Whom he did
predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified:
and whom he justified, them he also glorified. What shall we then say to these
things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us ALL, how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things?" -- "For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." As to the extent of
this love, we are left at no loss, being told that "God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life." If you would know how many shall believe
and be saved, Jesus tells you in the next words: "For God sent not his Son into
the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved.
John iii. 16, l7. Would you know how far the light of Christ. and his prophetic
office to mankind, shall finally extend, see John i. 7. "The same came for a
witness, to bear witness of the light, that all men through him might believe:"
The same is affirmed John xvii. 21. "That the world may believe that thou have
sent me."

I (...) before shown that the eternal decree of JEHOVAH, the firm
predestination of heaven, or the infinitely merciful election of God, as it
respects mankind after death, comprehends all alike.

IT appears that "the head of every man is Christ," 1. Cor. xi. 3. and that in
the covenant of redemption, all mankind were given to the Second Adam, as they
were once included in the, First; that he undertook to redeem them by price, by
power, and by application of the atonement he engaged to make; and which, in
the fullness of time, he did make: That nothing can resist his power as King
eternal, immortal, invisible: That our whole salvation is committed to him, in
every view, and in every part of it, as Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending, the first and the last: That "other foundation can no man lay than that
which is laid, which is Jesus Christ:" That he is of one mind, and who can turn
him? and what his soul desires, that he does: That of him, and through him,
and to him, are all things: That he has placed himself on the mountain of his
holiness and strength, and that in his own time, he will take away the veil of
darkness, and covering of ignorance, that has been spread over all the nations
of the earth; and will show them that death, spiritual and eternal, is
swallowed up in victory; and exhibit the gospel feast of joy and glory to all
the world.

THUS, as on a glorious and holy mountain, does he take his station, and, in
divine majesty and love, proclaim aloud, saying, "In this mountain, shall the
Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on
the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined; and
he will destroy, in this mountain, the face of the covering cast over all
people, and the veil that is spread over all nations. He will swallow up death
in victory; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the
rebuke of his people shall he take away, from off all the earth: for the Lord
has spoken it. And it shall be said in that day, lo, this is our God, we have
waited for him, and he will save us; this is the Lord; we have waited for him;
we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation; for in this mountain shall the
hand of the Lord rest." Isai. xxv. 6, etc. This well agrees with what has been
said of the progressive manifestations of grace and salvation to men. Infinite
wisdom has seen best to keep a veil and a covering over all nations, in a
greater or less degree; and to draw it aside a little, by slow gradations,
until the glorious removal of it, in full display, on the mountain of the Lord.

THE certain salvation of the human kind, may be argued from the doctrine of
repentance, as preached by Christ and his apostles.

ALL will allow that repentance is certainly connected with pardon and
salvation. Now, wherein does this certain connection consist? Does it merit
pardon? No: Does it at all change the eternal, immovable purpose of God? No:
Does repentance save us, as a meritorious good work, or good disposition in the
soul? No: How then is repentance surely connected with pardon and life? As
God's ordinance, and as a fit temper of mind, without which, in the very nature
of things, pardon and heaven itself could be no blessing. This is, indeed, the
true answer.

NOW, who gives repentance to sinners? Who makes this gospel qualification sure
to them, before they go to heaven? Does it depend in the least on themselves?
So far from this, their whole souls oppose it with all their might. Can any
creature give it to another? No: Do sinners ever before they are penitent, do
any thing to render it reasonable that God should give to them repentance
rather than to others? No. Repentance is a free, sovereign gift of God in
Christ, who will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, for his own name's
sake, and for his own praise. And Jesus is exalted to grant this grace, just as
much as the remission of sins, in consequence of it. He gives the former, only
as the necessary channel, or medium by which pardon and salvation can come to
the soul. The gift of this grace is just as much within his commission, as
Mediator and Savior of the world, Savior of all men, as is the bestowment of
pardon and heaven. "Him has God exalted, with his right hand, to be a Prince
and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, (all are so, in union with
Christ* by human nature, and by covenant) and forgiveness of sins." Acts v. 31.

THE prayer of Christ is efficacious. "Him the Father hears always." He has
prayed for the pardon of those that you would exclude, if you exclude any of
the human kind; even Judas, and Pilate, and Herod, and the malicious chief
Priests, and murderous, bloody band of soldiers, and all that mocked and
derided him, on the day when be finished the great work. For all these he
surely poured out an effectual, fervent prayer; "Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do." In this prayer which the Father certainly heard, (as he
does always without a single exception) Jesus comprehended every sinner in the
world; for every sin does crucify the Son of God. By this, and his other
effectual intercessions, he ensured the promised grace, to take hold of their
hearts in his own time. "They shall look on him whom they have pierced and
mourn."

THE gift of repentance as well as of faith, and every other grace, is only
that the sure pardon and salvation may be known* and enjoyed by the soul, in
God's chosen way, and in the only proper, or even possible way. Thus, as
peculiar to the gospel, all men every where are commanded to repent. Acts xvii.
30. "And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now COMMANDS ALL MEN
EVERY WHERE to repent." Repentance is preached for the remission of sins, which
remission was made as certain before as afterward. It was by the atonement of
Christ ascertained, in itself; but by way of repentance it is made sensible to
sinners.

CERTAINLY, repentance, as an exercise in the human soul, does not create its
own object, or lay its own foundation, any more than faith does, or love, or
hope, or joy, or any grace whatever. They all agree in this, that they are all
built on a firm foundation which they had no hand in laying. This foundation of
God stands as sure, when these graces are not in exercise, as when they are,
and before their implantation as after their utmost perfection. The foundation
of God has the seal, not of alterations in creatures, but of his own eternal
decree, and his knowledge of our salvation founded thereon. Let the mind of
man, at present, be in what state it may, "nevertheless the foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his."

WHEN all men are commanded every where to repent, no doubt, saving,
evangelical repentance, is the thing commanded, and this, we know, is the
exercise of a new heart, and implies union with Christ by regeneration, or a
new creation in him. The very command implies, that this is made sure, and all
the benefits connected with it, as what Christ has laid a foundation for. The
doctrine preached is only a piece of good news, founded in truth and certainty,
as all other gospel doctrines are. The doctrine is an object of faith, as all
other gospel doctrines are. It has a reasonable duty connected with it; which
is common to all gospel doctrines.

WHEN the doctrine of repentance is preached for the remission of sins, this
remission is always considered as sure in Christ. Repentance as a fit temper of
mind to receive it and enjoy the benefit, is also engaged by him, who orders
the doctrine to be preached. Christ considers all nations of the earth, and
every human creature as reconciled to God, by his blood, and God to them. What
remains, in the preaching of the gospel, is that they be brought to the
knowledge, sense, and enjoyment of it, that it may have proper influence on
their hearts.

BEFORE Peter thus understood the matter, he had an objection against preaching
the doctrines of faith, repentance, and salvation to the gentiles. He had no
idea they had any right, secured in Christ, to these favors; therefore he had
no news of that kind to tell them. His objection would have been founded in all
the reason in the world, had the position been true, that the gentiles were not
cleansed in Christ, and reconciled to God by him, and God to them. Had this
been the case, Peter ought not to have preached to them the gospel of
repentance and reconciliation. But Christ tells him, that his fundamental
principle in this matter was not true, forbidding him to assert it again; "What
God has cleansed that call not thou common;" i. e. unclean, or unsanctified in
Christ; or unaccepted of God, in him. See the vision of the sheet and its
explanation, Acts x. and xi.

HENCE it appears that all mankind, "even while enemies, are reconciled to God,
by the death of his Son, and much more, being reconciled, shall be saved by his
life:" i. e. because he lives at the Father's right hand, to make effectual
application of his atonement, which he does by sending his Spirit into the
hearts of men, to renew them; and by conveying to them in his own time, the
doctrines of repentance, faith, and every grace and virtue; and making these
doctrines take effect. We are after reconciliation saved by his life, much
more, i. e. most evidently and certainly, as he lives an almighty and faithful
Savior, exalted with God's right hand, a Prince and Savior, to make application
of the benefits of redemption, to give repentance to his redeemed (called his
Israel) and forgiveness of sins.

REGENERATION, repentance, faith, love, hope, joy, every virtue, and every good
work wrought in us, or exercised by us, all agree in this, viz. They are all so
many fit and necessary steps, which the almighty Redeemer takes with human
souls, to acquaint them with his meritorious impetration, give them comfort in
it, and affect them suitably by it in their hearts and lives. There is no
strict propriety in preaching any of these doctrines as gospel, i. e. as news
founded in facts, that ought to be believed; unless all is made true and sure
in Christ before we have any acquaintance with the tidings, or any operation
from them. The whole preaching of the gospel in every article of it, is only
the announcing of immutable truth, not created or altered by our hearing of it.
Which truth it is good for us to know, and has a good effect and consequence.

IN hearing the doctrine of repentance, we learn the nature of it; the good
effect of it in our great comfort and usefulness; the meet fruits of it, which
are all very good; and also that Christ is exalted by God's right hand to give
it to the world, whose sins he died to take away. Thus the pardon comes, to
their conviction and comfort, by the doctrine of repentance for the remission
of sins.

THEY, who would make repentance faith, regeneration, or any other grace, means
necessary to our salvation, say right. But they who make them terms of
distinction in us, to give us a sure title to salvation, put our safety now on
the same footing or ground, on which Adam stood at first, as to the general
nature and reason of it. Adam must have had a good heart and a good life, and
then he would have been safe; yet all would have been of God's grace, or free
gift, as every body will allow: For his whole being was so. Now, say they* we
must have good, (...), (...), holy hearts, in a good degree, all of God's
grace, and then we have a rule to his favor, and not otherwise. We (...) not be
quite so good as Adam must have been; but our safety stands on the same general
ground, and in a good degree too. The degree alters not the nature or ground of
our safety: The general reason is wholly the same. Both stand on personal
qualifications.

BUT the truth is, Adam stood wholly on his personal qualifications: We stand
wholly on those of Christ; and enjoy the comfort and operation of them, by
regeneration, faith, repentance, and every virtue. To suppose otherwise, is, at
best, falling into the neonomian scheme. The retainers of which, say, that the
terms of our acceptance with God, are much lowered since the fall of Adam, the
conditions much mitigated; but that we stand upon personal qualifications, such
as they be, in the gospel demand, as much as Adam did, on the higher
qualifications of the first covenant.

ANY impartial mind, with proper attention, will see, that we fall into the
self same doctrine, as to the general and real nature of it, if we insist on
any kind or degree of qualifications in creatures, as terms of acceptance with
God; or, otherwise than as the work of God's almighty power, and free grace in
us, in order to give us the knowledge of our previous acceptance with God in
Christ alone; and to form and attemper our souls to the enjoyment of life and
eternal salvation, made sure by the covenant of redemption, and the faithful
engagement of the Son of God, and sealed on his cross. If we depart from this
plan of hope, it is indifferent whether we call ourselves papists or
protestants, arminians or calvinists* neonomians, antinomians, new divinity
men* or quakers; inasmuch as we shall all agree in the grand principle, the
cardinal point: viz. That our acceptance with God* and our certain salvation,
does rest on valuable qualification* whereby we are distinguished from other
men. Yet all agreeing in this, even that God by his mere mercy and free grace,
has made the saving distinction. Thus we all, in our hearts, join with him of
old in pleasing devotion; "God I thank thee that I am not as other men." He
acknowledged the free grace of God, as much as any limitarian ever did.

IT is a further symptom that the way of life I am pleading for, is agreeable
to the gospel; that believing in it will certainly make us hate all sin, all
ungodliness. Or to speak with more accurate propriety, where this faith is,
there certainly will be a bitter hatred and aversion to all ungodliness. The
very discovery of God which I am speaking of, that view of the Redeemer, that
exhibition of the divine character, necessarily involves in it a perception and
sense of infinite amiableness, beauty and glory. The infinite loveliness of
God, and salvation by grace through Jesus Christ, are the essential objects of
the faith I maintain. This wholly agrees with the old calvinistic doctrine of
saving faith. No acquaintance with God or divine truth, without a feeling
impression of the divine loveliness on our souls, was ever thought to be saving
faith, by Calvin, Owen, or any eminent promoters of the protestant cause. Their
object of faith is exactly the same which I contend for; and the manner of
communication and operation is the same, as wrought by the power of God,
working by love, and purifying the heart, even as God is pure.

WE do not consider assurance of our salvation to be of the essence of saving
faith; but merely consequential, even as has been usual with protestants. The
faith we contend for, has nothing immediately and directly to do with
ourselves, but with the object of our faith. When this faith is wrought in us,
by the power and grace of God, and proper fruits ensue; thence we argue our own
safe estate by way of consequence, and so make our calling and election sure.
We unite with the orthodox in all ages, in saying, that hatred of all sin is
the fruit of faith; or that saving knowledge and supreme love of God are
through faith.

THE universal extent of Christ's saving power and grace, is further taught us
by metaphors and emblems, which the divine Spirit has made use of in the word.
As that of the dew, the wind, the rain, etc. which are known to be of universal
extent over the whole earth, at such various times and in such manner as God is
pleased to direct. Perhaps no emblem is more significant than that of a sun,
often made use of in the scriptures, as Psalm lxxxiv. 11. "For the Lord God is
a sun and a shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly." Mal. iv. 2. and in other places.

SIMILITUDES do not quadrate in all respects with the things illustrated by
them; but wherein they do, we may argue with safety. Take the similitudes now
referred to, and we shall find universal extent and operation, to be principal
ideas suggested. A comment might be made on each of them, perhaps, with equal
propriety. Omitting the rest, take that of a sun. It very well presents to our
view the Sun of righteousness, the great Redeemer, in the extent, and benign
efficacy of his mediatorial character.

THE sun is an object highly exalted above the world: So is Christ highly
exalted. The sun is the fountain of light to the world: So is Christ the
brightness of his Father's glory and the express image of his person. The
natural sun revives, quickens, gives life to all things in the natural world:
So does Christ with regard to the whole spiritual world. The sun has various
times and seasons of special influence, and does dispense his favors variously
to various parts of the world, at different times, seasons, and periods: So it
is with the Sun of righteousness, in the spiritual world. Under the influence
of the sun in the firmament, there is the vernal and the autumnal season, the
summer and the winter, the darkness and the light, in various degrees, and the
heat and cold in perpetual variation: So it is with the various displays and
dispensations of the great Redeemer, the Sun of righteousness. Something of
this has been taken notice of before in the gradual progression of gospel
light; and in the decrees of God, making many and great distinctions among
mankind in this world, both of an outward and of a spiritual nature, and also
in the world to come, with respect to degrees of exaltation and glory; though
none as to the certainty of future salvation, to the body of Christ, who is the
"head of every man."

THE natural sun is certainly and greatly beneficial to the whole world; though
not to every part in the same manner and degree. The frigid zones seem least of
all to feel the blessings of that glorious luminary; though they have their
day, and a long one, and many other benefits derived from the sun. The torrid
zone is, on the whole, favored far beyond those last mentioned, in many
respects; yet the inhabitants of those climates have not near so many benefits
from the sun as the regions included in the temperate zones. Moreover, each of
those parts of the earth, is more blessed with the benign influences of the sun
at one time than at another; and all of them more in the day time than in the
night; more in the serene and clear day than in the dark and gloomy day. Many
other remarks of this kind, will naturally occur to the mind of the reader.

IT is to be observed, in general, that there is no season of the year, no
period of time, no hour in the stormy day, or midnight darkness, in which any
part of the world is left wholly without any benefit, or even considerable
benefit from the sun. Even in dead of winter, the sun is a great blessing to
men: So even at the darkest or coldest midnight, it is neither so dark nor so
cold as it would be if there were no sun. When any particular climate suffers
most in the absence of the sun, yet the inhabitants of that particular climate,
have such a connection with the world in general, and with those parts of the
world where, at the same time, the influence of the sun is most replete with
blessings, that they receive great benefit, though in a mediate and direct way.
Each part of the world has at some times, the immediate and direct beams of the
sun; at other times his indirect and reflected influence, by the moon and
stars. And, even when these appear not, still many and great benefits are
derived to them; without which they would be far more miserable than they ever
yet were, in their most torpid or benighted circumstances. They always have
some " precious things brought forth by the sun." Just so with regard to the
"true light which enlighteneth every man that comes into the world." The Lord
is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works. All the human
kind are at all times much the better for Christ. He has always a desire to
the work of his hands.

THE covenant people of God, under every dispensation, may be compared to those
climates and regions most peculiarly under the blessings of the natural sun.
Different dispensations among them compare with different seasons of the year.
Special providence, propitious or adverse, are like the interchange of calm
sunshine and angry storms. The first openings of divine revelation are similar
to the first streaks of dawning day: Increasing light is like the gray of the
morning. The jewish dispensation was, at first, like the horizontal beams of
the rising sun. As light was added, under that dispensation, the sun advanced
toward the meridian. Christ and the inspired apostles, with the light at that
time poured in upon the world, may compare with the sun in his strength. "His
countenance was as the sun shines in his strength." "I am come a light into
the world." And "ye are the light of the world." There is much in sacred writ
to support this analogy.

AS it is demonstrated concerning the sun in the firmament, that his influence
is more intense some time after the meridian is past, than before; so the
blessings of the great Redeemer have been increasing, since he was on earth in
the form of man, since "he ascended up on high, led captivity captive, and
received gifts for men; yea for the REBELLIOUS also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them." Psalm lxviii. 18.

EVERY part of the pagan world, all nations of the earth unacquainted with
divine revelation directly or immediately, have indirectly something valuable
of the same light and knowledge, in various degrees and measures, by connection
with the people of God, more or less, by tradition, communication, etc. Even as
every part of the earth, has always, both in winter and summer, in every season
of the year, by day and by night, some benefit more or less from the sun: if
not by his direct beams, yet by the reflected or refracted. There are no people
in the world, but what have some religion. Yet probably there never would have
been any in the world, had there been no revelation from God. Yea, perhaps, the
existence of a God would never have been thought of, had he made no sort of
revelation more than in the works of nature and providence. It has been the
opinion of some of the greatest of men, that the first intimation of a Supreme
Being, was owing to divine revelation: Although, when the hint was thus given,
the nations of the earth, with this leading thought, could demonstrate his
existence from the works of nature. However this may be, there is no nation on
earth, which is not enlightened by Christ, in some degree or other, by his
word, spirit and providence, in such manner as infinite wisdom and goodness
has seen best. In this sense is the apostle to be understood, when he says,
"the gospel was preached to every creature under heaven." For this never had
been done by express revelation, or direct communication of the knowledge of
Christ.

ALL mankind have some religion, which came to them through Christ; though many
have never heard of his name. All people know the truth, in some degree. All
are orthodox in some points, and right in some measure. God manifests himself,
and gives knowledge and instruction of all kinds, to the inhabitants of this
world, and indeed to all intelligent creatures, only in and through Christ. All
common sense, all extraordinary endowments of mind, all science and learning,
all new inventions of every kind, all acquaintance with moral and spiritual
things, are by Christ. Hence he is called the word of God; because as men
convey knowledge and instruction by their words, so does God by the Mediator.

WHEN man fell, he was then immediately in total darkness, as to any
impressions on his mind, or mental exercises that might profit him. The
mediation of Christ began that very moment. The guilty pair were immediately
put in better circumstances, by the Son of God, than otherwise they would have
been. And it is the general opinion of divines, I think, with good reason, that
they were soon regenerated and brought back to the saving knowledge of God, in
a way of special illumination, repentance, and faith. There was, however, a
blessed degree of the power and influence of the Mediator on their minds,
immediately after their fall; and there ever has been on the minds and
dispositions of all their children. None have ever been nearly so bad, as if
there had been no Mediator. Common grace, as we term it, having always been an
unspeakable favor to all the fallen race. And this is as truly and really by
and through Christ, as eternal salvation is.

THE influence of the Second Adam, the Lord from heaven, on the hearts of men,
has always been sovereign, and very various; as much so as the light and
influence of the sun on the earth has been in the various parts of it, and in
the various seasons of the year: Yet all are much the better for the Sun of
righteousness. It is a universal proposition and every where true, that "the
people that walked in darkness have seen a great light;" i. e. with a vision
more or less perfect; with some degree of illumination; "and they that dwell in
the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined." So in Isaiah
li. when God speaks of his fixed determination to save sinners, his established
purpose and judgment in that matter, he says,"I will make my judgment to rest
for a light to the people, my righteousness is near* my salvation is gone
forth, and mine arms shall judge the people. The isles shall wait upon me, and
on mine arms shall they trust." "My salvation shall be forever: and my
righteousness shall not be abolished." "My righteousness shall be forever, and
my salvation from generation to generation."

THE MOST HIGH speaks of the light of Christ, as a growing and spreading light,
until, in the end, all the world shall behold his glorious beams, and feel his
saving power. Isaiah lx. "Arise shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon thee." "And the gentiles shall come to thy light, and
kings to the brightness of thy rising." "The abundance of the sea shall be
converted unto thee; the forces of the gentiles shall come unto thee." "Who are
these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows? Surely the isles
shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from
far." And it is observable, as God is speaking of his covenant mercies in
Christ to the ends of the earth, it is subjoined toward the close of the
chapter, "Thy SUN shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw
itself: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy
mourning shall be ended." And to the same purpose it is said, "The earth shall
be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea."

IN all this provision, and diffusion (...) saving light and grace to men, God
is as free and sovereign as in creating the sun in the firmament, and in
disposing of all his benefits. And as "he makes his sun to rise on the evil
and on the good," so likewise has he no regard to any distinction seen in the
human kind, in the bestowment of saving mercy. Many differences is he pleased
to make in this world, and that as becomes his holy sovereignty; but none,
none at all, as to the final extent of salvation, or the efficacy of the Sun of
righteousness.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE TOTAL DEPRAVITY OF HUMAN NATURE* is so plain a scripture
doctrine, that we cannot deny it, without rejecting the whole authority of
divine revelation.

THE doctrine is this: That the whole human nature, included in the first man,
was, by the fall, left totally destitute of any moral or spiritual good; and
that fallen man became as bad in a moral view, as fallen angels, at their first
apostasy, according to their inferior natural capacity.

THE angels who had fallen sometime before man, had increased their wickedness,
by the exercises of it; and man was in the like sure way to increase his, and
by the same cause. Every power, every faculty of the soul, was left without
any, the least degree of moral good; all dreadfully polluted; "every
imagination of the thought of man's heart was evil only, and that continually."
The depravity was total. And there was nothing left in the soul of man, of a
moral kind, but enmity against God. I should here take up the demonstration of
this at large, were it not so fully done already, by the most able divines, in
a way of the plainest scripture reasoning.

I HAVE said, and I here repeat it, the mediation of Christ, in favor of all
human nature, began the moment after the fall. In Adam and Eve was all human
nature included* or, in Adam alone: For the woman was from him. Christ, by his
merciful energy, began immediately to withstand the force of man's depravity,
and has done so ever since, in a greater or less degree, in all human nature,
in every child of Adam. Otherwise, mankind would all be as bad as the devils,
according to their measure of being; but we know they are not. The Mediator was
a sovereign in the measure of good influence he granted at first to the fallen
pair, and in all additional measures of grace of what kind soever; and is so
still, and always will be, as it highly becomes his character always, and in
every thing, to keep up a view of his holy sovereignty. At what time he
regenerated the souls of our first parents, we cannot say, or what measures of
grace he was pleased to give them while they lived.

HE now gives unto some, much more of his kind influence from their infancy,
than others; and to some increasing favors of this kind, all their days. Some
have less and less of it all their days, and so grow worse and worse. But none,
in this life, are ever found without some degree of grace or favor from the
Mediator; such as preventing goodness, restraining grace, some checks of
conscience, some humanity and kindness to their fellow men. Be it granted that
all this is from merely selfish motives, and destitute of all moral good, and
that there is sin worthy of damnation, in regard to deficiency, in all their
honor and honesty, in all their industry and the public good they do* and in
all the benefits they communicate. Grant all this, which indeed is true; yet
there is much of the grace of the Mediator in hindering their being and doing
worse. Christ, by his providence and spirit, mercifully and powerfully resists
the awful force of their depravity, at all times, even though he has not yet
renewed them in a saving manner.

TO illustrate the above remarks. God says to Abimelech, "I withheld thee from
sinning against me." Though he was guilty of great sin in all he did, even in
dismissing the wife of the patriarch, not doing even that in faith and from a
principle of friendship to God; yet a blessed degree of God's grace was granted
him. God in his providence, and, it should seem, by some special influence on
his mind and inclinations, kept him from a great sin, There never was any man
on earth left to the whole force of his natural depravity: No, not Cain, or
Ahab, or Jezebel, or Judas himself. If otherwise, Cain would have killed his
parents as well as his brother; Ahab would have murdered many besides Naboth,
thousands more than ever he did. Jezebel's whoredoms and witchcrafts were many;
but they would have been many more, had not the Mediator's grace resisted. And,
were it not for this grace, Judas would have been a much greater thief and
murderer than he was. It was this that made him repent, and bear his last
testimony in favor of the Redeemer. And even this good almighty government of
Christ so ordered, that he hanged himself, before he had further added to his
wickedness; though this was done by the instrumentality of satan, as the
immediate agent.

THE reader may now want I should show, if I can, that Judas did not go to an
eternal hell. I will take notice of this, in its proper place, and so of every
thing else that he may think of, as he goes along* as impatient to have at that
moment discussed.

BUT, not to digress further, I would add concerning the grace which the
Mediator afforded even Judas, in his highest pitch of wickedness. Had it not
been for the gracious, resisting power of Christ, he would have boasted of his
treason; strengthened his malice; been foremost, with his own hands, in nailing
Jesus to the cross; been the loudest to mock and deride his dying agonies; and
then gone on to murder all the disciples of Christ: And where would he have
made a stand? Surely not until he had hanged himself, which he would have done
at last. The same may be said or the most horrid monsters of wickedness that
ever have been in the world; Herod, Nero, Alexander, Richard IIId. of Britain,
Beadle, Benedict Arnold, etc. Not one of these, or any other on earth, were
ever, in any measure, so horribly wicked as they would have been, had all
restraints been taken off. And all the restraints that ever were kept upon the
wicked, are by the grace and power of the Mediator, and the purchase of his
blood. The mercy, power, pity* and grace of the Redeemer is great and
wonderful, even where souls are not renewed. "The Lord is good unto all; and
his tender mercies are over all his works."

I READILY grant there is a difference in kind, a specific difference between
common, and saving grace; or that grace which the renewed have, and that which
is common to men. But in these particulars they do indeed agree; both are free:
Both are good, and valuable in their nature: Both from God only through Christ:
Both wholly unmerited by sinners: Both bestowed on sinners who have equal
dependence on God: Both are the fruit of the Mediator's undertaking for a
guilty world, bestowed in God's own time and manner. So that the great
excellency of one above the other, does not, in the least, militate against the
present argument, to prove a real connection of the Messiah in a foederal way
with all mankind; but does fully confirm this doctrine, even as fully as if
there was no specific difference between them.

THERE are innumerable good things of a nature specifically different, that are
equally the gift and grace of the Mediator, as wisdom and wealth; health and a
good name; all the five senses: All these are good, and all alike from the Son
of God, as Creator and Governor of the world. Man could have enjoyed no good at
all, had not a Mediator interposed; but the curse* in its most literal,
plainest meaning* would have been executed. God was able to make Adam and Eve
understand what he said to them. They knew what was meant by the word day; and
God was able to make them understand what was meant by the word die, or death.
Otherwise he did, in effect, say nothing to them. If he did not make them
understand him, there was no threatening at all, as to them, in what he said.
They knew the day meant twenty-four hours, or a diurnal, apparent revolution of
the sun. God made them to understand, that to die, signified, with respect to
the body, a total cessation of all vital functions, all sensibility; and, with
respect to the soul, the total loss of his moral image. and his favor forever
more, with the miseries connected therewith, and the eternal pains due to the
transgression of his holy and good law.

WHEN they had sinned, they really expected that, within that very day, as now
described, their bodies would so die; and that, as they found their souls
deprived of the moral image of God, they would forever remain so, with all the
anguish and sorrow, pain and distress, contained in the malediction, to all
eternity; even a duration absolutely interminable. This appeared in their
fearful conduct, when "they heard the voice of the Lord God, walking in the
garden in the cool of the day," i. e. in the latter part of that very day on
which they rebelled.

No doubt, they thought he was come to execute the sentence upon them, just as
he had spoken* and as they plainly understood. And they knew that this was just
and righteous. But, to their great and joyful surprise, they found it quite
otherwise. A dark intimation was given them, in an indirect manner, of the
ground God proceeded upon, to avoid the violation of his honor and truth, viz.
a substitute, a vicar, an atonement, one in their place and stead, the seed of
the (...). The Mediator began to officiate that moment for all the human kind.
They were all present, all in the first pair. And he has constantly officiated
for all the human kind ever since, and will until the curse is wholly wiped
away. Sin reigned unto death, even then immediately upon the fall; and grace
began its operation on the same day, and shall reign with an overcoming,
prevailing triumph, to the end of the world, and to all eternity. "That as sin
has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness, unto
eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord." Romans v. 21.

AT what time our first parents were renewed, is immaterial to the present
argument; but it is certain the Messiah on that very day, operated, in a
blessed and merciful degree. He spared their lives. They did not die an
immediate and remediless death, as they deserved, and expected from God's own
mouth. On that day, they were graciously pointed to an atonement. The great
high Friest exhibited an oblation before their eyes; the import of which was,
that one of their seed should be divinely qualified for a full atonement, and
his death should stand for theirs. Then he took the skins of those beasts which
were slain, and clothed them. Which denoted that they were accepted, not in
their own fig leaves, a garment of their own preparing, their own vile
character; but in the character of the future Messiah, the clothing or
garments of his all perfect righteousness. Much grace and mercy was granted
them on that very day; and more added, as a gracious Sovereign saw proper. So
it is with all their poor, lost children. They have always much mercy and grace
from Christ; and he goes on to the consummation of it as a gracious Sovereign.

ALL this is only in a gospel way; and so "the gospel was preached to every
creature under heaven," even from the fall of man. i. e. Gospel grace was
always manifested, or held forth, to all human creatures, in some degree or
other. And where Christ begins a good work, as Mediator, he will perfect it, in
his own way and time. It will issue in perfection at the great day. "Being
confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in you, will
perform it until the day of Jesus Christ." Phil. i. 6.

IT is moreover evidential that this is the doctrine of grace and salvation;
because this, and this only, excludes all boasting. Good distinctions are the
only things that men boast of, or at least, what they value as good. If they
come in a way of mere grace, without any hand of theirs in them, they always
feel more pride in them, than if they came by their own good efforts. How proud
are mankind of exquisite beauty; noble birth; a grand estate descended down
from an ancient and dignified family? Every body knows that good things of this
nature are all of mere favor or grace, pure gifts of God, in the way of nature
and providence.

SAY of a man, that he is descended of the most honorable family in the nation;
that he has naturally the greatest powers of mind of any man in it; that he
carries the greatest majesty, dignity and beauty in his countenance, and in all
his gestures, together with the most unaffected, winning behavior; that in
vigor and activity, he exceeds all: Add that he was made so, he was born with
all this greatness and excellence in his very nature; and is indeed the
completest work of God to be found within a thousand miles. You can say nothing
that will take hold of the human heart, to make a man feel prouder; though you
have not said one word, but what is an expression of free, sovereign grace, as
the man himself will acknowledge. Indeed, he is much the prouder, on this very
consideration, that so great a Being as GOD himself, has taken such peculiar
notice of him, and singled him out as a special favorite.

LET another man hear it said of him, that he was in every view mean and
contemptible by nature; despicable in soul and body throughout; of a scandalous
family from generation to generation; but he has taken so much pains to become
something, that he is really now, a man that ought to be respected, indeed a
very worthy man. He will hardly thank you for the compliment; though you
attribute the whole of his virtue and worth to himself.

VERY great distinction from others, in honor, and happiness, is what men most
pride themselves in; and if this be owing to the peculiar notice of some great
personage, it really adds to their gratification. Men are naturally proud of
being peculiar favorites of the great. Mr. POPE, the celebrated poet, was a man
more free from vanity, than most men; but he betrayed much on an occasion, and
at a time when it was least to be expected. In writing his last will, when his
thoughts were full of approaching death and another world, his pride is
apparently moved by a matter of free, sovereign grace, a peculiar mark of
distinction from a king. In the bequest of a valuable ring, which might have
been quite as well described without telling how he came by it, he says, " the
ring which the king of Sardinia gave me." All the poets used to speak in like
manner, and they expressed human nature. If they had received only a pipe, or
any other small matter of a renowned poet, or any man of great note, as a free
gift; they would be sure to take notice of the manner in which it came to them,
valuing themselves on the mere gracious distinction of a renowned man. Such is
human nature.

TELL a man that he is bad, how ready is he to keep himself in countenance, by
enumerating many that do as he does! If he thought himself distinguished from
most others in wickedness, he would be far more ashamed. Whether it respects
pride or shame, peculiar distinction is the grand thing; and if that
distinction come in a sovereign way, from a great (...) it is not the (...) the
more flattering. To be mean, despicable, and contemptible by birth and nature,
or to be esteemed so, mortifies human pride, more than to be so in any other
way. Hence men are more mortified to be called fools, than knaves or cunning
rogues. It is indeed, distinction from others in a way of excellence, real or
supposed, that is in every case, a strong temptation to pride, in whatever way
that distinction is made.

THE reader may then say, that there will be this temptation to pride among the
saints in heaven, to all eternity: For there will be in heaven, great and
everlasting distinctions of free grace. But this objection will vanish in a
moment, when you consider that all fuel for pride to kindle, will be forever
taken away in that world; as no corruption at all will be admitted there; no
moral capacity of pride.

YOU will then say, that from this view of things, eminent advances in grace
and favor in this life are strong incentives of pride, in the most exalted
saints on earth. They are so. They always were, and always will be, so long as
any moral depravity remains, or any principle of pride in their hearts. Paul
found it so when God, of his free grace, set him at a great distance from
others, by special discoveries and divine raptures. 2 Cor. xii. Saints in
heaven, will find the same thing operating in a way of the deepest humility,
which now takes hold of their corrupt part, as an incentive to pride and self
exaltation. On earth, spiritual pride has always been a very dangerous and
troublesome enemy to the comfort of eminent saints, indeed to all good people.

IF you enquire, how did holy angels find pride originating or moving in them*
I answer; this is a question that never was solved, nor ever can be, by man. It
is a fact; but wholly incomprehensible by us, as innumerable other facts are.
This, however, may be said, saints in heaven are secured by Christ; the fallen
angels were not.

IN a word, the most exalted saints in heaven, will be as much before others in
humility, as in any other part of their holy seize; and will bow as much
lower before the throne of God, as they are exalted higher. Thus I am
advocating the only rational, gospel doctrine, that will exclude all boasting.
In heaven, it will be confirmed, when they will view the matter of their
justification, the righteousness of Christ, "to all and upon all, without any
difference."

THIS gospel doctrine tends greatly to the promotion of practical holiness and
virtue.

THE bands of love and gratitude ever were, and ever will be, the proper bands
of a man. Fear and terror, never yet had any direct tendency to holiness and a
good life. I mean common, legal fear. For it always carries in it, not only
terror, but even odium of its object. It never attracts the soul to the object
of terror, but quite the reverse. Love, or a sense of goodness, amiableness,
kindness, or benevolence, always attracts and affimilates the soul to its
object. As God has constituted immortal souls and their objects, it cannot be
otherwise. This is not only the clear doctrine of reason and scripture; but
also the doctrine of all called orthodox, since the days of the apostles;
remarkably so, since the reformation from popery.

IT is true, papists and arminians have often told us that the doctrine tends
to licentiousness; and that, if they believed the infinite steadfast, immutable
love of God, and faithfulness of Christ, as we do, in respect to our salvation,
the certain perseverence of believers and the like, they would indulge
themselves in all manner of sinful lusts and pleasures. While their hearts are
unrenewed, and while they believe not this glorious doctrine, they may think as
they say. But did they believe, and feel the power of it, they would know
better, as calvinists have always told them. They would find the cords of such
love very different bands from what they imagine, while in ignorance of God and
the power of his love.

WHAT great things has slavish fear or terror ever done to make men holy? It
will keep them from many open and daring crimes, in the sight of man, it is
true: But at the same time they will be just as guilty in the sight of God, as
if they had no such fear. In their very souls, they will wish and long to
commit them, as much as ever. In this wish, and longing desire of the soul,
lies all the sin, in the sight of God.

PRINCIPLES of fear are managed to good advantage, by the laws and government
of men. And without taking this great and good advantage of a principle of
slavish, unsanctified fear, in man, we could not live in human society. But the
vile, hardened wretch, who is restrained in his overt actions, only by fear of
the whip and the gallows, is as greatly guilty in the sight of God, as if these
fearful restraints had never been upon him. The civil magistrate has much to do
with this principle of fear in man. All human laws make great use of it; and
this is wise, and good for the end proposed. But alas! how little does this
avail as to things invisible and eternal? How little with the habituated
drunkard? How little with the inveterate thief and robber? Take away the fear
of visible, temporal punishment, and does it at all appear that the terrors of
eternal damnation have any influence on their conduct? Although they profess to
believe the doctrine, and allude to it in almost all their conversation, their
mouths being perpetually full of hell and damnation. Verily it is a sense of
the goodness of God that leads to repentance, a true sense of God, as love,
that meliorates the heart, with a divine power on the life and conduct. "If ye
love me keep my commandments." "Walk in love." "The love of Christ constrains
us."

I NEVER yet heard any man pray or preach to any congregation, without building
on principles, which, by just, inevitable consequence, would infer the sure
salvation of all the human kind, at last.

WE all agree in these particulars. We pray for the salvation of all. We, in
the name of Christ, offer salvation to all on the purchase of his blood. In the
name of Christ, we command all to believe. We tell all men that they have a
good warrant to believe: That a sufficient foundation is laid for them all to
believe; and that if they do believe they shall certainly be saved; and that
not at all on the merit of their faith, but the merit of Christ: That their
repentance and faith and whatever good may be in them, does not in the least
alter the foundation, or object of their faith. We tell them that it is the
greatest sin not to believe; that it makes God a liar, as far as they are
able. In the name of Christ, we promise them full pardon and life eternal, when
they repent, and believe, and obey the gospel; and this, not in the least, for
their repentance, faith, and obedience. What then, do we make of all these
graces in man, but only means leading to the enjoyment of an end, not dependent
on these means, but they dependent on that: Not an end which these means do
establish; but established beforehand, as an immutable foundation, on which
alone is built the propriety, use and necessity of all these means?

I HAVE often heard much inconsistency, and contradiction in the prayers and
preaching of good men; but never heard one performing these duties, who did not
adopt many sentiments, which, by just consequence, would infer the salvation of
all mankind, made previously sure in the purpose of God, and the foundation he
has laid in Zion. This is consistent. Otherwise, the salvation of man is
dependent on himself, if any thing can be on a creature. He depends on his
qualifications and exercises of mind, as the foundation of all his hope. What
God has done is just nothing, or worse than nothing to him, without these
distinctions in himself, or before he has them. All God has done gives him no
security. As if one should say, that the will and testament of his father was
not his security for the legacy; but his opening and reading of the will, after
his father's death, was the only thing that secured him. Would you not tell
such an one that he did not speak with propriety; that his whole security was
in the will and testament of his father; and that his opening and reading it
only gave him knowledge of it and comfort in it.

WE usually pray to God, just as Paul directed, and on the same ground which he
has established. We pray for the salvation of all men. This we ought not to do
without a foundation in the word of God. If God has decided the point in his
word, that many shall be damned eternally, in their own persons, we have no
warrant to pray as we do. But the apostle bids us pray for the salvation of all
men, even such wicked kings and magistrates as Nero, and the bloody,
persecuting magistrates in those days, for all the cruel persecutors of the
church, and for every body else, without a single exception; and then gives
this as our warrant, "God will have all men to be saved and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth." He also enjoins it upon us to give thanks for all men,
on the same ground; because "Christ gave himself a ransom for all." At the same
time, he plainly intimates, that the time was not then come to pour in all the
light that God had designed in after ages; that a progression of light would
continue as it had begun, and proceeded thus far; and that the glorious
doctrine would be more fully manifest in due time. Read 1. Tim. ii. 1, -- 6.

THE most literal translation that can possibly be given of those words which I
have more than once alluded to, is this; a testimony for times proper. (...).
In the English bible it stands, " to be testified in due time." However, it is
scaree worth while, in any place, to correct our last English translation of
the bible: For every man that is well skilled in the original languages, who is
also a man of candor, will bear me witness, that there is scarcely a single
sentence in the translation, but what will bear, without marring the true sense
any wise essentially.

IF it is certain, that the word of God; his justice and his glory, do
ascertain the eternal personal damnation of many; we ought to pray for that
awful event, as explicitly as for any thing else. " Thy will be done," ought to
run through all our prayers. But how would it strike the minds of any
congregation in the world, to hear him that leads in prayer, crying mightily to
God, that many, or most of his fellow men, might be the miserable victims of
his eternal vengeance personally, in hell to all eternity. Many men discern
premises well, but do not see the just consequence. We have always seen it a
clear gospel duty, founded on gospel warrant, to pray for the salvation* of all
men, and give thanks for all men, on the foundation laid in Christ. If a great
many have not discerned the consequence of such premises, it is no more than
what happens in many other cases every day.

I AM far enough from being an enthusiast, and believe I was never thought so
by any person, but rather the reverse: However, I think it is good and sound
reasoning, to argue from our own experience, and from what other honest people
affirm to us from their experience. Having had the special care of souls, many
years, and been happy in my charge, I have often conversed with persons under
special awakenings, and great concern about their souls. I have always kept up
the holy law in their view, with all its infinite purity and strictness, and
tremendous terrors to the enemies of God; have always told the distressed that
they could in no wise help themselves, or make any distinction in themselves;
charged them to make no dependence on their prayers, tears, reformations, or
any thing they feel within themselves, but on the sovereign grace of God,
through the atonement of his Son, totally exclusive of every thing else in the
universe; always pointing them to Christ as the end of the law, in the stead of
sinners.

I HAVE found numbers that have been by the Spirit of God, brought to this
sense of the way of salvation, and have rested in it as a safe way. They have
found it attended with evangelical repentance and great comfort. And hence have
invited the vilest of sinners to come to Christ, and trust in him, without one
moment's delay; telling them there was enough in Christ for their salvation,
vile as they now are: that the atonement was sufficient to recommend them to
God in their very worst condition of soul and life; and that they never could
obtain any qualification, within or without, that would move the heart of God
toward them; but that all things on God's part, are ready.

THEY have told me, that they never found themselves so unqualified, as when
their relief and comfort broke in upon them in a way of mere faith; and that
they looked far from themselves, even as far as Mount Calvary, for all their
hope; and that they saw all God had done to relieve their distressed souls, was
done, sure and certain, long before they were born. And that they could make no
foundation of hope in all that God had wrought on their souls, but praise his
glorious name that he has been pleased, in mere, sovereign mercy, to work thus
effectually on them, only in order to lead them to the sense and comfort of
what was immutable truth before, viz. The all sufficiency of Christ for the
chief of sinners. These persons have generally brought forth fruits meet for
repentance, and walked as real christians.

THE observation of my fathers and brethren in the gospel ministry, as many of
them have told me, is the very same in their concerns with souls, with what I
have now mentioned. They have also told me, it is their true experience with
respect to their own souls, and all their comfort; and I am certain it is mine.
It is well known that all pious protestant ministers have taken this very
method in guiding souls to Christ. And all the success they have found, has
been by thus cutting off sinners every way, as much as possible, from every
dependence, but on Christ alone. God has granted his peculiar blessing on this
doctrine, and this way of guiding poor, miserable sinners to a Savior. No
minister of the gospel in this land was ever more blessed of God in his labors,
perhaps, than the renowned bishop Stoddard, of Northampton. Every one that is
acquainted with his character and writings must be sensible that this was his
method.

MANY, no doubt, were brought to know Christ, in that remarkable period, in the
year 1740, and a few succeeding years, notwithstanding the great frailty and
distraction of human nature appeared much in those days. All, so far as I can
learn, who became true followers of Christ, in those times, built firmly on
this very doctrine; that Christ alone is the complete Savior of the chief of
sinners, exclusive of every distinction in themselves, previously moving the
heart of God toward them, or, in any wise, sitting them for mercy; that all
that makes them to differ from the most abandoned of the human race, flows
wholly from a previous source, alike open to all, and built on a foundation as
independent of man, as God was in creating him at first. It is well known that
the most successful preachers in those days, dwelt mainly on these very
doctrines.

THIS doctrine of saving, UNIVERSAL grace, is perfectly consistent with the
most plain and positive declarations of the word of God, that the pains of hell
shall be endless; and that the wicked shall go away into everlasting
punishment, in all the boundless extent of these words, and many others that
convey the same idea of the endless punishment of sinners, and that in the
plainest possible manner of expression.

IN their Surety, Vicar, or Substitute, i. e. in Christ, " the head of every
man," they go away into everlasting punishment, in a true gospel sense. In him
they suffer infinite punishment. i. e. he suffers for them, in their room and
stead. But how so? The divine nature never suffered, and the human nature was
not infinite, nor capable of infinite sufferings; yet by union in person with
infinite Deity, the gospel, the divine constitution does account the atonement
infinite. The obeying, and the suffering human nature was as much united to all
the attributes of Deity, as to any one of them; to Deity in all his infinite
perfections; to the eternity of Deity as much as to his omniscience,
almightiness, or any other attribute. And the sufferings of Christ are eternal
sufferings, just in the same way of reasoning that they are infinite. The same
ineffable, hypostatic union of human and divine natures, which connects
infinity with manhood in one person, does equally unite eternity with the same.
There is the same gospel propriety in calling them eternal sufferings, as
infinite sufferings. It is only by personal union with Deity, that either term
will bear.

THE apostle gives us this idea, as plainly as any other, to lead us to
estimate the atonement complete for the sins of the world, and in the gospel
account* an eternal punishment. He considers the gift of salvation by Christ,
under the idea of a will or testament, that makes the legacy sure; as sure
before the legatee knows any thing about it, or has any comfort in it, as
afterward. And, as in all his writings, he exhibits the atonement complete in
every other view, so he does in the eternity of it, in the divine account; that
none may imagine himself to be exposed to personal punishment in hell to all
eternity, for want of an eternal atonement, any more than for want of an
infinite one. He tells us that a sense of this, will free the conscience from
every bond that might hold the poor sinner under obligation to suffer; and will
also become a spring of holy gratitude and living sacrifice to God. "How much
more shall the blood of Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit, offered
himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the
living God?" Heb. ix. No person of judgment will say that the phrase, through
the eternal Spirit, here signifies, that the eternal Spirit of God supported
Christ in his sufferings: For he was then wholly forsaken in this sense, and
left, in his expiring moments, without any support at all, as much as ever a
victim was, when bound and bleeding on the altar. It was then he cried out, "My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me!"

WE cannot make the atonement sufficient for our redemption in any sense;
unless we consider the human nature infinitely dignified, by personal union
with Deity, with every attribute of Deity, one as much as another. On this very
ground it is, that the merit of the atonement took place, and was efficacious
long before Christ came in the flesh. Yea, from eternity, it was efficacious,
on our behalf, in the mind and decree of God. And it was, from eternity,
regarded in the gracious purpose of the Most High; as he always determined to
save sinners in this way and no other. "Then was I by him, as one brought up
with him; and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him; rejoicing
in the habitable parts of the earth, and my delights were with the sons of
men." Prove. viii.

THE atonement of the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world, was
present in God's view from all eternity; and will be so to all eternity, as
much as when he was actually bleeding on the cross, in all his amazing agonies.
Thus he is "the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world." Or, if you put
the adjective before the substantive, as a late writer does, and as it stands
in the original, the idea is the same; "the slain Lamb from the foundation of
the world."

THUS, at the great and solemn day, characters shall be separated one from
another, as a shepherd divides the sheep from the goats. God will show
infinite approbation to the character of his own Son, the Son of man, as
foederal head in union with his redeemed creatures, placing it at his right
hand; a phrase denoting approbation and honor. And he will manifest infinite
wrath, indignation and vengeance against the real character of man, placing it
at his left hand; which denotes the utmost detestation and abhorrence. The
place of his Son will, on that day, be at his right hand, as it always was, and
always will be, and "where I am," says Jesus, "there shall my servants be." The
character of sinners the real character of all men since the fall, was always
at God's left hand, and always will be God never abhorred man as his creature,
never hated, and never will hate any thing in man, but his bad character. In
Christ, he has no bad character, but one infinitely good. And God will bid all
that sustain it, welcome to all the joys and glories of heaven; even all whose
sins the Lamb of God came to take away.

WHEN the great Judge shall give final sentence, and thus display his wondrous
love to his elect head, and his elect body of human nature, also his tremendous
abhorrence of the character of sinners, it will make all human nature tremble.
But they will rejoice with trembling. Their amazing sense of the holy
indignation of God against sin, will not allay their holy joy, which will be in
God alone, on that day, and to all eternity. They will see their personal
deserts in the eternal sufferings of their Head: For in gospel account they are
so; though in time endured once for all on the cross. They will, I say, then,
and forever-more, see their damnable character and deserts in themselves; and
will go away into everlasting punishment, in this sense. This is the true, and
only sense of the gospel constitution; which is well called a wonderful
mystery, claiming the admiration and astonishment of angels and saints, now and
forever.

TO behold the redeemed surrounded with the most formidable displays of the
wrath of God forever, against their real personal character while in this
world, and with his awful indignation forever, as a burning flame, against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; and to behold the very persons to whom
this real character did personally pertain, made perfectly innocent in a
substituted character, their robes all washed and made white in the blood of
the Lamb, with clean hands and a pure heart, dwelling in this devouring fire,
and inhabiting these everlasting burnings, in displays of righteous and holy
Deity; and yet perfectly blessed, and even the more blessed, for this their
situation; in the midst of all these awful displays, dwelling on high, and
having their place of defense the munition of rocks, bread given them and their
waters sure: This is indeed a wonder of love worthy of the wisdom of God only
wise. Isa. xxxiii.

ALL this glory and terror of divine holiness and justice, we see, and forever
shall see, in the sufferings of the Son of God for sinners. And there is no
more need of the eternal personal damnation of any of the human race further to
display and illustrate the glory of God's justice, and his infinite holy anger
against sin; than there is need of the dim light of a candle, to help us to
behold the beautiful face of the earth in the vernal season, when the sun
shines in the meridian, with all his glorious splendour and in his full
strength. Even to suppose otherwise, is in full opposition to the sole glory of
God and Christ in the atonement. The gospel is, with great propriety, called a
"ministration of righteousness." i. e. righteousness displayed, imparted, and
applied, even as the ministration of healing medicines, imparted and applied
for the recovery of the sick.

IT is, moreover, evidential of the truth of this doctrine of free sovereign
grace, as now illustrated, that there is no possible danger in believing, and
living according to the genuine dictates of it.

IT will certainly have the same influence on the heart and life, which the
common protestant doctrine of grace always had; but only much more powerful in
its blessed operations and effects. It is the self same doctrine, in all points
but this: It extends the same eternal good will of God to all poor sinners of
mankind; which we have been taught, by puritan divines, is confined only to a
part; and it may be to a very small part indeed, agreeably to the more natural
aspect of their doctrine. It differs no more from the doctrine of Calvin, Owen,
and Edwards, and the great body of protestants, than a circle as large as the
the periphery of the earth, differs from a circle of the diameter of one cubit.
Both have all the same properties, and every demonstration may be built on the
one, that may on the other; but only one is much larger than the other.

IN this case, we hold the great distinguishing doctrines of divine revelation
exactly as they have always been taught, by those called orthodox.
Particularly; the first Adam a federal, as well as natural head, for all human
nature: Our fall, guilt and misery in and by him: The kind decrees, and
immutable purposes of the Most High to save sinners: The covenant of redemption
with the second federal head, even Christ, the second man, the Lord from
heaven: The all sufficiency of his atonement, and his obedience unto death, in
the room and stead of sinners: The necessity of regeneration by the almighty
power, and free grace of God: The necessity of repentance, faith, and
sanctification, a holy mind, perseverance to the end, all through Christ, and
by the power of his spirit and grace. Yet, we think the doctrines of divine
love, redeeming love and grace, include a greater number of poor, wretched
sinners, all alike unworthy of mercy; than good people have, in time past
imagined. This is the only point of difference.

I BELIEVE, God will have all men to be saved: That the Lamb of God has taken
away the sin of the world: Died for the sins of the whole world: That as sin
has reigned unto death, much more shall grace reign through righteousness to
eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. I believe all this, in the common,
plain, natural sense of language; and so I do a thousand other plain assertions
in the bible as full and direct to the same purpose as these are. Yet, I have
every motive, even with additional force, to seek the kingdom of God and his
righteousness; to press into the kingdom of God; to make my calling and
election sure; that ever was yet urged from the word of God: And so has every
man in the world.

WE insist on the same qualifications and in the same way; as do they who are
called orthodox. We know that while we believe not with an holy heart, we shall
be damned. We know that except we are born again, we cannot see the kingdom of
God, are condemned already; and that the wrath of God abides on us, unless we
are united to Christ by regeneration and saving faith; and that except we
repent we shall all assuredly perish. We insist on every medium, every
qualification for heaven that ever was insisted on, by any pure gospel
preacher. We have every motive to avoid all the ways of wickedness, and use all
the means of grace and salvation that ever the renowned Calvin had. He believed
that all the elect should infallibly be saved, and no more; so do I. He
believed, God has fixed and established the certain number, from all eternity,
as immutably as his own being; so do I. And let men cavil as much as they
please; there is but just one way to get rid of this doctrine; and that is to
deny divine revelation, and the necessary attributes of God. Calvin believed
that Christ had undertaken to prepare all the elect for heaven, and would most
certainly see the work done, in his own time and way; so do I. He insisted on
the necessity of the means of grace and salvation, and great propriety of them,
and adduced the word of God, and all the reason and nature of things, to
demonstrate that as a truth; which he did beyond all rational contradiction; so
do I. His idea of heaven and hell was the self same as mine, as to the nature
of the happiness and misery of each. I mention Mr. Calvin; because his name and
character are much known. I might unite with him, the great body of christian
teachers since his day.

NOW where is the difference between us, in the doctrine I plead for? This,
indeed gives a greater display, a more astonishing manifestation of the
goodness of the great Father of all, than we have before admitted. The eternal,
rich, free, sovereign love of the immense eternal source of love, breaks forth
to our view, in more copious, and amazing floods. The triumph of grace is more
glorious than heretofore, in our sense of it; and gives our souls a most
surprising, adoring, rapturous shock, enough to make us break forth, "O the
depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable
are his determinations, (...).
and his ways past finding out!" "For of him, and through him, and to him are
all things: to whom be glory forever. Amen."

EVERY judicious reader will see, that the use of means cannot alter the case
as to the salvation of the elect, any more on the common doctrine of
predestination, than on this I plead for; yet there is the greatest propriety
in the use of appointed means. On both principles, the means and the end are
inseparably connected, in the eternal gracious purpose of God.

UNTHINKING, unreasonable men have always been wont to tell those who were
founded on the pure doctrines of free, sovereign grace, and who trusted all to
God and nothing to themselves* and were thence led into pure and holy lives,
lives of prayer, self denial, watchfulness, dying to the world, and all the
vanities and carnal delights of it; that if they themselves had such a belief
of God's character, decrees and dealings with men, they would plunge into all
manner of sinful pleasures, and would gratify every lust, in the highest
degree. However, they who have indeed received this grace of God, have
constantly affirmed that the greater sense they had of the infinite, eternal,
immutable love of God to them, the more they loved him and all his holy laws:
And the greater assurance they had that Christ died for them, the more they
hated and abhorred all their sinfulness of nature and life, which nailed so
dear a Savior to the cross: The more they realized their absolute safety in God
alone, and the certainty of their perseverance to the end, through the promises
grace, and faithfulness of Christ, the more they felt their hearts weaned from
the world: The more Spiritual and heavenly was the frame and temper of their
minds, as they saw more of the vanity of themselves and of all creatures, and
that God was all in all.

THE children of God have always spoken the truth in all this. And we can say
the same, in answer to the same cavils of a blind world at enmity with God, and
ignorant of his nature, which is love. Only we may add, that as we have more
extensive views of the love of God, and the glorious harmony of all his
attributes, in gathering together in one all things in Christ; so, we trust, it
has a more powerful influence on our souls, of the same kind.

IF we really mistake concerning the extent of the merits, and salvation of the
Savior of all men; it is at the farthest remove from a mistake, that affects
the essentials of religion. It is only a wrong conjecture as to the number whom
Christ will save, in one and the same way. There always have been different
opinions among good people in this article. Some have been far more charitable
than others, on this subject.

SOME, at this day, expect a millennium of three hundred and sixty five
thousand years, i. e. a thousand prophetic years; in which long period almost
all on earth shall be holy and happy. I was ever in this sentiment; and am full
in it now. Yet many good people, at the present day and for ages past, have
said that they could find nothing in the word of God, but that the day of
judgment might be in their day; having no expectation at all of such a
latter-day glory. Now, there is an almost infinite difference between the
belief of these two, as to the extent of salvation; yet both are in the same
sure way to heaven, and on the same essential foundation. There is a much
greater difference between those that have faith in a millennium, and those who
have not, as to the number that shall be saved; than there is between the
advocates for the salvation of all men, and the former; at lead as to those
that have already lived on the earth.

SUPPOSE you hear three pious christians discoursing on the doctrines of grace,
and the way of salvation; all in perfect agreement. At the close of the
conversation, each gives his opinion with regard to the number, to be saved.
One says, the way appears to him so exceeding strait, that he believes not more
than one hundred thousand of all the human race, will ever get to heaven.
Another says, he believes there will be more than one hundred thousand saved,
but he is confident not a million. The third, having great faith in a
millennium, and naturally somewhat unhappy in his talent at computation, is
persuaded that there will be more of the human race saved, than there are
single atoms of matter in this whole globe of earth. You would not imagine that
either was in an error, in any thing that concerned his own salvation. From a
good acquaintance with human nature, you would only infer, that the first was
naturally a man of a narrow soul and stingy temper of mind; that the second
was, in these respects, not so unhappy; and that the last was rather
inattentive in his computations; but that they might be all in the same way to
heaven. And, indeed, if a great sense of the free, sovereign grace of God,
leads men into vice and immorality, how comes it to pass, as always appears to
be fact, that they who have the highest sense of this, have ever been men of
the purest lives?

IF I understand the gospel to be glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to
all people, in the common natural sense of language; and another understands
the same words to mean glad tidings to a few people of all sorts, and very sad
tidings to the bulk of mankind, as being a sure occasion of enhancing their
eternal misery in an awful degree: Yet, if I have gospel qualifications to
relish and enjoy heaven, I shall go there; and so will he in the same way. For
we both agree in the necessity of the same work on our souls, without which
there is no salvation for any. I insist on these qualifications, as flowing
from a previous all-sufficient atonement made for all sinners of the human
race, and as necessary to give me sense and enjoyment of the benefit of that
atonement, to which Christ has given me a previous title. He insists on these
qualifications to make out his title for him, instead of taking it solely from
Christ, and as sealed in his blood alone. I believe that, while we were yet
enemies, Christ died for the ungodly, and secured them for life eternal, as a
Priest; and then goes on, as a Prophet and King, to enlighten and subdue them,
and make them know the things freely given them of God. I put the atonement at
the bottom, the death of Christ as the chief corner stone, and build all upon
that. He supposes the sacrifice of Christ not to be the foundation of all our
hope; but when we have got good previous qualifications, then we may make great
advantage of it, and bring it in somewhere in the building, though not at the
bottom of all, Christ the only foundation. Both of us agree in this, that the
greater sense and experience of God's free grace we have, the more we shall
love and serve God; and that the love of God, or God in his character, which is
LOVE, is the only principle that constrains us to love God, and live an holy
life, or that the goodness of God leads to repentance.

THE general aspect of the limitarian principles, is, that a very few, in
comparison with the whole of mankind, shall ever be saved; and, indeed, that
but a very small part, even of those people that enjoy divine revelation, will
escape eternal, personal damnation; and a far less number, in proportion, among
all heathen nations. On this principle, the gospel is by no means glad tidings
of great joy which shall be unto all people, in any common, natural sense of
language: But to people and nations, as such, it is very bad news, doleful
tidings to any nation or people, in a collective view, as they are plainly
addressed in the text, to which I allude.

TAKE, for example, the inhabitants of the United States, as a people. More
than nine tenths of them, the limitarians suppose, are, at the present day,
going to eternal destruction; and that a very great majority of all that ever
lived here, are now in the intolerable flames of an eternal hell, with torments
aggravated more than ten thousand-fold beyond what they would have been, had
they never heard the gospel. How then are the tidings glad tidings to the
people, as such? They are plainly declared as such every where in the voice of
the gospel. Yet upon this plan, the people will be far more miserable than if
they had never heard the gospel. Suppose one out of an hundred is saved, which
is as many as the general aspect of the limitarian doctrine will admit; or, if
you please, suppose ten among a hundred, which is going quite beyond the
charity of the doctrine: You must still allow that all the rest are ten
thousand times more miserable, and will be so to all eternity, than if they had
never heard the gospel. So that the people, as such, and as they are plainly
addressed with good news, GLAD TIDINGS, will be found far more miserable than
if they had never heard these tidings. Thus the gospel becomes glad tidings
only to a very few individuals; but dreadful tidings to any people, or all
people, as such.

A SOVEREIGN prince has a colony consisting of one million subjects. All much
on a level, laboring under the toils and burdens which attend a people, that
eat their bread in the sweat of their face, struggling hard for a comfortable
provision for themselves and families. The common lot in this evil world. The
king sends an herald to assemble them all together, and to address them in the
following words:

"BEHOLD I bring you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all this
people. For it is the immutable decree of your sovereign, that a few of you
shall be delivered from all your toils and labors, and shall be exceedingly
rich and happy all their days, abounding in every possible pleasure and
delight. And that all the rest of you shall be inexpressibly more miserable and
distressed all their days, than ever they have been. Their labors, toils and
vexation shall be increased more than a thousand fold. Your sovereign will mark
the happy few with a distinction, which his own hand and no other can set upon
them; and the multitude, not so marked, shall forever find their woes amazingly
augmented."

WOULD not the colony, the people, be filled with horror at the tidings, and
think the news exceedingly sorrowful? Would it not be much happier for that
colony, as a people, to live as they did before; though many toils and troubles
attended them?

NOW, should, the herald proceed to name the happy few, perhaps one in a
thousand; and the multitude of their brethren should see them rejoicing and
triumphing in the sovereign distinction, by the free grace of their prince;
would they not say that this very joy and triumph was all founded in pride and
selfishness, and a total want of benevolence to the community? And should those
favorites cry out glad tidings! glad tidings! would not the wailing multitude
answer, " To you glad tidings they may be; but not to the people. The colony is
ruined; the people are undone, undone forever!" Andif these few favorites of
their sovereign had that amiable spirit of benevolence, which adorns human
nature, and is one of the glories of the gospel, would they not rather choose to
return to a level with their brethren, and partake with them in common, in all
troubles and calamities as before, than to be thus singled out for dignity,
glory, and pleasure, when necessarily connected with such augmented woe and
misery to the people?

THE case now stated, applies to the gospel tidings, on the limitarian plan. A
few, very few that hear them, are made happy. All the rest are much more
dreadfully miserable on account of Christ and the gospel. This is fixed by the
immutable purpose of heaven, with all the means, and every step leading to the
consummation of it.

I HOLD to the doctrine of predestination as fully as any man in the world ever
did, and that in the supra-lapsarian sense, which is the only consistent sense.
The absolute sovereignty of JEHOVAH I maintain in the highest possible
conception of it. But, it will abundantly appear, in its proper place, that
JEHOVAH is not a God whose attributes and sovereign will can admit of such a
predestination as that; such decrees as I have alluded to. God is love,
infinite love, sovereign love; and such love admits of no such limitarian
decrees; and the word of God abhors them, as you shall see in the sequel.

IT is an evidence of the true gospel, that there is no contradiction in it.
Every sentiment in it, is in full concord with the whole.

A SERMON is not made up of contradictory parts, if it be wholly a gospel
sermon. Now, the doctrine I plead for, is the only plan that ever was
exhibited, as consistent with itself. The arminian scheme is full of
inconsistencies. See what the late president Edwards has made of it; and he has
demonstration on his side. Many other great men have opposed it with the same
force. The calvinistic scheme, in the limitarian sense, is every whit as full
of contradiction and absurdity; as has often been objected, with arguments
that admit of no confutation. The same may be said of all the rest that ever
have been advanced in the world, except this alone. But this has not the shadow
of inconsistency with itself. If it be a mere hypothesis, it is a
self-consistent one.

ON this plan, you may hold up to view the true nature and character of God:
That of man in innocence: That of man fallen: The first and second covenant:
Give JEHOVAH his proper place, and man his place: Speak of a work of God on the
souls of sinners, as necessary to their salvation: Show them that without this
work they are damned, condemned already, and the wrath of God abides on them:
Tell them what Christ has engaged, what he has done and suffered, and for
what end; and what he will certainly do: Command all sinners to believe it, on
pain of abiding damnation: Tell them the warrant and ground of their faith*
That they are not commanded to create truth, or in the least alter it, by all
the changes and exercises of their own minds; but that eternal, immutable truth
is ready to their hands, and, by mere faith, they must take hold of it and be
saved: That this is the way, in Christ, sure as Godhead can make it: That
Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, etc. etc.

AS this doctrine relates to practice, you may urge every moral duty, with
infinite force, from motives truly evangelical; holding up the pains of sin,
and the beauties and rewards of holiness, all in most glorious harmony.

THE doctrine we have generally heard from our best preachers, since the
reformation, has been of this tenor, viz. God or has elected to eternal life
a part of mankind, and Christ made an atonement for that part only. And they
have commonly conveyed the idea of a very small part, in proportion to the
whole. Which part are elected to the end, and to all the necessary means and
qualifications; which God will infallibly bestow upon them in his own way and
time. All the rest of mankind shall as certainly perish, and that justly, the
fault being all their own. Now we invite, and command every one to believe in
Christ to salvation, every one alike: For in him there is a fullness for all. A
thousand arguments have been advanced to prove there is no inconsistency, no
kind of equivocation, or illusion in this way of preaching; but that it is the
pure simplicity of the gospel: While it has always been clear demonstration,
on the other hand, that there is great duplicity and illusion in it. Yet this
preaching is exactly right, in every point but this one; the extent of
predestination. Only extend it to all the human kind. Only define the decree in
the words of the apostle; "God will have all men to be saved." "As sin has
reigned unto death, so shall grace reign through righteousness, unto eternal
life, by Jesus Christ our Lord." Many other express declarations of divine
revelation, of the same import, are as simple and express to the same purpose,
as any language will admit. I say, thus explain the decrees of God; and all
their preaching would be as free from inconsistency as any mathematical
demonstration.

ONLY begin thus, in the plain, simple sense of the words; " Christ came that
all men through him might be saved." Tell people that this is the eternal fixed
predestination of the Most High; and that all means and qualifications are
connected with it, in the same decree, and made as sure as the end, to take
place in his own way and time; yet so as to have the free will and actions of
his elect, concerned in them, as moral agents and causes by counsel; which is
the only possible way of connecting the intermediate steps with the end. Tell
your audience so, I say, and then in all the rest, you may preach law and
gospel just as Calvin or Owen did, or any other calvinistic divine. Then you
may indeed proclaim Glad tidings of great joy to ALL PEOPLE; and may urge every
gospel doctrine, duty and motive, just as we have been wont to hear, without
the shadow of contradiction. Then you may call upon all poor, miserable sinners
as Paul did. He told them all, that Christ had began his operation in their
souls, as Mediator, and would perfect the whole work unto eternal life; dealing
with moral agents as such, in which the will and activity should have their
proper exercise. "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. For it
is God who works in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure." On
this plan the gospel is plain and clear: And the usual preaching of it, is
consistent with itself and with common sense.

IF any say here, that the use of means is of no consideration, if the end is
fixed and certain; they speak in direct opposition to this idea of the decrees
of God, and the whole scripture account of them, which ever unites the means
and end, in one and the same decree; and against all the common sense and
common practice of mankind. Every one that owns the being of God, allows that
he certainly knew every thing that ever did or shall take place; and that every
future event shall certainly be just as God always knew it would be. But this
never hinders their using means, in common life. Nothing can be more certain,
than that which God always knew would be, is certain. Whatever distinction
there is between the foreknowledge and decrees of God; every one sees there can
be none in the object, the infallible certainty of the event. Yet there is full
room left for all moral agency to operate, with all the liberty that any
creature can possibly be made capable of.

IF any say, there can be no moral agency at all in creatures; this is a flat
contradiction to all the common sense and feeling of man. We all know our
perfect freedom of will and action; not by any reasoning or demonstration: For
it is too plain to admit of any. It is a prime, immediate perception of soul,
which we always have, and constantly feel, and cannot possibly divest ourselves
of: Even as I feel heat or cold; or perceive that paper is white, and ink
black; or that whatever is, is; or that a thing cannot exist and exist at the
same time. So that I have ever imagined that such a senseless cavil is worthy
of no notice at all.

BUT to return. The gospel, on the ground I maintain, is all consistent with
itself, with common sense and reason, and with universal experience, and with
the best reasoning and practice of all mankind in every other matter. We always
unite the proper means with the end, in all other cases; and there is no other
way for moral agents to be treated, as such, and to act in proper character.
Creatures are creatures, although God is God.

THERE is a sentiment, or impression, on the hearts of all men, concerning the
dead, that universally favors the argument here advanced.

WHEN the vilest sinner in the world is taken out of it, by the most sudden
death, we dare not say, and it would wound our hearts to hear any one say, "
that person is certainly gone to an eternal hell, to suffer there in person
forever." Who dare say of the most abandoned sailor, having his head taken off
with a cannon ball, with an horrid oath in his mouth, " I am certain that man
shall burn forever in hell?" Yet we might say so, with great confidence, on the
principle I oppose. Had you, my reader, a son of this character, thus taken out
of the world, would you be so deeply affected, in regard to his eternal doom,
as if you certainly knew he was in hell? Or had you a son very dear to you,
even as Absalom was to his father, and of a character to the last moment no
better, taken out of the world by the hand of justice; would not the
circumstances of his death strike your mind deeper, than any certain knowledge
you have of his future state? You may say the future state of men is invisible,
and we have no business with it. Be it so. Yet, would it be in the power of any
man to avoid the most dreadful anguish of soul, in such a case but from a
latent hope in his heart, arising from the power and mercy of God? Would not
any man in the world, feel more anguish of heart to see his son hanged as a
criminal, than what he ever can feel with respect to his future state, separate
from the circumstances of his death? If we have no business with the invisible
world in such a case, yet this does not alter the necessary and unavoidable
feelings of human nature.

I AM persuaded that any man, who has buried a dear child, in a case which is
thought the most hopeless of all, will find, if he is critical to observe the
feelings of his own heart, some latent assuaging of his grief, in thinking of
the unsearchable riches of Christ, and the almighty power and infinite mercy of
God. Have we not often observed much of this nature, in mourning for the dead,
even in cases that would admit of nothing but absolute desperation, on the
limitarian plan? Despair, in this case, never takes place. There is something
in the soul of man that will not admit of it. What but the hand of Deity has
fixed in the hearts of all mankind this latent hope, in every death?

ALL the pungent pangs of David for the death of Absalom, may be fully
accounted for, on the principles of natural affection, without any
consideration of his future state. Any tender parent would feel as he did, in
the like case, without looking into futurity.

IT is exceedingly strange, on the limitarian plan, that the scriptures have
never asserted that any particular person went to an eternal hell.

THE state of no one, perhaps, is more hopeless than that of Judas, who
betrayed Christ the Savior of all men; yet not a word is said of him but what
may consist with his salvation after death. He is called the son of perdition;
and it is said that he went to his own place. All this is but just what we may
say of every sinner, in kind, though of Judas in a very aggravated degree.
Every man is a son of perdition until new born, damned until regenerated. Judas
was a notable son of perdition, signally so, a most miserable, lost, condemned
sinner, until his death; in perdition until that moment, even until soul and
body were separated; until then a son of perdition in an extraordinary degree.
Paul was so in a woeful measure. until he died, " a wretched man," with a " body
of death." Every man is so, in a sad degree, until the union of soul and body,
which first contaminated the soul, is dissolved; some in a greater, and some in
a less degree, according as the Head of every man, i. e. the Mediator, has been
pleased to advance, or restrain his prophetic and kingly power and grace upon
the soul.

JUDAS went to his own place, to a very horrible and ignominious death, in
awful anguish and utter despair, in his own mind. His soul went, perhaps, to
the lowest seat provided for the elect human race, by him who died for the sins
of the whole world; to the lowest place among all given to Christ. Judas being
one given to Christ, as is expressly declared. Judas was lost in an awful
manner; he was lost as an apostle of Christ; lost as to all service in this
world; lost with regard to all his comfort on earth; lost as to any hope to
support his own soul here; lost with respect to the proper seat of one of the
twelve apostles in the world to come, and with respect to that dignified lot,
in this world, which Matthias took in his place. He was, in fine, so lost, such
a son of perdition, and in such wise went to his own place, as fully to support
and justify the most plain and natural import of all the awful things said in
the word of God concerning him; without any consideration of positive misery,
after death. The same may be said of Ahitophel his type.

WITH regard to the parable of the rich man, in the gospel, who lift up his
eyes in hell, being in torments. It implies no personal misery there; but is
one of the many striking displays of pure justice, the sanction of the law, in
awful terror. Such displays will remain forever, as I have said before, in the
full view of all the saints in heaven to all eternity. In the glass of pure
justice, they will forever see, not only this Dives, but themselves also
lifting up their eyes in torments unutterable. And, in this sense, will dwell
with devouring fire, and inhabit everlasting burnings. Though in their surety,
they shall personally find a place of defense, a munition of rocks, the bread
and sure waters of eternal consolation.

I READILY grant, if this distinction, which I would every where keep in view,
between the voice of justice, and that of mercy, the display of law and that of
gospel, running through the whole word of God, is without ^^undation, my whole
argument falls to the ground. So does the whole of divine revelation, for ought
I can possibly discern, after a most careful inquiry, for many years. And (with
awful reverence I would speak it,) I am not able, without this distinction, to
vindicate the holy bible from many more flat contradictions, than any other
book I have ever read. But this distinction is the peculiar glory and mystery
of divine revelation.

WE are expressly told, that even a brother for whom Christ died, may perish.
1. Cor. viii. 11. This is a term used for eternal misery, by the limitarians
themselves, as much as the word damnation. The meaning is certainly no more
than this: He may fall into snares of infidelity, into many doubts and sorrows
in this world; may lose all gospel consolation, and become a miserable
creature, all his days on earth.

MOREOVER, what our Savior has said concerning children, greatly confirms the
opinion, that he gave his life "a ransom for all," in the most natural sense of
these words of the apostle.

THE greater part of departed human souls have left the body, having never
arrived at the age of maturity. Christ tells us, "of such is the kingdom of
heaven." Plainly signifying, that a great proportion for whom he died, are of
this description. And he does not at all limit his words to the children of his
peculiar people, in present knowledge of his covenant, and present enjoyment of
the privileges and comforts of it. This shows that he is the Mediator between
God and man, in general, without any exception or distinction as to final
salvation.

THE passage I have alluded to, may also carry in it this idea, viz. That all
who enjoy heaven, have a meek, humble, dependent, child-like spirit given them.
This may be one thing signified thereby; but this militates not in the least
against the construction I have given, as the main import of the words of
Christ; but is compatible therewith, and the rather confirms it. We hope for
the salvation of children of the covenant, dedicated to God by his special
seal. The same merits of Christ, and the same power of sanctifying grace, are
as adequate to the salvation of all the little ones in the world. We all fell
in our first foederal head, without our knowledge or act in the case; and all
mankind are restored in the second foederal head in like manner. Otherwise
grace does not abound much more; but indeed much less. This idea of the kind
Parent of all, gives us a father's consolation when we follow to the grave our
dear children, who are often swept away by death in such multitudes. Read
Jeremiah xxxi. 15, 16, 17. We can yet say, "the Lord is good unto all, and his
tender mercies are over all." No infant in the world was ever exempt from the
mediatorial love of him, who took little children in his arms and blessed them.

MUCH is said about being fit to die. There is one fitness and but one, and
that is by no means personal; but in the perfect character of a Covenant Head,
a Vicar, or Surety, in the full atonement, and all perfect worthiness of Jesus.
Whatever difference progressive grace may make between mankind in this life,
(and great is the blessing of all those who are elected to special seize
of grace in this world) yet every one without distinction, is left utterly
unfit for heaven, so long as the soul is in the body, an awful unclean thing.
No unclean thing shall enter into that world. On the separation, and not
before, is any soul in its own temper and qualifications fit; but in a relative
view, all for whom Christ died, are so. Their garments are all alike washed and
made white in the blood of the Lamb. What was done for David, Daniel and Paul,
at the moment of separation, that they might enter paradise with spotless
purity, was of the self-same nature, and not twice so much in degree, as might
qualify Pharaoh, Ahab, and Judas for the same world: For no man on earth, to
his last breath, was ever yet sanctified to the one half, or ever made progress
in holiness one half way from a state of total depravity, to a state of
complete holiness.

MY reader if you are left as you are found at your last breath, you must know
that your soul will be too unclean for heaven, or else you know very little of
yourself. In Christ, all things are ready for all, and equally ready at all
times, without any consideration in the universe, but what is drawn from God
alone in a glorious, all sufficient Mediator. God is all in all, and Christ is
all in all. Thus the primitive preachers of Christ warned every man, and taught
every man, in all wisdom: That they might present every man perfect in Christ
Jesus. Col. i. And I am bold to say, that any child of Adam that trusts to any
distinction in his own heart or life, in the least to support the heart in a
dying hour, or to any thing but Jesus Christ alone and him crucified, shall be
all his life time subject to bondage through fear of death; and, thus abiding,
shall find no relief, until the departed spirit is taught better, in the arms
of him who has the keys of hell and of death. The notion of some fitness in a
sinner for heaven, whether a penitent or an impenitent sinner, is utterly
repugnant to the whole word of God. It is built wholly on a legal spirit, and
on our attachment to the old covenant of works. It wars against every
evangelical motive of comfort in our souls, and obedience in our lives. It
stands in opposition to an entire dependence on God in Christ, and to every
moral virtue. Hence we do not allow God his proper character and place, nor
take our own: "We observe lying vanities and forsake our own mercies."

IT is an evidence of the true gospel: That when it is impressed on the heart,
it makes men better in their morals than before.

THE limitarians urge this argument against all the cavils raised from the
doctrines of God's decrees, of free sovereign grace, and of the certain
perseverance of believers. And they have ever well maintained their ground, by
dint of reason, experience and divine revelation. The doctrine I plead for,
takes full advantage of every argument they adduce, and enforces them all with
vast additional strength. They say, and that truly, that the displays of God's
mercy and love, always draw the heart to love God, and to keep his
commandments. How much more shall these more glorious and extensive displays of
the love and mercy of God, in the self same way, melt the whole soul into the
obedience of love, and produce every moral virtue in the life of man?

THE question is not, what will be the influence of this doctrine on those who
do not believe it, but on those who do? We know that every gospel doctrine is
turned to bad account, by impenitent, unbelieving men. They all turn the grace
of God into wantonness; while true believers are purified by their faith, and
led into all holiness of life. There is not one objection of licentiousness
against this doctrine, which does not lie, in full force, and much greater
force, against every limitarian doctrine of free, sovereign grace.

THEY who have built on the highest principles of sovereign grace, and have
most of all set at naught all fitness in men for salvation, but in Christ
alone, have ever been the most moral and virtuous in their lives: While, on the
other hand, they who could not endure a thought of the absolute decrees and
sovereignty of God, and salvation by mere mercy in Christ, exclusive from every
qualification in man, to move the heart of God toward him; and have plead for
power and merit and free will of their own creating, have too often been a
dissolute, abandoned part of mankind. The higher thoughts men have of God, and
the lower of themselves; the better their morals always have been, and always
will be. Therefore, as this doctrine, which I am supporting, carries these
sentiments to a much greater extent than any imitarian doctrine: So it will, if
cordially believed, produce much better morals.

THE fear of punishment after death, never yet had any power to restrain an
hardened sinner from sin; much less to make him love virtue.

THE most abandoned in wickedness, in all ages, have believed in the doctrine
of hell torments, as much as a hardened sinner can believe any thing of the
invisible world. They have always been wont to allude to these torments, in
their common conversation, as a matter indisputable. They have hell and
damnation in their mouths, all the day long. But did all this ever, in the
least, prevent their stealing, cursing, swearing, committing adultery, fighting
with one another, or any horrid blasphemy they were addicted to? Never in the
least. Now if any imagine the most extensive doctrines of divine goodness will
make hardened sinners worse than they now are; they have yet to study human
nature, and the common ways of the world.

GIVE an old, veteran, profane sailor, a guinea in some special distress he is
in, and he will not use a bad word if he knows it will offend you. But threaten
him with eternal damnation for his sin, and tell him his present distress is
just upon him, and he will curse you to your face. Men ought indeed, to be
deterred from sin by fear of hell: For hell in an awful degree, and the pains
of it attend all sin; and the eternity of hell torments can be avoided in no
way, but by forsaking sin, no more on my plan than any other. But ought is one
thing, and fact is another. Whatever hardened sinners ought to do, and from
whatever motives; I say, it is fact in all ages, the world throughout, that
they never did mend their ways, from a fear of any thing in the invisible
world. It has ever been fact, that when they have had most of hell and
damnation in their mouths, they have gone on most daringly in their wickedness.

IT is readily granted, that awakened sinners, with whom the spirit of God is
on his usual way to bring them to a sense of the salvation of God, will be much
restrained from all immorality, under such special awakenings; yet all these
will not bring them into the love and practice of holiness and virtue, as will
a sense of the love of God's redeeming love. Under all these legal awakenings
and restraints from open vice, they will only change their mode of sinning,
until the grace of God that brings salvation, appears to their souls: Which
alone will effectually teach them to deny all ungodliness and every worldly
lust. But then, let it be well noted that the doctrine I plead for, secures
every advantage and restraint of awakening grace, as fully as any limitarian
doctrine ever did, or can. I maintain the same doctrine in the true nature of
it; the same necessity of conviction and conversion, that they do. We differ
not a single atom, as to the way and manner of application; but only in this, I
extend the glorious work of God, and every good influence of it, much further
than they do.

FROM visible, sensible shame and punishment, in this world, the hardened and
most abandoned are laid under very great restraints, without which they would
be wholly intolerable; but none, none at all, from all you can tell them of an
eternal hell. As for these visible restraints, none can plead for them more
than I; as will appear in its proper place. It may however be observed, that
all the conduct of sinners, under the utmost power of their restraints, is
wholly destitute of any holiness, or real virtue in the sight of God. Their
open sin in the sight of the world, is much less than before; and there is a
good token, that the spirit of God is on his usual way to bring them to saving
good. There are reasons enough in opposition to stupid security and open
wickedness: Yet, still the soul of one unregenerate sinner is no more
recommended in itself to the mercy of God, than that of another. This mercy is
"unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no difference." Romans
iii. 22. Antecedently there is not a disposition, or thought of the heart, or
action in the life, but what is not of faith; and consequently sin.

THE view of divine love, of Christ and salvation, as is here represented, is
the true and only source of gospel charity, so much recommended in the word of
God.

WE are taught to love all mankind, and to pray for the salvation of all, and
to do all we can to promote the salvation of every human creature; as the
gospel has ever been, is, and ever will be preached to every creature under
heaven, in a more direct and clear, or in a more indirect and obscure manner,
as I have shown before. But how can you pray for the salvation of all, if you
believe it is the fixed will of that God, whose attributes and will are
infinitely dear to you, that most of mankind shall go to eternal, personal
misery? You love God better than men, and his will more than all the happiness
of creatures; how can you feel any disposition to have all men saved? And how
can you pray in opposition to the desire of your heart? Or how can you love all
mankind when you believe that most are infinitely hateful to God and Christ,
and always shall be? How do your will and affections correspond with the will
and affections of Christ in such a case?

YOU are strictly charged to hate nothing in any man, but his sinfulness; to
love the person and happiness of every one. You may hate the wicked with
perfect hatred, only as God does, and as David did, accounting them the enemies
of God, i. e. so far as they are so. And thus far, and in this sense, you may
hate all present believers, and even your father and mother, wife and children,
brethren and sisters, yea and your own self also. This is consistent with a
sincere love to your own salvation, and that of all mankind. But, how can you
desire that blessedness and extent of salvation, which the highest object of
your love opposes, with an eternal, immutable, holy, and good purpose of mind?
I see no way to warrant such desires, exertions and prayers of ours in all this
extent, but the warrant Paul has mentioned, viz. God will have all men to be
saved, and, first or last, in his own way and time, to come to the knowledge of
the truth; and because Christ gave himself a ransom for all: A glorious truth
to be communicated to the world by degrees, as infinite wisdom sees fit: A
testimony to be exhibited in proper times and measures. On this warrant, the
way is open and clear, to love all; to pray for all; to seek the salvation of
all; to exercise kind and tender affection for all poor sinners in the world;
because God has so loved the world, and Christ has so loved the world.

THE love of God will make us love all as he does, according to our measure of
love, and to be co-workers together with God. A principle of this nature moves
tender affection in all other cases. You have a very dear, earthly friend, that
is absent afar off, who has left a little child with you. The remembrance of
your friend, and how he set his affections on that child, and what tender
concern he continually has for the child, will affect your heart with
tenderness, pity and love, every time you look on the little helpless creature;
even though it be, a perverse child. The love of your most dear friend, will
make you always exceeding kind to his child, as an object of his love. Your
care will extend to his other property, less valuable* which you have any
concern with or knowledge of. So, in the present case, when you see any poor,
perverse sinners on earth, your love to God and Christ will cause your heart,
on the true gospel principle, to say, "My God made them in his love; and in his
great love and pity he preserves them. My dear Savior died for them, in the
greatness of his love. God has a desire to these works of his hands. The heart
of my best beloved even bleeds with compassion, love and pity to these poor
creatures. My love to my Savior makes me feel toward these unworthy, miserable
objects, as he does. He is exceedingly good to these evil, unthankful
creatures; and the love of God constrains me to feel toward them, as God and
Christ do toward them and me." There is verily no other fountain of gospel
charity but this: No other principle that can make us feel toward the vilest
of sinners, as God commands us. But this "charity believes all things, and
hops all things," certainly not excluding the capital point. This charity is
the radical grace in the soul of man, and "the bond of perfectness."

SOME, who have been full in the opinion, that Christ the Savior of the world,
will finally triumph over all the power of satan, and all the sins and miseries
of mankind, wholly destroying all the works of the devil, seeking and saving
that human nature which was lost; have yet supposed, that pain and misery may
attend many of the human race, a long duration after death; even for ages of
ages. (...).
This they suppose necessary, to purge, humble, and subdue some sinners; and
make them fit for a pure spotless heaven, a pure state of consummate happiness.

THE above sentiment is without any reason, or any thing in divine revelation
to warrant the supposition. All want purgation at the moment of death, as
really as any one. Sanctification is far, very far from being complete, while
the sinner breathes, whether a penitent or impenitent sinner. In both there is
much unholiness, while life remains. No unclean thing shall enter heaven; and,
of certain consequence, not the best saint, not any mere man that ever lived,
as he was in the last moment of his life.

WHATEVER is done before, for us miserable sinners, it is certain, the most of
all will be done in the parting moment, to separate us from pollution, and fit
us for glory. All then must go into purgation, if any: Though it were granted
that a shorter period would suffice for some than for others; which is not
true, as will soon appear. Hence the papists are quite consistent with
themselves, though not with the gospel, in sending all to purgatory; without a
decree of exemption, which, they say, is the pardon of the priest.

A SPECIAL work of Christ there certainly must be in death; or never one of the
mere human kind can get to heaven: For the very moment before we expire, the
best do justly cry out. O wretched men that we are; we have a body of death,
and who shall deliver us from it! We shall all be poor, wretched sinners in
that moment, whenever it comes, and under greater guilt then, than ever before,
in ourselves considered: For we shall continually add many sins, and atone for
none. The same infinite mercy, power, and faithfulness, which can then separate
one soul from all its unfitness for heaven, can another. Christ does but a
small part of his glorious work on any soul in this life. He graciously begins
earlier with some than others; but he finishes with all alike, even at death.
"The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. I will make this last even as
thee."

WE are very plainly taught in the word of God, that every soul goes
immediately after death, into an eternal, fixed state; which never more admits
of any alteration, but in progressive degree; the same in kind, unchangeable to
endless duration. The special manner in which Enoch and Elijah went out of the
world, does not make them differ from that of all mankind in this respect; viz.
That they were both so far from perfect holiness, the moment before their
translation, as to be utterly unfit for the pure glories of heaven. Yea, they
were much more fit for hell, in themselves, as neither they, nor any other man
had ever arrived half way to sinless perfection while in the body. Yet, it is
sure, they both went direct to heaven. The thief on the cross was miserably
unprepared for paradise, as long as he was dying; but when dead, he went there,
with the human soul of Jesus. Lazarus went as directly to that world when he
died, as the rich man went, in the voice of the law, to hell, and as all go
there, when they die, in the same holy sentiment of the law. Paul desired to
depart, not for some AGES of purgation and humiliation, but to be with Christ;
although he groaned under his body of death, more than under the dying pangs of
his body. And there is every reason to prove, that all the redeemed sinners,
for whom Christ gave himself a ransom, shall go there as immediately after
death, as the poor, hateful thief.

WE are taught the same truth, from the early periods of divine revelation. All
the uncleanness mentioned in the mosaic institution, and all the purgations
there, represent, as all allow, our moral or spiritual pollutions, and our
moral or spiritual cleansing. A day there denotes oftentimes the day or season
of life, and the evening, death, or the close of life. How many times is it
repeated, that the polluted and the unclean, in a ceremonial sense, though they
wash their clothes and bathe themselves in water, (denoting all the means of
grace and sanctification in this life) yet shall be unclean until the even? But
it is said of all sowing seeds, in like cases, that they shall be clean. Levit.
xi. And in many other places, needless here to quote. Seed sown and springing
up again, is a well known simile, denoting our death and resurrection. "It is
sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body." So in the type alluded to,
we die most dreadfully unclean; yet no unsafe consequence shall follow, any
more than it was unsafe to sow polluted seed, for fear the pollution would not
be taken out in the ground, and that the rising crop would be all unclean.

THE human body goes into the grave an awfully polluted thing; but does not
arise so. It is sown in dishonor and weakness, it is raised in honor and glory.
Our bones will be full of the sin of our youth, which will be buried together
with us in the dust; but will not arise with us, except in the holy voice of
law: And in that sense all mankind shall awake to shame and everlasting
contempt, and abide so forever; but in gospel language and certain effect, all
shall awake to everlasting life. Sin lies down, but does not arise. "His bones
are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust."
Job xx. Sin and its attendants shall vex and distress the wicked as long as
they live; and hurry them on in all its dreadful rage and malignity while they
live. It shall even drive them to death, "to the king of terrors;" but no
further.

THE utmost torment, for a long period, even for ages of ages, could have no
more effect in humbling sinners of the human, than of the angelic nature. The
devils are no better, for their long continued anguish and pain. Afflictions in
this world, do not make sinners any better; but are invariably, only an
occasion of their growing worse and worse, if the special, almighty energy of
the divine Spirit does not attend them. There is not the least intimation of
the operation of the Spirit of God, or of any means of grace in hell; in
whatever sense any understand that awful state, whether as a state of real,
personal suffering, or as the pure voice or display of justice. The devils have
been under these personal sufferings, for a long time, and are no more humble
than ever, no more fit for heaven. And had it been the decree of God, that all
mankind should be there in person with them, ever so long, they would grow
worse and worse, through all ages of ages; for ought that their intolerable
torments would do for them. Almighty power could create their hearts anew, even
in hell, as easily as on earth. God has power enough to change the natures of
all the devils there; but, he has not told us he ever will do it, and we know
of no savior provided for them, or that ever will be.

UNTO us a Savior is born; unto us God's own Son is given; and he has been
pleased to make known to us his decrees of infinite love and mercy. The love
and kindness of God to man has appeared, not by works of righteousness which
we have done, or can do; but by his mere mercy he saves man, by the washing of
regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he has shed on us, on
all mankind abundantly; though on different persons and people, and in
different ages and periods of time, in a very different degree, as the great
and holy Sovereign has seen fit.

UPON the true, gospel doctrine, that God will have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth: That the Lamb of God has taken away the
sin of the whole world: That Christ is invested with regal power, as Mediator,
to gather together in one all things in himself: That as far as sin has
reigned unto death, grace shall reign through righteousness to eternal life by
Jesus Christ our Lord: And that the last enemy he will destroy is death, crying
in exalted triumph, O death! I will be thy plague: O grave! I will be thy
destruction: On this plain gospel doctrine, I say, it is wholly without reason
or scripture, to suppose that the miseries of man shall reach beyond death.

THE contest between the Mediator and his grand adversary, or the two opposite
seeds, is very often, and very justly represented under the similitude of a
long war, or a long, obstinate battle. It is every where affirmed that the
Savior of the human race shall obtain the victory, and a full complete victory
too. The adversary shall succeed no further than to bruise the heel; which is
not a wound that shall terminate in that death, everlasting* personal death,
which he aimed at. It shall admit of a cure. But the seed of the woman shall
bruise the head of the adversary; give a fatal stroke, where a bruise by
almighty strength is certain death; and so far as we know, it will admit of no
cure. Such will be the victory of Christ over the serpent.

WHEN two armies go to battle, if the one, only with the loss of an hundred
men, slay ten thousand of the adverse party and take almost all the rest
prisoners with great spoil, we say there is a great and triumphant victory
gained; yea, we are ready to call it a complete triumph, even though the
victors lose a few men in battle, and a few more are taken captives by the
retreating foe. Just such will be the victory of satan, upon the limitarian
plan. The rescued of the Lord will be only a very few, amidst the general
overthrow of mankind. Satan will obtain a great and awful victory, though not
so entire and complete as he could have wished: Not wholly without loss; but
almost so. Now is this like the representation of the rencounter, the great
contest, in which the Almighty Son of God has engaged against his adversary,
and the grand adversary of his dear offspring of the human kind?

THE point satan aimed at, was to involve us all in death, temporal, spiritual,
and eternal. Christ set himself in full opposition to the whole purpose of
satan, that no evil, none at all on the whole, should accrue to man from all
the malice, and all the deadly works of, the devil. Christ's aim was as
extensive as satan's; as good as the devil's was bad. HE UNDERTOOK WITH AS MUCH
BENEVOLENCE, AS SATAN DID WITH MALICE. He aimed at no partial victory, much
less at a rescue of a very few, leaving the field and a triumphant victory to
his adversary.

THE Mediator, the Head of every man abundantly assures us, that his victory
shall be complete. "I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will
redeem them from death: O death! I will be thy plagues; O grave! I will be thy
destruction: Repentance shall be hid from mine eyes." Hos. xiii. 14. So in Heb.
ii. we find the union of Christ with human nature, with every man, as fully
asserted as words can express; together with the end of his undertaking, and of
all his sufferings. "That he by the grace of God should taste death for every
man;" and "that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death,
that is the devil;" and "that he might deliver them (without any exception
mentioned) who, through fear of death, were all their life time subject to
bondage:" Which is most of all the case of poor, distressed sinners, who under
conviction, feel themselves, of all mankind, the least qualified for heaven and
the most fit for hell: Indeed, all other sinners also, tremble at a realizing
thought of death. The great Redeemer speaks without any, the least exception,
when he says, "shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive
delivered? But thus says the Lord, even the captives of the mighty shall be
taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; for I will contend
with him that contendeth. with thee, and I will save thy children." Isa. xlix.
24, 25.

THE Holy Ghost speaks of man without any distinction, in words like these: His
soul draws near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyers* if there be a
messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man his
uprightness: Then he is gracious unto him, and says, deliver him from going
down to the pit, I have found a ransom." Job xxxiii. Here it is most plain,
that the discovery, interpretation, or display of the Mediator's own
righteousness is the sole relief of the guilty, without any the least
qualification or distinction in the sinful creature.

THE holy scriptures every where abound with thoughts correspondent to the
passages now cited. There is nothing that looks like a victory of satan over
the Son of man, in any part or degree; though it is well known, the whole human
kind are the prize contended for. All is quite the reverse. Christ rides forth
conquering and to conquer. "He has led captivity captive, and received gifts
for men, yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord our God might dwell among
them." Psalm lxviii. "For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness
dwell; and (having made peace, through the blood of his cross) by him, to
reconcile all things to himself, by him, I say, whether they be things in
earth, or things in heaven." "For in him dwells all the sulness of the
Godhead bodily; and ye are complete in him, who is the head of all
principality and power." "Blotting out the hand writing of ordinances, which
was against us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross; and having
spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing
over them in it." Col. i. and ii. The holy scriptures every where announce, not
only some benefit to mankind by Christ, a small, partial rescue from misery;
some valuable saving to the human kind; but a redemption, a victory over satan,
death, and misery, FULL, COMPLETE, and ETERNAL.

IT is utterly impertinent for any one to say, that this victory may be so
complete, and yet most of the human race, or indeed any of them, may be in
personal misery to endless duration: And that God may have his own full glory,
and the most benevolent system may be established, notwithstanding. We must
attend to the very thing contended for by satan, on the one part, and by the
Son of God on the other. On the part of the adversary, the matter contended
for, is the entire, complete, eternal, universal misery of all mankind: The Son
of God does flatly, and fully oppose satan, in this very thing. Otherwise there
is no war between them* i. e. if the devil is driving at one thing, and the
Savior opposing another. But the opposition is direct and full; as above stated.

SUPPOSE satan to say, "I will have the human kind miserable with me to all
eternity:" And Christ to say, "So you shall, most of them; but I will have my
glory in it." Here is concurrence in the main. The variance and opposition is
very small. But we know, that the seed of the woman does oppose satan, in full;
and will not let him gain that very point he aimed at, either in whole, or in
any part: Hence, he makes even the pains of this life, and natural death, not
only to turn to his own glory, but to the real advantage and happiness of man.
Satan never so much as hoped, or in the least aimed to obstruct the happiness
or glory of God; for he always knew it was utterly impossible for him to do it,
in the least degree. The complete, eternal misery of all mankind was the sole
point he aimed at; and this is the plain scripture representation of the
matter. The Savior fully and flatly opposed him in that very point; and this
alone can make a proper war, a true and direct contention. The Messiah did not
say to satan, "You shall have your will in the main, and I will have mine too:"
But "you shall not have your will at all, and I will have mine wholly." "I will
overcome and conquer you, on your chosen ground, on which you contend to make
all the human kind forever miserable. The human kind shall be as happy, as
universally so, and even more completely so, than if you had never determined
on their ruin." This is a proper opposition; and in this the Almighty Savior
will be victorious.

BUT alas! the limitarian plan gives satan a grand victory and triumph, in all
he had in view, or ever had any hope to accomplish. It considers Christ as
concurring with him, in the main, in all that he desired; though, in another
way, getting glory to himself, and making the victory and triumph of satan only
an occasion of it. Here is very little opposition. The devil has got his will
in one thing, and the Savior in another. Satan expected, in his most sanguine
hopes, little more than what he will obtain; and Christ never meant to make any
great opposition to the devil, while seeking whom he may devour; though in
another way he would secure his own glory. Consult the sacred oracles
throughout, and let common sense say, whether there is any thing in all this,
that bears the most distant likeness to the direct and full opposition, between
the seed of the woman and the serpent contending for one and the same thing,
even human happiness.

SATAN shall not finally have his will in the least part, or degree; though for
a season he may be gratified: For divine wisdom and goodness have ordained,
that there shall be a long contention, and the war not soon over. Yet, in the
end, satan shall be wholly overcome and disappointed in every view, and in
every hope that he has entertained. The prize in contest may be divided for a
time; and satan may seem to have the greater share of it. It has indeed been so
ever since the fall, to this day; and may be so to the end of this present
world. But in the result, satan shall lose all; and the Son of God gain all,
even the whole prize in dispute, and even destroy him that for a time, a long
season, has the power of death. His victory shall be complete; though for a
long time God divides him a portion with the great (adversary) and he divides
the spoil with the strong. Since he has poured out his soul unto death, and
since God has laid upon him the iniquity of us all, and he has been numbered
with transgressors, and bare the sin of many, i. e. as many as those, whose
iniquities were laid upon him, even "US ALL," all the human kind; he will, in
his own way and time, make the application sure. He will make intercession for
the transgressors. Isai. liii. Not a word of exception or limitation is
mentioned in the passages now alluded to.

THE word many, is often used in scripture to signify all the human kind. The
resurrection of all the dead is expressed in the same manner. Dan. xii. Also
the apostasy of the human race: "By one man's disobedience many were made
sinners." Romans v. Indeed it is the common language of scripture. The reader
will multiply quotations as many as he pleases. The word many so used, is often
explained by the synonimous term all; and often the plain sense and connection
of the context so explains it. So in the passage above cited out of the prophet
Isaiah, God laid on Christ the iniquity of us all, and he bare the sin of many,
i. e. the same number, the whole number of transgressors; and his effectual
intercession shall he for just so many, in the final result.

THE kingdom of Jesus, in this world, has ever appeared feeble, like a braised
reed and like smoking flax; and the kingdom of satan has appeared in pomp and
power; but this will not forbid a complete victory on the part of the Mediator
in the end. "He shall not fail nor be discouraged, until he have set judgment
in the earth: And the Isles shall wait for his law:" He will, in his own time,
"open blind eyes and bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit
in darkness out of the prisonhouse. I am the Lord, that is my name, and my
glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images." Isa.
xlii. 1. -- 16. Satan has long led away most of the nations after images, and
into various kinds of idolatry; but Christ will finally reclaim as many as
satan has deluded. "God will gather together in one all things in Christ."
Yea, wherever" sin has abounded, grace shall much more abound." The matter
immediately in contest is the weal or woe of the human kind.

"What can awake thee unawak'd by this,
"Expended Deity on human weal!"
IT is, moreover, worthy of our special notice that throughout the books of
Moses, and indeed through the whole of the old testament, there is very little
said of blessings, or of curses, of happiness, or of misery, but what is
temporal and pertains to this present life, as every attentive reader of the
sacred books will immediately recollect. And when the word hell is mentioned
any where in the old testament, it very seldom, perhaps never, signifies any
other than the grave, or state of the dead in general. The curses on the
disobedient are every where mainly such as take place in this world, or
terminate in the grave; so are the blessings promised to the obedient.
Citations from the scripture would be almost endless, the reader has them in
his own memory without number. How shall we account for this, but upon the
supposition that no distinction shall remain beyond death, except a distinction
in degree of happiness, by the glorious Savior of all men?

SIN is an infinite evil in its own nature; and nothing at all ought, or can be
said in excuse for it on our part: Yet, at the same time, it is not amiss for
us to know that we do not, cannot hurt God by it, or in the least infringe upon
his uninterrupted and infinite happiness, or add in the least thereunto by all
our holiness and virtue. We do much harm to our fellow men and to ourselves by
our wickedness, and much good by our virtues: But the essential glory and
happiness of God is untouched by both. "If thou sinnest, what do thou
against him, or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him?
if thou be righteous, what give thou him, or what receives he of thine hand?
thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the
son of man." Job xxxv. 6, 7, 8.

WITH regard to God Most High, his eternal, fixed will and choice was never yet
frustrated in any single instance, and never will be. This by no means excuses
sin on our part. The mere nature of it is infinite guilt in us, in the first
instance. Yet it is certain that every thing, every event in the natural and
moral system, does take place just, exactly, as God chose and fixed in his
immutable plan, before any creature had existence. Saint Paul grants this, when
the thought is suggested even with a view to a bad improvement of it. The
apostle gives the proper character of God, as absolute proprietor, absolute
sovereign of all things, and sets up his absolute decrees and immutable plan,
agreeably to the nature and perfections of such a God. The objector then steps
in and says, "why then does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his will?"
Upon this doctrine how can sinners be worthy of blame? Paul does not take back
a single word he had said, but most solemnly reprimands the bold objector, who
would on this ground justify his sin; by holding up to his view the holy nature
and character of JEHOVAH, as absolute proprietor and absolute sovereign of all
things; and he still maintains the principle he had laid down, without the
least recantation. Romans ix.

MUCH has been said against this true and proper character of God, as fixing
his own immutable plan, both in the natural and in the moral system, and seeing
it executed through all the scenes of providence, from beginning to end,
without the least possible variation. But all is in vain. We never can get rid
of it, unless we will rid ourselves of the word of God, and of the plain light
of nature, with all our just natural notions of the Supreme Being. We may even
as well reject God himself, his very being, as to deny that all events were by
him fixed and certain, in his own eternal, infinite mind, before creation
began; or that God had infinite right so to establish his own plan of
operation. Paul maintains this point, and pleads only this, to silence
effectually every objector, who would on this ground, justify the nature of
sin, when it is immediately known and plainly felt in the soul, to be, in its
own nature, directly opposite to the nature and attributes of God. As though he
had said, "you sinner, have not frustrated the eternal plan of the Most High,
it is true, and you never can; but it is enough for you to know that your will
and heart has been set to do it. This very thing is your guilt, and there can
be no guilt, no blame worthiness in the universe, in any thing else; but in the
evil will and disposition, in its nature and operations. You therefore have
merited unutterable punishment. But I will maintain the character of my God; if
I relinquish this idea of JEHOVAH, I can find no Supreme Being."

I WOULD add: However wicked and unreasonable it is to abuse this just idea of
God, to indulge in sin; yet we may and ought to make a very comfortable use of
it in another way. We ought not once to imagine that we have hurt the MOST HIGH
in the least, by all our odious sins, as we hurt our fellow men and our own
souls by them. God is infinitely happy in every thing that is done, every
event, both in the natural and moral system. The whole is just what infinite
wisdom and love decreed, and the whole forms the most lovely and benevolent
system, of all possible systems that were in the eternal, infinite view of
Deity.

THE nature of sin is, in the first instance, an object of sorrow in our
hearts; but its existence, connections, and all its effects and consequences
pertain to the pure and holy, wise and good government of the most high God;
all whose ways are holy, just, and good. God need not punish poor sinners, to
retrieve any harm they have done him, any damage, any infringement on his
happiness. God is, and ever has been, and ever will be, just as happy as his
soul has chosen to be, i. e. infinitely so. With infinite pleasure he sees the
operation of his own eternal plan, in every part and every movement of it. And
mankind, in God's own time and way, will behold it as God does, and delight in
it as God does, according to their capacity. We are in guilt and ignorance and
sorrow for a time, and all is just: For the will of God cannot be otherwise.
But, as the nature, of God is love, he will bring us all, "in due time," to see
and approve of his infinite wisdom and love, in all his counsels, and in all
his works. "What I do thou know not now, but thou shall know hereafter." "In
the latter end ye shall consider it perfectly."

THERE have been, no doubt, many godly persons that never could endure the
doctrine of the divine decrees, in the limitarian sense. The hearts of good
people do not reject the absolute predestination and decrees of God, nor ever
did, simply considered, or justly considered. What our hearts revolt at, is the
attributing such decrees to God, as are contrary to his nature. "GOD IS LOVE."
Attribute no decrees to God but those of infinite love, in harmony with all the
perfections of Deity, and they will set easy on our minds. Charge him with no
decrees that are contrary to his nature, and they will all appear beautiful.
But, when we conceive of a God exhibiting a nature and disposition opposite to
that of the great JEHOVAH; a God of some love and of great malevolence; and
then conceive of such decrees as such a God would make, our hearts shudder at
them. But decrees flowing from the true nature of the living and true God, are
all lovely. All our hopes of happiness are founded on the nature, attributes,
and sovereign will of the living and true God. His infinitely good disposition
secures us. His paternal love and goodness makes us safe; as all his natural
perfections are exerted under the direction of his wisdom and love.

COULD we suppose, I even shudder to name the supposition, that JEHOVAH was in
all things else as he now is; but only had a disposition to infinite
malevolence, as he now has to infinite love and benevolence; poor suffering
creatures could not even then impeach his justice, simply considered: For their
whole beings, and all the comfort, and all the pain that could ever affect
them, would be God's own absolute property, to dispose of, as he pleased. Their
very feelings, of every kind and degree would be his absolute property; since
their whole being is so. But, alas! he would certainly act out his disposition,
and propagate misery far and wide, and that to all eternity. My reader, is this
your God? Have you learned that he has indeed such a disposition of heart,
from his works or from his word? Is this the Son of God that you have heard and
thought so much about, that so loved the world as to die for the sins of the
whole world? Have you so learned Christ? To dispute of meum and tuum, mine and
thine, with Deity is utterly absurd; but to hope and trust in the nature,
attributes, will and word of such an infinitely good sovereign, through the
atonement of his own dear Son, is unspeakably comfortable to miserable, dying
sinners.

WE are taught, in the word of God, that all our backwardness in believing to
the salvation of our souls, lies in the enmity of our hearts; at least, that if
this was all removed, we should, under gospel light, readily believe. The
understanding, and all the powers of our souls would act in a saving manner
toward God and Christ, if the temper and disposition of our souls were right.
This is certainly true. But our hearts are exceedingly opposed to God who is
love. Therefore, until this enmity is removed, we cannot believe the doctrines
of God's sovereign, self-moved love, pity, mercy, to such horrible sinners as
we are.

WHEN we hear the pure doctrines of free grace, our hearts say, "this is too
good news to be true." Mankind, in a state of nature, find no such disposition
in themselves, nor in other men like themselves; and they do, and will imagine
that God is, in this regard, "altogether such an one as themselves:" and so
cannot believe there is any such self-moved love and mercy in God. They cannot
forgive their enemies before they repent, and reform, and become their friends,
and make all the restitution in their power; and hardly then. They will
maintain some grudge after all. Therefore, they will not believe "that while
they were yet enemies, in due time, Christ died for them," and paid their whole
debt, while they were in all their enmity against God: And justified them, as
to the law of God, while they were ungodly working not in any manner acceptable
to God, but wholly in enmity against him: And that "being justified by his
death, they shall much more be saved by his life*" i. e. By his almighty all
gracious mediation, applying the benefit of purchased (...) and salvation, by
giving them repentance, faith, holiness, and fulfilling in them all the
conditions, in his own way and time. They cannot believe, that "God has
exalted him a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance as well as remission of
sins:" That "he that spared not his own Son, but freely delivered him up for us
all, all sinners, will much more with him freely give them all things." They
have no such disposition themselves; but quite the reverse: and they cannot
believe that God has, when he says, "I, even I, am he that blotteth out your
sin for mine own sake." They cannot receive this saying; because, all they know
of the temper of their own hearts, and of other men is directly opposite to
such free love and self-moved mercy.

A SENSE of divine love, or charity, is never impressed on the hearts of sinful
men, but in an almighty work of regeneration, making them feel, in some degree,
the same temper and spirit. When they can forgive their most malicious enemies,
and love them, and sincerely wish them all good, and pray for them, before they
become any better, or ask any pardon at all, as Christ did, and as Stephen did;
then they can believe that there is such an heart in God as his word does
testify.

A YOUNG man that has been brought up in the family of a nobleman of vast
wealth, who has always been a great benefactor to him, and whom he always loved
most sincerely, and served most faithfully, giving every testimony of love,
fidelity and obedience, during his minority; well knowing that his benefactor
always had the kindest sense of his filial love, duty, and obedience, will,
when he comes of age, easily believe the report, if it be told him, that the
nobleman has given him a valuable legacy, in his last will and testament. But,
a young man that was under the like advantages, who yet always hated his
benefactor, rebelled against him continually, mocked him every day, reviled him
in all his conversation, did all he could to kill him more than a thousand
times, and finally purloined all his goods that he could lay hands on, and ran
away from him, and continues to hate him worse than ever; would by no means
believe the report, should the story pass, that the said nobleman had given him
a fine estate. His own sense of guilt, enmity, and ingratitude, would repel any
idea that the news could be true. Just so, the glorious testimonials of God's
infinitely free love and mercy, come to sinful men. The blessed gospel is
opposed by them, on every ground and motive of enmity and unbelief, which can
arise from a consciousness of the utmost disaffection in their hearts to an
holy God, and the most awful rebellion of their whole lives against him.

THIS doctrine of infinite, universal, sovereign grace, flowing wholly out of
the nature and disposition of God to mankind, is wholly consistent with his
rewarding every man according to his works; and is the only doctrine of
salvation that is so.

THE limitarians themselves, have always understood this doctrine as relating,
not only to the different degrees of happiness among the saved, and the
different degrees of misery among the damned; but also principally to the great
difference in the eternal world, between all who are saved, and all who are
damned: Each description being compared with the other, or the saved compared
with the damned. And this is certainly the true gospel sense of the
declaration, so frequent in the word of God. But then we ought to understand
the word of God aright, as to the true meaning of salvation and damnation.
Which cannot be, in any other sense than what I plead for, consistent with that
proportion of reward which is asserted.

NO limitarian on earth will presume to say, that believers in this world are
as much better than other sinners, as heaven is better than hell: Or that there
is, or ever was, so great a difference in moral character, between any two men
on earth, as there is between heaven and hell. There is not a man on earth, nor
ever was since the fall, that can justly claim a better character than that of
a believing, penitent, abominable sinner. We do not suppose that the best on
earth have got half way from the worst character they ever had, before
conversion, to that character which saints in heaven sustain. It is certain
that Job, David, and Paul, did not think they had. "I abhor myself, and repent
in dustland ashes." "There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger,
neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin." "My wounds stink and
are corrupt because of my foolishness." "I am carnal sold under sin." "O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!" "Not
as though I had already attained, either were already perfect." Thus spoke
these men, distinguished by the most eminent seize in this world; and
that without any compliment at all. They spoke the truth, as they felt the real
weight of it in their own souls. These are true specimens of the best men, and
best moral characters that ever were, or will be, on this side death. Now let
these three men go into the infinite and everlasting joys of heaven, (and no
doubt they are there) and contrast with them the three vilest moral characters,
that ever existed since the world began, gone away into the infinite and
endless torments of hell, in the limitarian sense; and then say, my reader, is
there not a greater difference between the reward of these, than there was
between their works in this world? All may be in heaven, and yet the difference
of reward be as great there as that of character here. In no other possible way
can the proportion take place according to scripture.

IF believers, in this life, were as holy as they are in heaven, and
unbelievers altogether as bad as the devil: yet even then, there would be no
proportion of reward to their works, on the limitarian plan, unless they had
been one eternity a part ante (as the language of the schools is) before they
went into another eternity a part post. The time of works, or of exhibiting a
moral character in this life, bears no proportion to eternity. Duration, or
long continuance in good or bad works, no doubt, has its due consideration in
the reward; but temporal, momentary works bear no proportion to an eternal
reward either of happiness or misery. Do not misunderstand me here. I mean not
in the least, to countenance the idle notion of those who say, "because sin is
but temporary in this world; therefore it is not strictly just that its
punishment should be eternal." I have before exploded this idea. I am now
speaking only of the proportion mentioned in the gospel, between the rewards of
mankind in a future state; not of the just demerit of sin. I say, it seems
exceeding plain, on the limitarian plan, there can be no proportion at all
between the rewards of the elect, and reprobate, as measured by their different
works in this life. All in themselves deserve an eternal hell* no doubt; but
God has been graciously pleased to assure us, that the state of each man in the
world to come, shall be in proportion to his works here. This never can be, if
some great sinners, who sinned all their lives here, yet believing sinners, are
in the next life consummately and eternally happy; and other poor, miserable
sinners, that is, unbelieving sinners, are made consummately and eternally
miserable. Both deserve it. But we are now availing ourselves of God's own
declaration of sovereign goodness in the gospel. I know, and I have already
said it again and again; that the law thunders eternal, certain damnation to
sinners, and it is the awful voice of justice throughout the sacred oracles
from beginning to end; but there is not one word of gospel, glad tidings, or
good news to sinners in all this: It is all law, pure law, glorious law,
denouncing what, in pure justice, ought to be. There is not a single word of
the gospel in the whole of this, in all these dreadful thunders. The gospel
mildly and sweetly announces that all these dreadful things have taken place in
Christ, the head of every man. And now he has full power and commission to
apply his own redemption, to all those of whom he is the head, and for whom he
died; and that in his own time and way.

WE all know there will be different rewards in heaven, according to different
characters and works in this life. None will be rewarded for their works; but
according to them. It will be so with all mankind that ever lived or shall
live. They will, every one of them, bear a proportion to each other, as to
their state in the eternal world, as they did in their respective characters
and works here. This never can be, without the universal triumph of Christ over
sin, death and hell, and all the condemning power of the holy law, in tasting
death for every man. We could easily see all this to be the true spirit of the
gospel; if we only knew and felt within our own souls, that the great PARENT of
the universe, as much exceeds any human parent, in love to his offspring, as he
is a greater being than man; and that this is the real nature of God.

THIS blessed, gospel doctrine gives us an admiring view of the wisdom and
goodness of God, in the appointment and ordination of his civil ministers in
the present world, to make this life tolerable, by the suppression of vice and
immorality: Especially as secure, hardened sinners are not at all restrained by
the threatenings of eternal damnation, even though they deny not the awful
doctrines they hear; but allude to the truth of them, by most profane and
horrid imprecations, in their common conversation. Present, visible punishments
strike them with dread, and greatly restrain them. A fine, a prison, a whip,
and a gibbet have great influence to suppress their enormities.

GOD has, in his infinite wisdom and goodness, appointed his civil ministers
for good. These powers are ordained of God, for this great and benevolent
purpose, to be a terror to evil doers, and the supporters of those that do
well. It will give an exalted sense of God to those that know his salvation, to
see all those ministers he has ordained for the good of mankind, executing
their respective offices well, for the glory of his great name and the good of
human society, in punishing all transgressors with the utmost faithfulness and
impartiality, according to good and wholesome laws; and in encouraging all the
virtuous and regular in the community. We ought to rejoice that they who do all
in their power to make their fellowmen happy, should partake largely of that
good, which they so much strive to promote and communicate; and that they, who
war against the happiness of mankind, should feel in a proper degree, that
misery, which, by their wickedness, they would bring upon all. God's glorious
decrees of sovereign, rich, self-moved mercy to them at last, do not in the
least, excuse them from the due reward of their deeds here; no, nor even those
that have already believed to the saving of their souls, when they backslide
and do the deeds of the wicked.

THERE are a great variety of just and terrible punishments from the hand of
God's civil ministers, that do, and ought to meet and oppose flagrant
transgressors, in all their open wickedness in this world. Those indeed have
their visible and sensible effect. The scourge and the gibbet are very terrible
to those that are wholly unmoved by every consideration which does not apply to
their senses: And how wretched are daring sinners in this world, by the just
rebukes of heaven in this way! While they are hardened in vice, all consolation
arising from the final mercy of God is wholly shut out of their souls, just as
much on the plan I plead for, as on any more limited doctrine whatever. The
most glorious truth, without an heartfelt conviction of it, can give no
comfort. These poor, miserable creatures are just as we have been wont to say
the elect are, antecedent to their conversion; not at all the more comfortable
for their election, until they are brought to know the things freely given them
of God. How miserable in this life, are thieves, drunkards, traitors,
murderers, and such like! Every good law, and every good magistrate, and all
good people oppose them with all their might, with one awful punishment after
another, until many of them end their lives of fear, trembling and horror on a
gibbet, awful spectacles of shame and reproach, and without any comfort in
their own souls, from the blessed truth I maintain. For it will fully appear,
that no man of the vile character I have been describing, while with such an
heart, can derive any comfort from this plan of salvation; any more than any of
the elect of God, on any supposition whatever, could have inward divine
consolation, while in a state of nature, of unbelief, and utter impenitency. I
say, how miserable are such poor creatures in this world! How full of shame and
horror, when taken away by the arm of justice! And why should we grudge them
the mercy and pity of the Father of their spirits, on whose sovereign grace
alone we ourselves are dependent for better conduct* and better circumstances
in this life; if he is pleased, in his infinite goodness, through the
all-sufficient atonement of him who died, not for our sins only, but also for
the sins of the whole world, to give relief, everlasting relief, to these poor,
trembling spirits, his own offspring at last, even at the time when the soul,
with infinite anguish and the most horrible expectations, is separating from
that body, from a union with which, it derived all its awful depravity.

IF we have been more favored in this life, by the sovereign, distinguishing
goodness of the common Parent of all, let us be exceeding thankful. We should
do well to remember, that, considering all the superior degrees of God's free
grace granted to us, against which we have also sinned every day, and every
moment, we may be as guilty in the sight of God, as our poor unhappy brethren,
that never have been blessed with that prudent foresight, and those restraints
wherewith God has been pleased to favor us. We may well acquiesce in all the
displays of divine justice which we see in this world, even in those that are
condemned to flee to the pit, and our hand should not stay them. But, I think,
we can give no reason why the blood of Jesus Christ, which cleanses from all
sin, should not save them in another world; which will not lie full strong
against every hope of our own salvation. If their sins go beforehand to
judgment, ours may follow after. An earthly tribunal affords but a miserable
decision to determine who are deepest in guilt, in the eye of the Omniscient
Judge.

WE have exceeding strong motives to religion and all moral virtue, drawn from
views of honor and prosperity, pleasure and joy in this life; and to deter us
from the ways of wickedness, from the opposite consideration. Caeteris paribus,
a man is always happy in this world, in proportion to that degree of true
godliness and virtue which forms his real character; and miserable in
proportion to the degree of wickedness that governs him. Also great, very great
will be the distinction between such different characters to all eternity.
Their reward will be as different, as their works have been. And this may be;
yet both of them be in the same world there, as well as here. No man in this
world, since the fall, ever had any heart but a bad one, really and truly so.
"There is none good but one, that is God." No man ever did one good deed, in
the strict sense of the divine law. "They are all gone out of the way; there is
none that does good, no not one."

WHEN we speak of the good heart of believers, and of their good and holy
lives; and when we find these epithets in scripture, they are never to be
understood in strict propriety of speech, but only in a comparative sense, i.
e. less wicked, in the exercises of their hearts, as to the real matter of
these exercises, than unbelievers are, or than they themselves were, in a state
of unregeneracy. It is the same with regard to their good and holy lives: i. e.
they are much less wicked, as to the matter of their conduct, than once they
were, or than unbelievers ordinarily are. But it is certain, that, in propriety
and strictness of speech, no positive goodness belongs to any human character
on earth; nor can this possibly obtain, unless something be found as pure in
all respects as the law of God, which is the only measure of positive moral
goodness.

IN real propriety of language, all men are great sinners without exception,
and some, as to the matter of their character and conduct, much greater sinners
than others. I say, as to the matter; for I shall consider obligations,
motives, aggravations, etc. in the sequel. But in this all men on earth do now,
and ever did agree, viz. " the heart and character of every man, in the sight
of God, is an awful, unspeakably bad heart and character." And there will be no
reward to any in the next world, but a reward of free, sovereign grace, through
the atonement and mediation of God's elect Savior, the elect head of every man.
All may be in heaven together in God's own time, brought there in his own way,
with as great a distinction of reward there, as of character here. But if some
are personally in hell, and others in heaven, to interminable duration; the
difference of reward will be infinitely greater than that of character and
works ever was.

ALL believers are absolutely, positively, and perfectly holy, in a relative
sense, i. e. in Christ. But this has no concern with their real character; and
their works have no hand in all this. Their own personal character, and their
works are just as far from having any consideration in their justifying
righteousness, as the character and works of those who never heard of a Savior.
They are justified as ungodly, by that righteousness made known to the soul, by
the medium of faith, which is unto all and upon all them that believe, for
there is no difference. There is no difference, none at all, but what exists
while the medium of faith and the means of application are suspended: None as
to the covenant of redemption: None as to the undertaking of Christ: None with
regard to the purchase or faithfulness and promise of him, who came into the
world, not to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved:
None as to merit on the part of man, or any motion toward God in the heart of
one man more than another: None, as to the eternal good purpose of God: In
this, and every other sense he is no respecter of persons. The language of a
God of infinite, sovereign mercy, to his children partakers of flesh and blood,
and for the sake of union with whom, his own Son took part of the same, is
this, without any distinction; "I, even I am he that blotteth out your sin, for
mine own sake."

VERILY there are all the distinctions among mankind, in this, and a future
world, which the holy scriptures know any thing of, without our making any
distinction, invented by the blindness of the human mind, and the great want of
benevolence that is natural to man. Pride, and love of preeminence which is so
dear to human nature, will not let us rest easy, but in a self-exalting
prospect that a very few of us shall have the pleasure, in the next world, to
look down on the great body of mankind infinitely beneath us, and feeling our
own happiness much heightened, and our own glory much augmented, by the
contrast of their extreme misery and shame. Do you feel this spirit, my reader?
You had need take care, lest, on your plan of limiting the Holy One of Israel,
yourself may take the inferior rank among those, whom you now view in prospect
with a future unutterable contempt.

WHATEVER difference, or specific difference, if any prefer these terms, there
may be between the grace given to one and another, in this life, the character,
temper and ways of all the human race agree in many things more than they
differ! "As in water face answers to face, so does the heart of man to man."
Bring all the human race together, and their dissimilitude will be very small,
in comparison of their general agreement. A present believer has indeed
something, which a present unbeliever has not; and God knows what a little
something it is. His omniscient eye sees how awfully we all agree. He never yet
saw a reason, or found a motive out of himself, to save any of us all. Had all
mankind right thoughts of God, a real true knowledge of that glorious fountain
of love, this would make salvation appear common salvation, as it did of old.
Jude iii. And none would deny it, or even so much as wish the doctrine were not
true. If that knowledge of God, which all men are commanded to seek after above
all things, would establish us in this blessed truth, is not the foundation of
it real, solid, and true? Or does our discovery and knowledge of things so
glorious, give being to their own objects?

IF mankind were wise enough to know in what way to find their greatest
interest, joy, pleasure, and delight, even in this present life, they would
certainly seek it and find it only in the ways of real piety and virtue, in the
ways of true wisdom. "Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace. She is a tree of life to all that lay hold on her; and happy is every
one that retains her." All the happiness of heaven consists in true religion,
in the highest perfection of it. If it is not happiness as far as we have it,
in the present world, it will not be in a future: For the nature of it is the
very same, in whatever part of God's vast dominions we are. The nature,
tendency, and concomitants of sin are just the reverse. If sin is happifying in
this world, it will be in the next; if it gives real joy and pleasure here, it
will there. The hell that the devils are in, and that all mankind deserve, and
are condemned to, by the law of God, is nothing but perfection of sin, with its
inseparable connections and consequences. These remarks being admitted, we are
prepared to resume the thought before suggested; comparing one sinner of the
humankind with another. I have intimated that there is a vast difference, in
many respects, and yet in one grand respect none at all.

WITH regard to this present life, and our connection with human society; and
with respect to our own comfort or misery here, there is very great difference
between those we call the best, and the worst of men. The former do much good,
and inwardly feel much comfort and real, solid pleasure; and are, in the
general course of the divine government, of all men most beloved, honored, and
promoted. I say, in the general course of providence; for special times of
persecution and the like, I now leave out of the question. In saying this, I
say just what the word of God, in the general tenor of it, abundantly asserts,
and what the general experience of all nations of the earth does abundantly
confirm.

EVEN, in days of the most bloody persecution, the real happiness and joy of
the godly is much greater than that of any other men. Whatever a blind, carnal
world may imagine, there is in very deed a great, and most blessed reward of
holiness and piety, in the present life. "Thou will keep him in perfect peace,
whose mind is stayed on thee; because he trusts in thee." "In keeping thy
commandments there is great reward." "And who is he that will harm you, if ye
be followers of that which is good?" "If ye obey and serve him, ye shall spend
your days in prosperity, and your years in pleasure." No outward circumstances,
or adverse dispensations can possibly frustrate this exceeding, real, inward
delight and joy in the mind, in the soul, the seat of all rational and
spiritual pleasure. "As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: As having nothing, yet
possessing all things." The real, substantial, solid pleasures of believing,
godly souls, have a basis very different from all the emotions of the hearts of
God's enemies, which deluded souls call pleasure. They are always "like the
troubled sea, which cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt." Whatever
false show of happiness they may make, in the eyes of the world, yet "there is
no peace, says God, to the wicked." There is truly as great a difference in
the real, inward reward of the virtuous and vicious, the godly and ungodly, in
this life, as there is in the different temper of their minds, and in the
different ways in which they walk.

BUT now let us compare their desert of punishment, in another world, solely as
it respects the law of God, the great and only unerring and decisive rule. We
all agree in the following ratio of estimating the demerit of sin in the sight
of God. We consider the matter of it as one thing, i.e. how far our hearts and
lives deviate from the law of God; and the obligations against which we sin, as
another. We compare these two together, and thence judge of the real
criminality of a sinner in the sight of God. This is agreeable to reason and
the word of God.

LET us set up two men, and try their guilt in the sight of God, or in the eye
of his holy law, by the above rule. Pharaoh shall be one, and Paul the other.
The former was a most horrible sinner, in the eyes of all good people; the
latter was one of the best of men, in the same view. Pharaoh did all the harm
in his power, and his whole heart was in it. Paul, after his conversion; did
much good, with a sincere and pious heart. Thus far the difference of character
is exceeding great, while we attend only to the matter of it. Next bring in the
obligations. Pharaoh was, perhaps, least of all mankind favored with tenderness
of conscience, or restraining grace. He was in all the gross darkness of
paganism, and God did indeed harden his heart, in a most signal manner, and
that in a way consistent with his own holiness and purity. It is here quite
foreign to the argument, to enquire into the manner how. Whether only by
permission, or otherwise, it is certain God did it. He was left under the least
obligations and motives to keep him from sin, we will suppose, of any man that
ever lived; and we will also suppose, and grant, that the matter of his sin, in
heart and life, was the greatest of any man on earth. Paul, after his
conversion, was blessed with the greatest divine light (we will suppose) of any
man on earth. His natural powers and education were exceeding good, with most
eminent degrees of saving grace in his soul, abundance of sanctifying grace,
and an equal degree of divine joy and consolation. And he served God in a most
eminent manner. Yet he always sinned in some degree, in his heart and in his
life; he was never perfect one single moment; far, very far from it, if we may
believe his own inspired testimony of himself.

NOW, did not Paul's obligations and motives to holiness, as far exceed
Pharaoh's, as the matter of his character was better? What made him better, but
his motives and obligations, arising from the light, grace, and spirit, freely
given him of God? Yet his character was always very inadequate to the purity of
God's holy law. All that made him less sinful in heart, and life, was mere
obligation from God. All light and grace, and every thing that has this
effect, is so. Multiply the degree of his remaining sinfulness, as to the
matter of it, into the degree of obligation and motive to which it was opposed,
and what less will be the total amount, in the sight of God, than that of
Pharaoh? This abominable prince had obligations, against which he sinned, many
and great; as every man in the world has. But compare them with all that a
sovereign God did for the apostle, all his light and grace; the difference is
exceeding great. God did as much more for Paul, as his heart and life were
better than Pharaoh's. All he did for that eminent apostle was mere obligation
on him, and the law justly required perfection of him: But he was always very
far from it. Obligations on Pharaoh, i. e. light and grace, were as far
withheld from him, by a holy sovereign God, as his heart and life was more
sinful than that of Paul. Perhaps my reader has not much attended to this
thought in time past; but I think it worthy of solemn attention, I am sure it
runs through the whole word of God. This will account for those most abominable
descriptions, which Job, David and Paul give of themselves, even in their
highest seize in grace, and after all their pious walk with God, and all
the great good they had done in the world.

DESCRIPTIONS of this tenor, which the best of men give of their hearts and
lives in holy writ, and which I have always heard the most eminent christians
give of themselves, in their solemn and devout prayers, were surprising to me,
in the days of my early youth. I once understood them as humble and meek
compliments, which they were disposed to make to the Deity, or expressions
entirely hyperbolical. When I so often heard the most godly ministers and other
eminent christians describe their hearts and lives, in the presence of God, had
enough for the vilest, and most notorious sinners in the world, I used to,
wonder how they dared thus to compliment with an heart-searching God, who, I
supposed, must know they did not speak the strict truth, and that they knew it
themselves. I did not so much wonder to hear a rich man own his poverty; or a
delicate lady despise a fine entertainment, an excellent dinner, or supper she
had provided, in the presence of her guests. Such compliments I thought might
bear having countenance from frequent custom, and an appearance of humility and
delicacy. But, I thought it quite amiss to say that to the great,
heart-searching God, which both the speaker and the object of prayer knew was
far from strict and plain truth.

AFTER long attention to the law of God, and the hearts and lives of men, and
the obligations we are under to God, very especially for every degree of divine
light and saving grace; I am at last very sensible of the propriety of all such
confessions before God, and that they are wholly without a compliment. The
pharisee in the parable was, no doubt, a man of pure and amiable character in
the eyes of the world, and deserved great honor and respect from man, for the
good he had done in the community, by his shining virtues. But, when he was
transacting the great concerns of his soul with his Maker, he might have prayed
just as the scandalous, infamous publican did, and with good acceptance too.

LET beneficent, shining characters, the eminent benefactors of mankind receive
great honor and respect from their fellow-men. Let them stand far distinguished
from the common people, and farther still from all the vicious and immoral: But
as they stand related to that holy law which considers every obligation men are
under to perfect holiness, as well as the matter of their conduct, I say, in
this view, set every high thought and towering imagination be levelled with the
dust. Let every mountain and hill be brought down, and the Lord alone exalted.

MANKIND have a spirit of monopoly. Nothing is more natural to them. If they
have great advantages and honors in the eyes of others in this world, they are
apt to insist on those distinctions before God, as an argument for eternal
continuance. But, "the last shall be first, and the first shall be last."

THAT which is highly esteemed among men, ever all that men call good, in the
human character, is so far from, bearing the test of God's holy law, that it
is, in that relative sense, abomination in the sight of God. Let the best man
on earth plead the best of his heart and his life, as a ground of acceptance
with God; and he shall find it an utter abomination. The atonement stands by
itself alone and unmixed: "The Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root and
offspring of David, and he alone has prevailed." This glorious truth has ever
been deeply impressed on the hearts of the friends of God, in this world, and
will be to all eternity. The blind, proud notions of mankind will have no place
in heaven, as they have here. There they will know and feel that "the former
things are passed away."

THE doctrine which I plead for, has a great tendency to afford believers
adoring and submissive exercises of mind, in view of all the sin and calamity
they find in the world.

THEY see that God has done nothing inconsistent with his infinite love, and
his avowed character in his word, by introducing, in his holy providence, or
permitting, if you please, all the moral evil that is in the world. It will all
have a glorious issue, conducive to the greater manifestation of his infinite
love, and all his amiable attributes, in the wonders of redeeming love. And in
a view of all natural and penal evil connected in justice with the evil of sin,
the soul adores God and falls in lowly submission under all his holy rebukes.
So, when we see so many miserable creatures of our own kind struggling with
pain and calamity, through life, we behold them as Jesus does, who died to save
them from wrath to come; and our souls are filled with humble submission, and
all the astonishment of devout love.

WHEN we read of all the dreadful slaughters of the ancient inhabitants of the
land of Canaan, and many millions more of God's own offspring like ourselves,
under all the horrors of massacre, by the express command of the Father of
their spirits, we shall yet say "God is love." He has, in all these things
given a due testimony of his justice, and his abhorrence of sin. Yet it is not
"the rod of an enemy, or the chastisement of a cruel one:" God has not
forgotten that he is their own Father, by creation, and that creation is a dear
child of his love. On this plan, we do not stumble at any thing he does; but
feel these his words with believing joy, "as I live, says the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies." When we think of all the awful and
terrible judgments that have fallen on the trembling children of men, our own
flesh and blood, it is well for us to remember what he has said, who died for
the sins of the whole world, "and I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will
draw ALL men unto me."

LET it not be imagined here, that I would so much as intimate, that God is
under any obligation to save men finally; because that, in the dispensations of
his government, they have been very miserable in this world: Or that those who
have been most so, have in justice, any claim of reparation on their Maker. I
mean no such thing. I argue only from the nature and attributes of JEHOVAH, as
they appear in his word and works. He is worthy to be God supreme, by his own
infinite worth, by virtue of his own infinitely glorious and lovely
perfections. He is by nature God, as some have well expressed it.

MY hope is founded entirely on his nature and disposition, through his own Son
made manifest. In this manifestation, GOD IS LOVE. His moral disposition is
infinitely amiable and inviting. It is the supreme joy of all holy, wise,
intelligent beings, that there is such a God. His nature is the basis of all
happiness, and the foundation of all hope. It is the source of all our comfort,
that there is such a God over all, blessed forevermore; that he is Creator,
Proprietor, and absolute Disposer of all things, absolutely sovereign and
uncontrouled; and that he works all things according to the counsel of his
own will. For his will flows from a nature infinitely glorious and lovely.

WE have no claim of justice on him who gave us our whole being, whose absolute
property we are. Whatever he does with us, he meddles with nothing but his own.
Hence, I argue only from the immutable nature of God, infinitely perfect and
good, and from his plain word and all his manifestations. I say, these do
ascertain the final redemption of a whole guilty world, or, that he will have
all men to be saved.

HAD there been an eternal, Supreme Being, Creator and absolute Proprietor of
all things, as JEHOVAH is; who in his moral disposition, his moral nature, had
been just the reverse from what he really is. Horrible supposition! but lawful
in the view I make it. Had he created innumerable myriads of rational creatures
more than ever yet had existence; and made them all consummately sinful and
miserable; and had we our place in that woeful scale of beings, doomed to
endless sin, sorrow, and pain unutterable: Even on this supposition, we could
have no claim of justice, on our Maker, as we have upon our fellow creatures
who injure us, and bring pain and misery upon us. They take hold of property
not their own, but ours, in opposition to their claim; and therefore we may in
justice demand reparation of them. Not so is it with regard to the supreme
Fountain of all being, who is the Creator and absolute Proprietor of all
things, including all the feelings and sufferings of creatures. Their very
pains and all their affections are his property: For their whole being is so.

IN such an awful, lamentable case, as above supposed, we could never accuse
our Maker of injustice, with any kind of propriety. All we could say would be
to howl, in doleful accents, to all eternity; " the Supreme reigns, let all
creatures mourn; let the multitude of beings lament and bewail! woe! woe! woe!
to miserable creatures, that such is the nature and disposition of him that
rules over all." I cannot think we do any honor to the blessed JEHOVAH, in
ascribing to him a moral nature, in any wise similar to this. One as opposite
thereto as we can possibly conceive of, is indeed the very nature of that
blessed Being whom we adore. God's will cannot possibly, in the nature of
things, be unjust; and by his own immutable nature, it is infinitely good, and
the spring of all blessedness and joy. Diffusion of being and blessedness flows
from the nature of God. This doctrine exhibits JEHOVAH, as the true God, whom
angels and saints adore, "Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the
first and the last."

IF we carefully attend to the holy scriptures, we do not find any holy men
insisting upon terms of limitation with God, as though they thought there could
ever be in the disposition, or will of God any possibility of doing wrong to
them. They all appear to choose God should be just as he is, or as his own
nature does dispose and incline him; and they know he ever will be so disposed
toward them. This is their happiness; and in this they put all their
confidence. All their hopes arise from this; although they have ever looked on
themselves as sit objects of eternal misery, as any creatures that ever God
made. His character is often, and with great propriety, called his name. Poor,
penitent, believing sinners repair to nothing else, nothing but his character
and disposition as manifested in a Savior, in whom only they are righteous.
"The name of the Lord is a strong tower: The righteous runs into it and are
safe."

IT is truly for the honor of JEHOVAH, that we should all know, that he alone
is the absolute source of all being and blessedness: That he is absolute,
sovereign, and uncontrouled, in every view, no foreign influence of any kind or
degree ever acting on him: That his creatures never can nor shall have any
thing else to found their hopes upon, but his own glorious nature and sovereign
will: That his manifestations are all glorious and comfortable to every human
soul, that understands and believes them: And that it is not the understanding
and belief of a sinner that makes them so, but they are so in their own nature.

NO sinner of mankind does God any honor, by believing that all his own hopes
of pardon and salvation, depend as much on himself, as it is possible any thing
can depend on a creature, viz. on some disposition or qualification in himself.
This denies God his proper character, in his relation to sinful man. But to
believe the blessed God has given qualifications as sure to unworthy sinners,
in his own way and time, as he has provided an all-sufficient Savior for a
guilty world, is ascribing to God all his glorious attributes, "working all
things (without the least exception) according to the counsel of his own will."

IF the limitarians could be disposed to think, study and read as much on this
point, as the writer has done for many years past, with an ardent desire to
find nothing but the truth to rest in; they would see that it does no honor to
the great and glorious God to make eternal salvation, in the least, depend on
any creature, as to the certain event of it. Indeed, all the powers of the soul
are fitly exercised by a sovereign God, in his own way, in the application and
enjoyment of all that flows out of the mere goodness of his own nature, in a
way honorable to himself, by the substitution and mediation of the second man,
the Lord from heaven.

I CAN find no plan of religion but this, that can ever warrant the great
charity, and union among men, which is so much recommended in the sacred
oracles. If we consider ourselves as distinguished from most of our fellow men,
in the eternal purposes and views of God: That we are destined to his infinite,
everlasting love, and most others to his hatred, wrath and vengeance
forevermore; we shall hardly find it in our hearts to exercise that pity, and
tenderness, love and good will to them, that the gospel requires. If we think
our God will be their eternal enemy, and delight himself in their eternal
destruction; we shall hardly feel ourselves friendly to our God, in loving and
pitying all mankind, and striving all in our power for their salvation. You
cannot more displease your fellow men, than by manifesting great love and
tenderness to their enemies.

AGAIN; In conversation, or in hearing the word preached, or in reading the
multitude of good authors that have written on our most important concerns, we
cannot upon any other plan, maintain gospel candor. We shall find the light and
communications of God to men so various; and their channel of preaching or
writing, in many respects, so devious from one another; that we shall be ready
to scruple whether there is any truth in the doctrine of a special revelation
from heaven. We shall fall away, at least, as far as Deism. But, on the plan,
for which I am pleading, the whole difficulty is obviated: As every writer
uninspired, every preacher may be wrong in many things, and some in many more
than others; yet all be essentially right. By them God communicates light and
truth to the world, in various measures and degrees. Perhaps, it has not as yet
been fit, in the sight of God, in the former, or present gradations of divine
communication, to enlighten any author, or preacher so, but that all have been
involved in more darkness than they have seen of the true light. Hence arises
great bitterness of spirit toward many, or universal skepticism. But on the
gracious principles I am supporting, we can rest contented, that the infinitely
wise Being should cause the light to dawn and increase just as fast as his own
wisdom and goodness dictate. And we can love one another as the gospel
requires; though under various degrees of instruction, and under various modes
of thinking.

THUS, if I read an author, or hear a sermon which I look upon one half
according to truth, and the other half not so; that part which is good, ought
to set as well on my mind as if the whole was so, and I ought to love the
writer, or the preacher, and bless God that they are enlightened so far as they
are. This I take to be a gospel spirit, and if so, it is according to the truth
of the gospel. It is for want of such a spirit, that many will reject all that
is good in an author or preacher, because of the many mistakes, or supposed
mistakes found in both. But, in good truth, if we will be instructed and
edified by none, but those who are right in all things, we deprive ourselves of
the whole benefit of instruction, or edification from any man uninspired.

THE doctrine I am pleading for, is much in favor of gospel love and charity,
harmony and peace. This is one mark of the truth of it. The true tendency of
this principle is so far from disposing those who believe it, to contend and
quarrel with the teachers and ministers of the christian churches, wherewith
they are now furnished, that it will induce them to love them more than ever,
and to treat them with all possible kindness. At the same time, we shall wish
and pray, that it may please God to lead them further into those glorious
truths, which they understand but in part. Thus it will have that quiet, and
peaceful influence among ministers and people, which so much adorns the gospel.

THE true import of the initiating seal among God's covenant people, both in
the former and present economy, confirms the doctrine which I am advocating.

THE whole Jewish church, and the great body of christians, who practice the
initiating seal in infancy, have ever understood it to be a seal of the
covenant of grace, to which even the infant seed of covenant parents, have a
right, and are thereby sealed in the covenant of grace and salvation; even
though they have always allowed, that such children are personally no better
than the infants of heathen. An infant among the Jews, at eight days old, was
supposed to be no better, personally, than any children of other nations; yet
they were sealed by circumcision in the covenant of grace and salvation; even
as they are now by baptism.

THE church of God and the ordinances of it, from the days of Abraham to this
day, were designed and instituted as a light or lamp which God holds up in the
world, to beam forth by degrees, and fully manifest, in due time, his purposes
of mercy and salvation to a guilty world, through that Mediator which he
appointed to take away the sin of the whole world. Hence God has commanded
that all the infants of covenant parents should be sealed, though personally in
the same unregenerate state with the world in general, as a testimony that all
were purchased by the common Redeemer of sinners, and should be brought to
actual enjoyment of salvation, in the time and manner most fit in the eyes of
infinite wisdom and goodness. Hence any child of a pagan has right to the seal,
if its lot is providentially among God's covenant people, and under proper
circumstances to be trained up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

ACCORDINGLY, the commission given to the apostles, was, to go forth and teach
all nations, and to command them to believe that divine truth which brings
salvation, and to baptize all nations to whom they preached, both parents and
children, (if they would submit to it) as a seal of the common salvation. This
was not a token that they had done, or ever could do any thing toward their own
salvation; but that Almighty God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, had engaged to
accomplish the salvation of a guilty world, and had made all sure, and would
seal it by baptism.

WE can, upon no other principle, make use of the seals and special ordinances
with any consistency. How shall we seal, in the covenant of grace and
salvation, persons destined and decreed to eternal personal damnation? How
shall we admit those to the holy supper, a seal of our eating and drinking with
Christ, at his table, in his heavenly kingdom, who may be, for ought we know,
not only in an unrevealed state at present, but also under an irreversible
decree of eternal reprobation? Would the Most High, in any wise, allow his
seals to be so used? God never would have set such blind creatures as we are,
about the work of admitting into the church, and exercising discipline, or to
handle the seals of grace and salvation, had his own plan been a limitarian
plan, or had he sent his Son into the world on any other errand than that the
world through him might be saved.

DISCIPLINE must indeed be kept up in the church; and the body elected to such
special and glorious privileges, out of a world, as yet buried in darkness,
must be kept visibly pure, as bearing a proper, visible resemblance to its pure
and holy head. Those members that do not bear this visible resemblance, must be
delivered to Satan, yet only " for the destruction of the flesh." A dreadful
thing it is, to be in a state of excommunication from the privileges and
consolations of the people of God in the world; but there is nothing in it that
affects the certainty of eternal salvation at the great day: For the express
end of every final censure on earth, is, " that the spirit may be saved in the
day of our Lord Jesus." 1. Cor. v. 5. Whatsoever is thus bound on earth, shall
be bound in heaven, both as to its propriety and good tendency in this world,
and its glorious issue in the world to come, even the salvation of the soul in
the day of the Lord. Hence an excommunicated person is still a brother, and not
to be "treated as an enemy; but admonished as a brother."

MANY souls for whom Christ died, have justly experienced the awful sentence of
excommunication from his church on earth: Even Moses and Paul were willing to
suffer the same, if it might redound to the glory of God and the salvation of
souls. i. e. As most have understood them. Yet this does by no means frustrate
the irreversible and extensive plan of redeeming love, to gather together in
one all things in Christ, and to make all men, in due time, see the glory of
this mystery, which for many ages and generations lay hid in great obscurity.

GOD's church on earth, his visible covenant people were always designed, in
his infinite wisdom and goodness, as a lamp, a light to the world, a city set
on an hill, to manifest and hold forth to a lost world what God has done for
them, and what he would do. The church is a present, visible representation of
divine love and mercy to sinners, to a lost world. The church holds forth to
the world the glorious God with all his divine attributes and blessed purposes,
and the Savior of all men, in all his glorious offices, and the Holy Spirit, in
all his infinite and almighty energy. "By the church is made known the manifold
wisdom of God." Ephesians. iii. 10. The church was not set up in the world, to show
us how much better some men are than others, or what a respecter of persons God
is, in his purposes and operations; but rather to witness that God has
concluded all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all. Not to hold forth
the worth and riches of any community of poor sinners; but rather, the
unsearchable riches of Christ.

ANOTHER argument against the limitarian scheme, is this: No man, on their
principles, can do his duty; even if his whole heart and disposition were
perfectly right.

IT is our duty to acquiesce in God's will in every event. But an holy heart
cannot do this in such an event as his own eternal damnation, or that of any of
his fellow men. The principal misery of that eternal damnation they plead for,
lies in an eternal, fixed and growing opposition of heart to an holy God, and
the horrible rebellion proceeding from such an heart. It is certain an holy and
right heart, which is full of love to God, cannot feel willing to be thus at
enmity with God, and hate and rebel against him to all eternity. It is equally
certain, that an holy man, that loves his neighbor as himself, and values his
neighbor's happiness as his own, and is exceedingly averse to any dishonor done
to God, any opposition against him, as much if it be in his neighbor as in
himself, cannot be willing that his neighbor should thus hate and sin against
God to all eternity. If we do not so love our neighbors in all things as
ourselves, we fall short of that perfect benevolence required of us.

BESIDES, the nature of this opposition to God is infinitely evil and odious,
whether in ourselves, or in any of the human kind. Hence if our hearts are
right, we shall feel a great opposition to it, and can never be pleased with
it, or reconciled to it. We must be exceedingly wicked, to be reconciled to
such great and eternal wickedness.

IT is true, the redeemed will in the true gospel sense see the smoke of their
torment ascend up forever and ever, and shout Alleluia in the view of it; but
this will be in the manner I have before taken notice of, only in the glass of
pure justice, in the glass of the divine law. Thus they will eternally see all
the human race, and themselves as well as others, forever dwelling with
devouring fire and everlasting burnings; while, in very fact and in person,
they shall from their munition of rocks shout Alleluia, finding the bread of
life sustaining their happy souls, and the waters of everlasting consolation
made sure.

IT never can be found in a holy heart to take any more satisfaction in the
rebellion of others against God than in his own; both are infinitely hateful to
a soul obedient to God. The limitarian plan, if fully considered, and realized
seriously in the soul, (which is very little done) can never meet with the
approbation of the friends of God. They will feel their hearts inclined like
the infinitely benevolent heart of God, who will have all men to be saved, and
to come to the knowledge of the truth. They will pray for the salvation of all,
and plead this warrant so to do, viz. It is the will of God and our Savior, who
gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.

FURTHER, the charitable hope and desire of good people, such as the gospel
requires, is certainly agreeable to the word of God. Now suppose all the race
of mankind that ever have lived in the world, or ever shall be in it, were to
pass before any godly man, individually in succession. Ask that good man, as he
views them passing before his eyes one after another, with regard to each in
particular, "Do you hope and desire that in the infinite mercy of God through
Christ, that man may be saved?" He would say yes, with all my heart. So he
would say of the first that passed before him, and so of the second, and the
same of every one. To answer otherwise, would indicate a spirit not regulated
by the word of God, i. e. not according to truth. But thus to express our
desire and hope of each individual of the human race, would certainly include
the whole. Yet a man destitute of such desires, hopes and prayers, we should
not look upon as possessing a gospel spirit, or such a friend to souls as the
gospel requires. What should we think of a man that would say, I desire most of
these may be in the greatest misery to all eternity?

THE prayers of good men for their most malicious enemies, for the vilest
creatures in the world; such as the prayers of David, and that of Stephen when
he was dying, under a shower of malice from his enemies and the enemies of God;
these prayers, I say, were not without faith, and a good foundation of faith;
and of consequence, were heard and answered of God. Yet, if any are to be
eternally damned in their own persons, we should imagine that such malicious
persecutors, and murderers would certainly be found among them. We should think
that the murderers of Christ, at least some of the many thousands combined in
that most malicious of all sins, would be objects of God's eternal wrath; but
it is as certain they were all forgiven, as it is that the prayers of Christ
were always answered, and all his petitions granted at all times. " And I knew
that thou hear me always: John xi. 42.

IF it were possible for people to divest themselves of the long, deep, and
rooted prejudices arising from the limitarian scheme, every man would most
clearly see that we have no foundation or warrant, in reason or scripture, to
pray as good people ever have done, or as Christ did for the vilest of men, for
their pardon and eternal salvation, but a warrant of this nature, viz. It is
the will of God and our Savior, it is his will, without any equivocation or
collusion, that all men shall be saved, and, in his own way and time, come to
the knowledge of the truth; and that consistent with his truth, holiness and
greatest honor, by a proper atonement; as Christ gave himself a ransom for all
to be testified in due times, or fit seasons. 1. Tim. ii.

IF we were to single out any one of the multitude combined in the murder of
Jesus, as being the worst of all, perhaps we should pitch upon Judas to be the
man. And he indeed met with an awful and aggravated damnation, in the highest
sense of the term, in the true scripture meaning of it, as it relates to any
mere man personally. What this his damnation or perdition was, I have before
shown. But it is just as certain that he was forgiven of God, in his own time,
and all the rest of the horrible, blind, malicious multitude, as that Jesus
cried to his Father with his dying breath, " Father forgive them; for they know
not what they do."

CHRIST never made but one conditional prayer, and that he made for this
special reason, to leave an everlasting testimony to the world, that sin,
whether actual or imputed, could never be discharged without a full
satisfaction to the divine law. That prayer related to his own sufferings, and
was introduced with an hypothesis, and closed with full submission to the will
of God. See Mat. xxvi. and other parallel records in the evangelists. All the
rest of his prayers were peremptory, without any condition. On the ground of
his atonement, all having the force of a just and absolute demand. " Father I
will," is the tenor of all the prayers that ever Christ made for guilty men.

IT is proper for us further to consider, that God will accomplish the highest
glory of his own attributes; and that it is certain, they are all more
glorified in the salvation, than in the personal damnation of any sinner, or
every sinner on earth.

IN the salvation of such vile, guilty creatures as we are, every divine
attribute does shine most gloriously, and all in perfect harmony. No attributes
are more glorious than the infinite pity and mercy of God to sinners, with his
power and good will to save them freely. This most blessed part of the divine
character is not seen, it makes no discovery of itself with regard to many
millions, on the limitarian scheme. Neither can the holiness and justice of
God, ever shine so gloriously bright in the personal damnation of any sinner,
or of all the poor sinners in the world, as in the great atonement, exacting
full satisfaction of a personage infinitely greater and dearer to God than any
mere man, or all the mere human race. If you leave room, in the glorious plan
of our redemption, for all to be personally damned, you take away all the glory
of it: And you derogate from this glory, in just proportion, as you hold, that
any number shall be personally damned, be that number more or less.

THAT doctrine which represents all sin, all moral evil, in the most odious and
abominable aspect, has thence, one evidence of being a true doctrine.

THERE is no other understanding of the word, nature, and character of God,
that makes opposition to him and rebellion against him, appear so full of
mischief, and ingratitude, as this I am pleading for. To oppose such a God, as
I consider JEHOVAH to be, on this plan of creating, governing and redeeming the
world; how abominable! All the glorious attributes of God would be effectually
obstructed, in their displays and operations; and the whole creation, that
wonderful child of divine love, would suffer the most barbarous murder, if
sinners might have their perverse wills gratified, in all their necessary
consequences. The infinite, eternal fountain of love, being and blessedness,
would be wholly dried up; and rebellion against such a character, would leave
nothing but consummate woe and misery in the universe. To rebel against
infinite power and knowledge, if united with a disposition opposite to that of
infinite love, (could such a being exist) would not be like rebelling against
our infinitely kind and merciful, heavenly Father. To rebel against the
cruelest tyrant that ever was clothed with despotic power, might be a perilous
thing; but not like rebelling against the kindest, most compassionate and
loving ruler that a happy people was ever blessed with.

WILL not every man on earth agree with me in this one point, at least, that no
other doctrine ever advanced, can make sin against God, hatred of God and
opposition to him, look and feel so horribly as the doctrine I maintain? For
surely the nature and native tendency of sin is wholly to overthrow a God, so
infinitely glorious and amiable as JEHOVAH, in this view appears, and to stifle
in the birth all his emanations of being and felicity. This is the nature of
all sin, and not the less odious and abominable, because God counteracts the
whole by his almighty power and love; but the odiousness of sin is rather
enhanced and aggravated for this very reason. The real nature and disposition
of our God is, to emanate being and blessedness far and wide, and that
forevermore. The nature of sin is to obstruct all this, and therefore no words
can express the odiousness of it. For sin is to be infinitely hated only for
its nature. Merely as an event, it belongs to the pure and holy plan, and good
government of Deity: Who, even in infinite love and goodness, saw fit not to
hinder the existence of it, however infinitely hateful; and will certainly turn
it all to good account, (even contrary to its nature) to the greatest happiness
of his creatures. Thus the whole system of being shall, in the result of all,
be the perfection of love and happiness.

BUT, were the moral disposition of a Supreme Being such as to propagate some
happiness and abundance of misery, and that eternal, though, in regard to his
absolute property in all things (which I have often mentioned) we might not
accuse him of injustice; yet most of his creatures could do no other than
lament their fate in bitter howlings and deepest agonies of soul, because being
and misery had been forced upon them. Our glory and blessedness lies in this,
that JEHOVAH is what he is. "I AM THAT I AM." To be disaffected to such a God,
oh, how criminal!

MOREOVER, that salvation is ensured to sinners, by the death of Christ,
without the least dependence on any qualifications in them; but, on the
contrary, that all the qualifications necessary to their enjoyment of the
benefit are insured by his death, is manifest expressly from Heb. ix. as well
as from the whole tenor of the gospel. A testator insures the legacy, at his
death, without any regard at all to the present disposition, or even the
knowledge of any one of the legatees. He has made the testament, and, when he
dies, it becomes unalterable, and the heirs take the benefit, whenever it comes
to their knowledge. This is the idea of the apostle to the Hebrews, on this
point. To the same purpose he writes Titus iii. 4. 5, 6. "After that the love
and kindness of God toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness, which
we have done; but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior." So it every where appears from the holy
scriptures, that the atonement, in all cases, insures qualifications, or the
application of the whole benefit; and not that our qualifications insure an
atonement, in our behalf; that the undertaking and purchase of Christ is at the
bottom of all, leads in the whole of the salvation of sinners, makes all sure;
and that the whole application and all qualifications are but consequences,
through the kingly and prophetic offices of Christ, co-extensive with his
priestly impetration.

NO man on earth can ever obtain assurance of his safe estate, or any good hope
toward God, on any other foundation than the real and universal grace of God.
For, while believing, penitent sinners are laboring to build any hope at all,
on good distinctions, and good qualifications in themselves, they can find
nothing but what points them out for eternal destruction. And they will sink
deeper and deeper in despair, in this way, as they look deeper and deeper into
their hearts and lives for any ground of hope. God, and he alone is "the hope
of Israel and Savior thereof, in the day of trouble." "Other foundation can no
man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ." In such a God and such
a Savior, the vilest sinner on earth may find comfort and salvation. "Look unto
me and be ye saved all the ends of the earth; for I am God and not man, the
Holy One in the midst of thee."

WE may add, that this understanding of divine revelation, not only leaves the
holy bible free from all contradictions and inconsistencies; but also takes
away the main ground of all deistical scruples and doubts.

MANY are inclined to deism, under the light of divine revelation, because they
see such an infinite variety of opinions among revelationists, innumerable
different sects among those, who in common, hold the sacred bible for their
rule of faith. They are all alike concerned in the great things contained
therein, and alike sincere and honest in what they profess to believe; yet,
there is such variety of opinion, and such opposition of sentiment, in many
points, many are thence inclined to doubt whether the doctrine of such a
special revelation is not wholly groundless; and so fall away into infidelity.

ON my plea, all this inducement to deism is removed. We consider the all-wise
and sovereign God, as enlightening mankind in various measures and degrees, in
his own time, way and manner. All are right in some degree, more or less, and
none but what have much darkness mixed with the best light they have. All agree
in one, as far as light is given to each respectively. They differ not, on the
account of their knowledge of the bible, so far as they understand it; but only
for want of more knowledge of it, and a better understanding of its true
meaning. Thus all sects in the world, all opinionists, however diverse in many
things, do indeed conspire and unite in confirming the truth of the sacred
bible.

WHEN I hear all that papists say of religion, though I perceive great
ignorance and darkness in them; yet I have thence great confirmation that there
is indeed a special revelation from God, and that the same is contained in the
old and new testaments. When I find mahometans defending the old testament,
though they deny the new, I am by them confirmed in the truth of both. Yea,
when I hear any pagans in the world, talk about their own religion, (for none
are without religion) I easily see something they have derived from the bible,
in some indirect way or other: Even as we have light from the sun by way of the
moon, and many other media of reflection; all witnessing alike that there is a
sun. So every sect of pagans on earth confirm me in my faith. I find they are
all taught of God, as the bible teaches, so far as they are taught at all.
Their many error are all owing to negative considerations. i. e. Where light
extends no further, darkness will remain on their minds. So far as God has been
pleased to lead them to the knowledge of truth, they are right; and in all
beside they must be wrong. So when I take a view of the great variety of
opinions among protestants, whom I look upon more enlightened than any other
people in the world; they all confirm me in the belief that the bible is from
God; though they greatly vary in many things, and oppose one another in points
almost endless to name.

IF I am right in my understanding of God's design and method, his merciful and
wise plan of operation to save a guilty world by his dear Son; then my faith is
justly confirmed by all these things, which, on any other principles, will tend
greatly to confound the mind. On any other Scheme of salvation, a very few
there be, but what are destined to eternal, unutterable torments. Who alas! are
those few that shall escape? All are damned by each other; and I think with
equal authority: But, blessed be God, the great Judge is THE SAVIOR OF ALL MEN,
and has taken away the sin of the whole world.

I AM edified, and comforted by every serious, honest man, that I hear talk
upon his religion, whatever degrees of light God has been pleased to give him,
be they more or less. I am most edified where there is most light; but truly
the light is sweet, even in the least degrees of it. I find something from God
given to every sect, and party; and that gives me delight. So it is with me,
and so it must be with all that receive divine revelation in this light. Which,
I think, is one mark that it is the true light, in which we ought to understand
it; as it bears the stamp of its divine Author, who "is the true light, which
LIGHTS EVERY MAN that comes into the world." And oh! what charity, love, and
mutual friendship must flow from such a view of God and his ways! This is that
charity which is the bond of perfectness.

THERE is no other doctrine of grace, that will so encourage the use of all the
means of grace and salvation, and so enforce upon our minds the fitness and
propriety of all the institutions of the gospel.

I CONSIDER the whole divine plan connected indissolubly: All made sure; not in
any distinction of means and end; but all in one indissoluble chain. So that it
is as true and proper to say, that none can be saved without regeneration,
repentance, faith, and holiness, as to say that the extreme link in any chain
cannot be drawn forward, by an hand at the opposite end of the chain, unless
every link in the same chain is moved. It is always true, and always will be,
that he that believes not shall be damned, and is indeed damned personally, so
long as he remain in that state. "He is condemned already;" "the wrath of God
abides on him," and will so abide, until he is brought out of that state of
infidelity and impenitence.

THE greater our hope is in the use of means to obtain any important end, the
greater will be our exertions in every case, without exception. Full assurance
of success will excite the greatest exertions of all, provided we know that
sure success is only in this way. So, when Paul told the sailors, from the
mouth of an angel, that not one of their lives should be lost by the shipwreck,
Acts xxvii. they exerted themselves much the more vigorously to obey his
directions afterward, in using the means, as he told them it was the only way
in which they could be saved. Every careful observer of human nature, and of
the force of motives, well knows it is so in every case. If the end is very
important in our view, and there is but just one way to attain it; yet, if
success in that way is altogether dubious, and most likely our labors and
efforts will be all in vain, we might probably exert ourselves in some degree,
though with a faint heart. But, let us know assuredly we shall attain our
important end, if we will exert ourselves with all our might, and that this is
the only way; this will animate all the powers we have, and we shall engage to
purpose. The case is just the same in this matter of infinite weight, as in
other cases of a temporal concern; excepting only that our exertions are
excited with much greater force.

MOREOVER, the infinite reasonableness of religion and the service of God; the
unspeakable pleasure of it, and the superior reward in heaven, in proportion to
our signal obedience and piety in this state of probation; the great and good
influence of religion and virtue, as relative to the spiritual, and even
temporal good of our fellow-men, and many other considerations, too many now to
specify, all recommend the careful use of the means of grace and salvation, and
a life of piety and virtue in this world. In this of piety and virtue in this
world. In this way of saving sinners, God manifests his infinite wisdom and
goodness in laying out for rational creatures and moral agents, work adapted to
their rational, moral natures, and full of comfort, pleasure, and joy.
Salvation, however, was not appointed for the means of it; but the means, for
eternal salvation, which was eternally made sure, in the covenant of
redemption, to that race of beings whose sin the Lamb of God came to take away.

IT has ever been the sense of the most enlightened part of christians, that
the doctrine of election, and of the certain perseverance of believers, were
doctrines tending to engage them the more in the use of means. The doctrine of
election, as I have defined it, has a greater influence of the same kind, as
it displays a more extensive love of God to men, and gives us more enlarged
views of free grace, and makes poor sinners more dependent on God in every view.

IF this doctrine does indeed take hold of our souls, oh! what a sacrifice of
love shall we offer to God, even our whole souls and bodies! How shall we love
God and all his creatures for his sake! How shall we love our dear Savior, and
all for whom he died, for his sake, whether to us friends or enemies, known or
unknown, Jews or gentiles, barbarians, Scythians, bond or free! Jesus has died
for them all; he loves them all; and he will bring them all into his kingdom.
He will reconcile the world to himself, not imputing iniquity. The ends of the
earth shall look unto him and be saved.

IT is another token of true gospel faith, and truly evangelical principles,
that, in the exercise of them, good people find themselves happy in their own
lot, and are not uneasy or envious toward others.

WHOEVER has that sense of the word of God. which I maintain, will enjoy this
happiness. They are quite Willing that all mankind should enjoy every favor and
blessing God is pleased to bestow. They delight in the gracious communications
of God, every where. If the friends of God have many blessings, they delight
therein; and if they that at present know not God, abound in outward good
things, they delight in God's mercy thus far toward them. They would by no
means exchange their own enjoyments, whatever their circumstances may be in
worldly things, for all the enjoyments of those in a state of darkness, and
ignorance of the great salvation. They well know that their real happiness is
as much greater than that of the unrenewed, as are the manifestations of divine
light and love to their souls. They feel themselves happy in the knowledge of
God and Jesus Christ. This is life and heaven to their souls. Their
acquaintance with God is perfect peace. Their sense of the sure, final mercy of
God to all men, whom indeed they ardently love, does much add to their
consolation. One that loves and pities all sinners, as the gospel requires, and
as all that have a gospel spirit do, cannot feel so happy in a persuasion that
most of them will be eternally damned, as they do, who believe that "God will
have all men to be saved."

THEY who have that sense of God and salvation which I plead for, are exceeding
happy at all times, in such a God and such a salvation. Indeed their souls
desire no more. "Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire besides thee." Such well know that godliness carries its own
comfort along with it, even in the present world, having promise of the life
that now is, as well as that which is to come. I am very confident in
affirming, that they who know God and his salvation, in the light I have
represented, will be filled with exceeding joy, and will envy no person on
earth; but will rejoice in all the good that any enjoy. If this be the effect
of these doctrines wrought in the heart, they are doubtless according to
godliness.

I AM very sensible no man will, or ever can fully and cordially believe in
such a character of God, and such a salvation, without the special energy of
divine power and grace, which is fitly called regeneration. Others may have a
doctrinal belief of these things, in some sense; but to feel the reality of
these glorious truths in the soul, requires a supernatural work on hearts so
disaffected to God as ours are in a natural state. We judge of God's feelings
toward us, by ours toward him, as all natural men do. Therefore, none but new
creatures, can believe such glorious, astonishing truths as these, with all
their hearts, without hesitation, and with joy and peace in believing. No man
can be fully satisfied with this doctrine, until God has created in his soul a
friendship toward himself. When he knows by experience that he loves God, he
will believe that God can love sinners freely. They that truly know God, have a
very different sense of the love of God, from that of a blind world, whose eyes
are fast closed in infidelity.

THESE thoughts, moreover, lead us to see the great duty, and propriety of
supporting, and maintaining gospel ordinances and institutions in the world,
and giving all due encouragement to the best instructors in the way of
salvation, that we can obtain, whether God has been pleased to enlighten them
more or less. The blessing of such instruction and ordinances is great in every
view, temporal and spiritual. This is God's wise and merciful way to make us
know the things freely given us of God, and to give us great present comfort in
these things, and glorious hopes of eternal, consummate happiness in the life
to come. No other plan of religion can ever so much animate a people, to attend
the worship and ordinances of God, to hallow his sabbaths, and reverence his
sanctuary, and to love their spiritual guides most cordially, and account them
worthy of double honor, for their works sake, especially those who labor in
word and doctrine. In a word, these principles, if they really take hold of the
heart, will have every happy effect that the gospel requires of us.

AGAIN; It is an evidence of true, gospel doctrine, if, when cordially
believed, it will make us willing and joyful that God should be at the head of
the universe, almighty, absolute Sovereign in all things, God over all, blessed
forevermore; also if it make creatures willing to keep their own proper place,
at the feet of JEHOVAH, and rejoice to be absolutely dependent on such a God,
and at his absolute, sovereign disposal forever and ever.

THIS idea of God, and this understanding of his word, will have such a blessed
effect on every believing soul. We shall see clearly, that JEHOVAH is by nature
God, and worthy to be God over all; and we shall exceedingly rejoice that we,
and all creatures are in his hands, as the clay in the hands of the potter. We
can trust him with as much joy, as safety. And we see, that all the world may
well rejoice in his absolute, sovereign rule. Then we shall break out in
raptures of holy joy, "The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice, let the
multitude of the isles be glad thereof." Then we shall cry out with unfeigned
lips, "Praise the Lord all his works, in all places of his dominion: Bless the
Lord, O my soul." When God has given souls this understanding to know the
truth, they will exceedingly rejoice that God is what he is, and that they are
his creatures, in the proper relation of creatures; that is, in a state of
entire, absolute, and everlasting dependence on such a being as JEHOVAH.

THE limitarian scheme never can have this operation on our souls. God himself
has fixed his own laws, in our souls, that absolutely forbid it. The law of
nature is as really and truly the law of God, as the written word. Those
natural and inevitable feelings, which are common to all rational creatures,
whether holy or sinful, whether angels or men, or of whatever rank or
description, are indeed the laws of God. The whole law of nature is the law of
JEHOVAH, the Author of nature; and a pure law too. By this law of God, he has
made it forever absolutely impossible that any creature should cordially,
without any aversion of soul, freely consent to be forever and ever in the most
inexpressible pain and torment. God's law of nature cries out against it, with
all the authority of the divine Being himself. Much less can any holy soul be
willing to be an eternal sinner, an everlasting enemy to God, which is the
grand, essential thing in that hell the limitarians plead for.

GOD does not set his own laws in opposition to one another. He does not, by
one law, call upon us to avoid pain and misery as much as we can, and by
another bid us be pleased with it. Much less does he, by one law, command us to
be holy and love him supremely, and serve him in all holy and perfect
obedience, and, by another law, command us to be quite willing to hate and
rebel against him to all eternity. For us to obey two laws directly opposite,
is as impossible as to serve two opposite masters. But on the plan which I
support, we may, if our hearts are right, keep all the laws of God in glorious
harmony, and find that, in keeping them there is great reward.

THE limitarians do indeed tell us, that all, under their eternal decree of
reprobation, ought finally to be willing to be damned. Many of them say, that
every man must be brought to this willingness, before he can be saved!! God
grant them further light, that they may better understand his nature,
character, and wise, harmonious laws.

ON the present plan, I can will all that God wills, and do all that God bids
me, if my heart is right, and that with great alacrity and joy. I am willing to
keep my own place, as a creature of God, and I rejoice that my God will forever
keep HIS, that JEHOVAH will sit on the throne of absolute, universal government
to all eternity. I rejoice that he does his pleasure in the armies of heaven
and among the inhabitants of the world, that none can stay his hand, neither
may any say unto him what do thou? I want no security but what I have in the
nature and character of God, as displayed in his works and word, through his
own Son, the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person.

I THINK those principles cannot be wrong that have this native effect on the
soul; nor those right, which require of us opposite things and absolute
impossibilities.

I HAVE before observed, that personal damnation in hell, is not once asserted
in the bible, of any particular person; nor a word of that nature said, but
what, agreeable to the whole genius and tenor of divine revelation, points to a
substitute. I add, in this place, that no such thing is said even of Judas
himself; though, as the english words stand, in our translation, there is more
that seems to favor such a tenet, than in any other passage of sacred writ.

IN our english bible we have the words thus, "It had been good for that man if
he had not been born." Mat. xxvi. 24. and, in Mark xiv. 21. "Good were it for
that man if he had never been born." Now if this translation were ever so exact
and literal, it would by no means overthrow the general tenor of reasoning from
the nature and word of God, which we have been led into. It might, without any
unreasonable straining of words, be understood, only as one of the many awful
denunciations we have of the voice of justice, all silenced and satisfied in
the great surety. I appeal, however, to every learned reader, that the
translation of these words is not just, nor grammatical. The following words
are exactly literal and grammatical. " Good were it for him, if he had not been
born that man," or such a man. (...).
Much better indeed, had it been for Judas if he had not been born such a
prodigy of wickedness. So much the divine spirit says. But by no means, says
that Judas, or any other man, shall be a loser by existence, on the whole. This
I notice by the way as just, though not essential to the grand argument.

IT is also evident that we have a right understanding of the character of God
and his word, if we are thence affected with holy fear and trembling, mixed
with holy joy and engagedness of heart to serve God.

THIS sense of God and salvation, now maintained, has certainly such an effect
on the soul. To think of such a God, whose absolute property we are: To
consider what sinners we indeed are, and how justly deserving of his awful
wrath and vengeance to all eternity: And that we can do nothing to help
ourselves, and no creature can help us: That all our hope originates from the
nature and sovereign purpose, and decree of God, utterly contrary to all our
deserts: To think what we must be to all eternity, if justice should only take
place upon us, (and let God do what he will with us, we can never open our
mouths with any charge of injustice on the absolute Proprietor of all things)
this will fill our whole souls with fear and trembling. Also, to find the
nature and disposition of the great and terrible God so displayed in his word,
as to see that this, and this alone, is our full and everlasting security: That
our everlasting safety lies in the nature of the great God, and no where else:
This I say, will fill us with exceeding joy, and engage us earnestly in all the
means of salvation, which such a great and glorious God has appointed. Knowing
that this awful and endearing JEHOVAH saves, only in his own way; how thankful
shall we be that he has told us the way, and marked out the path! Most
certainly, this will make us work out our own salvation with fear and
trembling. We shall indeed serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

NO view we can have of the way of salvation, but this, will affect us with
that undissembled, unfeigned humility, which the gospel requires. But this will
make us esteem others better than ourselves, and that without any compliment at
all; not only some others, but, in the natural sense of the phrase, others in
the general view.

EVERY man that feels the truth and force of this doctrine, will really feel
and know that he is worse than other men, yea, than any other man that ever had
existence; because he knows so much more of himself than of any other man;
also, because the belief of this doctrine is attended with real, gospel charity
toward all men, even that charity which hops all things. Such a sense of God
and salvation, and such a view of himself, will make any man cry out, in the
utmost sincerity, and without so much as the shadow of a compliment, surely I
am more brutish than any man: I have not the understanding of a man: I neither
learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy: I abhor myself and repent
in dust and ashes.

SUCH indeed is the very nature of all mankind, that, while they build their
confidence of God's eternal favor, on good marks, and good distinctions in
themselves; and thence conclude they shall be saved and most others damned, it
will feed their pride, and puff their souls up with haughtiness. They may say
what they please, of "mere grace," "mere favor," "free grace," "free favor:"
Not the less proud will they be for all this; but quite the reverse.

NOTHING in the universe has a more powerful operation on human souls, to make
them proud, than that great, exalted, renowned personages have singled them out
as special favorites. A full confidence that the infinitely exalted JEHOVAH
has done it, will make every man, while in this world, feel just as the
pharisee did, when moved by the same inward sentiment. Merely a sense of the
greatest favors will make no man proud; but bring in the idea of comparison and
distinction, and it will make every man so, while under the moral infirmities
of nature which attend us in the present world. But on my plea, every valley is
filled, and every mountain and hill is brought low, and the crooked is made
strait, and the rough places plain, and the Lord alone is exalted. This will
bring down every high thought and imagination, that exalts itself against the
knowledge of Christ, and bring all into subjection to the obedience of faith.

IT is very natural for many to make inferences, and draw consequences from
what is said concerning the salvation of mankind, and apply the same to other
ranks and orders of beings, which we know little, or nothing about.

THUS, they apply these doctrines to the case of the miserable, fallen angels.
I think we proceed upon very uncertain ground, in all such reasonings and
applications. God has been pleased to acquaint us a little, and but a very
little, with any other intelligent creatures, whether holy or unholy, but those
of our own rank and order, our fellow men. Yet, as it does, in certain
respects, concern our duty and practice in this world, to know something of
holy angels, and also of evil angels, we are made so far acquainted with their
respective dispositions and circumstances as relates to our practice, and no
farther.

WE are taught, that many of the angels have been very sinful and very
miserable a great while, and that they are very assiduous, crafty, and
malicious to oppose the happiness of the human race, and promote all the sin
and misery they can. We are told that the holy angels are of a direct contrary
disposition and character. And we are taught, in the word of God, how to
conduct ourselves relative to both. This is as much as God has seen fit to
reveal to us on this subject. I have often thought, that the immodesty of
mankind is as much discovered in many positive assertions about the angels, as
in any one thing.

THIS, however, I suppose we may say concerning the miserable, condemned
angels, that they are as great sinners, as we by nature are, in proportion to
the quantity of being they possess; and greater sinners than we are by nature,
only in consideration that they are of an higher rank than we, and have a
greater measure of existence; but less sinners than we in one very capital
view. For they have not sinned against a KINSMAN REDEEMER, and the
proclamations of such a gospel as we have despised.

WE may also say, that even to this day (for ought we know) they have as much
cause of eternal despair as the human kind once had, during the space between
the moment of our original rebellion, and the first intimation of a Savior:
That they justly deserve endless damnation, by the very nature of their
criminality, as well as we: And that they will certainly be eternally damned,
in the voice of justice, and we know of no declaration of grace that relates to
them, any more than the human kind once did, with regard to miserable, damned,
or condemned sinners, of our own order.

WE may further say, that God can certainly do them no wrong, any more than he
can us. If their misery is endless, or if ours had been so; the will of God is
necessarily just, and the only standard of all justice and righteousness, for
this grand, all important reason, which I would not so often repeat, were it
not of the utmost consequence that it should sink deep into our souls and never
be unthought of, viz. his absolute, underived, universal, and everlasting
property in all things.

IF we say more than the above, I apprehend, we do no honor thereby to our
profession of gospel humility: Or rather, that we transgress in exercising
ourselves in great matters, or things too high for us, that we know not; and
darken counsel by words without knowledge. Who can say that the same God who
found a way for our recovery, can find none for theirs, throughout an
interminable eternity? Or who can say, that even our own all-sufficient Savior
will not, in some way, unknown to us at present, be found hereafter the Head of
ALL principalities and powers, in a more gracious sense than we have imagined,
even in an infinitely merciful sense to the father, the devil, as well as to
his children? Who can say that a Savior, of such unsearchable riches of grace,
such boundless wisdom and power, will not, in his own way and time, make every
knee bow to him, in one and the same sense, and every tongue confess, from one
and the same spirit, that he is Lord of all to the glory of God the Father? Who
can say that God will not, in some future period of endless duration, gather
together in ONE, ALL things in Christ, both in heaven and on earth and under
the earth, in the most plain and simple understanding of the terms? Who can
say, that he will never wholly conquer death, though it be the last enemy, and
shall survive every other conquest of his; even death, in the most common,
scripture sense of the word, including spiritual death, which includes all
sinfulness, as well as natural death?

WHO can say, that the greatest sufferers, and those who are thrown into the
greatest distress and horror, save ONE, shall be on the whole losers by their
having been called into being, by the almighty power of God, who is love? Since
it is certain that the greatest of all sufferers, and he who, in a legal view,
was justly charged with the greatest guilt, is the greatest gainer of all
creatures by his existence. I here speak just as our most enlightened, and most
orthodox divines have always spoken. They all agree in the perfect holiness and
purity of the man Christ Jesus, in a personal sense; yet, in a vicarious sense,
and as by the covenant of redemption he stood related to the divine law, they
all agree, he was justly charged with the greatest guilt of any creature that
ever God made, even the sins of the whole world. As he stood related to pain
and punishment he never had an equal. And this is the great, essential, capital
doctrine of divine revelation, whereby the bible is most of all distinguished
from all other books. I say since this greatest of all sufferers, on account of
sin, is the greatest gainer of all the creatures of God by his existence, on
the whole, who can say God cannot deal in a similar way with all who suffer on
account of sin? For whether you are an original debtor, or a surety, there is
no difference as to your just obligation to pay the debt.

ARE we not rather immodest and arrogant, when we positively affirm, that we
certainly know, God has called into existence innumerable myriads of
intelligent creatures to be extremely miserable, to endless duration, under his
own fixed eternal decree? God indeed saw it best, on the whole, that much evil
should take place, both moral and natural; otherwise he certainly would have
hindered it. But who can say that God himself, with all his wisdom, power and
love, is not able to answer all the wise, good, and glorious purposes he
designed, by the existence of all evil, moral and natural; yet so as to leave
not one of his offspring a loser by existence?

AS to the man Jesus Christ, he had ten thousand times more guilt to answer
for, than any other man in the world, and no doubt more than any miserable,
fallen angel. And he was just as much obligated to suffer pain, misery, and
punishment, as if it had been personal; yet that man Christ Jesus is, on the
whole, the most dignified and happy creature that ever God made. "Being found
in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to death, even the
death of the cross; wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a
name which is above every name: That at the name of Jesus, every knee should
bow, of things in heaven and things in the earth, and things under the earth;
and that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory
of God the Father." Phili. ii. 8, etc. "For the joy set before him, he endured
the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne
of God."

DO we know enough about the extent of divine wisdom, power and love, to affirm
that most, or even any of God's own offspring shall be infinite losers by
existence irresistibly forced upon them, by the infinitely kind Fountain of all
being and blessedness? When we get so far beyond our line in reasoning, we
tread on very uncertain ground. Let us then let the fallen angels alone. But if
any of us must needs enquire more about the eternal fate of the angels that
fell; it is well for us to remember that they are our superiors, in the scale
of creation, and stand related to us as the offspring of the great, common
Fountain of being; and are no worse than we in their temper and disposition,
only as no mediator has operated on their minds, as upon ours, in a way of
restraint, or by any kind, or gracious operation, as upon the human kind ever
since the fall.

CHILDREN are to hate their father the devil, only as they are to hate their
natural parents and all their fellow men, and even themselves. Not with
personal hatred; not with feelings of malevolence; not as creatures of God; but
all in them morally evil in its own nature, all that is opposite to the moral
nature or character of the common Fountain of being. Thus we are to hate father
and mother, wife and children, brethren and sisters, yea, and our own life
also; and thus, and in no other way, we ought to hate every thing in which
moral evil appears. But if we feel any malevolence toward the devil, as a
creature of God, or wish him evil; we feel toward him as he does toward us,
and show his moral likeness in this our malevolence, as might be expected from
devils only. If we wish the fallen angels may all remain eternally damned, and
that the common Parent of all may never display and glorify his great name in
their deliverance, from enmity, sin and pain, even if he is able to do it; if
we heartily wish they may be the objects of almighty vengeance to endless
duration, then, we feel toward them, as they do toward us.

IF our natural parents are very wicked, and, by necessary consequences, very
miserable, we do well to wish, that God, of his infinite power and grace, would
make them better and happier. We know he can do it, if he pleases. And since we
know not, but that infinite wisdom, power, and mercy can, if God please, take
hold of our infernal parents; we show a spirit too much like theirs, in wishing
they may continue to endless duration, in all their sins and in all their
torments. It is certain the great JEHOVAH may, in pure justice, leave them so
forever; the very nature of their sinfulness does merit this, by every rule of
pure righteousness, without any consideration in the universe separate from the
very nature of sin. And God might have left us in like manner, and in the like
pure justice. But, for my part, I am quite willing God should make me holy and
happy, for the glory of his own name, and all my fellow sinners without
exception, if he please. I am willing the Lord should be thus " good unto ALL,"
and his tender mercies thus be over all his works, which are capable of
holiness and happiness.

IF we knew ourselves better than we do, we should not look upon ourselves, by
nature, so unlike to the fallen angels as we are apt to imagine. I think it,
however, our wisdom to enquire no more about any order of beings, than we have
some data, some means of knowledge to assist our enquiries; and no more about
the devils than may concern our practice, that we may not bear their image, and
may guard against their malice and evil influence.

AND now, to take up another thought, I apprehend that the way of salvation I
am defending, has this further mark of truth. It exhibits God to our view, as
conducting the affairs of our salvation analogous to all his other conduct.

THE all-wise and good God does influence, move, and govern all his creatures,
in a way suitable to the natures and faculties he has given them. This is to
be seen every where, and in every thing. With regard to all our temporal
enjoyments, though they are the objects of his eternal decree, made eternally
sure in his all-glorious, immutable plan; yet he gives us all these things, in
a way suitable to our natures, as rational creatures and free moral agents, by
the exercise of our minds and bodies, that we may have, at all times, proper
exercise; for this is wholly necessary to our felicity. This is all the reason
why God does not give us all our food immediately fit for eating, and all our
raiment ready to put on: If he did so, we should be without that exertion and
employment suited to our natures as active creatures, and necessary to our
comfort. Therefore, though our exertions are required, it is not to make these
enjoyments more sure to us, than he could have otherwise made them, or than
even his eternal decree made them. It is just so with regard to our salvation.
The means are all laid out for us, and enjoined upon us, and connected with the
end, just as much as in all temporal things, only because this gives proper
exercise to the immortal soul, attended with unspeakable pleasure and delight;
and is suited to our rational natures, and the relation we stand in to God. Our
working out our own salvation, is only a reasonable duty, not preceding the
certainty of it, in God's view; but following as a fit and happy consequence,
in his eternal plan, and in the order of his communication of blessedness made
sure before the foundation of the world.

SO there is every reason, and all manner of fitness, that we should inculcate
upon all mankind, the use of the means of grace and salvation, that can
possibly be in any case in the universe. It is our reasonable, fit, and happy
service, and not only with regard to all the powers of our souls, but of the
whole man, even our bodies also. Hence did Paul say, "I beseech you therefore,
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service." Romans xii.

IT is proper to say, in every case in the universe, and in every case alike
true, that the actions and exertions of creatures never alter the previous and
eternal certainty of any thing; neither did God design them for any such end,
or with any such view. God has ordered and commanded all the duties that are to
be done by all his creatures, to carry into effect, and to accomplish his own
fixed, good and merciful decrees, in the only fit way, that is, in a way suited
to the natures he has given them, and in certain connection with the end. All
these are in the immutable universal system, as much as the end. Hence we see
the great propriety of God's encouragements and promises to the virtuous and
obedient; and of his threatenings to the vicious and rebellious. They are all
suited to the nature of man. And hence we see how fit it is, that obedience and
virtue should be attended with delight and joy, as it always is; and that all
sin should be attended, or rebuked with pain and sorrow, which never fails to
be the case.

THEY, whom God has set up in this world to rule and govern mankind, should,
under him, enact good and wholesome laws, in favor of all virtue, and good
conduct; and in terrible opposition to all wickedness, all that opposes the
nature of God, and the good and happiness of the creatures of God. This is
exceeding fit and proper among men, wisely adapted to their natures. The Most
High, no doubt, could suppress vice and iniquity in some other way; but none
appears to us so well adapted to the natures of men. Hence there is every
reason for rulers and ruled, to unite in the most vigorous efforts for the best
possible civil government.

THIS view of the way of God, and this understanding of his revealed will, is
supported, in that it opens to our sight another grand doctrine of revelation.
Which is, the amazing unreasonableness of sin, and sinners; and how they will
pervert all truth and reason, to the vilest purposes.

MANY will say, if all these things are so, if all things, all events, are
eternally made certain; men and devils are not to blame for their sins: Just as
though the blame of sin did not lie in the nature of it. Many will say, if
salvation is finally secured, as here represented, then it is very eligible for
men to indulge all their lusts in this world, and live in all manner of vice,
as they please: Just as though vice and wickedness were attended with
happiness: Not considering, that perfection of wickedness, with its inseparable
connections, does in very deed, make the whole hell that the limitarians plead
for; or that rectitude and virtue in its perfection, does, in very deed, make
the heavenly happiness we hope for. They are so blind and unreasonable, as not
to see that if sinfulness, or hell, which are for substance the same thing, are
not hateful and horrible in this world, they cannot be hereafter; and that if
virtue, holiness, or heaven, which are essentially the same thing, are not
desirable in this world, they cannot be in the world to come.

THIS plan, moreover, helps us to the best possible solution of the question,
which so often arises among men. Why did God ever bring moral evil into his
eternal plan, or suffer it to exist? For, upon this plan, we see that God does
so display and exercise his own perfections, in opposing the nature of sin and
its effects, as we cannot see he otherwise might have done. And we also find
many exercises of mind; many employments and efforts laid out for his rational
creatures, in opposing sin and its awful attendants and consequences, in
obedience to God; and much exercise of humility, and thankfulness, and all
graces which we can see no room for, had God's eternal plan been otherwise.

THIS doctrine is further supported, by the doctrine of God's unlimited wisdom
and power.

ALL will allow, that if all the good ends could have been answered and
accomplished, without the eternal misery of a multitude of mankind, then it had
been better, and then God would have chosen it; because all grant, that such
misery is, in its nature, a great evil, and very undesirable, yea very
horrible. To suppose that God could not have answered all these glorious ends,
without this eternal misery of so many creatures, is to suppose that he was
limited by the very nature of things; or that it could not, in the nature of
things have been otherwise. But, pray, what is the nature of things? And whence
does the nature of things originate? Certainly from God and his attributes
only. For in that period of duration when there was nothing existent but God,
where was the nature of things, or the necessity of nature, but in God only?

TO suppose there was any limitation upon the eternal Being, when no other
being did exist, is to suppose that his own infinite, unlimited attributes did
limit, and set bounds to his conduct, or to the emanations of his infinite love
and benevolence. It is to say, that God would have done better if he could; but
that he could not: He acted out himself with as much kindness as he could, and
wished to have been more kind, had it been possible, in the nature of things;
that is, in the nature of his own perfections, which give nature to all things
else: That his infinite wisdom, power and love, could do no better than to
exhibit a system glorious in the main; but at the expense of the unutterable,
endless misery of countless myriads of his own offspring. This lays a
limitation on the Most High, arising from his own attributes; because thence
slows the whole nature of things, as their nature cannot flow from nonentity.

BUT, a just idea of the great God is this, he can indeed do all that the
infinite goodness of his heart is disposed to do; and he never gave a nature to
things to obstruct the emanations of his love. " What his soul desires even
that he does."

THE limitarians suppose God has formed a system as full of happiness as was
possible, and a glorious system on the whole. That he would have kept out of
this system the eternal misery of any creature, if he had been able; but was
not able, through the necessity of his own attributes, so to do; therefore
formed the best system he could. A system much better than none, and even good
on the whole, in a high degree. How does this correspond with just conceptions
of JEHOVAH, God Almighty, all-wise, and infinite love?

IT is in vain to say here, that this argument would equally exclude out of the
system, all the moral and penal evil that ever did exist, or ever will.
Because, on the gospel plan, according to my sense of it, all the evil of every
kind that has existed, or shall exist, is real good in the whole connection;
not only to the system in general, but to every individual in it, capable of
rational happiness. No one shall be less happy, on the whole, than if no evil
had ever taken place. Moral and natural evil never did, or shall exist, at the
expense (if I may so speak) of any one of the creatures of love, or of God who
is love. Eternity is long enough, to make every creature as happy on the whole,
as if there had never been any experience of evil of any kind; at least, we can
by no means prove the contrary. That sentiment of the poet has ever been
admired -- "The blessed to day, is as completely so,
As who began a thousand years ago."


CREATURES may suffer evil a great while, yet have as long duration before them
to be happy in, as if they had never tasted of evil. To say that any duration
of evil, or any degree of it, certainly, makes some deduction, and a
proportionable deduction from our quantity of happiness, though it may
afterward commence and be endless thenceforth, is to say more than any
creature can know; unless we can find a creature who comprehends eternity and
all things belonging to it. It is also saying, what stands in full opposition
to the common sense, and faith of the protestant world, in several other cases.
Take only the following well known instance instead of many.

WE all believe that the saint that last goes to heaven, shall have as great a
reward of free grace, as the saint that first went thither; provided their
moral characters are equal in this life. Of this we doubt not, and the
scripture is full to the purpose. We also agree in the opinion of the eternal,
progressive happiness of the saints in heaven, and that they who went there
several thousand years ago, are far advanced in glory and blessedness beyond
those who go there at this day; and further still before those, who may go to
heaven thousands of years hence. All this we believe, also, that all equal
characters shall have an equal reward of glory in heaven, whether they live and
die sooner or later. "I will give unto this last even as unto thee:" "The first
shall be last and the last shall be first:" i. e. all equal on the whole, if
their moral characters and services have been so in this world. These are
points not controverted among protestants. Yet it is easy to see, that the same
objection, if any, lies against this doctrine, as against what I have asserted,
viz. that experience of evil, for a given time, may be consistent with the same
quantity of happiness in endless duration, as if the evil had never been
suffered. Suppose a rational creature to exist any given period of time, more
or less, in great misery, and then, at the end of that certain period, to exist
just as much longer in as great pleasure and happiness, so as exactly to
counterbalance all his former pain and make him even on the whole, neither a
gainer or loser by his existence thus far. Then suppose it to be the good will
of his Maker, to continue him in being to endless duration, in a state of
progressive happiness. Suppose also, that it is the pleasure of the Most High
to create another, of equal capacity, at the moment when the former has arrived
at the end of the second period aforementioned, viz. at that moment when he is
just as well off, and no better than if he had never been created. Let these
two beings exit thenceforward to endless duration, in equal degrees of
progressive happiness, and it is easy to see that both, on the whole, shall be
just alike happy, i. e. the former will be, at the moment of his
counterbalance, in the self same predicament, in this respect, as if he had
been created that very moment. So that it is evident enough, that if our
uncontroverted opinion, that all equal characters in this world shall have
equal happiness in the eternal world, whether they are born sooner or later, be
true; then it is true, that a rational creature may suffer great pains, for any
given period of time, and yet be so far from being a loser by existence, that
he may be just as great a gainer thereby, on the whole, as any other creature
of equal capacity who never tasted of any evil at all, and who has his
beginning of existence in a later period of duration. I beg none would imagine
from this remark, that I think the great JEHOVAH bound in justice to repay any
of his creatures for their pains, by an equal balance of happiness. I have no
idea of any such demand of the clay on the great Potter, or of any creature on
his Maker. The will of JEHOVAH is necessarily just, and the only criterion,
rule and standard of all righteousness. Let men or angels be in whatever
predicament they may, it is the will of God that has placed them there, and
they may not impeach their Maker of injustice, or by any means make on him a
claim of reward. I only take refuge in the infinite sovereignty of the divine
will, flowing out of the INFINITE GOODNESS OF THE DIVINE NATURE. To know what
this is, I turn to all his works, and to his revealed will.


I WOULD, indeed, never be positive, when I reason about infinity and eternity,
which are incomprehensible to all beings, but God himself. And I only mention
this instance, as I might many more, to show, that the objection I am refuting,
is built on no certain foundation; and that in the fair application of it, it
must overthrow many articles of faith in which we are all well agreed, and
bring into confusion the limitarian scheme as well as any other adopted by
christians.

BUT it is plain, at first view, that, if innumerable of the offspring, of God,
rational creatures which he has called into being, or even any number of them,
are in extreme sufferings to endless duration, in that case, they must be
infinite losers by that existence, which the God of love forced upon them. Yet
even on this supposition we might not impeach the justice and righteousness of
the absolute, sovereign Proprietor of all things. But, I would ask my reader,
is this your idea of the true character of the GOD OF LOVE, God who is love,
even in the abstract; or of Christ, who so loved the world, that he gave
himself a ransom for all?

IT may here be added. On the limitarian plan, they who are saved will be saved
by their own works, being justified by their own works, in Paul's sense of
justification by works, or in any other possible sense in which we can conceive
of any such justification. Yea, they are saved by their own merit, so far as we
can have any notion of merit in a creature.

ALL the idea we can possibly have of merit in creatures, or claim on the Deity
by any good works, is the following: That there is something good in the
creature, which God considers as a condition of his salvation; and which in the
order of nature, precedes his security of eternal life. The question is not,
whether we are wholly dependent on the free grace of God for all this good in
us, and all these conditions and terms of justification and salvation? We all
agree, that every creature is absolutely and entirely dependent on God, for all
good of every kind, both inherent and external. If we consider any good in us,
whether faith, repentance, holiness, or any thing else, as a term or condition,
previous to which, as a condition in God's view, he has not made eternal life
sure to us; we arrogate to ourselves all the claim of merit that can possibly
enter into the proud heart of a sinner, and all that Paul so much opposes; we
claim to ourselves every thing that man can possibly boast of, unless we claim
entire independency of God, which no man ever pretended to.

TO say we have, indeed, certain good qualifications, and certain good
distinctions, through grace, which give us claim to salvation; is to say all
that the proud pharisees ever did say, and all that the proudest man on earth
ever did, or can say; even though we are ever so ready to own, that God freely
gave us all these good qualifications and distinctions. But the feelings of a
soul are exceedingly different, who considers salvation made sure to him, by
God in Christ, under the idea of a most ungodly wretch, and without any
distinction of good in him more than in any man on earth, or any fallen angel
in hell; that God justified him in Christ as ungodly, wholly so, and then sent
him all the distinctions, all the qualifications of repentance, faith, etc.
merely in a way of application of that salvation which, with God, was made sure
to him before the world began.

IT is certain we can form no other idea of salvation by works, or merit in a
creature, than this, viz. That God, by his own free grace, has made some good
and valuable distinctions in that creature, has freely bestowed some good
qualifications, making that creature better than some others; and then that God
on that consideration, bestows eternal life; and that the good he has already
bestowed is a condition that binds him so to do.

EVERY one who thinks he has got hold of a distinguishing, or special promise
made under a condition, will readily acknowledge that it was wholly owing to
the grace of God, that ever he come up to the condition. Faith, repentance,
holiness, and all those things that are called terms and conditions of
salvation, are wholly of the free grace of God, as we all grant. Yet, all these
are good works in the creature; yea, the chief, the capital of good works. Now,
to say that we may plead our title to salvation, as grounded on any of these,
or all these, is only to offer the plainest and greatest plea of merit in us,
or of our own works, that any man ever did offer or rely upon. To own we had
our qualifications, which we plead as conditions of the promises, from God,
only in a way of mere grace, does not militate in the least against all the
pride and confidence of our (...) merit* but does rather (...) it, as I (...)
shown before. The more distinguishing notice we imagine God has taken of us, to
make us better than other men, the more we shall feel like the pharisee in the
temple. Indeed there is no salvation, on the limitarian plan; but the same that
was so pleasing to that devout pharisee.

BUT, on the GOSPEL PLAN, the idea, and the feelings of the heart are quite
different Christ alone is our security for eternal life, wholly distinct from
all conditions or qualifications in us. Our hope is laid up in heaven. Jesus
Christ is our life. He has taken away the sin of the world, even before we
knew any thing about it: And now, by his holy spirit, sends to us the means of
salvation, and makes them operate effectually on our souls, to make us meet to
be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light. He first insures
salvation, and then makes the application of the benefit, in his own way; which
is the only reasonable and proper way, the only way adapted to the rational
natures he has given us. God looks on no terms, no conditions in poor sinners,
however believing and penitent they are; nor on their inward holiness,
otherwise than as fit gradations he himself is taking, to apply to them that
eternal salvation which, with him, was equally sure to them in their very worst
estate. "If while we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son: Much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life." Romans v. 10.
He that gave himself a ransom for all, will take his own way and time to make
the application; but the day shall come when without a single exception, "the
ransomed of the Lord shall return and come with songs to Zion, and everlasting
joy shall be upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow
and mourning shall flee away."

IT is a certain truth, that good qualifications and valuable distinctions,
conferred by a sovereign God on his rational creatures, will always operate in
a way of pride and haughtiness, if they consider these as terms and conditions
obliging God to confer great things on them in future; how much soever they may
acknowledge free grace in all these excellent endowments. It is equally
certain, that all these graces will operate in a way of meekness and humility,
if considered only as God's fit and proper means, or gradations to confer
benefits, founded on Christ as the only condition, and his atonement as the
only foundation to make them sure. Thus, although there will be great
distinctions of grace and glory in heaven to all eternity, among the redeemed
race, they who have most glory there, will excel others as much in the grace of
heavenly meekness, as in any thing else. They will cast down the brightest
crowns; and in doing this, will bow, with the most lowly reverence, before the
throne of the great and glorious Sovereign of all.

IT may not be amiss here to resume a thought before suggested, with some
addition. I have said that, on the limitarian plan of salvation, the old
covenant with Adam, and the new covenant in the gospel are entirely one and the
same, in every thing essential or material; the difference is only in words,
not in reality.

ARE we, under the gospel, wholly dependent on God for every good
qualification? So was Adam before the fall. Was real goodness, holiness, or
virtue required of him as a previous condition of eternal life? The same
things, in kind, are required of us on the limitarian plan in the same view,
only not in so high a degree: For an holy heart is at the bottom of all the
conditional accomplishments they plead for, as making out our claim, in the
sight of God, to his eternal favor. Did God say to Adam you shall produce or
show your qualifications in heart and life, or else there is no foundation of
hope from the constitution you are under? Just so the limitarian preacher says
to us under the gospel. So in all other respects, the old and new constitutions
are, in their nature, substantially the same.

BUT, there is one difference to be taken notice of which makes the new
covenant much more difficult to obtain eternal life by, than the old. It is
this; the terms and conditions God required of Adam were such, as, at the time
they were made, Adam had both natural and moral power to comply with: Whereas
we now have only the natural power, but no moral power within our souls. Though
moral impotency is very far from excusing us from guilt; yet, nevertheless,
this shows us that they who now hear the gospel, are, on limitarian principles,
in a far more perilous condition than man was, when placed under the first
covenant; or that Jesus Christ preached in all his infinite fullness, is not so
good a foundation to rely upon, as the covenant of works was. And is this the
account God has given us of the foundation he has laid in Zion? You may
answer and say, Christ has undertaken and engaged for sinners, to work all
things in and for them. This is indeed a GLORIOUS TRUTH. Yet upon the
limitarian scheme, are not the great multitude of mankind left out of this
engagement, and under an eternal decree of reprobation too? And not every one
of them commanded to believe and repent and become a new creature, and that
upon pain of damnation most dreadfully aggravated? And is this good news to all
people? Is this gospel, or good news to every creature under heaven? Is not
this ground of hope to a lost world, much more perilous, than to man under the
first covenant, which yet saved him, not from total ruin?

I MUST freely confess, that, after a very long and very critical consideration
of this matter, I cannot see but that, if any obtain eternal life on the
limitarian plan, they do it essentially in the same way, in which Adam was to
make it sure by the first covenant, i.e. by their own qualifications. These are
no more of free grace than his must have been. Nor can I see, but that the
foundation of hope laid in Christ for man, since the fall, is far more perilous
than his ground of hope by the first covenant: But, blessed be God, Jesus
Christ is preached in the TRUE GOSPEL, as a sure foundation and fountain of
life to every guilty sinner, and to all alike; and every sinner is alike
commanded to believe on him. "This is a faithful saying and worthy of all
acceptance (the acceptance of all sinners without a single exception) that
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief." 1. Tim.
i. 15. And, I never yet could pray or preach according to the gospel, to
satisfy my own conscience, without saying those things which, by unavoidable
consequence, do plainly infer, that God will have all men to be saved in the
end; and that Christ is the Savior of all men, in the full, direct and most
natural meaning of the words; though he is especially so to those who now
believe, as I have before noticed. Nor, did I ever yet hear an evangelical
sermon from any man, or a devout prayer, without premises from which the same
consequence is inevitable.

I AM very sensible that it has been common for great and good preachers to mix
much of the old and new covenant together; though they never yet could make
them unite in one. So far as the new covenant has been attended to with
clearness, as pure gospel, they have always said those things which cannot
possibly be true; unless, Christ has given his life a ransom for all; and died
for the sins of the whole world; and will have all men to be saved; and will
draw all men unto him, in the plain, simple sense of language, without any
comment at all. Every sentence and exhibition of pure gospel, from the first to
the last page in the book of God, does fully announce or imply the same; though
the desert of man, on the covenant of works, is all along kept in our view,
with all the dreadful thunders of a broken law, and the tremendous wrath of
Deity against sin every where displayed as a flaming fire. The gospel and the
law over against each other, even as in their ancient types, mount Gerizim and
mount Ebal.

IT is my very humble, though very firm conclusion, after all possible
attention to the nature of things, and to the word of God, that whatsoever
miserable sinner of the human kind is disposed to collect the least ray of hope
from any distinctions, or qualifications in his heart, or in his life, however
he may come by them, to embolden him to depend on eternal life, as promised in
consequence of these things; but not insured in the Mediator previous to all,
or any of these qualifications, and that most absolutely in the covenant of
redemption; that man, I say, does still virtually desire to be under the law.
And he shall hear the law too, until the spirit of God shall be pleased to
furnish him with a more honorable sense of the true God, and Jesus Christ whom
he has sent; and more exalted views of the glory of JEHOVAH, in the
manifestations of infinite, eternal, self-moved love, and in his displays of
sovereign mercy to a lost world.

I WOULD now resume and illustrate a thought which I have before introduced. It
is a common thing among men, that a man is condemned in one character, and
justified in another, even the same man. A judge may be likewise general of an
army. He may appear exceeding well in one of these characters, and very bad in
the other. He may be justly damned or condemned as a general, having ruined his
country in his military character; and yet be much approved or justified as a
civilian. He may be justly amerced to the amount of ten times the value of his
estate, and cast into prison for life; yet be wholly justified in the latter
character. A sponsor may step in and redeem him, and he may after that enjoy
the blessings of his good character; although his bad one will remain forever
condemned, and not the less so because he is redeemed from the penalty of it.

NO fair, candid reader will cavil at this simile, because it does not quadrate
in all respects: Since it does entirely in the point designed to be illustrated
by it, which is, that we may be forever condemned in one character; yet
justified in another, and also may be delivered from all the pains and
penalties justly due to our condemned character and conduct. To say that both
characters in this similitude are personal; whereas, in the way of our
salvation, one is only imputative, is nothing at all to the purpose. For the
imputed character is, in the account of our great Judge, and by the covenant of
redemption, just the same as to our redemption from the pains of hell, and our
title to heaven, as if it were personal.

THE common sense and practice of mankind, in many cases in common life,
approves of the condemnation and justification of the same persons, in
different relations and connections; and of the indemnity of men most justly
condemned, in a real character, which they have personally sustained. And
though men cannot be happy and miserable at the same time; yet they may be
happy, in their persons and real enjoyments, while forever conscious they have
merited nothing but sorrow and woe.

IT is further an evidence of true gospel faith and hope; that they work by
love, and purify the heart and life. Faith operates in a way of love to God and
man; "and every man that has this hope in him purifieth himself even as HE is
pure."

I HAVE already observed, that the faith and hope for which I am pleading,
always have such an effect, and, in the very nature of things, always will,
while men and moral agents remain what God has made them. Also my own
experience does indeed witness to this truth. I suppose that my own soul is
formed on the general, the universal plan of human nature: And I am certain
that such a view of God and the way of salvation as I am pleading for; such a
view of man, and of all creatures, and of their entire, absolute, and
everlasting dependence on God; such a sense of the guilt and misery of man by
nature, and the exalted glory of Christ, and of infinite, free, and sovereign
grace, has, of all things, the most powerful effect on my own heart to lead to
repentance, odium of all sin, the mortification of every inordinate desire, and
every worldly lust, joyful resignation to the will of God in all things, in all
afflictions, however painful to nature, and to make me feel toward God and all
his creatures, in imitation of the feelings of the blessed Redeemer. I am
certain that if I have, in any degree, the same mind which was also in Christ
Jesus, I have it in this way. When I have the deepest sense of these things,
the world and creatures appear to me as nothing, yea, less than nothing and
vanity, and God all in all. Therefore, if other human souls are like mine, I
have not the least fear that understanding the way of salvation as I do, will
do any harm to any child of Adam; but quite the reverse.

I CANNOT contract my views of the great salvation, the common salvation,
within narrower limits, without limiting the Holy One of Israel, even as to the
capital glory of all his ways. Yet after all, I am happy in this, that if my
dear kindred of the human kind, or many of them cannot, at present, extend
their faith beyond the narrow bounds of the limitarian plan; yet they are still
in the sure way to eternal salvation, if they fall not short of their own
understanding of the way of life; that is to say, if they have that repentance,
faith, and holiness which they hold necessary; which is exactly the same as
that which I maintain necessary, and in a way of free grace only. I well know
that every man is at present, in the way that leads to destruction, who has
not these graces. If many suppose, that the great Mediator has never engaged,
in his own way and time, to give these graces, except to a few of the human
kind; let them see to it that they be found among those few. If they do this,
they shall never fail.

THEIR faith falls short in no essential point: Their unhappiness lies only in
this, that they do not draw all the blessed consequences and comforts they
might draw, from premises truly evangelical and saving. The premises are not
unsafe, as far as they go. If inwrought into the soul, they shall lead to
safety. We ought, however, to satisfy ourselves in the inquiry, WHAT IS TRUTH?
Yet it is not our believing, or not believing, that there are many or few who
shall arrive at glory, which will save or ruin any of us. Believing the great,
essential doctrines of grace, and living agreeably to the power of them;
believing on the Lord Jesus Christ to the saving of our souls, and following
him in the regeneration, whether that work be done for us sooner or later,
these, as God's means, will end in glory. No man shall see the Lord in glory,
without holiness, and that in a far more perfect degree than ever any man had
in this world since the fall, or ever will have while breath remains, or the
soul is in union with this mortal body. Most blessed however, are those elect
of God, chosen in Christ to early conversion, piety, and holiness, and to a
life of faith, godliness, and divine pleasure all their days.

LET those who believe, that, in the most plain and literal sense, Christ is
God's salvation to the ends of the earth: That as sin has reigned unto death,
much more, shall grace reign through righteousness to eternal life, by Jesus
Christ our Lord: And that as, by one man, judgment came upon all men unto
condemnation; so, by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men
unto justification of life: I say, let all such see to it, without delay, that
they become new creatures. Such should be immediately reconciled to that God,
in the actual temper of their souls, who is truly reconciled to them, in the
covenant of redemption, and the atonement of his dear Son; and they should walk
worthy of him, who has called them to his kingdom and glory. For, in very
deed, there is the same necessity of all this, in order that we may be happy in
the world to come, on the doctrine here advanced, as on any limited plan of
salvation, that ever entered into the minds of any of the lost human race.

THE great business of the preachers of righteousness is little concerned, in
telling, how many shall be saved; but rather, how guilty, miserable souls shall
be saved. They are to hold up to the view of all men, the true character of
JEHOVAH, and of fallen man: And the relation in which man stands to his Maker
and his Judge, his Redeemer, and the Sanctifier of the polluted human soul:
What Christ has done to lay the sole foundation of all his hopes: What must be
done on his soul to bring him to the fruition of that blessedness which alone
can happily his immortal soul: What man must be and do, as indispensably
necessary, in its due place, to give him true comfort in this world, and
introduce him to the inheritance and enjoyment of a kingdom prepared for the
elect body of Christ, and, with God, made absolutely sure to that whole body,
before the world began: And to point out and enforce all relative duties, and
every moral virtue, agreeably to the reason and nature of things, and the word
of God.

THEY are also to show the horrible nature of all sin, vice, and immorality;
that it is even death, hell, and damnation, so long as the soul continues
impenitent in the ways of it. They are to dissuade from it, by every gospel
motive, and by every motive from God's pure, holy, and infinitely amiable law.
They are to give hope and relief to the sinking, despairing soul, in Christ
alone, and comfort to the children of God in him only: To lead in the holy and
joyful solemnities of divine worship, in the high praises of God and the Lamb:
To preach the unsearchable riches of Christ: And to manifest their solemn sense
of all these things, by a pure and holy life and example. Yet when pressed with
arguments against that glorious, divine revelation God has made to a lost
world, which never can be fully and fairly answered on any more limited plan, I
think it a duty, and highly expedient to take refuge in that very gospel which,
for ages and generations, has lain in great part, hidden from men, in all the
extent and glory of it. In which all the infinite honors of Deity are secured,
and also the final recovery of a lost world. Thus, they are to open the word of
God as fully as possible in that true sense, against which there can lie no
solid charge of inconsistency. Thus it will forever appear in the utmost divine
beauty, and in glorious harmony, from beginning to end.

COULD I possibly conceive of any way, in which the great and holy God might be
more glorified in the eternal personal damnation of many, or most of mankind,
than in extending final redemption to them all; I certainly ought to acquiesce
in such a fearful event, yea, even to wish for it. But as it really appears to
me, from the nature of God, from his word, and from all his works, and above
all, from the character, atonement and commission of his dear Son, and from the
covenant of redemption and of grace, that the most high and holy God cannot
leave one human soul forever, under the power of spiritual and eternal death,
consistent with his own highest declarative honor, and glory; I ought not, I
cannot believe he ever will.

MY reason is weak, very weak indeed; yet it is my duty to keep close to the
dictates of it, under the all-sacred authority of divine revelation. I cannot
possibly see, but that, in the eternal, personal damnation of one human soul,
the Most High would cast a great reflection on the full and complete atonement
of the Son of his love, and also on the Father himself, as the Son is the
brightness of his Father's glory, and the express image of his person. The
dishonorable reflection appears to me would consist in this; it would fully
imply and indicate, either, that the atonement of Christ was not infinite, nor
his power and faithfulness; or that the love, pity, mercy, and grace of God,
was not infinite; or that the satisfaction of Christ could not be adequate to
the divine law.

TO imagine there is any need of the eternal personal torment of any sinner of
the human race, in order further to illustrate the holiness and justice of God,
the infinite evil of sin; or further to impress the minds of the intelligent
system with a sense of the infinite odiousness of sin, and the infinite purity
of God, and his infinite hatred of all sin, is plainly to suppose that the
great work of the Son of God can admit of some amendment; that in very deed it
is not a finished work. For any man to think this necessary or expedient, or
any such thing, is an amazing reflection on him who said "IT IS FINISHED," when
he bowed his head and gave up the ghost. It is infinitely more absurd than it
would be for a nobleman, whose galleries are adorned with the inimitable
performances of a Raphael or a Titian, afterward to employ the most
contemptible of all painters, to come and retouch them, in order to their
greater embellishment! God is a rock, his work is perfect. The work of
redemption is most emphatically so. Of all that pertains to this work, must it
be said, "Whatsoever God does, it shall be forever: Nothing can be put to it,
nor any thing taken from it; and God does it that man should fear before him."

IN good truth, I can learn nothing from the nature, character, word, or works
of God; nothing from the emanations he has been pleased to make of himself,
that leads me to a single idea that the most holy God, since what has been
done and suffered by the Son of his love, can derive any glory to himself, or
communicate any instruction, any good to the intelligent system, from the
eternal, personal damnation of any poor, miserable, guilty sinner of the human
kind; or that such a thing can be without manifest opposition to the blessed
nature of God, who is infinite love, and to the glorious and merciful covenant
of redemption, and all the most glorious and tremendous work of the Son of God,
which he finished on the cross. I cannot see, but that the nature of God is now
open, (if I may so speak) the nature of eternal, infinite, unlimited, boundless
love, is now free to take its spontaneous course, without the least obstacle,
from any opposing claims of justice, standing in the way of the final salvation
of a whole guilty world. If it be so, do we in any wise, displease God in
ascribing such "salvation to our God who sits upon the throne, and to the
Lamb? Saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and
honor, and power, and might, be unto our God forever and ever. Amen." Rev. vii.

I AM constrained to think, that it is this very plan of redeeming wisdom,
power, and love, that the four and twenty elders, the representatives of all
the redeemed on high, hold in rapturous contemplation; and also all the blessed
in heaven, when they fall down before him that sits on the throne, and
worship him that lives forever and ever, and cast their crowns before the
throne, saying, thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and
power: for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were
created." Thy pleasure, most emphatically, as all things were made for, and
result in the glories of redeeming love. Rev. iv. Nor can I, on any limitarian
plan, or on any in the universe, but that I am pleading for, account for that
glorious display. Rev. v. "And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels
round about the throne, and the living creatures, (...).
and the elders; and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand,
and thousands of thousands; saying, with a loud-voice, worthy is the Lamb that
was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor,
and glory, and blessing. And every creature which is in heaven, and on the
earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in
them, heard I, saying, blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him
that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb forever and ever. And the four
living creatures said, Amen. And the four and twenty elders fell down, and
worshipped him that lives forever and ever."

IF we attend only to the voice of the holy law of God, as it sounds every
where through the bible, we must forever despair, not only of the salvation of
this lost world, but of any one of the fallen race; unless we consider this
law, in all its maledictions, and in all its holy demands, wholly satisfied in
the second man, the Lord from heaven. This indeed, is pure gospel truth. When
we so consider it, the door of salvation is wide open for all, and open alike
for every child of Adam. The whole debt is paid, and why should not all the
prisoners be discharged? Christ paid it not for himself, but for them, and that
according to divine stipulation, and the entire good pleasure of the Father.
"Messiah shall be cut off, but not for himself."

HE has as much power and love, as he has of merit; and his kingly and
prophetical abilities are equal to his priestly. All power is given to him, in
heaven and in earth. Shall the infinite love, that brought him to the cross to
die for the sins of the whole world, stop at the cross? Will he not make the
application, finally, as extensive as the merits of the purchase? If not, it
cannot be for want of power, it must be only for want of will and merciful
disposition of soul. Is it any honor to Christ, that we restrain the bowels of
his love in our own minds? Or is it agreeable to his word? Ye are not
straitened in him; but ye are straitened in your own bowels. Certainly we
should more honor and please God, and the Son of his love, if we had not such
narrow, limited thoughts of DIVINE LOVE.

YOU, my reader, know, in your own soul, that you sincerely and cordially love
your neighbor, and daily give him every possible proof of it; yet he so hates
you, that he cannot, he will not believe that you love him, and is ever
complaining of you as the most bitter, cruel enemy he has in the world. Does he
not abuse and dishonor you? But what proof did you ever give to any man on
earth, that you loved him and wished well to him, in any measure comparable to
the testimonies of love, mercy, pity, and real good will which the Redeemer
does daily produce, to prove his real, wonderful love, mercy, and pity toward
every child of Adam? He bestows more real kindness on the vilest sinner in the
world, in one day, than ever you bestowed on any person on earth, in your whole
life.

AFTER all this, for us to say, that it is his will and disposition to damn
most of mankind in person, to all eternity, appears to me not honorable to the
true character of Christ, or agreeable to his word. To say, he is willing to
save every sinner, that he takes no pleasure in the death of him that dies,
but that he would turn and sive; and yet that God Almighty will not see that
effected in his own way and time, in which he so much delights, and that, after
every obstacle is removed by his Son, which ever stood in the way of man's
salvation, I think, is very far from doing honor to the character of the living
and true God. Our heavenly Father would have us argue his love, and that of his
Son toward unworthy sinners, from all the manifestations of love, kindness and
mercy he has made to them, in all the paths of his providence, and, above all,
in the wonders of redeeming love. It is our great blame that we do not know
that the goodness of God leads to repentance, and that repentance takes hold
of a sense of pardon and eternal life.

FOR my own part, I feel afraid to speak, or even think of my heavenly Father,
in the limitarian view of him; lest I should awfully abuse that character which
claims my highest reverence and love. If my own children will think and say,
that, for my own pleasure, I will make them as miserable as I can, after all
the fruits of kindness in my power, which I have conferred upon them with an
unremitting hand; I should think them very wicked, a shame to their father, and
bitterness to her that bare them. Why should we imagine, that our heavenly
Father is pleased to have us entertain similar thoughts of him? "If ye then
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your Father who is in heaven, give good things to them that ask him?" Matt.
vii. 11.

THE work of Christ is a finished work. The covenant of redemption is fulfilled
on his part, in every iota of it.

THE blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin, from impenitence, hardness
of heart, and blindness of mind, as well as practical sins. Indeed, if it did
not, it could cleanse from no sin at all: For these are the fountain of all
other sins and the greatest of all. All sins are alike forgiven to men, and
done away in the atonement; and regeneration, repentance and faith, are
communicated on the same ground, and their office is to make us " know the
things freely given us of God." God sent his beloved Son into the world, that
the world, through him might be saved; and he "tasted death for every man." The
prophet foresaw this, and he speaks of the blessed consequence, without a word
or thought of limitation. He considers a lost world all alike prisoners of
justice, and cast into one and the same doleful pit together; yet proclaims
aloud, "By the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of
the pit wherein is no water." Zech. ix. 11. Nor had Isaiah any thought of
limitation, when he speaks of the anointing of the Son of God, "to proclaim
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound;
to comfort ALL that mourn." Isai. lxi. "That thou may say to the prisoners,
go forth; and to them that are in darkness, show yourselves." Isai. xlix. 9.
And it is worthy of our notice, that when the Savior was commenting on these
passages, he immediately took occasion to open the extent of his salvation to
the audience. Luke iv. This was as much to their surprise and offense, as the
most extensive doctrine of the salvation of sinners now is to the most
tenacious retainer of the doctrine of a partial salvation.

AS I have already hinted, whatever doctrinal persuasion may be in the mind of
any unregenerate man, that the way of salvation, and the extent of it,
according to the nature and word of God, is such as I maintain, this doctrine
will never quiet an alarming, polluted conscience, and set the soul at rest
from awful fears and terrors; until it is acquainted with God and reconciled to
him.

WHILE total enmity to God remains in the soul, there will he distressing fears
in seasons of reflection. Nor is it possible in the nature of things, that
creatures that hate God as we do, in our natural state, should have that
exalted sense of his love, which is manifested in the gospel, and is indeed the
glory of it. Blind, unrenewed sinners will measure the love of God, and the
motives on which they suppose God acts, much by their own.

WE must indeed know the living and true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, in order to have a feeling apprehension of our eternal life, as manifest
in the gospel; whether we have a more confined, or a more extensive
understanding of it. Never can we have comfort in the reconciliation of a
friend, to us; until our hearts meet with him in that reconciliation. If our
enmity remains, it will exclude us from comfort in his friendship. How
important then is an immediate reconciliation to God, by a new creation in
Christ Jesus, and by repentance and faith in his blood!

THE infinite importance of immediate reconciliation to God, is even more
forcibly urged on the doctrine I have advanced, than on any more limited
principles. The great apostle Paul has in a few words, virtually said all I
have been pleading for; and from premises arising from the most extensive view
of the atonement of Christ, he does most forcibly inculcate the immediate
reconciliation of sinners to God. "For the love of Christ constrains us,
because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead; and that
he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him who died for them, and rose again. And all things are
of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us
the ministry of reconciliation; to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them: and has committed
unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, at
though God did beseech you by us: We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him." 2. Cor. v.

ALTHOUGH this apostle did also preach the law abundantly, and sound the voice
of pure justice in all its tremendous terrors; yet he never preached or wrote
one word inconsistent with what I have just quoted. Whenever in his preaching
or writing, he held up the gospel to view, it was of the same tenor. The same
may be said of all the other apostles, and of all the prophets. They learned it
from Jesus Christ himself, in whom the only foundation was laid, and who
announced the same glorious tidings.

AND, truly, as I have before hinted, I never read or heard any discourses of
eminent and pious protestant divines, but what were built on premises and
arguments which fully infer that glorious, final extent of salvation, which I
maintain, however inconsistent they may have been, in some parts of their
writings or sermons. Indeed, all I have now written, is nothing more or less
than the common, genuine, protestant doctrine of grace, set free from all the
contradictions and inconsistencies that have so long been intermixed with it,
and the genuine and glorious consequences of it more openly and explicitly
displayed. And thus I read those writings still, and ever shall, with great
edification and pleasure. And the inconsistencies I find intermixed with such
pure and glorious truths, give me no more offense, than the bones I find in
delicious fish or fowl at my table.

TO close the whole, as a consistent IMPROVEMENT of this doctrine of salvation.

HOW should we love, fear, adore, and obey such a God, whose nature and
character is such as here exhibited to our view! How ought we to submit to him
in all things, and rejoice in him evermore! What a foundation is here laid for
the relief of the most guilty, even the chief of sinners! What high and
honorable thoughts of God should we ever entertain, and what should we think of
Christ his Son! What comfort and even joy does this doctrine afford us in all
scenes of divine providence, in the whole government of such a God!

HENCE how are we taught to love one another, to love, pity and pray for all
our fellow sinners! How will the firm belief of this doctrine lead us to prize
the word and ordinances of God, and to delight in his worship, and to call on
all creatures to praise the Lord, whose mercy endures forever, and to hate all
sin, all that is opposite to the nature and commands of such a God! How will
these principles, if really in the heart, produce a feeling sense that all sin,
vice and immorality, is no other than death, hell, and damnation; and that
holiness and virtue is heaven and divine glory! How will they lead us to live
religion, for the love and pleasure of it; and to mourn for, and shun all
disobedience to God, all moral evil as hateful beyond all expression, in its
own nature, and as that which cost our best Friend, our blessed Redeemer so
dear! How will these truths, if really believed and wrought into the soul,
promote love, union, and harmony among all the ministers of Christ, and every
branch of his church redeemed by his own blood, of whatever denomination they
are!

THESE principles cannot make those who do not believe them, either worse or
better: For they can have no effect upon them. And as for all those who do
really in their hearts believe in this salvation, I am certain the effect will
be very great and good. Their hearts will be enlarged, and they will run in the
way of God's commandments. Our misery consists very much in the want of high
and honorable thoughts of God and of Christ. And we fall short in nothing more
than in our ideas of the divine love. There is not a miserable sinner on earth,
and never was, who would not trust in God, if he had a knowledge of his true
character. "They that know thy name will put their trust in thee." Psalm. ix.
10. But all that know not God, are in a state of condemnation. There never can
be any danger of our having too exalted and enlarged thoughts of any of the
attributes of God, no not of his love: For GOD IS LOVE. And to keep ourselves
in the love of God, in all the infinite extent of it, can never bring us into
condemnation.

YOU, my dear reader, as well as the writer, must soon die, and appear at the
awful bar of an omniscient and holy Judge. We must soon make trial of the
foundation of the hope upon which we build. Our distinctions from other lost
sinners, will probably be no greater then, than at this very moment; and where
shall we look for support then? To things within ourselves, or to Jesus Christ?
To our good qualifications, or to God alone? Will you, my friend, venture into
the eternal world with any hope, or any mixture of hope, but what is built on
JEHOVAH alone, as manifest in his beloved Son?

WHATEVER men may plead, in days of health, in favor of marks and distinctions
in themselves, to feed their vanity, or support their hope; I never yet
discoursed with any dying man in the exercise of his rational powers, who did
not entirely set at naught every such ground of hope. I have invariably found
every one who felt within his soul in that awful, trying hour, any hope at all,
has fixed it wholly on the glorious nature and attributes of God, as displayed
in the great Redeemer. And whatever our refuge may be now, you and I, my dear
friend, must make this our last refuge. Death is too terrible, and the tribunal
of the great Judge too awful, to admit of any confidence but in Christ alone.

WE shall not feel ourselves so much better than others, when death and the
judgment stare us in the face, as we are apt to do, in days of worldly
prosperity and pleasure. Whatever we imagine now, we shall then be fully
convinced that a sole, unmixed dependence on God in Christ can alone support
our trembling souls; and that every other refuge is but a refuge of lies. We
shall then find our need of Christ for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and complete redemption in every view, and in every part of it, for Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last. God, in his Son,
will be all in all. And in that trying hour, we shall all find, that it is our
sole refuge and only consolation, that, OF HIM, AND THROUGH HIM, AND TO HIM ARE
ALL THINGS, TO WHOM BE GLORY FOREVER.

AMEN.

