Mr. KELLOGG's SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE MIDDLESEX LODGE, JUNE 24th, 1796.

THE NATURE, OBLIGATION AND IMPORTANCE OF CHRISTIAN COMPASSION, ILLUSTRATED; IN
A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE MIDDLESEX LODGE, OF FREE AND ACCEPTED MASONS, IN
FRAMINGHAM, ON THE TWENTY-FOURTH DAY OF JUNE, 1796.

BY DAVID KELLOGG, PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN SAID TOWN.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE SOCIETY.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY THOMAS FLEET, JUN. CORNHILL. MDCCXCVI.

1 EPISTLE JOHN, III CHAP. 17th VERSE. But whosoever has this world's good, and
sees his brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him,
how dwells the love of God in him?


IT is a distinguishing characteristic of the Gospel, that it gives clear, and
consistent views of the perfections, and government of God: that it reveals a
system of doctrines incomparably sublime, perfectly pure, and with infinite
wisdom adapted to the circumstances of man: that, it enjoins duties perfectly
reasonable; as they result, not solely in the sovereign will of the Supreme;
but necessarily originate in the infinite perfection of his nature, and the
particular standing of man, as a rational, dependent, social being; and tend to
exalt his nature; to render him useful, and happy; as an individual, a member
of a particular society, a citizen of the world, and a probationer for
immortality.

Among many of those excellent, and interesting doctrines of christianity,
that, in our text is one, of eminent rank: and that is, the importance of
christian charity, or benevolence.

This, the Apostle considers so essential a part of the christian temper, that
without it, no man can exist a friend to God, or be supposed to exercise love
to the great Author of good.

"Whosoever has this world's good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts
up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?"

This interrogation involves a strong negation. A man who cannot cordially
sympathize with the afflicted, and contribute a proportion of his time,
interest and talents, to a supply of the indigent, and relief of the
distressed, is a stranger to that religion, the essence of which is love:
neither has he experienced the power of the Gospel, which breathes benevolence.

The frequency, and persuasive eloquence by which a generous charity and tender
sympathy are inculcated in the Gospel, evince the importance of those christian
virtues, and suppose an occasion for a continual exercise of the noble temper.

We find the face of the moral world equally variegated, in respect to the
outward circumstances, and local situation of its numerous members, as the
surface of the globe on which we tread.

We see some in prosperity; others in adversity; some in affluence, others in a
state of indigence.

We have high and low, rich and poor, bond and free. This always has been, and
ever will be the state of the world in degree, to the conclusion of time.

The effect being uniform, and universal, demonstrates a permanent cause; which
can be no less, than the unalterable establishment of heaven.

Affluence and indigence, prosperity and adversity, are by no means the result
of blind chance, or contingent fate; although, in all those instances, there is
the concurring influence of natural causes; some of which operate in a measure,
subordinately to human control: Yet, in general terms, reason and revelation
teach us to adore, the sovereign Providence of God, as the supreme disposing
cause.

This consideration urges a perfect approbation of the present adjustment of
the scale; renders profound submission indispensible; and opens a way to the
exercise of those bowels of compassion insisted on in my text, as essential to
the christian character.

The principal intention of my discourse will be --

In the first place -- more particularly to illustrate the agency of
Providence, in the diverse circumstances of mankind, and to point out the
wisdom of such an establishment.

And then -- to explain the nature, point out the obligation, and importance of
that charity, and compassion, implicitly urged in our text.

This sacred passage supposes, that objects of compassion will be continually
presenting to view, in this changing world. "Whosoever sees his brother have
need." And said our Lord, "The poor ye have always with you." This declaration
is the result, not of omniscience merely; but, of a just view of the
establishments of nature, and an experimental acquaintance with human
vicissitudes.

In these unfailing sources our Lord foresaw, that poverty and pain,
wretchedness and woe, would uniformly originate.

Observation and experience, have invariably evinced the truths of the
prediction.

It is a doctrine of revelation, that the diverse circumstances of men are
ordered by Providence.

Says Solomon -- "The rich and the poor meet together; the Lord is the maker of
them all."

In contemplating the agency of Providence however, in the production of any
event, we should remember, that there is the concurring influence of second
causes.

In a common course, temperance produces health. Industry and economy procure
riches; and the contrary vices, are attended with poverty and wretchedness.
This is the establishment of heaven. But still, these causes do not invariably
produce their several effects.

Schemes projected with wisdom, and prosecuted with diligence, are not always
crowned with success. Providence defeats our designs, and blasts our fairest
prospects.

On the contrary, measures adopted with the least possible degree of policy,
and pursued with a careless indifference, which forbids the most distant
probability of success, are surprisingly efficacious.

Thus, riches are sometimes procured, by causes apparently inadequate to the
effect; and poverty succeeds the most wisely concerted measures for avoidance.
In instances thus especially remarkable the agency of Providence is peculiarly
striking. They abundantly verify that memorable assertion of Solomon's, "The
race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet favor to men
of skill;" but such circumstances attend them, as an infinitely wise Providence
pleases to appoint.

It is sometimes the case, that a man of temperance suffers the painful effects
of a sickly habit, and closes the scene by an untimely death; while the
licentious epicure takes his case, and retains a firmness of body to the
evening of life. Thus, "they that provoke God are secure; into whose hand God
brings abundantly." Who knows not, that the hand of God is in all these
things?" Reason assents, that there is an invisible hand, which controuls
second causes with sovereign wisdom.

Although all the misery suffered in this world of trial, may be considered as
the effect of human folly, in a secondary view; yet, we are pointed to
Providence, as the wisely controuling cause.

Human policy and power are as perfectly unable to effect a complete equality
in the circumstances, and means of enjoyment, in respect to the moral world, as
they are to reduce the globe to a plane. The unalterable laws of nature forbid
the attempt.

The widely different circumstances of men, as well as their diverse local
situations evince, that the rich, and the poor, the comfortable liver, and the
perfectly indigent, are scattered through society, by a sovereign Providence.

Such is the territorial lot of some, that, indefatigable industry, and rigid
economy, can promise nothing higher, than a bare subsistence; even if
Providence should secure them from uncommon disasters.

A seemingly trifling disaster, immediately throws them upon the charity of
society.

In respect to others, whatever may be their local situation, although they are
stationed in a place, where a luxuriant soil, and advantageous commerce, render
an affluent living of the easiest attainment possible; for want of a capacity
to improve, or so much as enjoy the bounties of nature, they pine, and even
starve in the midst of plenty.

Such is the state of the world; of course, we must expect objects of charity
continually presenting to view.

In this, apparently, unequal adjustment of the scale, we may discover obvious
marks of wisdom and goodness.

In the construction of the natural world, the supreme Architect has ordained
variety; which is justly deemed the beauty of creation.

There are bodies celestial, and bodies terrestrial. Of each of those species
of bodies there is an almost infinite variety. One excels another in point of
luster, and importance. Says the Apostle, "One star differs from another star
in glory." There is one glory of the sun; another glory of the moon; and
another glory of the stars."

We behold a sun, and a glow worm; a star of the first magnitude, and a
fleeting meteor; a pearl, and a pebble.

To view such a wisely contrived variety, such regular gradations, and striking
contrasts in the natural world, is peculiarly pleasing to a contemplative mind,
and gives exalted views of the unsearchable wisdom of the adorable Creator.

A similar arrangement, as it respects certain purposes, may be deemed a
display of wisdom in the moral world. Different capacities, diverse local
situations, various degrees of property and power, reason and experience attest
are essential, to the order and happiness of the universal whole.

Various ranks of intelligencies exist in the heavenly world, where there is
the brightest possible display of the wisdom, and goodness of the Creator, and
Ruler of all.

But, in respect to objects of real misery, whom we behold in the world,
equally deserving of ease, with others who swim in pleasure; our feelings are
reconciled to the painful prospect, by a consideration, of the immutable
rectitude of the supreme Disposer of events; and by a firm belief, that, the
present is only a state of trial, preparatory to a better; in which the
mysteries of Providence will be unfolded to the view of admiring worlds.

We may further observe -- that, a view of poverty and distress serves to
enkindle grateful sentiments in those, who are in ease and affluence; to awaken
their bowels of compassion, and call into exercise that charity and benevolence
which christianity inspires, and inculcates upon all, as ornamental to a
christian, and well pleasing to God.

Agreeably to the order of my discourse, I will now attempt an illustration of
the nature, obligation and importance of this christian virtue urged in our
text.

The Apostle uses neither of the terms, love, charity or benevolence, but
compassion; this is the same virtue, under a different form, suited to the
particular case which calls forth its exercise.

Benevolence, charity, candor, a forgiving temper, and sympathetic compassion,
are all comprised in the term love; and are nothing more, than this one
comprehensive principle, appearing in different forms, and adjusted to
different circumstances, persons, and things.

Love, when denoting general good will, is termed benevolence. When it involves
delight in any particular object, and a desire for connection with it, on
account of its apparent merit, or intrinsic excellence, it is complacence.

When importing a disposition to a most favorable construction of the words
and actions of others, it is candor. When it intends an inclination, or
actually generous contribution to the relief of the necessitous, it is
beneficence. When manifesting itself in a tender sympathy with objects in
misery, and solicitude for their relief, it is compassion. In this view of the
heaven-born principle, the Apostle, in our text, terms it, bowels of compassion.

In my present discourse, I shall not confine myself to this particular form of
love, as displaying itself, only in a tender feeling for objects in misery; but
shall allow myself the latitude prescribed above.

It is of importance, carefully to observe -- that, love, charity, or
compassion, may be considered in two different points of view; either as a
natural instinctive principle, or as a christian virtue.

By instinct is here intended, a propension in the creature, to certain actions
adapted to his nature, without a sense of duty upon his mind, or regard to the
honor and authority of God. This instinctive principle of charity, or
benevolence, however deficient as to motive, or end, when viewed in the light
of christianity, has its use, and is of singular importance in society. Without
it, man would cease to be a social being.

The great Author of nature has interwoven this principle in the human
constitution, for wise reasons, and will overrule it to purposes of present
importance; although, he will not finally crown it with immortality.

Of a much higher nature, and more noble complexion, is that benevolent
compassion urged in our text, by an Apostle divinely inspired.

In this sacred passage, as well as in other parts of the Gospel, it is
considered as a christian virtue; originating in a sense of duty to God, and
respect to his honor; and tending in its exercises especially toward his
children; for this important reason; because, they bear his image, and are
members of Christ.

The Apostle, with a freedom, and boldness becoming an ambassador of Christ,
declares the most pompous services performed upon any principle inferior to the
above, or the most painful and expensive oblations to society, destitute of the
essential nature of a christian duty, and of course a nullity, in the view of
the all-perfect Judge.

"Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have not charity, I am
become as sounding brass, or as a tinkling cymbal." "And though I have the gift
of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and have not charity, I am nothing."
"And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and give my body to be
burned, and have not charity, I am nothing."

By charity, here, is intended evangelical love; as appears from the following
passage -- "Now abides faith, hope, charity; these force; but the greatest of
these is charity." True love is the grace which bears this distinguishing rank;
because, it renders the subject more like God; and will be a predominant
principle in the heavenly world, to an interminable eternity; while, faith and
hope, are swallowed up, in vision and enjoyment.

This charity is to be exercised especially, toward the children of God; who,
in the Gospel are styled brethren. The Gospel in our text speaks of withholding
charitable assistance from a brother, in particular, as an evidence of the
absence of a christian temper.

Paul exhorts the Galatian converts to do good unto all men; especially to the
household of faith.

True christians are the excellent of the earth, as they bear the image of God;
are faithful in the cause of God, and zealous advocates for the best interest
of men.

Individuals, or a society of this happy character, are with the highest reason
proposed, as primary objects of our tenderest affections, and complacential
regards.

But, we are not confined to the christian family, in our benevolent wishes.
Particular societies with which we are connected, by some peculiar bonds, have
a right to a special share of our attention, and friendly assistance. Those, to
whom we are allied by consanguinity, reason and christianity point to our view,
as objects of particular regard.

Partial connections are necessary, in the present imperfect state. The great
family cannot sit in the same circle; but is unavoidably formed into detached
parts; each select portion can best attend to their own improvement; each
member can best know the wants of his own body, and supply them; can feel their
burdens, and administer to their support under them, or relief from them. The
wants of the great whole cannot fall under particular observation; neither can
there be a mutual converse through so extensive a body.

Particular societies therefore, for the purposes of cultivating the social
affections, diffusing knowledge, and promoting the happiness of a select few,
are founded in reason, expedience, and even necessity. At the same time, a love
of benevolence is due to being in general. "Let us do good unto all men." is an
injunction of christianity. Equally extensive is that compassion urged in our
text.

It involves no less, than good will to all; a tender regard to the best
interest of mankind, and cheerful exertions to promote the happiness of all
within the sphere of our influence. It imparts a real participation of the joys
and sorrows of our fellow men; that we pity the afflicted, and endeavor to
relieve them; that we are concerned for the erroneous, and wish to reclaim
them: that we feel for the indigent, and cheerfully contribute a reasonable
supply; that we are placable to our enemies, and ready for reconciliation; that
we can forget personal injuries, and forgive them: In a word -- it involves a
disposition to communicate happiness in a way which reason approves, and upon
motives which christianity urges, and inspires.

Thus extensive, and sublime, is that christian compassion recommended in our
text.

These observations open a way to an illustration of its obligation, and
importance.

To exercise this heavenly temper, renders a man as near a resemblance of God,
as humanity will admit. "God is love; and he that dwells in love, dwells in
God, and God in him."

By this most forcible argument, christian charity is urged by our blessed
Lord, upon his dear disciples. "I say unto you, love your enemies; bless them
that curse you; that ye may be the children of your Father who is in heaven;
for he makes his sun to rise, on the evil, and on the good."

Thus by exercising a diffusive benevolence, toward the unworthy, and a love
of complacence to the truly amiable, we imitate God, and give the brightest
possible display of an heavenly temper. In this view, christians are exhorted
to be perfect, as their Father in heaven is perfect.

The repeated injunctions of sacred scripture, further, render the cultivation,
and exercise of this christian virtue indispensibly binding.

Even, under the comparatively dark, and partial dispensation of the law,
humanity and compassion were as repeatedly urged, and cogently enforced, as any
of the direct duties of devotion. Yea, under both dispensations, positive and
ritual duties, are held in subordination to those, of the moral and social
kind. Said God in reference to the ritual services of his people of old --
"bring no more vain oblations; learn to do well; seek judgment; relieve the
oppressed; judge the fatherless; plead for the widow." Similar to this, is that
reply made by our blessed Lord, to the cavilling Pharisees -- "Go ye, and learn
what that means; I will have mercy, and not sacrifice." And the apostle Peter
exhorts christians to love as brethren.

The same sublime virtue is urged upon the Colossian converts, with the most
persuasive eloquence. "Put on therefore, as the elect of God holy, and beloved,
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering,
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another.

Of so eminent a rank is this virtue in our text, that it is considered as
essential to the christian character. The man who is destitute of bowels of
compassion for the distressed, is a stranger to religion, an enemy to God.

Equally important, and indispensible, does this virtue appear, from that
relation, and mutual dependence subsisting, between the numerous members of the
great family of man.

If we confine our views to christians, they are of the same nature, in a
spiritual view, born from above; begotten to the same lively hope; have one
common Lord; are engaged in one cause, and are all tending to the same glorious
end. Unity and love, and the tenderest affection, ought of course, to pervade
the whole body.

A relation in a natural, and civil respect, between the numerous members of
the human race, calls for the exercise of the same virtue throughout the whole.

However diverse the complexion, capacities, tempers, interest, and manners of
men, they are all descended from one common progenitor; and of course have the
same nature. Says the great Apostle -- "God has made of one blood, all flesh
to dwell on the earth." To love as brethren then, is a duty resulting from the
constitution of nature.

We may further consider -- that throughout the whole human family, there is a
similarity of passions, of weakness and infirmity: The same real dangers, and
imaginary evils; the same natural foibles, and moral depravity: which
constitution necessitates a mutual interchange of charitable offices, bowels of
compassion, friendly forbearance, candid allowances, and favorable
constructions.

The cultivation, and exercise of this christian spirit, lay the only permanent
basis of civil peace, and social happiness.

Sordid passions are the baneful source of anarchy, and war, and of all that
wretchednses and woe, which are the unhappy lot of mortality.

In the last place, I observe -- that the refined pleasures resulting from the
sublime affection, which christianity inculcates, and inspires, further evince
their importance, and afford a persuasive argument to the cultivation, and
exercise of them.

Unruly passions create a painful ferment in the mind, which renders a man like
a troubled sea, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

But the christian virtues inspire a solid peace; a peace, resulting from
conscious conformity to principles of reason and religion, and a consequent
prospect of immortality.

Thus, amiable, extensively useful, and highly important, are those social
virtues recommended in the Gospel; a comprehensive branch of which is involved
in that tender compassion, urged in our text.

The man, who lives in the exercise of this christian love, and compassion, is
a favorite of heaven, and the best friend to man. A contrary character, is an
enemy to God, to himself, to his country, and the world.

Are christian charity, diffusive benevolence, and bowels of compassion, of so
amiable a nature, and singular importance? every good man wishes to see them
promoted in every possible way; and will approve of any institution, human, or
divine, which he is convinced is adapted to the laudable design.

Upon this principle, the religion of the Gospel is cordially embraced, and its
institutions revered, by the really wise and truly good.

For a similar reason, principles of Masonry, so far as I have been able to
collect information, from authentic documents, merit approbation. For they
involve the moral, and social virtues, so clearly explained, and cogently
enforced in the Gospel of Christ.

I find that a Mason is sacredly bound, to an uniform observation of the same
duties to God, himself, his neighbor, and to man, which the religion of nature
and revelation unitedly enforce. He is bound "to fear God, love the
brotherhood, and honor all men." In respect to God, he is required "to look to
him, as the chief good;" and "to speak of his name, with reverence, and awe."
In regard to his neighbor, he is obliged "to act upon the square;" (i. e.) "to
do to others, as he would that others should do to him." Relative to himself, a
Mason is bound to avoid every species of irregularity, and intemperance,
unbecoming the dignity of human nature. Especially is he obliged, "to practice
benevolence, and charity."

These I conceive, to be some of the distinguishing characteristicks of this
ancient, and honorable institution.

Its antiquity is indisputable. That, it deserves the appellation of
honorable, an appeal to its principles as above, may evince.

To the honor of the institution, it may be further observed -- that, some of
the most dignified characters, patrons of science, friends to their country,
and to man, have graced the Fraternity, by joining their number, and submiting
to their discipline.

We may add -- in honor to the Society, that, the numerous ages, through which
it has existed, have not been able to produce any higher charges against it,
than may with equal propriety, be alleged agninst any other order of
defectible creatures.

In no instance, perhaps, has the Institution been proved an obstruction, to
civil, ecclesiastical, or social happiness.

I will hazard a presumption, that, many of the great human family have
experienced its beneficial effects.

Are not these reasons sufficient, if not to induce approbation, yet, to forbid
censure?

That Masons do, in numerous instances, counteract their profession, and
essentially deviate from their excellent principles, like every other
Denomination, is undoubtedly true.

Nevertheless, their theory may merit approbation; while their practice
deserves censure,

Principles are founded in nature, and exist, independently of practice.

Were the world to judge of christianity by the conduct of its professors, they
might be justified in rejecting it, as, unworthy of God to reveal, and unfit
for man to receive.

In respect to christianity however, every man has the system before him; that,
he may judge of its merits, independently of the practice of its professors.

But, Masonry, is mostly a secret to the world. But few have any knowledge of
its principles; so, that the multitude are obliged to found their sentiments of
its theory, upon the deportment of the Fraternity.

This, ought to serve, as a powerful motive, with every masonic society, to an
uniform exhibition, of those moral, social, and christian virtues, which are
the ornament of human nature, and will infallibly secure public approbation,
and private esteem.

Peculiarly important is it, that, this argument should have a practical
influence, upon the newly constituted Lodge in this Town. For it is now in its
infancy; and is here, a novelty.

Various opinions are formed respecting it. Some suppose it to be of an evil
tendency: others may think it of no use to society; and some consider it a
matter of indifference.

Which of these conjectures are founded in truth, your conduct, Gentlemen, will
decide.

Let the solemn charges in your book of constitutions be observed, and the
principles of the Order reduced to practice; sure I am, that you may shine, as
the ornaments of civil society.

In the language of an inspired Apostle let me exhort you -- "to walk
circumspectly; not as fools but as wise."

A sense of duty, and regard to the reputation of the Institution, will induce
a cautious inspection of the character of those, whom you admit into your
Fraternity.

These motives will likewise operate to a strict observation of temperance,
sobriety, and decorum, in all your assemblies, as well as in your general
intercourse with the world.

You will not forget to observe seasonable hours in your meetings; remembering
that family religion is not to be neglected.

The eminently good, in all ages of the world, have considered this, an
important branch of social duty; and have not failed to pay a devout regard to
its obligation.

To see its neglect sanctioned by a society, will not fail to cast an indelible
blot upon their character.

You will allow me to observe -- that it will not be altogether unimportant for
this, and other detached portions of the great Masonic Fraternity, to caution
the young, and less informed members, against a fond indulgence, in rapturous
encomiums upon the sublime mysteries of Masonry: As if, in that system, every
scattering ray, leading to a knowledge of truth, were collected to a point.

Such empty suggestions, a man of reason and information, ever views with a
benevolent contempt.

Finally, my friends -- whatever may be your proficiency in masonry, keep in
view the infinite importance of Gospel piety.

Prayerfully study, and uniformly practice the art of holy living.

A speculative acquaintance with this heavenly art, may be acquired by human
exertion: but, an experimental knowledge of things Divine, christianity obliges
us to consider the result of spiritual illumination.

Religion lays the only foundation of present peace, or future felicity. Its
essence consists, not, in lifeless speculations, which only enkindle
enthusiastic raptures; but, in inward purity and love.

The sublime pleasures, resulting from this principle, of heavenly extract, are
a profound secret to the world; a secret, never taught, but in the school of
Christ, entrusted to none, but followers of the Lamb.

Said our Lord -- "I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of
mine." The Evangelist informs us -- that "the sheep follow Christ, for they
know his voice, but a stranger will they not follow." Here are tokens, by
which, a christian will find admission into the New Jerusalem, the city of the
Living God.

The grand token is, the christian temper: a practical faith, which triumphs
over the world.

To him that overcomes, will I grant to eat of the hidden manna; and I will
give him a white stone; and in the stone a new name written, which no man
knows, saving he that receives it.

So be it LORD -- ALLELUIA,

AMEN.

