MR. HAVEN'S SERMON PREACHED FEBRUARY 7th, 1796. FORTY YEARS AFTER HIS
SETTLEMENT IN THE WORK OF THE MINISTRY IN DEDHAM.

A SERMON PREACHED IN THE FIRST SOCIETY IN DEDHAM, ON THE 7th DAY OF FEBRUARY,
1796. FORTY YEARS AFTER THE AUTHOR'S INDUCTION INTO THE WORK OF THE GOSPEL
MINISTRY.

BY JASON HAVEN, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN SAID TOWN.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY THOMAS FLEET, JUN. AT THE BIBLE and HEART. MDCCXCVI.

ACTS, xx. 24. BUT NONE OF THESE THINGS MOVE ME, NEITHER COUNT I MY LIFE DEAR
UNTO MYSELF, SO THAT I MIGHT FINISH MY COURSE WITH JOY, AND THE MINISTRY WHICH
I HAVE RECEIVED OF THE LORD JESUS.
THESE are the words of the great apostle Paul. He addressed them to the elders
of the church of Ephesus. These elders endeavored to dissuade him from going
to Jerusalem, as they imagined he would there be exposed to great troubles and
dangers, from the enemies of the gospel. The apostle considered it his duty to
go. He was very desirous of preaching christianity to his countrymen, the Jews,
who dwelt at Jerusalem. He was determined not to be prevented, by the
formidable picture of impending dangers, set before him. He expected troubles,
and was prepared to meet and bear them, with fortitude, and patience. "None of
these things move me."

HE expresses a firm and unshaken resolution, to pursue the path of duty,
discovered to him, notwithstanding the difficulties and hazards which might
attend it. He had engaged in a good cause, in a good work, and he would not
desert it, because the duties of it could not be performed, but with great
danger and self-denial. In this he set a noble example, to the followers of
CHRIST, in general, and to his ministers in particular. "Having put their hand
to the plough they should not look back." They should not neglect any known
duty, whatever may be the expense or pain of performing it.

IN the following words of our text he rises, in the expression of a holy zeal
and heroic courage. "Neither count I my life dear to me, that I might finish
my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the LORD JESUS."
He had "received the ministry" of the gospel, or an apostleship, "of the LORD
JESUS," who is the great LORD of the harvest, whose sovereign province it is to
send laborers into his vineyard. This apostle had a clear, a special, an
extraordinary call to this work. The call he had accepted; and to the service
he had devoted his life. Therefore to wear it out, or even to lay it down, in
that sacred employment, was not so painful to his mind and apprehension, as the
thought of quitting the work or doing the duties of it slightly. He had set out
in the christian course; he had engaged in the christian ministry. To finish
these well was his great object. This so strongly engaged his attention and
pursuit, as to give him a noble elevation of soul, above the obstructions and
discouragements which might lie in the way. He expected his life would be
spent, and perhaps shortened by a diligent and faithful performance of his duty
as a christian, and especially as a christian minister. He laid his account in
this, and the event proved his calculation just.

PAUL went to Jerusalem. After he had preached the gospel there, for a season,
and with some success, the Jews, in a tumultuous manner seized him, and brought
him before their ecclesiastical court. They accused him of subverting their
system of religion, and of teaching things contrary to the law of Moses. He
made a clear, rational, and animated defense. But finding it did not satisfy
the partial bigoted judges, before whom he was brought, he appealed to Caesar,
the roman emperor. After a while, he was sent to Rome, to take his trial there.
His trial was long delayed. During the delay, he enjoyed some liberty. He
improved it, in promoting a cause, which lay near to his heart, and was dearer
to him than his life. He preached the gospel, planted christian churches, and
wrote epistles. After a while he was confined a prisoner at Rome. In prison he
wrote several of those invaluable epistles, which we have in the new testament,
and which constitute part of the sacred canon. After he was liberated from this
confinement, which continued about two years, he traveled over great part of
Italy, preaching the gospel, and founding churches. He went to Spain, to Crete,
to Philippi, to Macedonia; and at length, returned to Rome, about the year of
the christian era 65. The sacred history does not particularly inform us, what
brought on his second imprisonment, at Rome, and his death. But some of the
ancient fathers, and particularly St. Chrysostom, tell us, in their writings,
that he having converted, by his ministry, a cupbearer, and a concubine, of the
emperor Nero, who was a bitter enemy, and cruel persecutor, of christianity, he
was so enraged, that he ordered Paul to be seized, and committed to prison:
That from prison he was brought forth, and beheaded, at a place called the
salvian waters, on the 29th day of June, A. D. 66: That he was buried at
Ostium; and that afterward, when the roman empire became christian, a
magnificent church was built over his tomb, which, Mr. Calmet, in his
dictionary, says continue to this day. Thus this great apostle to the Gentiles,
"finished his course, and the ministry which he had received of the LORD
JESUS," by the honors of martyrdom. No man, it is likely, ever did as much in
spreading the gospel, and promoting the cause of CHRIST, as he. That his
sufferings, in his cause were exceedingly great and pressing, we may collect,
from the history of the acts of the apostles, and from several of his own
letters, before he sealed his testimony to the truth and goodness of that
cause, by his blood.

BUT is this a just picture of what the ministers of CHRIST'S religion are to
expect, and of what they do in general suffer? In answer to this enquiry, it
may be said, that there has been no small similarity between the services and
sufferings of this eminent servant of CHRIST, and those of many, who were his
brethren and companions, "in the kingdom and patience of JESUS;" especially in
the early days of christianity, when its promoters generally met with warm
opposition, and cruel persecution. The case has been very different, at some
periods, and in some countries since. This difference has been strikingly
obvious, in our happy land, in which the principles of religious liberty have
been so well understood; and maintained; and in which, the faithful ministers
of the gospel, instead of being persecuted, have been honored, and encouraged,
by men of the best and most respectable characters in civil stations.

BUT can we hence pronounce, that laborers, in this part of CHRIST'S vineyard,
have no trials and difficulties, connected with their profession and
employment? This would, undoubtedly, be carrying the matter too far, and saying
what is universally found by experience not to be true.

INDEED for one, in that profession, to exhibit a long and dark catalogue of
the trials and troubles which attend it, might lead some to suspect, that he
aimed to make a merit to himself, in the fortitude and patience with which he
meets, and bears such trials and troubles. I wish not to fall under such an
imputation, or suspicion. Still I do not conceive it amiss for one, in the
profession, before mentioned, to suggest some of the burdens and difficulties
which can hardly be separated from it. This may tend to excite a proper degree
of candor and tenderness, in his fellow christians toward him, and to engage
their prayers for him. "He who wears the shoe, best knows where it is strait
and pinches," to use a common remark; or to use one of Solomon's, "the heart
knows his own bitterness."

No small part of the difficulty of a gospel minister's work and office,
consists in properly "taking heed to himself." To maintain that spirituality,
that devout and pious frame of mind, and that sober circumspect course of
conduct, which the christian character requires, and which is peculiarly
requisite, to support and adorn the ministerial, is no easy thing, even for a
good man. Great watchfulness, servent prayer, and help from above, are
necessary to it. The ministers of religion are compared to "a city set on a
hill which cannot be hid." Many eyes are upon them. These are not always the
eyes of candor and friendship, but too often of suspicion and malevolence. What
minister can be always so circumspect and cautious, as to avoid creating,
though without intending it, a number of little piques and enemies, against
himself? He may do it sometimes, even by an inflexible discharge of necessary
duties. And if his character must be taken from those whom he has thus
innocently, perhaps laudably, offended, all his virtues will be thrown into the
back ground, and his foibles magnified with the utmost virulence of malice, and
resentment.

No part of his professional business, which a christian minister has to
perform, is without it is attendant trials and difficulties. He must, through a
great proportion of his time, apply himself to close study. "This is easy
employment," some may be ready to pronounce; and those would be most likely to
pronounce such an opinion, with confidence, who know least of the matter. An
ancient Sage, who knew what it is to apply his mind to a great variety of
subjects, to acquire science, and investigate truth, remarks, "that much study
is a weariness to the flesh." Close exertion of the mind preys rapidly on the
body. It relaxes and weakens the various springs of the animal machine. It
impairs the powers of digestion; hence crudities abound, producing that very
afflictive and variegated tribe of disorders, called nervous, and
hypochondriac, by which no class of men suffer so much, as the sedentary and
studious. They often become strangers to quiet repose, and refreshing sleep.
All the springs of life are weakened, and the period of it frequently
accelerated. Great students seldom enjoy a healthful vigorous state of body,
for any considerable space of time. Their lot is often an early old age, and
premature death.

WILL it not require the vigorous employment of all the powers of the christian
pastor's mind, to search out the various truths and duties, contained in the
sacred oracles? To show their harmony and connection? In weekly compositions,
to astort and arrange them, in plain and familiar language; and in a manner
adapted to the different ages, characters and circumstances of his people? To
endeavor, by a proper application of them, to awaken the thoughtless and
secure; to lead the weary and heavy laden to rest and safety in CHRIST; to
remove from hypocrites their false hopes and confidences, that they may build
on the sure corner stone, laid in Zion; to comfort the meek and humble
followers of Jesus, when their spirits are depressed, with gloomy apprehensions
of their state and character; and to guide all into that way of salvation,
revealed in the gospel? The person who supposes such services can be performed,
and such stated instructions prepared, without much close study, and great
application of mind, judges quite erroneously. He must have paid very little
attention to the matter.

As to the labor of public speaking, from sabbath to sabbath, and on other days
of social worship, some may suppose it light and inconsiderable. Do such judge
rightly? Do they judge by experience? The experiment will show such an opinion
to be unfounded, and must have taught all who have made it, that to stand for
several hours, and to speak, with a voice loud and forcible enough to be heard,
by a large assembly, require no small exertions of strength; and that few
things will sooner spend and exhaust it. Not only the lungs, and other organs
of speech, are kept on the strain; but the powers of the mind must, at the same
time, be vigorously exercised. There must be a constant concern to speak
clearly and properly. In most assemblies the preacher has the additional trial,
of seeing some before him, whose attention he is not able to gain, by his best
endeavors, to prepare useful instructions, and to deliver them with propriety;
some who, either fall asleep, or appear quite heedless and inattentive,
"hearing as though they heard not;" others who, if they hear, it is not with
the best disposition; it is rather with a view, to watch for faults, and to
make uncandid remarks, than to be instructed, and excited to a faithful
performance of duty. A mere mistake, in the speaker, will, by such persons, be
magnified into a crime; and any little impropriety, or uncouthness, in his
accents, pronunciation, or gesture, will be more noticed, than the most useful
and important sentiments; will be remembered longer, and be mentioned oftener,
either to censure, or ridicule the performer. The present speaker, however
liable he may be to such remarks, has the satisfaction to think, there are as
few, among his stated hearers, disposed to make them, as in most assemblies.

BUT there is another thing, which may be still more likely to excite
unfriendly feelings, in many persons toward their minister, and consequently
be an exercise to his faith and patience. His office obliges him to be plain
and faithful in his public addresses, to reprove the vicious, to warn them of
their danger, to call them to repentance, to urge on them the performance of
neglected duties, and to press such a virtuous and godly conversation, as is
contrary to a carnal heart, and a corrupt disposition. Such exhortations and
admonitions will generally be ungrateful to the more loose and vicious part of
an audience. Will they not be apt to feel, toward their religious instructor,
much as Ahab did toward the prophet Micajah, though they should not express
their feelings, in so plain terms? "I hate him, for he always prophesies evil
concerning me."

STILL more difficult it may be, for a christian minister to give private
counsel, exhortation and reproof, without awakening the resentment of those
whom he addresses, and bringing on himself the pointed marks of their
displeasure. Yet faithfulness to GOD, and to them, will not suffer him to
neglect this difficult and painful duty.

THE service, to which a minister is often called, of visiting and conversing
with the sick, frequently involves in it great difficulties, trials, and
temptations. He many times finds persons, in sore distress, both of body and
mind. Their situation strongly excites compassion. His heart must be hard and
unfeeling indeed, not to be tenderly moved. As to many of these persons, he may
have no ground, from their former lives and conversation, to judge favorably
of their spiritual state. He wishes to speak words of comfort to them, and to
apply the promises of the gospel, to dispel their fears, and ease their pained
minds. His bowels of pity and tenderness almost constrain him to do it. But he
is anxious, left this should produce a false peace, and lead them to rest on
deceptive hopes; left it should prevent that sense of guilt and danger, which
they ought to entertain, in order to lay them low, humble, and penitent, at the
feet of divine mercy, and to excite them to employ their remaining moments, and
their last breath, in ardent cries to a compassionate GOD and SAVIOR, for
pardoning mercy, and sanctifying grace. What can the minister do? If he deals
plainly and faithfully, through from the most benevolent motives, he may be
deemed cruel: He may grieve and offend the sick persons, and their surrounding
friends. Those who have never been called to perform the part of a gospel
minister's duty, which we are considering, will hardly conceive the
difficulties which in many cases attend it. Great wisdom is requisite so to
unite fidelity and tenderness; that a dangerous presumption may not be
encouraged, nor a fatal despondency produced, in the last and important days,
and hours of sickness, and of life.

ANOTHER thing, in the situation of a minister of religion, will, by persons
acquainted with human nature, be considered as painful and selfdenying, viz.
his being obliged to give up his independence, so far as many of his people
seem to expect; so far as to make himself subservient to their call, their
will, and, too often, to their humor; so far as to have scarcely any time
which he can call his own; so far as not to be allowed to claim many of the
common rights of human nature, with that free and independent spirit, with
which other good men among his people do it, without giving any offense. He
ought undoubtedly to adopt the language, and sentiment of the great apostle,
who owned himself "his people's servant for JESUS' sake;" and to be willing in
a sober and consistent sense, "to become all things to all men; " i. e. to
discover a kind, yielding, and condescending disposition. But is it certain
that this would give universal satisfaction? There may be, in most societies, a
number who expect their minister should make a greater sacrifice than this to
please them. He must forbear to declare his opinion, with that decent freedom
which others use, upon religious, domestic, or political subjects, concerning
which a diversity of sentiments prevails among his people. Many individuals may
be ready to claim a right of prohibiting their minister from expressing an
opinion contrary to their's. If he does not yield to that prohibition, he will
hardly fail of meeting with the displeasure of the persons, from whom he dares
to dissent. Ministers, as well now, as in the day of our SAVIOR'S abode upon
earth, need to be "wise as serpents, and harmless as doves." And when they
sincerely desire and endeavor to be so, it is hardly to be expected they
should be so fortunate as to give offense to none. Their concessions may not
come up to the wishes of some. Is it possible to please all, when so many, and
so different tempers and dispositions, views and designs exist among their
parishioners?

ONE of the most painful trails, which Christ's ministers often meet with,
still remains to be mentioned, namely, the little attention paid to their most
faithful instructions, by a great proportion of their people, and the small
success of their labors, in general. It is hard to say what can be more
grievous and disheartening to those who have a proper concern for the
prosperity of the Redeemer's kingdom, and the salvation of precious souls.
Under this discouragement, respecting the people to whom he ministered, the
prophet Jeremiah once made this resolution, "I will speak no more to them, in
the name of the LORD." This drew very moving complaints from some others of
GOD'S ancient prophets. "I have labored in vain, and spent my strength for
naught: Israel will not be gathered. Who has believed our report?"

W^^^ a minister is diligent in his studies, fervent in his prayers, earnest in
his preaching, faithful in giving private counsel, and circumspect in his own
conduct, yet then to observe many among his people growing evidently more
hardened and fixed in wickedness; many who will not give themselves the trouble
of attending public worship; many more, who appear quite careless and
unconcerned about the welfare of their immortal souls; and some among those who
have bound themselves, by public covenant engagements, to maintain a life of
strict piety and virtue, yet walking very unsuitably to the profession they
have made; what can more deeply and painfully wound him? Yet thus wounded, many
times, are CHRIST'S faithful ministers. Their time, their strength, and their
lives are wearing away, without the comfort of satisfactory evidences that
"their labor is not in vain, in the LORD."

I HAVE been long, perhaps too long, in sketching out the dark side of the
picture of a christian minister's situation. Still nothing has been said but
what I believe to be a just representation, and what is often realized, by
persons in the sacred office. This may have led many ministers, of the present
day, to apply to themselves, the remark which the apostle made, relative to
himself, and his brethren in the apostolic office. "If in this life only we
have hope, we are of all men most miserable."

BUT is there no bright side to this picture? Is there no counterpart to what
has been described, of a minister's labors, trials and conflicts? Has he no
pleasures and comforts, while discharging the duties of his station? He
undoubtedly has, if he is faithful, and some which are exceedingly endearing
and supporting. The approbation of his own conscience, and comfortable hopes of
the Divine approbation. Sensible aid and assistance in his labors, from the
spirit and grace of CHRIST. Delightful contemplations on the truths, and
blessings of the gospel, for which his professional business gives him great
advantages. The friendship, the warm affection, the sincere good wishes, and
the fervent prayers, of the most amiable and worthy characters, among his
people. Great satisfaction, sometimes, in seeing "the pleasure of the LORD
prospering in his hands;" and "souls slocking to CHRIST, as doves to their
windows:" And especially the prospect of those gracious rewards, which CHRIST
has promised to his faithful ministers, when they shall have finished their
course, and the ministry they have received. "Be ye faithful unto death, and I
will give you a crown of life."

WILL not the faithful labourer, in the vineyard of CHRIST, who keeps the eye
of his faith fixed on such gracious promises, be comforted, in all his
tribulations? Will he not, like the apostle, though sorrowful, yet be always
rejoicing? Yea it may be hoped that in the near views of death, he may be able
in a good measure humbly to adopt his joyful and triumphant language. I am now
ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a
good fight: I have finished my course; I have kept the faith henceforth there
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the LORD, the righteous
Judge, shall give me, at that day.

WHO could be expected to enter into the sacred employment, or long to continue
in it, if nothing of this sort was to be expected, or found, to balance the
many trials and difficulties which are inseparable from it? More virtue and
fortitude, than most men are possessed of, would be requisite to prevent their
shrinking from a service, so unpromising, yea so formidable. But our SAVIOR
does not leave, thus comfortless, his servants, whom He calls into his
vineyard. Though the rewards of their diligence and fidelity are principally
reserved to the future world, yet for their present support and comfort, He
has made such gracious declarations as the following "Lo I am with you always
to the end of the world. My grace is sufficient for you, and my strength is
made perfect in your weakness."

WITH an expectation of both these, the trials Seven members of the church, and
three or four others, opposed his settlement. After a little time, he had the
satisfaction of numbering them all, among his kind, affectionate, and
confidential friends; and such they all continued, to the close of their lives.
and the supports, your minister consented to enter into the sacred work, in
this place, and was solemnly set apart to it forty years ago, viz. on the fifth
day of February, A.D. 1756. A day, and a transaction much to be remembered; and
which he can truly say have hardly been out of his serious recollection, for a
week or a day since. Very frequently has he recollected the leading sentiments
of an excellent discourse delivered by the rev. Mr. Appleton, on those words of
the apostle, 2 Timothy ii. 15. Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman
that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. Often has
he recollected the charge by the rev. Mr. Townsend of Needham, delivered, at
once, with that parental tenderness, and that seriousness and gravity, which
were happily united in the temper and conduct of that worthy servant of Christ.
Often has he recollected that profusion of christian friendship, and brotherly
love, expressed, in the right hand of fellowship, given by the rev. Mr. Balch;
all which friendship and brotherly love he continued to exemplify, while his
valuable life was spared, toward the person then ordained, and toward his
brethren, in the gospel ministry in general.


SOON after his entering on the work he was visited with such bodily
infirmities, as led him to expect his life and labors would be short; that he
should, in a little time, finish his course, and the ministry which he had
received. Still, with truth he can say, he did not forget his vows and
resolutions, to work while it was day; nor did he feel an unwillingness to
spend what little strength he had, in the service of his beloved people. He did
"not account his life dear to him," if he might spend it successfully in the
great work, on which he had entered. To the honor of GOD, he desires
thankfully to mention it, that he was strengthened to go on, in his
professional labors, much beyond his expectations, and with no long
interruptions, for a number of years. With sentiments of gratitude and
affection, he often reflects on the kind, candid, and tender manner, in which
his people treated him, and with which his feeble endeavors to serve them were
received. They did not despise either his youth or his infirmities. The
abundant marks of their sympathetick tenderness and affection rendered all his
labors among them, eminently labors of love, which were their own reward.

AFTER about eighteen years, feebly, yet pleasantly spent, in their service,
GOD was pleased to visit him with a threatening fever, which reduced him, in
appearence, to the very gates of the grave. The tenderness with which they
ministered to him during that sickness, is fresh in his grateful remembrance.
Their prayers, A day of fasting and prayer was observed by his people, on his
account.
which GOD was pleased graciously to answer, called him back to further labors
among them. The blessing of Heaven, on the gratuitous, the careful, and
judicious prescriptions, and attendance of his skilful and benevolent
physician, Doctor John Sprague.
recovered him to a better state of health, than he had enjoyed for some time
before. With renewed pleasure and resolution he again entered on his public
and private labors, in the gospel. And with renewed marks of respect his
people received him.

DURING about seventeen years after this, he was not absent from public worship
more than two sabbaths, excepting the time when he had the small pox, which
detained him three. Frequently, however, in that term of seventeen years, has
he come into this house of worship, weak and trembling, when it appeared to him
hardly possible that, without special help from above, he should go through the
services of the day. Strength was, as he desires thankfully to record, from
time to time, vouchsafed to him.

ABOUT five years ago, he was visited with a slow fever, which detained him
from the house of GOD, for five sabbaths. Since that time, he has, every
Lord's day attended the services of the sanctuary. He desired now to set up his
EBENEZER, acknowledging that "hitherto the LORD has helped him." He has
spared, and assisted him, to labor in his vineyard, feeble and imperfect as
his labors have been, much longer than any of his predecessors, in this
society. His term of service has been protracted beyond that of most of his
brethren, in the ministry.

UPON retrospecting this term of forty years, your minister finds much to
lament, much to be humbled for, of his faults, defects, and imperfections. His
hope is in the abundant mercy of GOD, and the merit of that blood, which was
shed for the priesthood as well as for the congregation; to pardon what has
been amiss; and to accept his feeble, though, he hopes, sincere attempts to
promote the cause of Christ, and the good of souls. He finds, at the same time,
many things which demand his gratitude to his DIVINE MASTER; particularly, that
he has called him to labor in so pleasant a part of his vineyard; that he
has supported and assisted him so long; that he has rendered his services, in
a good degree acceptable to his people; and that they have not, as he would
humbly hope, been wholly useless and unsuccessful; though it is a painful
consideration, that the evidences of their success have been so few. It is
matter of pleasing and grateful reflection, that friendship and harmony among
the people of his charge, and between him and them, have so generally
prevailed. He fervently prays, that "brotherly love may continue." He rejoices
with his flock that they have been, and now are, so free from those religious
disputes, and contentions, which prevail in some societies; occasioned by
different and militating sentiments, and by the prevalence of various sects and
denominations of christians. There is not, in the first precinct in Dedham a
family of professed Baptists, Quakers, Methodists, or Universalists, known to
the writer of this discourse.

There are now, and have been for more than half a century past, a few families
of the episcopal denomination. The rev. William Montague is their minister of
rector.




MANY events, in this society have taken place within the term of forty years
past. The inhabitants of the precinct, and the members of the church, are, in a
great measure, changed. But 5 males, and 10 females, who were, so long ago,
members of the church, continue alive among us. The church then consisted of 55
male members, and 87 females, resident, in the parish. It now consists of 42
males, and 99 females. The whole number is 1 less now than it was then. The
disproportion between males and females is increased. The number of the former
is 13 less, and of the latter, 12 more.

THE number of persons admitted, who were not in communion with any church
before, is 296, 7 have been received by recommendation from other churches. 32
have been dismissed from this to other churches. The number of children which
have been baptized, with us, in the above mentioned period, is 904. 10 adult
persons have been admitted to the ordinance of baptism.

THE number of couples, who have been joined in marriage, by your pastor, one
or both of which belonged to this town, is 279. A few have been married by
magistrates, in the town.

THE number of deaths in this society, within the term of 40 years past,
according to the most authentic records, is 529. I have formerly mentioned,
that the yearly average number of deaths was between 9 and 10. It was so during
the first 19 years of my ministry. In the last 21 years, in which the small pox
has several times, prevailed among us; the dysentry, and some other epidemick
distempers, the average number has been considerably greater.

OF the 529 persons who have died, 9 have arrived to the age of 90 years, or
upwards, which is nearly in the proportion of 1 to 60. 42 have lived to be 80
years old and upwards, besides the 9 who survived 90 years. This shows about 1
in 12 to arrive to the age of 80 years.

74 persons have died between 70 and 80 years of age, which, in connection with
the calculations above, shows that as great a proportion as 1 in 5, of those
who have died, in the term aforesaid, have lived to see threescore years and
ten, or more. I cannot ascertain the number of births in this society, during
the term of 40 years past. It may be about 1100.

THE above calculations show, that a greater proportion of persons, among us,
than has been generally supposed, has lived to what we may call old age. If a
regular, sober, and virtuous mode of living may be assigned, as the natural
cause, it reflects honor on the society. A presumptive argument is hereby
suggested, in favor of the situation, air and climate, as being friendly to
health, and long life. We are bound however ultimately to ascribe it, to his
kind providence, who is the "GOD of our life and the length of our days."

THE number of females, who have lived to old age, is a little larger than that
of males. There is not one man, now in the society, quite 80 years old. There
is one woman, in her 94th year; and several between 80 and 90 years old. There
are 11 women, and 7 men, whose age is between 70 and 80 years, there are 7 men
and 34 women in a state of widowhood.

THE deaths, in the society, have mostly taken place by the common laws of
mortality, or have been what we call natural deaths. None in the way of
murder, or by the magistrate, "holding the sword, as a terror to evil doers."
The lives of several have been brought to an end, in the way of drowning, and
by some other melancholy accidents. Two only have been lost at sea. William
Ames, and William Avery, jun.
A small number have died in the army either by sword or sickness.

THE three worthy persons Deacons Joseph Wight, Ephraim Willson, and Nathaniel
Kingsbury. The first of these died July 14th 1756, in the 75th year of his age,
and 27th of his office. The second died July 19th 1769, in the 86th year of his
age, and 34th of his office. The third died August 20th 1775, in the 78th year
of his age, and 29th of his deaconship.
who sustained the office of deacons, when your present pastor entered on his
labors among you, all lived to a good old age; but have, for many years, been
numbered among the dead. Two others, Deacon William Avery, now in the 80th year
of his age, and 37th of his office. Deacon Ebenezer Richards, in the 78th year
of his age, and 27th of his office.
chosen into that office, within 40 years past, after faithfully discharging
the duties of it, for a length of time, are now by bodily infirmities, rendered
unable to attend to them. We pray GOD to brighten the evening of their day, by
the consolations of that religion which they have long professed, and
endeavored to promote. Our brethren, Deacons Joseph Whiting, Aaron Fuller, and
Isaac Bullard.
who now perform the benevolent services of that office, we wish may long
continue to perform them, to their own reputation, and to the satisfaction of
the church.

VERY precious to you, no doubt, is the memory of many in the catalogue of more
than five hundred persons, deceased from among you, within 40 years past. Their
memory is dear to your pastor. In the number were included all the men, except
5 or 6, who invited him into the office, which he now sustains among you. Not a
few of them were his intimate and confidential friends, whom he often met, with
great delight, in the house of GOD, and at the table of CHRIST, mingling hearts
and affections, in the exercises of piety and devotion. The proofs of their
sincere regard to him were so strong, and so multiplied, as to preclude all
doubt of it. And he sometimes entertains the pleasing hope, that he may have
been the feeble unworthy instrument of good to their souls, in helping them
forward to the heavenly world.

IF the names of those who have died, from among us, within the term often
mentioned above, should be called over, most of us should hear some which
designated our nearest and dearest connexions. Tender parents; beloved partners
in life; dear children; affectionate brethren and sisters. Calling them to mind
may afford a melancholy kind of pleasure. A care to be followers of them, so
far as they were of CHRIST, excited and strengthened, will be essentially
beneficial to us. We cannot see them again, in the flesh, "till the heavens be
no more." How happy if we may then meet them, at the right hand of CHRIST, to
unite, in tracing the mysterious steps of Divine providence; and in celebrating
the wonders of redeeming love! Soon our bodies, like their's, will be laid in
the grave, and be mouldering in the dust. A successor to your present pastor,
may perhaps, half a century hence, make remarks on our deaths, memory, and
character, as we do now, on those of our friends, who are gone before us. It is
earnestly to be wished, that these commemorative anecdotes, may not only afford
transient amusement, but useful instruction, respecting the passing nature of
time; the shortness of human life; and the importance of improving well every
day as it passes.

THIS particular society in which we dwell, is not exclusively the school, in
which we may receive instruction of this serious and universally interesting
kind. In neighboring churches and societies, particularly in those which
originated from this, At the beginning of the term which this discourse
reviews, rev. Jonathan Townsend was pastor of the church in Medfield. He was
dismissed from his office, October 9th 1769. Rev. Thomas Prentiss was inducted
into the pastoral office in that town, October 31st 1770; and continues to
minister to that people in holy things. A small baptist society has, for a
number of years, existed in that town. The late rev. Thomas Gair, was for
several years the pastor. Since his removal, a Mr. Clarke resides there, and
frequently preaches to them.

IN Wrentham, rev. Joseph Bean was minister. On the 12th of December 1784, his
life, and his very faithful labors were terminated, in the 66th year of his
age, and 34th of his ministry. Rev. David Avery was installed his successor,
May 25, 1786, and his dismission voted by the town, agreeably to advice of
council, April 21, 1794. It is painful to add, that that church and town, which
for more than a century enjoyed great peace, harmony, and prosperity, are now
in a very unhappy, divided, broken state. May they be led to know and pursue
the things which are promotive of peace, and christian edification! A small
baptist society is in the westerly part of that town. A rev. Mr. Williams is
their minister.

THE 2d parish in Wrentham continued vacant, after the death of rev. Elias
Haven, till June 4th 1760, when the rev. Caleb Barnum was ordained their
pastor. He obtained a dismission from the pastoral office after about 9 years
service among them, and was, soon after, installed pastor of the church in
Taunton. He went chaplain into the western army, in 1776, and died abroad. The
rev. Nathaniel Emmons was ordained his successor, in Wrentham, April 21. 1773,
and continues the beloved pastor of that flock. This 2d parish in Wrentham was,
in the year 1778, made a town, by an act of incorporation, and the name
Franklin given to it.

IN Needham, the rev. Mr. Townsend continued his faithful labors till
September 30th 1762, when his Lord called him away by death, in the 65th year
of his age, and 43d of his ministry. Rev. Samuel West was ordained his
successor, April 25th, 1764. He left Needham in November 1788; and was soon
installed pastor of a church in Boston, where he now officiates. The rev.
Stephen Palmer was ordained to the pastoral office, in Needham, November 7.
1792, and there continues his ministrations. A number of the inhabitants of
Needham got incorporated into a distinct precinct, about the year 1773. They
were led to seek this, on account of some disagreement in the town, respecting
the place of building a meeting house. This 2d precinct has not yet settled a
minister.

IN Walpole, their first minister, rev. Phillips Payson, died January 22d 1778,
in the 74th year of his age, and 50th of his ministry. The rev. George Morey,
his successor, was ordained Nov. 19th 1783, and continues the guide and
overseer of that people.

IN the second parish in Dedham, the rev. Thomas Balch continued his acceptable
labors till January 8th 1774, when he was removed by death, in the 63d year of
his age, and 38th of his ministry, and was succeeded in office, by rev. Jabez
Chickering, the present pastor, who was ordained July 3d 1776.

IN the 3d parish in Dedham, of which the rev. Andrew Tyler was pastor, some
unhappy dissentions took place, about the year 1764. Attempts to restore peace
and harmony not succeeding, Mr. Tyler was dismissed from office, about the
close of the year 1772. He died in Boston in 1775. The rev. Thomas Thacher was
ordained his successor, June 7th 1780.

THE 4th parish in Dedham had the rev. Benjamin Caryl set over them in the
Lord, as their first pastor, Nov. 10th 1762. He still labors among them in
word and doctrine. That parish was incorporated, as a district, by the general
court, July 7th 1784, and had the name Dover given to it.


providence teaches the same things, by similar changes and events. "He that is
wise will observe these things." And if we extend our view to a larger circle,
to mark the footsteps of divine providence, in the vicissitudes which have
taken place, within no very long period of past time, more useful information
will arise to our minds. Within the easy recollection of many of us, the grand
American revolution has been brought about, which has given our country a
station among the sovereign and independent nations of the earth. This forms an
important era, and has given, or confirmed to us, civil and religious
privileges, equal, perhaps superior, to those enjoyed in any part of the world;
especially taken in connection with those wise constitutions of government,
which have been formed, in our country, and carried into operation, during, and
since the revolution. The faithful page of history, it is hoped, will convey
the knowledge of these great events to the latest generations.

Do not the private events which relate more immediately to this society bear
evident signatures of a kind providence, rendering it is condition prosperous?
"Instead of the fathers are the children." Many repsectable persons have
finished their course. Many respectable ones have risen up in their stead. The
number of births has been more than double the number of deaths.

THE education of youth has had some share of attention paid to it; and a
conviction of it is importance appears to be increasing. A gentleman of
respectable learning and abilities, Ebenezer Wight, Esquire has opened an academy,
in the parish, and has devoted his time to the instruction of youths, of both
sexes, in various branches of science. The institution, though new, and of a
private kind, bids fair to be useful.
Fourteen young men, Their names, time of being graduated, and profession, are
in the following table.
Names. Graduat. Profes. George Daman 1756 Divinity Nathaniel Ames 1761 Physic
Nathaniel Fisher 1763 Divinity * Seth Ames 1764 Physic Ebenezer Starr 1768
Physic Joseph Avery 1771 Divinity Fisher Ames 1774 Law Ebenezer Battelle 1775
Trade Ebenezer Wight 1776 Divinity Peter Woodward 1776 Civil Line
Sam.Shuttlesworth 1777 Divinity Samuel Dexter 1781 Law Samuel Haven 1789 Law
Jonathan Fisher 1792 Divinity


within the period we are retrospecting, received an education at the
university in Cambridge. All of them, except one, are now living. Twelve of
them entered into one or other of the three learned professions.

MANY improvements have been made in the society, tending to convenience and
ornament. This decent house THE first meeting house, tradition says, was built
1638, where the present house stands. The people assembled in it for religious
worship about ^4 years. Iu the year 1672 they took it down, and erected
another, in the same place, the first being too small to accommodate them. The
second, which many of you remember, stood 90 years. In the year 1762 it was
taken down, and this, in which we now assemble, was erected, in the same place.
The spot fixed upon, by the proprietors, for the first, seems, by general
consent, to have been deemed the most suitable, ever since. Soon after the
present meeting house was finished, the handsome clock now in it, was given to
the parish, by Samuel Dexter, Esquire In the year 1775, Mr. Joshua Bracket, late of
Boston, deceased, gave to the society, the christening basin, now in use, and
the frame in which it stands. The aged and venerable Madam Catharina Barnard
(formerly Dexter) March 16, 1789, presented to the society a large folio Bible,
desiring a portion of it might be read, in public, on Lord's days. Her donation
was greatfully received, and her desire complied with.
for public worship has been erected. More than half the dwelling houses in
the parish have been built, and most of the others repaired and enlarged. Few
(I think but seven) have been consumed by fire. THE houses burned belonged to
the following persons, viz. Dr. John Sprague, Robert Smith and his son, Joseph
Wight and his son, John Eaton, Israel Everett jun. Job Richards, and Isaac
Eaton.
Some branches of manufactures have been introduced. Others have been extended
and enlarged. There has been an augmentation of property, in the church, and
society. The cultivation of the soil has been carried to greater perfection.
The number and commodiousness of buildings have been increased. A church fund
THE history of the origin and progress of the church's property, is to be
found, partly in the records of the church, and partly in those of the original
proprietors of those lands which constituted what was, at first, the town of
Dedham. It is well understood that the fund, which the church now possesses,
proceeded from the sale of a number of lots of land, which belonged to it. This
sale was made more than 30 years ago. The money produced by it was let out upon
interest. The interest, for a succession of years, was added to the principal.
The annual interest now amounts to about 267 dollars, or 80 pounds. It is
applied toward the support of the minister. It renders the burden of
maintaining public worship light.
has been established, and become considerable. This society is become the
seat of the public business of a new formed country. THE county of Norfolk was
formed out of the county of Suffolk, by an act of the general court, passed
March 26th 1793. Dedham was made the shire-town. The public county buildings
were not completed, till a year or two after the incorporating act was passed.
Hereby it is figure and respectability are advanced.

AND to it is honor, it may be mentioned, that a spirit of candor and
accommodation has generally marked it is proceedings, to the maintaining peace
and harmony. This was the case in building this house for public worship; and
in settling the feats, apartments and conveniences to be enjoyed in it. This
was the case when a change of the version of the psalms, ABOUT 35 years ago the
society, with very little opposition, exchanged, what was generally called, the
New England psalms, for the version of Tate and Brady, and a collection of Dr.
Watts's hymns bound with it. About three years ago, without any opposition,
they introduced Dr. Watts's version of the psalms, and his hymns, in the room
of Tate and Brady's.
to be used in public worship, was repeatedly made. And this has been the case
in regulating that agreeable part of religious service, singing the praises of
GOD in his house. Much commendation and thanks are due to those who lead in
that part of worship, for the judicious and pleasing manner in which the
service is performed.
And, this also has been the case when alterations were, more than once,
proposed, and agreed to, as to terms and modes, March 7th 1742, the church
voted not to insist on persons offering relations, as a term of admission into
fellowship with them; and at the same time introduced a confession of faith, to
be publicly assented to, by each person, when admitted, who did not offer a
relation. This confession of faith, though excellent in general, was long, and
contained some religious tenets, concerning which many pious persons have their
doubts and difficulties. About the year 1767, it was suggested to the church,
that something more concise, and expressed in more general terms, might better
answer the purpose. A substitute of that kind was proposed, and peaceably
adopted.

At a meeting of the church, April 11th 1793, it was suggested, whether it
might not be advisable to make some alterations in the modes and forms of
admitting persons into communion. A committee was chosen to consider the matter
and report, what they think proper to be done. The committee, at an adjournment
of the meeting, reported a general form of christian union, and covenant
engagements, in which all persons admitted are to agree. This was adopted
without opposition. The said committee also reported the following method of
admitting persons, as, in their opinion, proper and advisable, viz. That a
person, desiring admission, shall apply to the minister, and make his desire
known; that the minister shall mention this, in public; and if no valid
objection is offered against the person, within a fortnight, the name of the
person shall be inserted in the church covenant, beforementioned. And when the
minister has notified the church, that this has been done, such person shall
be considered as a member of the church, and be treated as such. This report
was accepted by the church, the following clause being added, viz. Provided
however, that if any person shall choose rather to be admitted into the church,
in either of the methods which have been heretofore used, they shall readily be
allowed their choice.


of admitting persons to church fellowship, and christian privileges. Few
disputes and controversies have prevailed in the church or society. If the
members have not always been perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in
the same judgment, yet a disposition has prevailed, to permit every one freely
to enjoy the right of his private opinion, provided he does not break in upon
the rights of others. This spirit of candor and mutual forbearance has happily
tended to the peace of the community. GOD grant it may abound among us, more
and more.

BUT whether the scenes through which we pass, or the events upon which we are
remarking, be pleasing or painful; one thing is certain; we shall be here but a
little while, to observe them. The fashion of the world changes, and passes
away, and we are changing, and passing away with it.

YOUR pastor need not tell you that he is in the decline of life. Evidences of
it cannot escape his and your observation. He desires to adore that kind
providence, which has sustained him so long. And he takes this opportunity to
express sentiments of gratitude to his beloved people, for the candor and
friendship with which they have generally treated him. He wishes never to
forget the many, many expressions of their kindness and affection.
Unkindnesses, and injuries he desires to remember none. He wishes to be
instrumental of promoting their best interest, during the short remaining
period, GOD may continue him in the ministry. He earnestly requests their
prayers that he may be so. He has no ground to calculate upon a long
continuance. He can expect no other, than ever long to be laid by, as a broken,
or worn out vessel. But while any considerable degree of bodily strength, and
powers of mind, is continued to him, he hopes not to be a mere cumberer of the
ground, or burden to society. To survive all capacity of usefulness, appears to
him an event, by no means to be desired.

THOUGH he sincerely wishes that his private intercourse among his people may
be agreeable to them, and minister to their profit; yet probably his occasional
visits may not, in frequency, come up to their expectations, or his own
inclination. Should this be the case, their candor, and good sense will furnish
sufficient apologies. They will do him the justice, to acknowledge, that he
has not been a stranger, in their families, in times of sickness and trouble.
As he has taken a tender and sympathetick part, in their afflictions, it is
his desire to do so still, to the extent of his strength and abilities.

HE feels great solicitude for the utility and success of his public ^^^ours
and instructions. The small capacity he has, as a public religious teacher, he
desires diligently and faithfully to improve. Still it lies very much with his
hearers to determine, whether these endeavors shall be beneficial to them or
not. Without a stated, serious, and prayerful attention, on their part, what
profit can they expect to receive? He earnestly entreats them not refuse such
an attention.

THE remarks which have been made, at this time, he hopes will be received with
the same candor and friendship, with which they have been prepared, and
delivered. For a public speaker to say so much concerning himself, may be
deemed rather indelicate. The subject and the occasion are his apology. He has
not been wont to trespass in this way. And this probably may be the last time,
that any thing of this sort, will be delivered by him, in this place. Possibly
some of the historical anecdotes, in the foregoing pages, may be thought too
small and trifling to have a place there. It was the desire of the writer not
to offend in this way. Little incidents generally interest the feelings of
persons immediately concerned in them.

To conclude,

THE pastor of this flock considers his time, all his little strength, whether
of body or mind, and even his life, devoted to the honor of CHRIST, and the
promotion of their spiritual good; and thinks he can sincerely adopt the
language of the apostle, and say, that he "does not account his life dear to
him," if it may be thus faithfully, and usefully spent; and "his course, and
ministry finished with joy."

THE law of mortality, if nothing else, must ever long, dissolve the relation
of pastor and flock, which has now subsisted between him and them, through the
term of forty years. GOD grant that he and they may (...) discharge the
respective duties of the relation, as shall promote the joy and felicity of
both, in the coming world.

AMEN.

