Beauties of Hervey.

THE BEAUTIES OF HERVEY OR DESCRIPTIVE PICTURESQUE AND INSTRUCTIVE PASSAGES,
SELECTED FROM THE WORKS OF THIS DESERVEDLY ADMIRED AUTHOR, viz. MEDITATIONS
AMONGST THE TOMBS -- REFLECTIONS ON A FLOWER GARDEN -- DESCANT ON THE CREATION
-- CONTEMPLATIONS ON THE NIGHT -- THE STARRY HEAVENS -- A WINTER PIECE -- THE
MOST IMPORTANT, INTERESTING, AND PICTURESQUE PASSAGES FROM THEREON AND ASPASIO
-- LETTERS AND SERMONS -- MISCELLANIOUS TRACTS -- RELIGIOUS EDUCATION OF
DAUGHTERS -- AND -- REMARKS ON LORD BOLINGBROKE'S LETTERS. TO WHICH ARE ADDED,
MEMOIRS OF THE AUTHOR'S LIFE AND CHARACTER; WITH AN ELEGIAC POEM ON HIS DEATH.

Behold him walking 'midst the flowery race,
While birds melodious hail the opening day;
How well he paints the wondrous words of grace.
From these of nature which the f^^^ds display!
PRINTED FOR ROBERT CAMPBELL, PHILADELPHIA, By V. BONSA^, Wilmington, 1796.

PREFACE.
THE, following work co^^aim on impartial unprejudiced, and complete account of
the late Rev. JAMES HERVEY, collected from all who have written concerning him;
together with a selection of the moral and descriptive beauties of his elegant,
ingenious, and devout writings, which have been so well received by the public
in general, and continue to be read with pleasure (as doubtless they ever will
be) by the serious, discerning and ingenueus of all denominations. In his life
and character, the reader will find several anecdotes, which are not mentioned
by the editor of his Letters, but are properly authenticated by several of his
intimate friends, new living, and serve to illustrate that genuine piety,
humility end benevolence, for which be was so justly admired, end deservedly
esteemed.

In the extracts from his works The extracts (...) place alpbal^tically (...)
they follow on (...).
, the most pleasing picturesque, and instructive passages are selected, for the
rational entertainment of persons of all ages (as the utile dulci of the
ancients was) to improve the understanding, excite to the love, and assist in
the practice of virtue and true piety, arrayed in all the engaging charms a
lively fancy, solid judgment and most fertile genius can magine or describe.

CONTENTS.
MEMOIRS of the late Reverend J. Hervey Page 13 Observations on his Life, with
his Character at large Page 37 COLLOQUIAL BEAUTIES, extracted from his
Dialogues, entitled THEREON and ASPASIO Page 59 DESCRIPTIVE BEAUTIES, from ditto
Page 93 Theron's extensive Gardens Page ibid Description of on Arbor and
curicus Fount^^n in ditto Page 107 A Vice of Theron's pleasure Grounds and
Hermerical Retreat, with a Description of Noon Page 110 Theron's Rural
Elopement Page 115 Theren and Aspasio's Conversation on the Beauties of Nature
Page 117 Theron's moral Soliloquy on the benests of Rural Solitude Page 119
Camillus's Gardens, with the beautiful Prospects from his Summer House Page 124
The various Changes of Nature, and their Effects on the Natural as well as
Moral World. Page 128 Theron's Evering Meditations on Aspes^o's Dis^curse Page
129 Description of a Country Church Page 132 MORAL BEAUTIES, extracted from the
Meditations, Sermons, etc. Page 134 Death brings all upon a Level Page ibid The
Sepulchre's pertinent Address to Man Page 135 An affecting Representation of
adying Christian, with the Sorrow of his Family Page 136 Alively Picture of a
tender Wife mourning the expected Loss of an indulgent Husband Page 137 An
interesting Description of a good Man in the Views of Death Page 138 The
Chambers of the Tomb pourtrayed Page 141 The Tomb knows no Distinctions of
Titles or Estates Page 142 Important Lessons taught by the Tombs of Nobles Page
143 The Benefits of Faith in the Son of God Page ibid A picturesque Description
of a Summer's Morn Page 144 Sunrising described Page 145 The Usefulness of the
Sun illustrated Page ibid A Description of Rural Nature Page 146 A Fruit-garden
and Orchard in their Summer Array Page 147 A Kitchen-garden and its products
Page 148 Nature and Art Contrasted Page 149 Flowery Beauties pleasingly
represented Page 150 The grand Cause of Vegetation, and the Growth of Fruits
and Flowers Page 151 Tulips and Pinks Emblems of the differences among
Christians Page 152 Flowers pourtrayed in lively Colors Page 153 The Time,
Order and Adjustment of Flowers, evidence the Creator's Wisdom Page 157 An
Argument for Christian Resignation Page 159 A Comment on the Beauties of
Creation Page 160 Budding Flowers, emblematic of the covetous Man Page 161
Antidetes against unruly Possions Page 162 Important Admonitions to the Fair
Sex Page 163 Consolations in the Views of Death Page 164 A Description of Noon
Page ibid Bees contrasted with Butterflies and Spiders Page 165 The Beauties of
a Garden Page 166 The effects of Hear and Cold, with a Reference to the Savior
of the World Page 167 Meadows and Fields deseribed, with ditto Page 168
Precious Stones, deseribed with ditto Page 169 A Deseription of the Silk Worm
Page 170 The Happiness of glorified Spirits Page ibid Evening, the Time for
Reflection Page 171 A pleasant Rural Walk described Page 172 The Blessings of
Liberty and Property Page 173 A Description of Sunset Page 174 The Appearance
of Nature after Sunset Page 175 Interesting Resections on the Ch^s^ of ^^ey
Page 176 The Co^ldress of Evening, Twilight, and its Benefits Page 177 The
Advantages of Solitude Page 178 The Benefits of ^ff^^tions Page 180 Darkness
and Light contr^csted Page 181 The Workings of Faney in cleep Page 182 An
Address to the Votaries of Mirth Page 183 The Folly of the Adv^cetes for Vice
and Se ^su^lity Page ibid The proper Sphere of Reason^ Page 184 The Tendancy of
Novels, Romances and Theatrical Amusements Page 185 A View of Rural Nature, by
Moonlight Page 186 The Benefits of Moonlight Page 187 A Walk by Moonlight,
with the Effects of nocturnal Darkness on Rural Scenes Page 188 A View of the
Starry Heavens Page 189 Description of a Frosty Night and Morning Page ibid The
Effects of Frost on Nature, with moral Reflections Page 191 Frosty Winds, and
their baneful Influences Page 192 A Shower of Hall deseribed Page ibid
Description of a Rainbow Page 193 The only Method of reforming Sinners' Page
194 Too true a Picture of the present Age Page 195 Christ compared to Rivers of
Water Page ibid The Security of Believers in Jesus Page 196 The Danger of
Covetousness and Predigality Page ibid The Benefits of Christ's Redemption Page
197 The Necessity of Prayer, and the Practice of it urged on all Page ibid A
timely Warning to thoughtless Sinners Page 198 All the Perfections of Deity
harmonize in the Cross of Christ Page ibid The Nature and Effect of Faith in
Jesus Page 199 The happy Influences of the Love of God Page ibid Jesus Christ
worthy of our highest Regard Page 200 The Happiness and Employment of the
Saints above Page ibid The Contents of the Bible beld out and recommended Page
201 God's Method of Dealing with Man, Page ibid The Benefits of Adversity Page
202 Nature and Divine Revelation somewhat alike Page ibid The Love of God, the
End of all Religion Page 203 The Works of Redemption too great for Angels Page
ibid The Work of Gospel Ministers Page 204 Good Works absolutely insufficient
to save Mankind Page ibid On the relegious Education of Daughters Page 205
MEMOIRS OF THE LATE Rev. Mr. JAMES HERVEY, M. A. RECTOR OF WESTON-FAVELL, IN
NORTH-AM^TONSHIRE.
THE Reverend Mr. James Hervey was born on Friday the 26th of February,
1713-14, at Hardingstone, a village about a mile from Northampton; his mother
taught him to read, and kept him at home till he was seven years old, when he
was sent as a day scholar to the free grammar school at Northampton; there he
continued under the tuition of a Mr. Clarke, master of the school, and vicar of
St. Sepulchre's in that parish, till he was seventeen, learning the Latin and
Greek languages, in which he would have made a much earlier progress, had he
not been kept back by his master, who (out of a blind paternal affection and
partiality) would suffer none of his scholars to learn faster than his own son.

In the year 1731 he was sent by his father to the university of Oxford, and
enterod a Fellow of Lincoln College, where he resided seven years, and took his
degree of Bachelor of Arts Mr. Hervey took his degree of Master of arts at
Cambridge in 1752 and entered at Clarehall.
; during his continuance here, he made himself master of Dr. Keil's Anatomy,
Dr. Derham's Physico and Astro-Theology, and Spectacle de la Nature, translated
by Mr. Humphrey's, which last work he read with peculiar pleasure; nor was he
less delighted with the Rev. Mr. Spence's Essay on Pope's Odyssey, to which he
often acknowledged himself greatly indebted for his improvement in style and
composition.

He entered into holy orders as soon as his age and the cannons of the church
would allow, and became curate to his father, who was then possessed of the
living of Weston-Favell and Collingtree, near Northampton; in the year 1738, he
went by invitation to Stoke Abbey, the seat of his valuable friend, Paul
Orchard, Esquire. This gentleman was the father of Paul Orchard, Esquire. for whom Mr.
Hervey stood sponsor, and to whom he dedicated the second volume of his
Meditations.
here he continued above two years, greatly esteemed and respected.

In the year 1740 he undertook the curacy of Biddeford, fourteen miles from
Stoke Abbey; here he had a large congregation, though the income, with the
assistance of friends, did not exceed sixty pounds a year This sum, though
hardly sufficient to maintain him, he enjoyed with thankfulness, and was
universally beloved for hi^ piety, humility, and diligent discharge of his duty.
; in this place, and very probably about this time, he planned his ingenious
meditations; the first volume of which was published in February, 1745-6, and
the second in December, 1747, which have been so well received by the public,
that the twenty-first edition of them appeared last year.

About the year 1743 he returned from Biddeford to Weston-Favell, leaving
behind him many disconsolate friends The rector dying, and the new one
dismissing Mr. Hervey from the curacy (though against the consent of all the
parishoners, who would have maintained him at their own expense) was the
occasion of his leaving Biddeford.
; and continued curate to his sather till June 1750, at which time, being
greatly impaired in health occasioned by his constant attention to his duty
This, if it may be styled a fault, few, if any of our clergymen in the present
day, can be charged with.
, he removed to London to try what effect a change of air and relaxation of
mind would have upon him: here he staid from June, 1750, till about May, 1752,
in which time he had a very severe and dangerous sit of illness; being
recovered, and his father dying in this year, he returned to Weston-Favell, and
succeeded him in that and the living of Collingtree, worth about one hundred
and eighty pounds a year.

In November following he puolished, in a letter to a lady of quality, his
remarks on Lord Bollingbroke's letters on the study and use of history, so far
as they relate to the history of the Old Testament, and especially to the case
of Noah denouncing a curse upon Canaan; the next year he published, for the
benefit of a poor sick child, a sermon which he preached at the visitation of
the Archdeacon of Northampton, under the title of "The Cross of Christ, the
Christian's glory;" a few months afterward he wrote a recommendatory preface
to Burnham's pious memorials.

In 1755 he published his Thereon and Aspasio, or dialogues and letters on the
most important and interesting subjects, which met with great approbation from
the unprejudiced and discerning, excepting those who differed in religious
sentiments from Mr. Hervey, concerning the imputed righteousness of Christ, of
which these dialogues principally treat; especially the Reverend Mr. John
Wesley, Sandeman, and a few others The Rev. Mr. John Wesley, Sandeman, and
several other persons, published letters in answer, or rather opposition to Mr.
Hervey's Thereon and Aspasio, some little time after the publication of the
latter; endeavoring to prove Mr. Hervey's sentiments erroneous and
unscriptural, which Mr. Hervey together with several friends and espousers of
his tenets answered. (See a Desence of Theren and Aspasio, printed for C. Dilly
in the Po^^try)
.

In August 1757, Mr. Hervey published three sermons which he had preached on
public fast-days, to which have been since added, his visitation sermon
preached in 1753, his posthumous sermon on the ministry of Reconciliation, and
his Considerations on the prevailing custom or fashion of visiting on Sundays;
all which evidently manifested his genuine piety, and earnest desire to promote
the cause and interest of his great Lord and Master.

In this year also, he published a new edition of his favorite author, Mr.
Jenk's Meditations, in two volumes, with a strong recommendatory preface,
showing the use and excellency of them; but his conititution being weak, and
his illness (which was of the consumptive kind, under which he had labored for
several months, with singular patience and submission) increasing on him about
October, 1758, gave great reason to fear his usefulness would soon be
terminated, as it proved; for on the 2d of December following, in the evening,
after praying with his family, he seemed to be arrested by the stroke of death,
so that it was with difficulty his sister and servant got him up stairs to his
own room: from this time, growing worse every day, he became sensible that his
end was near. He had now frequent and violent fits of the cramp, which gave him
great pain, and a hestic cough, which was so bad at night, that he could seldom
lie in bed till four o'clock in the morning, Mr. Hervey, when in health,
usually got up about six in the morning in winter, and much earlier in summer.
and obliged him often to get up at two.

On the 15th of this month he complained of a pain in his side, for which he
was blooded, at his own desire, though against the consent of his worthy friend
and physician Dr. Stonhouse; who apprehen ^^d him too weak to bear it. When the
surgeon came, he could scarcely perceive any pulsation, and therefore took away
only four ounces of blood, intimating to those around, that the case was
desperate.

The Rev. Mr. Abraham Maddocks, his curate, being with him in the afternoon,
Mr. Hervey spoke to him in very strong and pathetic terms of his assurance of
faith, and of the love of God in Christ. These were his expressions, O what and
how much has Christ done for me, and how little have I done for so loving a
Savior! If I preached even once a week, it was at last a burden to me; I have
not visited the people of my parish as I ought to have done, and thus have
preached as it were from house to house; I have not taken every opportunity of
speaking for Christ. These expressions were accompanied with fears, which, lest
they should be misinterpreted, as they had been conversing of his approaching
end, and his assurance of faith, he proceeded thus: -- Don't think that I am
afraid to die; I assure you I am not. I know what my Savior has done for me,
and I want to be gone; but I wonder and lament to think of the love of Christ,
in doing so much for me, and how little I have done for him. -- In another
conversation, discoursing likewise of his approaching dissolution (which he
always did with the utmost calmness and serenity,) and of the little which we
know of God's word, he said, How many precious texts are there, big with the
most rich truths of Christ, which we cannot comprehend, which we know nothing
of; and of those we do know, how few do we remember? A good textuary is a good
divine, and that is the armor, the word of God is the sword. Those texts are
the weapons which I must use, when that subtle spirit that arch-adversary of
mankind, comes to tempt and sift me in my last conflict. Surely I had need be
well provided with these weapons; I had need have my quiver full of them, to
answer Satan with texts out of the word of God when he assaults me.
On the nineteenth the pains of his body abated, and he grew drowsy and
lethargic; the next day Dr. Stonhouse came to see him, and declared, in his
opinion, Mr. Hervey could not live above four days longer. The Doctor
happening, on this visit, to speak of the many consolations through Christ,
which a good man enjoys in the prospect of death; and discoursing on the
emptiness of worldly honor to an immortal, and the unprofitableness of riches
to the ungodly Mr. Hervey replied, True, Doctor, true; the only valuable
treasures are in heaven; what would it avail me now, to be archbishop of
Canterbury. Disease would show no respect to my mitre. It is godliness and not
grandeur that will avail me hereafter. The gospel is offered to me, a poor
country parson, the same as it is to his Grace. Christ makes no difference
between us. Oh! why then do ministers thus neglect the charge of so kind a
Savior; fawn upon the great, and hunt after worldly preferments with so much
eagerness, to the disgrace of our orders? These, these are the things, Doctor,
and not our poverty or obscurity which render the clergy so justly contemptible
to the worldlings. No wonder the service of our church, grieved I am to say it,
is become such a formal lifeless thing, since it is, alas! too generally
executed by persons dead to godliness in all their conversation; whose
indifferent religion and worldly minded behavior proclaim the little regard
they pay to the doctrines of the Lord who bought them.


The day before his death, Mr. Hervey went a few steps across his room, but
finding his strength sailing him, he sunk, rather than fell down, his fall
being broken by his sister, who observing his weakness ran and caught him; but
he fainted away, and was to all human appearance dead, it being a considerable
time before any pulse could be perceived.

When he came to himself, and his brother, Mr. William Hervey, who was come
from London to visit him, said, we were afraid you was gone; he answered, I
wish I had. And well he might wish so, considering his painful and melancholy
condition; for his strength was exhausted, his body extremely emaciated, and
his bones so sore that he could not bear any one to touch him hardly, when it
was necessary to move him; yet in the midst of his sufferings, he was ever
praising God, for his mercies He never received a bit of lemon to moisten his
mouth, without thanking God for his goodness, in creating so many helps and
refreshments to a sick decaying body.
, and for granting him patience A few years before he died, when Mr. Hervey was
at his brother's house in London, he had a severe fever, in which he had
several blisters; on this occasion Mr. William Hervey writing to one of his
intimate friends says, My brother is indeed an example of patience; he has not
spoke one single word of peevishness during his whole illness.


On the 25th (Christmas day) on which he died, Mr. Maddocks paying him a
morning visit, Mr. Hervey lift his head and opened his eyes, as he fat in his
easy chair (for he could not lie down) to see who it was, and said, "Sir, I
cannot talk with you now."

He complained much all the day of a great inward conslict, which he had,
laying his hand upon his breast, and saying, O! you know not how great a
conflict I have. During this time he almost constantly lift his eyes toward
heaven, with his hands clasped together in praying form, and said two or three
times, -- When this great conflict is over, then -- but said no more; though we
may naturally suppose he meant then he should be at rest. Dr. Stonhouse came to
see him about three hours before he died. Mr. Hervey strongly and
affectionately urged on him the importance and care of his everlasting
concerns, as here is no abiding place; and entreated him not to be overcharged
with the cares of this life, but to attend to the one thing needful.

"Which done, the poorest can no wants endure,
"And which not done, the richest must be poor. Mr. Hervey was very fond of,
and used frequently to repeat these lines with a peculiar emphasis.
"
POPE. The doctor seeing the great difficulty and pain with which he spoke (for
he was almost suffocated with phlegm and frequent vomitings) and finding by his
pulse, that the pangs of death were then coming on; desired that he would spare
himself: "No," said he, Doctor, no; you tell me I have but a few moments to
live, O! let me spend them in adoring our great Redeemer. He then repeated the
26th verse of the lxxiii Psalm; Though my flesh and my heart fail me, yet God
is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever.

A little while after this he expatiated in a most striking manner on the 1st
of Corinthians, chap. iii. ver. 22, 23. All things are yours, life and death;
-- for ye are Christ's. "Here," says he, is the treasure of a Christian. Death
is reckoned among this inventory, and a noble treasure it is. How thankful am I
for death, as it is the passage through which I pass to the Lord and Giver of
eternal life; and as it frees me from all this misery, you now see me endure,
and which I am willing to endure as long as God thinks fit; for I know he will
by and by, in his own good time, dismiss me from the body. These light
afflictions are but for a moment, and then comes an eternal weight of glory. Oh
welcome, welcome death! thou may well be reckoned among the treasures of the
Christian -- To live is Christ, but to die is gain Philippians, i. 21.


Here he paused a little, and then with great serenity and sweetness in his
countenance, repeated those words: Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in
peace, according to thy most holy and comfortable words, for mine eyes have
seen thy precious salvation Luke ii. 29, 30.
. Here, Doctor, is my cordial: what are all the cordials given to support the
dying in comparison of that, which arises from the promises of salvation by
Christ? this, this supports me. -- About three o'clock he said, the great
conflict is over, now all is done. After which he scarce spoke any words
intelligibly, except now and then, "precious salvation."

During the last hour he said nothing, but leaned his head against the side of
his easy chair, and in this posture, without a sigh, groan, or struggle, shut
his eyes eternally on this world, and died in the Lord, between four and five
o'clock in the afternoon of Christmas day, 1758, and in the forty-fifth year of
his age.

When his body was conveyed to the silent chambers of the grave, it was covered
by his own express desire with the poor's pall, and he was buried under the
communion table in the chancel of Weston-Favell church, on Friday, December
28th, in the presence of a numerous congregation, full of regret for the loss
of so excellent a pastor: his funeral indeed was a most awful and very
affecting sight. Mr. Maddocks, his curate, who buried him, was himself in
tears; -- some were wringing their hands, others sobbing; many were silently
weeping, but all were inwardly and sincerely grieved, as their looks
sufficiently testified.

It may truly be said of him, that few lives have ever been more heavenly: --
few deaths have ever been more triumphant. -- He died in the Lord, and is now
at rest, where even the wicked cease from troubling: his name is recorded in
the annals of eternity, and the honors conferred on him by Christ, will for
ever continue blooming and incorruptible in the world of glory.

His character, both in his public and private capacity, was of the most
exemplary kind.

As a minister he performed all the duties of that office with the greatest
strictness. -- In the pulpit he was earnest and fervent, and showed that he
felt the efficacy of what he preached. Nor did he think it sufficient to preach
on Sabbaths only, but set up a weekly lecture every Wednesday evening at
Weston-Favell church. The last two or three years of his life he could scarce
do any thing more than preach once on the Sabbath, when people from many miles
around flocked to hear him. His Wednesday evening lecture at seven, he
discontinued for the last year. He had not been able for some time to preach at
Collingtree, or to visit his parishioners at their own houses, as his custom
had been; but he encouraged them to come to him, and to converse freely upon
the subjects relating to their eternal interests, and on such occasions he
would speak with a force and propriety peculiar to himself.

He always preached without notes, except on some very particular occasions;
and his method was judicious, clear, and not encumbered with too many
subdivisions. His weakness rendering him for several months before his death
incapable of speaking to his congregation as usual, he shortened his
discourses, and took a most useful method of inculcating his instructions; for
after he had expounded his text, and divided his sermon into two heads, (rarely
into more, and never exceeding three) he would speak briesly, and at the
conclusion of each head ensorce what he had said, by a pertinent text of
scripture, desiring his congregation (which was generally very numerous) to
turn to their bibles, and double down the text. "Now", added he, my dear
brethren, if you forget my sermon, you cannot forget God's word in this text,
unless you wilfully throw your bibles aside. Show these to your children, or
the absent part of your family when you return home. -- Then he gave a s^riking
exhortation, at the end of it another text for them to double down, so that he
had always three texts; in order to their finding of which, he paused in the
pulpit two or three minutes.

He endeavored as much as possible to divest himself in his public discourses
of his usual elegance of style, and to adapt his language to the lowest
capacity. In this he followed the example of Luther, who in his table talk
says, If in my preaching I were to pay a regard to Philip Melancthon, and other
learned divines, then I should do little good. I preach in the plainest manner
to the illiterate, and that gives content to all.

His method of catechizing children in church, and of speaking to them in
private, was very engaging and useful. He would ask not only such questions as
were suitable to the words of the catechism, but also such as would strike at
the capital vices of his parishioners, yet without giving personal offense.

Some of his parishioners having lain in bed on the Sabbath morning longer than
he approved, and others having been busy in foddering their cattle when he was
coming to church, and several having frequented the alehouse, he thus
catechized one of the children before the congregation: -- Repeat me the fourth
commandment. Now, little man, do you understand the meaning of this
commandment? Yes sir. -- Then if you do, you will be able to answer me these
questions. -- Do they keep holy the Sabbath Day who lie in bed till eight or
nine o'clock in the morning instead of rising to say their prayers and read the
Bible? No sir. -- Do those keep the Sabbath who fodder their cattle when other
people are going to church? No sir. -- Does God Almighty bless such people as
go to alehouses, and do not mind the instructions of their minister? No sir? --
Do not those that love God read the bible to their samilies, particularly on
Sabbath Day evening, and have prayers every morning and night in their houses?
Yes sir.

He usually breakfasted at nine, after having called his family together, and
required each of his servants to repeat by heart the text which he had
explained the preceding evening, and then he would recapitulate his exposition;
by which method both his text and commentary were imprinted on their memories:
after this he had prayers.

In the afternoon when he was called down to tea, he usually brought his Hebrew
Bible or Greek Testament with him, and would speak either upon one or more
verses, as occasion offered; and in the summer season he would now and then
drink tea, when his health would permit him, with some of his most serious
parishioners; and then five or six of the neighbors were invited; and Mr.
Hervey's conversation was remarkably improving, as he had a happy talent at
spiritualizing almost every incident, and was naturally of a most obliging and
cheerful disposition.

In the exercise of his charity, he chose to clothe the poor rather than to
give them money: and he would get some judicious person to buy linen, coarse
cloth, stockings, shoes, etc. for them at the best hand: alleging that the
poor could not purchase on such good terms what they wanted at the little
shops, and with small sums of money. "I am, said he, God's steward for the
poor, and I must husband the little pittance I have to bestow upon them, and
make it go as far as possible." But when money would be really serviceable to a
family, as to a prudent housekeeper, distressed by sickness or misfortunes, he
would give five or more guineas at a time; taking care that it should not be
known whence the money came. He was particularly desirous of getting the advice
of a physician (or at least of some judicious apothecary) for the sick poor;
and was ever ready to procure them the very best medicines. He would frequently
petition such physicians of his acquaintance in different parts of the kingdom,
as he apprehended to be charitably disposed, to give their advice occasionally
when they rode through a town, to such poor creatures, as the clergyman of the
place, or some substantial inhabitant, should recommend, as real objects of
compassion. He greatly disapproved of the clergy's attempting to give medicine
to their parishioners; as he thought it impossible for them to do it with the
requisite judgment. "Let my brethren," he would say "give them wine, bread, or
beer, and get good spoon-meats made for them; but medicines are of too
important a nature to be given indiscriminately." He observed that by his own
method the sick poor had the very best medicines, as the physician saw them
himself, and bought them very cheap; because the apothecary, knowing they were
for charitable uses, charged the physician no more than prime cost, with some
little allowance merely for his trouble in compounding them; and as the
physician knew what diseases were curable, there was no waste of medicine in
fruitless attempts to cure cases, which, though actually incurable, persons of
less judgment could not pronounce to be so.

He gave away a great number of good books, with suitable instructions for
their use, and especially Bibles. In the blank leaf he frequently wrote
something striking, or else stuck in a printed paper, relating to the promises
of God in and through Jesus Christ.

His income was but small, and it may be wondered how he managed it so well, as
to have such large sums to spare for charitable uses. He sold the copy of his
Meditations, after it had passed through several editions; which sale of the
copy, and the profits of the former impressions, amounted to about L.700, all
which he gave away in charity. He made of it a bank for the poor. "This," said
he, I have devoted to God, I will on no account apply it to any worldly uses: I
write not for profit or for fame, but to serve the cause of God; and as he has
blessed my attempt, I think myself bound to relieve the distresses of my fellow
creatures with the profit that comes from this quarter. He has likewise left
all the future profits of his works to some of the charitable uses above
specified.

In any expense relating to himself, he was extremely frugal, that he might be
liberal to others; and it was always his desire to die just even with the
world. I will be my own executor, said he. And as he died on Christmas day, his
fund expired almost with his life. What little remained, he desired might be
given in warm clothing to the poor in that severe season.

To the instances of his charity we may properly add an incident which affords
a very strong proof, not only of the benevolence of his heart, but of his
regard to practical religion, and to the doing of every good work within his
power.

A day or two before his death, when he was reduced to such extreme weakness as
to be unable to read, and could with difficulty speak, a little account being
settled with him by a friend, on the balance of which he received eighteen
shillings, looking on the money with great indifference, he expressed himself
to this effect, "I would gladly dispose of this small sum in such a manner as
may do the most good; it is the only act which I now am, and probably the last
that I shall be able to persorm. Give yourself the trouble of looking amongst
these books, and you will find Mr. Richard's pamphlet, at the latter end of
which are, I remember, some hints concerning the means of promoting religion in
ourselves and others, which (even with some additions and improvements, which
you might easily make) will not fill more than a sheet of paper; and if stuck
up or framed, might be particularly useful in that form; let then such a number
of them be printed and given away as this money will admit of." His orders were
properly executed, and the evidences of such an angelic temper were equally
matter of edification and comfort to his friends, as this charitable legacy (if
we may so call it) will be to all who receive and rightly use it.

This incident, it is to be hoped, will be heartily considered by those who
draw such inferences from his favorite doctrine, and strong expressions of the
all-sufficient righteousness of Christ, as his whole life did in the most
exemplary manner confute. No man had ever a greater disregard for money, which
he esteemed unworthy of his notice, upon any other account than as it furnished
him with the means of doing good. Surely we may here borrow the sentiment and
expression of our celebrated poet, and justly conclude, that, "He felt his
ruling passion strong in death."

In learning he was inferior to few. Greek was almost as familiar to him as his
native language. He was a great master of the classics; and in the younger part
of his life had written some verses, which showed no contemptible genius for
poetry. He had a critical knowledge of the Hebrew tongue, and delighted in it.

With respect to his private capacity, he was never known to be in a passion.
No worldly concerns (though he sometimes met with very trying ones) ever
effected him. His humility rendered him invulnerable. When he was
misrepresented and calumniated, he would say, "Our enemies are sometimes our
best friends, and tell us truths; and then we should amend our faults, and be
thankful for such information; and if what they say be not true, and only spoke
through malice, then such persons are to be considered as diseased in their
minds, and we ought to pray for them. They are to be pitied," says he, "and I
might as justly be angry with a man that is diseased in his body." In his
ordinary transactions, with others, he was ever cheerful, punctual, just, and
candid, to persons of every denomination.

Yet notwithstanding these irrefragable proofs, that Mr. Hervey's opinions
(even supposing some of them in their remote consequences, were not altogether
defensible) had no pernicious influence on so excellent a mind; it is but
justice to add, that he guards against the abuses of the Antinomians, though he
has himself been branded with that odious name. -- Nay, some of his enemies
have not scrupled to assert, "That his tenets were dishonorable to God,
subversive of all gospel-holiness, and destructive even of common morality, and
very injurious to society itself, by making men melancholy and regardless of
business".

These were the very words of an abusive and anonymous letter, sent to him by
the post; on which that meek and excellent man observed to an intimate friend,
with all his usual mildness, "Indeed this gentleman may be said, I think, to
write at random. -- Surely he has never read my works; if I knew where to
direct to him, I should desire him to turn to what I have advanced, page 124,
in the second volume of my Meditations, and such a reply, I would hope, might
convince him of his mistake."

Whatever vein of Calvanism runs through his writings, yet the weakening the
obligations to purity and holiness of life, were the farthest imaginable, from
his view: and when persons of judgment have pointed out to him such expressions
as were liable to be misunderstood in that respect, he always disavowed any
such meaning, affirmed, that the fault was not in the evangelical doctrines, so
much insisted on by him, but in the misapprchension, ignorance, or inattention
of those who abused them to licentiousness. -- He would then add, he was ready
to alter or retract any sentiment or expression, which he apprehended to be
really objectionable; but that to make things equally clear to every one's
apprehension, or to have the same effect upon every one's mind, was an
impracticable attempt: for as the poet very justly observes, "He who strives
th'approbation of all to obtain.
"Shows a world of good nature, but labors in vain."


OBSERVATIONS ON THE Rev. Mr. JAMES HERVEY's LIFE, WITH HIS CHARACTER,
RESPECT^^C BOTH HIS PUBLIC AND PRIVATE CAPACITY.
FROM the foregoing account of Mr. Hervey, it evidently appears he was a truly
good man in life, as well as by profession; indeed I do not remember ever to
have read, or conversed with any one concerning him, but what joined in
acknowledging his title to the character and appellation of a real Christian.

Those who differed from him in religious sentiments, could not but acknowledge
that he wrote as became a man of true piety; and greatly esteemed him for that
candor, liberality of spirit, humility, and benevolence to mankind in general,
which so evidently appeared in his publications. But as I find him portrayed in
a late treatise, The Triumphs of Faith.
in far more lively colors, and characterized in much better language than I
would flatter myself master of, permit me to extract it, for the entertainment,
satisfaction, and benefit of my serious readers.

"A more diligent, distinguished and successful labourer in the church of
Christ, has perhaps seldom appeared; and in few characters was there ever a
more happy conjunction of the gentleman, the scholar, and the Christian. The
upright heart, the deep humility, under all his seize, the warmest love
to mankind in endeavors to promote their best interests, the most zealous
attachments to truth, the noblest defense, as well as the daily practice of
evangelical holiness, the utmost serenity of mind under the most grievous
afflictions, and a perfect resignation to the will of his heavenly Father, are
a few of the outlines of his character, and justly represent him to have been a
burning and shining light to the world. As a burning light, he warmed many by
his example, and as a shining light, he instructed many by his doctrine; he was
a strenuous asserter of the free grace of God, taught men to be rich in good
works, without placing the least dependence upon them; the Savior was all in
all to him, and a Redeemer's unsearchable riches it was his business and
delight to publish. To bring sinners to Christ, as needy beggars to buy wine
and milk, without money and without price, was the constant aim of all his
public ministrations as well as elegant writings; and it has pleased God to
make both remarkably successful, and him an instrument of turning many from the
service of Satan to the living God. Oh, that they may become more and more so;
and that many may be led by the spirit of all grace, to follow his steps, and
go and do likewise! The writer of this account appears to be not only a great
admirer of Mr. Hervey, but a zealous advocate for his religious sentiments, as
well as a sincere well wisher to the cause, and no indifferent scholar in the
school of Christ, himself.


When at school, Mr. Hervey was always remarked for genius and parts: and he
there laid the foundation of that knowledge which has since gained him such
universal esteem. Until the year 1733, however, when he became acquainted with
some persons distinguished for their serious impressions of religion and zeal
for its promotion, he seems to have been (as in the phrase) a moral man only.
Some of his letters that are written from college, when he was not more than
twenty, either speak a language very different from free grace, for which he
was afterward so powerful an advocate, or at least treat very confusedly of
it. But be this as it may, the obscurity did not long continue: the Holy spirit
soon opened his eyes to see the salvation of God. By the eye of faith he
obtained and enjoyed clear views of it. He was able to act faith upon it: for
his faith worked by love. The love of God was the glorious theme on which he
dwelt; and the love of Christ his delightful song in this the house of his
pilgrimage. This heartfelt love to God and Christ, appeared in every part of
his after conduct; as a minister, his faith wrought by love to the souls of men
Though the term faith is frequently mentioned here, the tautology, it is hoped,
will not be disgusting, as it could not properly be avoided.
; watching over his flock with peculiar care and assiduity; privately
exhorting, and publicly calling and inviting them, with all the earnestness of
a faithful ambassador of Jesus Christ, that they would turn and live: -- as the
master of a family, in the care of the souls of his domestics; in their
reproof, instruction, and government; as a member of society, in good works to
his neighbor: in charities to the poor, abundant His charity and benevolence
to the poor and needy was truly exemplary, and deserving universal imitation,
wherever God has given abilities and opportunity to exert it; a friend of Mr.
Hervey's observes, his liberality was so diffusive, that at his death he left
no more than 185. besides what would defray the expense of his funeral.
clothing the naked and feeding the hungry; informing the young, and supporting
the aged; in zeal for the salvation of all, fervent; desirous to be of some
good to every person, and in every company, and of great good in many; a proof
of which was the exemplary lives of such persons, their circumspect behavior,
and, in several instances, eminent piety: -- as a private Christian, he was
under the influence of the same faith working by love to the will of God. He
walked close after Christ, and was himself a striking proof, that the belief of
Christ's righteousness being imputed to him for his justification, was so far
from a licentious doctrine, that it inspired him with the noblest motives to a
grateful obedience; Where true grace reigns in the heart, it will be evidenced
by good works, in the life; saving faith, without works, is as impossible as
the sun to shine without giving light.
and his holy life was, in truth, the strongest recommendation of his
principles. God had enriched him with great humility, as well as great gifts
and graces. He was humbled by the power of grace. He had been a very vain,
proud young man; but this emptied him of pride and self; and this clothed him
with humility. -- In his studies, the same principles of faith, working by
love, was manifest: all was directed to the glory of God; all aimed at the
advancement of the Redeemer's kingdom: "Nulla dies sine linea; nulla epistola
sine Christo," was his motto. Not a day without a line, or an epistle without
something of Christ in it.
Classical learning, for which he had a resined taste, and heathen authors,
were in his latter years dropped, to make way for the more important study of
the sacred scriptures. Search the scriptures, for therein ^e think ye have
eternal life, and they are they which ^yl^sy of me, John v. 39.
These were his delight, and sweeter to him than the honey or the honeycomb.
They will be so to every one who reads them, as he did, with faith: for they
are the power of God, and the wisdom of God unto salvation.

From these particulars, then, a judgment may be formed of this eminent
character; but still more from the last scenes of life, and the glorious
triumphs of his faith, in the hour of death. Its preciousness, indeed, never
more appeared than at that time, by it he saw and apprehended the salvation of
God, and rejoiced in the clearest views of his own interest in it. At this
season, when, as he himself writes, "little bodily rest could be got, and
medicines gave no relief, the never failing cordial of the love of Christ was
felt: "Religion bears my spirits up:
A faithful and unchanging God
Lays the foundation for my hope,
In oaths, in promises, and blood."
Of his sentiments in such a season, the following extract from a letter to a
friend, will give the full^st and most amiable proof. It was wrote long before
he left this world indeed; but it was wrote in the near prospect of death from
a severe and very violent illness. "Now that I apprehend myself," says he, "to
be near the close of life, and stand, as it were, on the brink of the grave,
with eternity full in my view; perhaps, my dear friend would be willing to know
my sentiments of things in this awful situation. At such a juncture, the mind
is most unprejudiced, and the judgment not so liable to be dazzled by the
glitter of worldly objects. However the sons of pleasure or the votaries of
dissipation may laugh at religion, and look on the doctrine of a future state
with contempts as a more bugbear to frighten children, let them be laid on a
sickbed, and, in their own apprehensions, on the brink of eternity, and their
thoughts, as well as language will (as it has often provedy be much changed,
and proclaim their sormer solly, in pursuing the (...) joys of riot and
sensuality, at the expen^e and hazard of the eternal weifare of their
never-dying souls.


"I think then, dear sir, that we are extremely mistaken, and sustain a mighty
loss in our most important interests, by reading so much, and praying so
little. Was I to enjoy Hezekiah's grant, and have fifteen years added to my
life, I would be much more frequent in my applications to the throne of grace.
I have read of a person who would often retire to his closet, and was
remarkable for his frequency and fervency in devotion; being asked the reason
of this so singular a behavior, he replied, because I am sensible I must die.
I assure you, dear Mr. ***, I feel the weight of this answer, I see the wisdom
of this procedure; and was my span to be lengthened, would endeavor always to
remember the one, and daily to imitate the other. The thought of death, when it
is sent home with power to the conscience, will put a man on thinking to
prepare for it, before it is too late.


"I think also we fail in our duty, and thwart our comfort, by studying God's
holy word no more; I have, for my part, been too fond of reading every thing
elegant and valuable, and particularly charmed with the historians, orators,
and poets of antiquity: but were I to renew my studies, I would take my leave
of those accomplished trifles. I would resign the delights of modern wit,
amusement, and eloquence, and devote my attention to the scriptures of truth. I
would sit with much greater assiduity at my divine master's feet, and desire to
know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. This wisdom, whose fruits are
peace in life, consolation in death, and everlasting salvation after death;
this I would trace, this I would seek, this I would explore, through the
spacious and delightful fields of the Old and New Testament. In short, I would
adopt the apostle's resolution, and give myself to prayer and to the word.

"With regard to my public ministry, my chief aim should be, to beget in my
people's minds a deep ^^nse of their depraved, guilty, undone condition; and a
clear believing conviction of the all sufficiency of Christ, his blood, his
righteousness, his intercession, and his spirit to save them even to the
uttermost. I would always observe to labor for them in my closet, as well as
in the pulpit; and wrestle in secret supplication, as well as exert myself in
public preaching, for their spiritual and eternal welfare. For unless God takes
this work into his own hand, what mortal is sufficient for these things?

"Now, perhaps, if you sat at my right hand, you would ask, What is my hope
with regard to my future and immortal state? truly my hope, my whole hope, is
in the Lord Redeemer; should the king of terrors threaten, I fly to the wounds
of the slaughtered Lamb, as the trembling dove to the clists of the rocks.
Should Satan accuse, I plead the surety of the covenant, who took my guilt upon
himself, and bore my sin^^^ his own body on the tree Should the law denounce a
curse, I appeal to him who hung on the accursed tree, on purpose that all the
nations of the earth might be blessed. Should hell open its jaws, and demand
its prey, I look up to that gracious Being, who says, "Deliver him from going
down to the pit, for I have found a ransom, Job xxxiii, 24.
" should it be said, no unclean thing can enter into heaven, my answer is, "The
blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. John i. 7.
" Though my sins be as scarlet, through this blood they shall be as white as
snow, should it be added, none can sit down at the supper of the Lamb without a
wedding garment, and your righteousnesses, what are they before the pure law
and piercing eye of God, but filthy rags? these I renounce, and seek to be
found in Christ Jesus It is written in the word that is to jud^e the world at
the last day, "By his obedience shall many be made righteous." Romans v. 19.


"So that Jesus, the dear and adorable Jesus, is all my trust. His merits are
my staff, when I pass through the valley of the shadow death. His merits are my
anchor, when I launch into the boundless ocean of eternity. His merits are the
only riches which my poor soul, when stripped of its body, desires to carry
into the invisible world. If the God of glory pleases to take notice of any
mean endeav^^rs to honor his holy name, it will be infinite condescension and
grace; but his Son, his righteous and suff^ring Son, is all my hope, and all my
salvation." Ac^iv. 12.


Thus far my author, from whom we may learn that Mr. Hervey, both living and
dying, was a zealous advocate for the religion of Jesus, and a saithful
follower of the Lamb, till he was called away by his great Lord and Master, to
receive, in the mansions of eternal bliss, that crown of life which shall never
fade, reserved for those alone who are faithful to the death.

But as it is often observed, and it may be with no little propriety, that the
life of a good writer is best read in his works, which can scarce ever fail of
receiving a peculiar tincture from his temper, ^^anners, sentiments and
conversation; the distinguishing character of his mind, his ruling passion and
most favorite tenets, at least will in them appear undisguised: on this
account permit me, reader, to examine impartially, and both for your
entertainment and instruction, present you with an original portrait of the
late Rev. Mr. Hervey, faithfully drawn in genuine extracts from his different
publications.

Among his letters to his friends, the following, written to the inhabitants of
Collingtree, near Northampton, expresses his character of a true minister of
Christ, how far he answered the description, and resembled the pertrait; they
who were most intimate with him, and attended on his ministry, best can tell.
The auther of this treatise has conversed with several persons who were
intimately acquainted with Mr. Hervey, and atte^^ed on his ministry, who all
joi^ in acknowledging h^ not o^^^ wro^^ that it was to be a faithful minister
of Christ, but truly sili^d (...) character of one himself, to the admiration
and ^^^^em of (...); his s^rmens were judicious, ^vang lical, and con^^n^ing;
(...) ^^livery was affec^io^ (...) p^th ti^ and e^engelic, and his who^e
deportment and behavior spoke him both the Christian and ^he gentleman.


"A minister is a person of the greatest importance imagirable; his office is
of the most universal concernment, and his demeanor therein of the most
beneficial and prejudicial tendency; beneficial, if he be able, faithful, and
watches for the souls committed to his care, as one that must give an account;
prejudicial, if he be unskilful, unactive, and unconcerned about the spiritual
welfare of his people. The things that pertain to salvation, and the means of
obtaining everlasting life, are lodged in his hands. He is the steward of the
mysteries of Christ, and so the guardian (under divine grace) of your best and
most abiding interests. If through ignorance he mismanage, or through idleness
neglect this weighty trust, it may be the ruin of immortal souls: whereas, if
he be both discreet and diligent in his holy vocation, he may be the instrument
of the richest benefits to those committed to his charge. His praying to God,
and his preaching to them, may be attended with such a blessing from on high,
as will fill them with heavenly wisdom, form them to true holiness, and fit
them for the future glory. Benefits these not inconsiderable or momentary, but
such as are great beyond all expression, and lasting to eternity. -- A faithful
minister of the everlasting gospel has a tolerable stock of knowledge. Though
not enough to explain all mysteries, or to answer every perplexing question;
yet sufficient to make himself and his hearers wise unto salvation. He may be
ignorant of many things without much disparagement to himself, or prejudice to
his people; but he must be acquainted with, and able to teach others all that
is necessary for them to know. -- Secondly, He has not only some understanding,
but some experience also in the ways of godliness. He has learnt to subdue, in
some measure, the pride of his nature, and to be humble in his own eyes, and
not fond of applause from others. He has broke the impetuosity of his passion,
and generally possesses his soul in patience; or if upon some very ungrateful
and provoking usage, he cannot calm his temper, yet he can curb his tongue; and
though his spirit be russled, yet his words will be gentle. He is most commonly
meek, after the manner of his blessed Master, and will always return blessing
for cursing, according to his holy command. He has often looked into the
shortness of time, and the length of eternity; he has weighed the greatness and
richness of heaven, with the insignificant and despicable meanness of earth;
and discovers such a mighty difference, as helps him to live above the world,
even while he is in it. So that he is no lover of filthy lucre, no hunter of
carnal pleasures; but his hopes, his desires, and all his views of happiness
are hid with Christ in God. He is courteous and condescending, and will stoop
with the utmost cheerfulness to the lowest person in his parish. He will be
affable and kind, and seek to please, not himself, but his neighbors, for
their good to edification. But you must not expect to find him trifling or
ludicrous; he will not preach to you on the Sunday, and play with you on the
weekdays, but carry the spirit of his sermons into his ordinary conversation.
He will maintain an uniform gravity of behavior, without suffering it to be
frozen into moroseness, or thawed into levity. He will love his parishioners,
not for their agreeable persons or amiable qualities, but because they are
redeemed by the blood of Christ. It will be his business and constant
endeavor, I had almost said his meat and drink, to set forward their
salvation. That by their being made meet for the inheritance of the saints in
light, his crucified Lord may see of the travel of his soul, and be satisfied.
He will never forget the importunate request of his Savior, but those winning
and commanding words, "Feed my sheep, feed my lambs" will be engraven upon the
tables of his heart. To fulfill this earnest request and execute this last
charge of his dearest Redeemer, will be the fixed and invariable scope of all
his designs. If at any time he hits this desirable mark, by bringing home to
the fold any that have gone astray, he will be as glad as one that finds
great spoils. -- To see the people of his care presisting in profaneness,
sensuality, and an unconverted state, will be the greatest grief that he feels:
but to see his children walking in the truth, mortifying their evil affections,
and growing up in goodness as the calves of the stall, this will be his joy,
and crown of rejoicing, better to him than thousands of silver and gold. It is
his work to win souls, and by the former of these qualifications, he is fitted
for it, by the latter he is wholly devoted to it. And in order to prosecute it
with the greater success, he will, first, take heed to himself, that his life
be a fair and beautiful transcript of his doctrine, such as may remind men of,
and be daily reinforcing his instructions. He will not bind the yoke upon your
shoulders till he has wore it himself; and should the paths of religion prove
ever so thorny, he will go first and beat the way. As far as human infirmities
permit, he will strive to be unblamable and unreprovable, that he may renew the
apostle's challenge, Be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ. Secondly,
his preaching will be plain; full of such useful sense as may be edifying to
the better learned, and yet delivered in so easy a manner, as may be
intelligible to the ignorant. It will not only be plain, but powerful also, if
preceding prayers and tears, if words coming warm from the heart, and
accompanied with an ardent desire of being attended to; if to feel himself what
he speaks, and so long that it may be felt by others, can make it such, he will
declare the whole will of God, without withholding or mincing any. Be the truth
ever so disagreeable, contrary to your profits, or contrary to your pleasures,
you will be sure to hear it. He will indeed show it in as lovely a light, and
make it as palatable as he can, but nothing will prevail upon him to conceal or
disguise it. Thirdly, he will not confine his teaching to God's day or house,
but will exercise his care of you every day, and will bring it home to your own
houses, whether you invite him or no. He will frequently visit you, and for the
same end as he meets you at church. Now, shall you like this part of his duty,
or bid him welcome when he comes on such an errand? nay, he will think himself
bound to proceed farther, and to enquire into the state of your souls, and your
proceedings in your families; whether you are competently furnished with saving
knowledge? and are careful to increase it daily, by allowing a daily portion of
your time for reading the scriptures? what virtues you are deficient in, what
vices you are subject to? what evil tempers, what vile affections, what unruly
passions, are predominant in you, and want to be suppressed? whether your
children are catechized, and your servants instructed? whether you are constant
in family worship, and at your closet devotions? how you spend the Sabbath?
whether you squander it away in impertinent visits, idle chat, or foolish
jesting; or in holy discourse, reading and meditation? These, and other points
of the like nature, he will examine into, and exhort you to amend what is
amiss, no less than encourage you to persevere in that which is good. Nor will
he exhort you once or twice only, but again and again, and hardly leave off
till he has won your consent. In things that relate to himself, he will be
easily said nay; but when the great God insists upon obedience, and a blessed
immortality will be lost by disobedience, he will be instant in season, and out
of season, he will solicit with unwearied applications the important cause, and
press you to perform your duty, as the poor widow importuned the unjust judge
to avenge her of her adversary; he will add to his exhortations, reproofs: his
eyes will be open, and his ears attentive to what passes in his parish; and
when any one walks disorderly, he will meet with him as Elijah did Ahab, 1.
Kings xxi. 20.
with a rebuke in his mouth. This I can promise, that he will not rail at, nor
accost you with reproachful words; but he will certainly set before you the
things that you have done. He will not defame you behind your backs, but
whether you be rich or poor, whether you be pleased with it or not, he will
bear in mind the commandment of the Lord, and "show his people their
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. Isaiah lviii. 1.
" He will tell you with tenderness, but yet with plainness, that such courses
are a sad and too sure a proof, that grace has not had its proper work on your
souls, that ye are carnal, and have not the spirit of Christ. So that a true
minister of the gospel will be a constant inspector of your actions, a faithful
monitor of your duty, and an impartial reprover of your offenses. He will guide
you by his council, animate you by his example, and bless you by his prayers."

In another letter, entitled "the Hope of Glory, a strong incitement to duty,"
Mr. Hervey breaks out in the following expressions, which seem to be the real
language of his heart, and the pious breathings of a soul filled with love to
God, and fervent zeal to promote his cause, interest and glory in the world.

"Oh that ministers may work for their dying Lord, while they have health;
remembering that sickness may confine them to their chamber, and death will
imprison them in the grave. God Almighty give us courage that we may fight the
good fight of faith and prudence, that we may not dishonor our high calling;
'ere long eternity will receive us, and then we shall rest from our labors,
and forget our transient toils, amidst innumerable ages of perfection, glory,
and joy."

The high esteem he had for, and the pleasure he experienced in the work of the
ministry, may be gathered from the ensuing passages in a letter he wrote to one
of his friends, on his taking up the sacred character of an Ambassor of the
King of Kings.

"I heartily congratulate you, my dear friend, my dear brother, I must call you
now, on this change. And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, that he has counted
you faithful, putting you into the ministry. -- How honorable is your new
office, to be an envoy from the King of Heaven! how delightful your province,
to be continually conversant in the glorious truths of the gospel, and the
unsearchable riches of Christ! how truly gainful your business, to win souls!
This is indeed an everlasting possession. -- And how illustrious the reward,
promised to your faithful service! when the chief shepherd shall appear, you
shall receive a crown of glory, that fades not away. May we clearly discern,
and never forget what a master we serve; so glorious, that all the angels of
light adore him: so gracious that he spilt his blood even for his enemies: so
mighty that he has all power in heaven and earth, so faithful, that heaven and
earth may pass away, much sooner than one jot or tittle of his word fail. And
what is his word, what his engagement to his ministers? LO I AM WITH YOU
ALWAYS. I write it in capitals, because I wish it may be written in your heart.
-- Go forth my dear friend, in the strength of this word: and verily you shall
not be confounded. Plead with your great Lord, plead for the accomplishment of
this word, and the gospel shall prosper in your hand. In every exercise of your
ministerial duty, act an humble faith on this wonderful word, and the heart of
stone shall feel the powers of hell fall -- Remember you are now a minister of
God, that your tongue is to be a well of life: you are to believe in Christ,
daily to cherish your faith in Jesus, that out of your heart may flow rivers of
living waters. Such tides of heavenly and healing truths as may refresh the
fainting soul, and animate its feeble graces."

Mr. Hervey's zeal in publishing the glad tidings of salvation, and maintaining
the doctrine of an "imputed righteousness," by the man Christ Jesus, is fully
discovered in most of the sermons he printed, many of the letters he wrote to
his friends, but more especially in his dialogues, entitled, "Thereon and
Aspasio;" of the latter, the ensuing extracts may suffice as a specimen; while
they evidently display the elegance of his diction, the piety of his heart, and
the strength of his arguments. In the ensuing extracts, great care has been
taken to select, not merely the most pleasing and picturesque parts of the
dialogues ('though that has been attended to,) but the substance and force of
Mr. Hervey's arguments for "imputed righteousness," leaving the reader to judge
of them as he sees sit.


THE BEAUTIES OF HERVEY. COLLOQUIAL BEAUTIES, EXTRACTED FROM THEREON AND ASPASIO.
Thereon. THE notion of a substituted and vicarious righteousness, is absurd
even to common sense, and to the most natural and easy reflections of men.
Thereon is a private gentleman of fortune and education, who disbelieves the
doctrine of imputed righteousness; Aspasio is a clergyman, and an intimate
friend of Theron's, who, not only believes, but endeavors by every argument he
can suggest, to bring him to embrace the same doctrine.


Aspasio. It may not, my dear friend, agree with our natural apprehensions; nor
fall in with the method which we might have devised for the salvation of
mankind. But this is the voice of scripture, and a maxim never to be forgotten;
-- "God's thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his ways as our ways." Isaiah,
lv. 8.


This notion, you say, is absurd even to common sense. -- A saying upon which I
must beg leave to put a queery. It was, I own, absolutely beyond the power of
common sense, unassisted by divine revelation, to discover this truth. -- I
will grant farther, that his blessing infinitely transcends whatever
common-sense has observed in all her converse with finite things; -- but if I
have the least acquaintance with common sense, I am persuaded, she will not,
she cannot pronounce it an absurdity.

To this judge I refer the cause.

And to open the cause a little, let me just observe; that God imputed our sins
to his Son. Why else is it said? that, at his second coming he should appear
without sin. Hebrews, iz 28.
Plainly implying, that at his first coming, he appeared with sin; not indeed
committed by him, but laid upon him, or imputed to him.

How else could the immaculate Jesus be punished as the most inexcusable
transgressor? "Awake, O sword, against the man that is my fellow, says the
Lord of hosts. Zachariah, xiii. 7.
" -- Is not this the voice of a judge, pronouncing the sentence, and
authorizing the execution? or rather, does it not describe the action of
justice, turning the sword from us, and sheathing it in Christ?

If Christ, then, was our substitute, with regard to penal suffering, why may
he not stand in the same relation, with regard to justifying obedience? there
is the same reason for the one, as for the other. Every argument in favor of
the former, is equally conclusive in behalf of the latter.

Thereon. I freely grant, that Christ was punished in our stead; that his death
is the expiation of our sin, and our security from penal suffering. But this --

Aspasio. -- Will undeniably prove, that sin was imputed to him, otherwise he
could not truly suffer in our stead, nor be justly punished at all. "And
imputation is as reasonable and justifiable in one case, as in the other; for
they both stand upon one and the same foot, and for that reason, he who throws
down one, throws down both." -- I should by no means have interrupted my
Thereon, were it not to introduce this answer from an eminent divine, who adds,
what should be very seriously considered: "and therefore, whoever rejects the
doctrine of the imputation of our Savior's righteousness to man, does by so
doing, reject the imputation of man's sin to our Savior, and all the
consequences of it. Or in other words, he who rejects the doctrine of the
imputation does, by so doing, reject the doctrine of the expiation likewise."

Thereon. I know nothing of this Divine, and, eminent as he is, can hardly take
his ipse dixet."

Aspasio. I was in hopes you would pay the greater regard to his opinion,
because he is not in the number of the whimsical fanatics. -- However, "say I
these things as a man," or on man's authority alone? "says not the law the
same also?" speaking of the peace offering, the Holy Ghost has declared; "if
any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings be eaten at all on the
third day, it shall not be accepted, neither shall it be imputed unto him that
offers it." Hence we learn, that sacrisices and offerings, when duly
administered, were imputed to the offerer; imputed to him for reconcilation and
peace with God. And wherefore? because they were figures of Christ, of his
atonement and righteousness; which, in like manner, are imputed to sinners for
their pardon and salvation.

Lest you should think this proof being deduced from typical usages, not
sufficiently conclusive -- I would farther observe, that the imputation of
Christ's righteousness bears an evident analogy to another great and
acknowledged truth of religion. We did not personally commit Adam's sin, yet
are we chargeable with guilt, and liable to condemnation Romans, v. 12, 13.
, on that --

Thereon. How! we chargeable with guilt, and liable to condemnation, on account
of Adam's transgression! this an acknowledged truth? No; it is a position I
must deny, I had almost said, which I cannot but abhor. None other could, in
the eye of justice and equity, be blamable for any offense of our first
parents, but they only.

Aspasio. So says Thereon; but what says St. Paul? Yours may be the voice of
natural reason, but what is the language of divine revelation? in whom, that is
in "Adam all have sinned." Ibid. v. 12.


Thereon. The words, if I remember right, are -- "for all that have sinned." Is
it possible that Aspasio should forge the hand, or counterfeit the seal of the
Holy Ghost, in order to establish a favorite notion?

Aspasio. Impossible I hope. -- In the margin, the words are translated as I
have repeated.

In these words, the apostle assigns a reason for the preceding assertion, "by
one man's sin, death came upon all." -- It might be replied, is not this
strange? is not this unaccountable? No; says our sacred disputant; we account
for it on this principle, because "all have sinned."

This doctrine, that we all died in Adam, and were undone by his apostasy,
cannot puzzle the simplest, if unprejudiced, mind; nor will it offend any, but
the proud philosopher, or the self-righteous moralist. And I assure you, I
should not mention it, much less insist upon it, did it not subserve (and in a
very singular manner) the purposes of edification. The doctrine of a Redeemer,
obeying and dying in our stead, is the very hinge and center of all evangelical
revelations; is the very life and soul of all evangelical blessings. This
doctrine is not a little illustrated, and comes very much recommended by the
imputation of Adam's sin. Romans, v. 15.


Contraries, you know, cast light upon, and set off each other. Winter and its
severe cold, make spring and its cheering warmth, more sensibly perceived, and
more highly pleasing. Such an influence has the present subject, with respect
to the vicarious obedience of our Mediator. The more clearly we see the reality
of the first, the more thoroughly we shall discern the expediency, the
excellency, and the glory of the last, the more we are humbled under conviction
of the former, the more we shall court, or the more we shall triumph in the
enjoyment of the latter If the sinner is convinced of his liability or
obnoxiousness" to eternal punishiment, from the guist of Adum's sin descending
by generation upon him, as upon all mankind, the death of Christ as a
sussicient atonement for original as well as actual transgression, will appear
the more valuable, and accordingly be more highly prized.
. The apostle draws a long parallel, or rather forms a strong contrast between
them, in the fifth chapter to the Romans.. He speaks copiously of Adam's guilt,
imputed to all mankind for condemnation and death, that he may speak the more
acceptably, the more charmingly of Christ's righteousness, imputed to all
believers for justification and life. In that dark ground, he well knew this
fairest, loveliest flower of christianity appears with peculiar beauty, indeed
with all the beauty of consummate wisdom, and adorable benignity.

Thereon. It really seems to me a thing impossible, that one man's righteousness
should be made another. Can one man live by the soul of another? or be learned
by the learning of another? Good Aspasio, never attempt to maintain such
palpable absurdities. They will only expose christianity to the scorn of
infidels.

Aspasio. If infidels scoff at this comfortable truth, their scoffing will be
like their other cavils, not the voice of reason, but the clamor of prejudice.

My friend's objection insinurates what we never assert: that the righteousness
of Christ is transfused into believers, which would, doubtless, be in fact,
impossible, as it is in theory absurd. But this we disavow, as strenuously as
you can oppose. The Redeemer's righteousness is made ours, not by infusion, but
by imputation. The very terms we use may acquit us from such a ridiculous
charge; as imputation signifies, "a placing to the account of one what is done
or suffered by another," Accordingly we believe, that the righteousness which
justifies abides in Christ, but is placed to our account: that Christ, and
Christ alone, actually performed it: that Christ, and Christ alone, personally
possesses it: but that performing it in our stead, and possessing it as our
covenant-head, God imputes it to us. God accepts us for it -- accepts us as
much, as if we had, on our own behalf, and in our persons, severely fulfilled
it.

Though one man cannot live, be actuated with a principle of life; by the soul
of another; yet you must allow, that one man, nay, that many men may live, be
continued in the possession of life, for the righteousness of another: or else
you must do what I am sure you abhor. -- You must charge with absurdity and
impossibility, even the declaration of Jehovah himself; "If I find in Sodom
fifty righteous within the city, then will I spare all the place for their
sakes Genesis, xviii. 26.
" When your worthy minister was disabled, by a rheumatic disorder, from
attending on the business of his function, several of the neighboring clergy
gave him their assistance: was he not by this vicarious performance of his
office, entitled to all the profits of his living? It seems therefore, not so
unexampled a thing, for one person to act in another's stead. And when a
service is thus discharged by the proxy, the benefit may, according to the
received maxims of mankind, accrue to the principal.

Did not Jehu's descendants, even to the fourth generation, reap the advantage
of their great-grandfather's zeal 2 Kings, x. 20.
? does not the Duke of -- enjoy the honors and rewards won by the sword of a
victoriousancestor? and may not the whole world of believers, with equal, with
far greater justice, receive life and salvation on account of their
all-deserving Savior? -- especially since he and they are one mystical body,
represented as such in scripture, and considered as such by God.

No, say you: "this is contrary to the rules of distributive justice." -- What
is your idea of a surety? how was the affair stated, and how were matters
negociated, with relation to your generous acquaintance Philander? he, you
know, was bound for an unfortunate brother who lately stepped aside.

Thereon. The debt, by his brother's absconding, devolved upon Philander. He was
responsible for all, and obliged to pay the whole sum.

Aspasio. Was not his payment as satisfactory to the creditor, as if the money
had been paid in the debtor's own person, by the debtor's own hand?

Thereon. Certainly.

Aspasio. Was not the debtor by this vicarious payment, released from all fear
of prosecution, and acquitted from any future demand on this score?

Thereon. He was.

Aspasio. Apply this instance to the redemption of sinner's by Jesus Christ,
who is in the sacred writings expressly styled a surety*. -- If Philander's act
was deemed, in the estimation of law, the act of his brother; if the deed of
the former was imputed, in point of advantage, entirely to the latter, why
should not the same effects take place, with regard to the divine bondsman, and
poor insolvent sinners? why should that be exploded in our system of divinity,
which is universally admitted in our courts of justice?

Thereon. Obedience and righteousness are, in the nature of the things
themselves, personal qualities, and only so. Every man is that only (and can be
nothing else) which he is in himself.

Aspasio. Righteousness, as dwelling in us, is undoubtedly a personal quality.
Obedi^ence, as performed by us, comes under the same ^denomination. But does
this supercede the necessity, or destroy the existence of imputed
righteousness? -- Your first proposition is ambiguous. Let it speak distinctly;
add inherent to your righteousness, and the sense becomes determinate, but the
argument falls to the ground.

"Every man is that only (and can be nothing else) which he is in himself." --
if I had never seen the Bible, I should have yielded my ready assent to his
proposition. But when I open the Old Testament, and find it written by the
prophet; "In the Lord shall all the house of Israel be justified. Isaiah, xlv.
25.
" When I turn to the New Testament, and hear the apostle saying," ye are
complete in him, who is the head of all principalities and powers Colossians,
ii. 10.
:" I cannot concur with Thereon, without contradicting the revelation. Israel,
or the true believer, is said to be justified; and the foundation of this
blessing is declared to be, not in himself, but in the Lord. The Colossians are
said to be complete, which, we are very certain they were not in themselves;
and are expressly assured they were so in Christ. Hence it appears quite
contrary to my friend's assertion, that sinners both have and are that in
Christ, which they neither have nor are in themselves. They have, by imputation
a righteousness in Christ; they are, by this imputed righteousness, complete
before God.

I believe your mistake proceeds from neglecting to distinguish between
inherent and imputed. -- We never suppose that a prosane person is devout, or
an intemperate person sober. To live soberly and act devoutly is inherent
righteousness. But we maintain, that the profane and intemperate, being
convinced of their inquiity, and betaking themselves to the all-sufficient
Savior for redemption, are interested in the merit both of his life and of his
death. -- This is impu^ed righteousness -- We farther affirm, that though
criminal in themselves, they are made righteous in Christ, and are accepted by
God for his beloved Son's sake. This is justification, though imputed
righteousness.

Neither is this a precarious or unwarrantable opinion, but the clear and
positive declaration of scripture. He justifies, he absolves from guilt, he
treats us as righteous. Whom? upright, obedient, sinless creatures; this were
nothing extraordinary -- no; but "he justifies the ungodly that believe in the
Lord Jesus," Romans, iv. 5
imputing, as the ground of this justification, their trespasses to him, and
his righteousness to them; this is divinely gracious indeed! Cor. v. 19, 21.


I am persuaded that multitudes in the gay and licentious world are held fast
in the fatal snare of sin and carnal security, by their ignorance of this
sweet, alluring, consolatory truth: they find themselves deeply obnoxious to
divine justice, and feel themselves strongly bound with the chains of
sensuality. They think it is impossible to clear the enormous score of their
guilt, impossible to deliver themselves from the confirmed dominion of sin.
Therefore, like desperate debtors, they stifle every serious thought, least a
consciousness of their long arrears, and a prospect of the dreadful reckoning
should torment them before the time Mat. viii. 29.
But if they were informed, that the infinitely merciful Son of God has
undertaken to redeem such undone and helpless sinners: That he has thoroughly
expiated the most horrid transgressions, and procured, even for ungodly
wretches, all the needful supplies of strengthening grace. -- That instead of
being prohibited, they are invited to partake of these unspeakable blessings.
-- I say were they acquainted with these glad tidings of the gospel, their
chains, which now are like steel and adamant, would become like a thread of
tow, when it touches the fire Judges, xv^. 9.


Yes, my friend, these truths, if once revealed and received in their hearts,
would be an infallible method to make them free John, viii. 32.


God the father is well pleased with this righreousness of our Redeemer. He
expresses his complacency by the most emphatical words: behold my servant whom
I uphold, mine elect, in whom my soul delights, viz. in Christ and his
righteousness. God is not only pleased, but delighted: his very soul, every
perfection of the godhead, with ineffable satisfaction, rests and acquiesces in
them. Our Lord Jesus Christ is well pleased. He esteems it his honor to shine
forth as the everlasting righteousness of his people. It is the brightest jewel
of his mediatorial crown.

In this he sees the travel of his soul, and is satisfied Isaiah, liii. 11.
; accounting himself fully recompensed pensed for all the labors of his life,
and all the sorrows of his death, when sinners are washed from their guilt in
his blood, and presented faultless by his obedience.

The holy Spirit is equally pleased with this great transaction, and its
matchless effects; it is his peculiar office and favorite employ to convince
the world of the fullness and efficacy of their Savior's righteousness.

Since then this method of acceptance and salvation is excellent and glorious
in the eyes of the adorable Trinity -- since it magnifies the law, and yields
the most exalted honors to its divine Author -- since it makes ample provision
for the holiness of a corrupt, and the happiness of a ruined world, why should
my friend any longer dislike it, oppose it, or treat it with a cold
indifference?

Surely all these grand recommendations are enough to overruled any little
objections, which may crise from the suspicions of timidity, or be started by
the artifices of sophistry and cunning.

It is very probable I may meet with afflictions; death in my family, or
disease in my person; disappointments may frustrate my designs; Providence may
wear a frowning aspect; as though the Lord had a controversy with his sinful
creature, and was causing him to possess the iniquities of his youth; and what
will be sufficient to support and cheer in such a gloomy hour? no thing but the
"righteousness of Jesus Christ."

Nothing is sovereign to clam our fears, and remove all apprehensions of the
Divine wrath, or to draw the curtains of horror from around our sick beds, and
throw our languishing eyelids off the gloom of the shadow of death, as a
believing improvement of the imputed righteousness of our dear Redeemer: this
clears up the mournful scene, and takes away the sting of tribulation and
distress.

Attending to this great propitiation, the sufferer sees his sins forgiven, and
his God reconciled; from whence he concludes, that the severest afflictions are
only fatherly corrections, and shall not exceed his ability to bear, and shall
assuredly obtain a gracious issue. He can fetch comfort from that cheering
word, "I will be with him, and bring him to honor" Psalm xci. 15.


These supports have enabled the saints to kiss the rod, and bless the hand
which chastised them. To possess their souls, not in patience only, but in
thankfulness also. While they have looked inward, and discerned their absolute
need of these bitter but salutary medicines, they have looked upward, and
beheld the cup in a most wise and tender physician's hand: have looked forward,
with a joyful hope, to that better world, where God will wipe away all tears
from their eyes, and there shall be no more sorrow, nor any more pain for ever.

The last occasion of need is the trying hour of death, and the tremendous day
of judgment. Will this righteousness carry us with safety through the darksome
valley, and present us with acceptance at the dreadful tribunal? -- It will: it
will. -- This silences all the curses of the law, and disarms death of every
terror.

To believe in this righteousness, is to meet death at our Savior's side, or
rather, like good old Simeon, with the Savior in our arms. -- They overcame,
says the beloved disciple, they overcame the last enerny, not by natural
fortitude, or philosophic resolution, but by the blood of the Lamb Rev. xii. ii.
. By that grand price of redemption which cost the Redeemer every drop of his
blood: which delivers sinners from the wrath to come, and entitles them to the
incorruptible inheritance.

"I know," adds the heroic apostle "whom I have believed;" 2 Timothy i. 12.
I am assured that my Jesus is infinitely faithful, and will not desert me;
that his ransom is absolutely sufficient, and cannot deceive me, therefore,
with a holy bravery, he bids defiance to death, or rather triumphs over it, as
a vanquished enemy; "thanks be to God who gives us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ I C ^^ xv. 37.
" Nay, through the victorious efficacy of Christ's propitiation, death is ours;
not our foe, but our friend and deliverer. We may number it among our
treasures, and rest satisfied that to die is our gain Ph^^pp^^^ i. z.


O! for a firm and lasting faith,
To credit what the Almighty says;
TO embrace the promise of his Son,
And call the joys of Heaven our own.
DR. WATTS. Thereon. I know not how it is, Aspasio; but I cannot reconcile
myself to this doctrine of "imputed righteousness:" not withstan ling all the
pains you have taken to make me a convert.

Aspasio. The disappointment is mine, but the less is yours, Thereon. --
However, let me entreat you not to reject my sentiments absolutely, nor to
condemn them prematurely. Suppose it possible, at least, that they may be true,
and weigh them in an even balance. -- Learn wisdom from your Aspasio's folly. I
was once exactly in your situation, saw things in your light, and through your
medium.

Conversing (I well remember) with a devout but plain person, our discourse
happened to turn on the solemn admonition; "if any man will come after me, let
him deny himself." I was haranging upon the import and extent of the duty;
showing, that merely to forbear the infamous action, is little. We must deny
admittance, deny entertainment at least to the evil imagination, and quench
even the kindling spark of irregular desire. -- When I had shot a random bolt,
my honest friend replied, "There is another instance of selfdenial, to which
this injunction extends, and which is of very great moment in the christian
religion; I mean the instance of renouncing our own strength, and our own
righteousness, not leaning on that for holiness, nor relying on this for
justification." I thought the old man, I must confess, little better than a
superstitious dotard; and wondered at (what I then fancied) the motley mixture
of piety and oddity in his notions. But now I discern sense, solidity, and
truth in his observation. Now I perceive that we ourselves are often the
dreamers, when we imagine others to be fast a sleep.

Thereon. You have no reason to be ashamed Aspasio, of receiving instruction
from your honest counselor.

Aspasio. But still "you cannot reconcile yourself." And no wonder. For this
way of salvation runs directly counter to the stream of corrupt nature. It
puzzles our reason, and offends our pride. -- "What! shall we not work, but
believe unto righteousness? shall we receive all freely, and reckon ourselves
no better than unprofitable servants? having nothing whatsoever that may
recommend us to our Maker." This is a method to which we should never submit;
this is a proposal which we should always spurn, were not our natural
sentiments rectified, and our high imaginations abased by the power of divine
grace.

Let me remind you of a little incident which you must have read in the Grecian
history: a certain stranger came one day to dine with some Lacedaemonians, who
always sat down at a public table, and were content with the plainest sood, the
gentleman accustomed to higher eating, could not forbear expressing his disgust
at the homely pro^ision. -- Sir, said the cook, you do not make use of the
sauce. -- What do you mean? replied the guest. -- You do not use hard exercise,
nor habituate vourself to long abstinence, nor bring a sharpened appetite to
the meal. -- And you, my dear friend, I am apprehensive, have not the sauce,
have not the proper preparative for this salutary doctrine, which is indeed the
bread of life, and the very marrow of the gospel.

Thereon. What preparative? Did you not just now say that all was free, and
nothing needful, but only to receive the blessing?

Aspasio. True; nothing is needful, as inclining God to give, but only as
inclining us to receive. -- Would you seek, would you solicit, would you so
much as accept a pardon from your sovereign, unless you stood convicted of some
capital crime, or was apparently liable to condemnation? neither will sinful
man seek, no, nor accept the great atonement, till he is made sensible that
the wrath of God and the damnation of hell are what he justly deserves, and
what, without the propitiation of Christ, he must unavoidably suffer

This, then, is the preparative. -- A sense of the horrible silthiness of the
least sin in the sight of God; of the innumerable sins of our heart and life,
and our undone damnable state on this account. -- While destitute of these
convictions, our souls will be like the full stomach, that loathes even the
honeycomb. So long as these convictions are slight, and hover only in the
imagination; we shall be like Gallio, listless, indifferent, and "caring for
none of those things." -- But when they are deep and peneirate the heart, then
the righteousness of a Redeemer will be sweet, tasteful, and inviting. Sweet as
myrrh and srankincense to the smell; tasteful as milk and honey to the palate;
inviting as gold and treasures to the ruined bankrupt.

Thereon. How are these convictions wrought in the soul?

Aspasio. "By the law is the knowledge of sin." Consequently, by the law is the
conviction of our undone state. Let us therefore endeavor to understand the
law of God how pure, how extensive, how sublimely perfect it is. -- Then, judge
of our spiritual condition, not from the flattering suggestions of self-love,
nor from the defective examples of our fellow creatures, but by this unerring
standard of the sanctuary. -- Above all, let us beseech the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to send his enlightening spirit into our hearts: for
indeed, without enlightening influences of the spirit, we may have the divine
law in our hand; we may comprehend its grammatical meaning; yet be like blind
Bartimeus under the meridian sun. It is the blessed spirit alone who can remove
the veil of ignorance from our minds; and show us either "the wonderful things
of God's law," or the glorious mysteries, of his gospel. In this sense, our
polite poet speeks a truth, as singularly imporportant as it is elegantly
expressed: "He from thick films shall purge the visual ray,
"And on the sightless eye balls pour the day."


Will you give me leave to propose another expedient, which, I believe, may be
considerably serviceable in this particular case. Which I am assured, will be
greatly advantageous in many other respects.

Thereon. Backward as I am to adopt your doctrine, I am no enemy to my own
interest; therefore, shall not only give you leave to propose, but give you
thanks for communicating so valuable an advice.

Aspasio. It is, in reality, none of mine. It was long ago recommended by our
old acquaintance Horace. It consists in keeping a diary.

Compile a secret history of your heart and conduct. -- Take notice of the
manner in which your time is spent, and of the strain which runs through your
discourse. How often the former is lost in trifles, how often the latter
evaporates in vanity. Attend to the principle from which your actions flow;
whether from the steady habitual love of God, or from some rambling impulse, 02
and a customary propensity to please yourself. -- Minute down your sins of
omission; how frequently you neglect to glorify your Creator, to edify your
fellow creatures; and to improve yourself in knowledge and holiness. Observe
the frame of your spirit in religious duties; with what reluctance they are
undertaken, and with what indevotion performed; with how many wanderings of
thought, and with how much dullness of desire. How often, in transacting commen
affairs, you feel the inordinate sallies of passion, the workings of evil
concupiscence, or the intrusion of foolish imaginations.

Register those secret faults, to which none but your own conscience is privy,
and which none but the all-seeing eye discerns. Often review these interesting
memoirs; frequently contemplate yourself in this faithful mirror, and do not be
afraid to see your wants and weaknesses, the depravity of your heart, and the
iniquity of your life. -- An artist, some time ago, took a survey of your
estate; drew the form, and measured the dimensions of each enclosure; pictured
out every hedge, and scarce omitted a single tree which grew upon the premises.
-- Act this with your will, your understanding, and your affections.

By this means we shall discover the sins which most easily beset us, which
most frequently elude our vigilance, and baffle our resolution. We shall learn
how to post our guard, when to exercise the strictest watch, and where to
direct the artillery of prayer. -- In a word, we shall learn better than from
ten thousand volumes, to know ourselves. A knowledge which was supposed, by the
ancient philosophers, to descend from heaven, and which, I believe, our
christian divines will allow, has a happy tendency to lead people thither;
because, of all other preparatives, it best disposes them for that blessed
Redeemer, who is the way, the only way to those blissful mansions.

Now I have mentioned a way, let me suppose you traveling through an unknown
country: you came to a place where the road divides itself into two equally
inviting parts. You are at a loss which track to pursue. Whose direction will
you choose to follow? that man's who has passed through, neither of them? that
man's who has (...) through one of them only? or that man's who has passed and
repassed them both? To wait for an answer would be an affront to your judgment:
only let me observe, that the last is your Aspasio's case. He has traveled
long, and proceeded far, even in your path. All that circumspection and
affiduity, all that prayer and self-denial, all that fasting and alms, and
every other means of grace could do, in order to establish a righteousness of
his own, has been done. -- But to no purpose. -- He has also trod every step in
the way, which he recommends to his beloved friend. He has made the trial
concerning the righteousness without works, or the righteousness of God
imputed. He can set his probatum est to whatsoever he advises on this subject,
and may venture to say, with his divine MASTER, "we speak that we do know," and
testify that we have experienced.

Th^on. I am sorry to observe that the night (...) coming on, and our
conversation almost at an end. My regret is increased by the consideration of
your intended journey. -- Though business obliges you to depart, it will I
hope, afford you leisure to write. This will be some compensation for the want
of your company.

Yonder sun is sinking below the horizon, (...) taking his leave of our earth.
To retard the departing radiance, at least to alleviate the approaching loss
those western clouds catch the rays, and reflect them to our view in a most
amusing diversity of colors. By this means we enjoy the great luminary in his
beams, even when his orb is withdrawn from our sight. An epistolary
correspondence has something of the same nature. Letters may be called the talk
of absent friends. By this expedient, they communicate their thoughts, even
though countries, kingdoms, or seas intercept their speech. You must,
therefore, pr^mise me this satisfaction, that I may converse with my Aspasio by
the pen, when I can no longer have an intercourse with him in persin.

Aspasio. You have anticipated me, Thereon; otherwise, what is now my promise,
would have been my request.

I cannot but take notice of another particularity in that magnificent
affemblage of clouds; how they varied their appearance, as the lamp of day
changed its situation. -- A little while ago, those curtains of the sky were
streaked with orange, or tinged with amber. Presently they borrow the blush of
the ^ose, or the softened red of the pink. 'Ere long, they glow with
vermillion, or deepen into crimson. Soon succeed the purple, more beautiful and
grand th^^ any imperial robe, and as soon (thus transient is all sublunary
grandeur!) gives place to the sable veil of evening, or saddens into the gloomy
pall of night. Such I trust, will be the issue of my Theron's present
apprehensions. All his splendid ideas of human excellency and
self-righteousness will become faint, will lose their imaginary luster, till at
length they fade away, and darken into absolute self-abasement. -- Then the
grace of free justification will be amiable, will be desirable as the beauties
of the dawn, breaking upon the shades of night. Then you will make no
difficulty to say with the Psalmist and the Apostle, "Blessed is the man unto
whom God imputes righteousness without works Romans, iv. 6.
."

Oh, my Thereon! what is the drop of a bucket to the unfathomable waves of the
ocean? what is a grain of sand to the unmeasureable dimensions of the universe?
what is an hour or a moment to the endless revolutions of eternity? such are
all human endowments and temporary seize, compared with his
righteousness, who "thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet took on him
the form of a servant? who was made sin for us who knew no sin, (...) might be
made the righteousness of God in him a Cor. v. 21.
?" -- And is this righteousness designed for us? Is this to be our wedding
dress, this our beautiful array, when we enter the regions of eternity?
Unspeakable privilege! -- Is this what God has provided to supply, and more
than supply our loss in Adam? Boundless benignity! -- Shall we be treated by
the Judge of the world, as if we had performed all this unsinning and perfect
obedience? well might the prophet cry cut, like one lost in astonishment, "how
great is his goodness!" How great indeed! since all that the Lord Jesus did and
suffered, was done and suffered for us men, and for our salvation, "is imputed
unto us for righteousness," and is the cause, the sole but infinitely
sufficient cause of our justification.

Is not your heart enamoured, my dear Thereon, with a view of this
incomprehensibly rich grace? what so excellent, what so comfortable, what so
desirable as the gist of a Savior's righteousness? though delineated by this
feeble pen, methinks it has glory and dignity enough to captivate our hearts,
and fire our affections; fire them with ardent and distinguishable desires
after a personal interest and propriety in it. -- O! may the eternal Spirit
reveal our Redeemer's righteousness, in all its heavenly beauty and divine
luster! then, I am persuaded, we shall esteem it above every thing; we shall
regard it as the one thing needful; we shall count all things in comparison of
it, worthless as the chaff, and empty as the wind.

But here sinners may "suck and be satisfied with this breast of consolation;"
yea, millions and thousands of millions "may milk out and be delighted with the
abundance of its glory." -- Here we shall find the doctrine of supererogation,
no longer a chimera, but a delightful reality. Here, indeed, is an immense
surplusage, an inexhaustible fund of merit, sufficient to enrich a whole world
of indigent and miserable creatures; sufficient to make their cup run over with
a superabundant fullness of peace and joy, so long as time shall last, and when
time shall be no more. For to use the apostle's weighty argument, "if by one
man's offense, death reigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of
grace, and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by me", Jesus
Christ. Is it reasonable that we should ascribe more power to Adam, a mere man,
in making us sinners, than in Christ, the GOD-MAN, in making us righteous? No
verily. If one offense, committed by one man, made all his posterity chargeable
with guilt, and liable to death, MUCH MORE shall the manifold instances of our
divine Redeemer's obedience absolve all his people from condemnation and
punishment, and entitle them to the honors and joys immortality.

Think not that what I have written is the language of rant; it is a
paraphrase, though I must confess, but a scanty paraphrase, on David's
practice, and David's faith; "My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness and
thy salvation all the day, for I know not the numbers thereof." The
supereminent righteousness of Christ, and the great salvation obtained thereby,
he declares, shall be the chosen, the principal subject of his discourse; not
on a sabbath only, but on every day of the week, of the year, of his life: not
barely at the stated returns of solemn devotion; but on every common occasion,
in every social interview, all the day long. Why will he thus dwell,
perpetually and invariably dwell, on this darling theme? because, "he knew not
the numbers thereof." It is impossible to measure the value, or exhaust the
fullness of these blessings. The righteousness is unspeakable, the salvais
everlasting. To compute the duration of the one, numbers fail; to describe the
excellency of the other, words are at a loss.

This will appear in a clearer light, if, to the perfection of his obedience,
we add the majesty of our Savior's person. -- Let me desire my friend, the
friend of my bosorn, to contemplate our Lord Jesus under that lovely and august
character, CLORIOUS IN HOLINESS. And, for my part, I will not cease to pray,
that a sense of this supereminently grand and precious righteousness may be
written on my Theoron's heart. -- On those living tables, may it be like
figures cut on a rock of solid marble, or inscribed on the bark of a solid
tree; be lasting in its duration as the former, and spreading in its influence
as the latter; and it will then be a sure proof that his name is written in the
book of life.

You give a most astonishing account of the pressure of-the atmosphere.
Astonishing indeed! that we should be continually surrounded, continually
overwhelmed with such a load of air; quite dreadful to think upon! yet not be
crushed to death; no, nor be sensible of the least weight. -- This, I think,
may serve to represent the state of sinners, unawakened from carnal security.
Loads, more than mountainous loads of guilt, are upon his soul, and he
perceives not the burden. For this reason, he is under no apprehensions of the
vengeance and fiery indignation which he deserves; he has no superlative esteem
for the atonement and merits of the Redeemer, which alone can deliver him from
the wrath to come; but if once his conscience feels what his lips, perhaps,
have often repeated, "we do earnestly repent us of these our misdoings; the
remembrance of them is grievous unto us, the burden of them intolerable;" then
how will he prize such a text; "The Lord laid on Christ the iniquity of us
all:" how will he long for an interest in the Lamb of God, "which takes away
the sin of the world!" then that Jesus, who has finished the transgression, and
brought in everlasting righteousness, will be all his salvation, and all his
desire.

That Mr. Hervey was a great admirer of the charms of rural nature, and closely
studied the beauties of her sylvan retreats, may be readily proved by his
choice of, and attachment to the silent recesses of the country, and his
picturesque descriptions of them in various parts of his admired writings: the
beginnings of his Meditations, Contemplations and Dialogues, plainly evidence
his taste and genius, especially for rural and luxuriant paintings; the
following extracts from the aforementioned dialogues will, I doubt not, be very
acceptable to all who are fond of romantic and sequestered scenes.

DESCRIPTIVE BEAUTIES.
A DESCRIPTION OF THERON'S EXTENSIVE GARDENS.
THE spot adjoining to the house was appropriated to the cultivation of flowers
-- In a variety of handsome compartments were assembled the choicest beauties
of blooming nature. Here the hyacinth hung her silken bells, or the lillies
reared their silver pyramids. There stood the neat narcissus, loosely attired
in a mantle of snowy luster, while the splendid ranunculus wore a full trimmed
suit of radiant scarlet. Pinks were rising to enamel the borders; roses were
opening to dress the walks, surrounded on all sides with a profusion of
beauteous forms, either latent in the stalk, or bursting the buds, or blown
into full expansion.

This was bounded by a slight partition: a fort of verdant parapet, through
which they descended by an easy flight of steps, and are presented with the
elegant simplicity of the kitchen-garden. -- In one place you might see the
marygold flowering, or the beans in blossom. In another the endive curled her
leaves, or the lettuce thickened her tufts. Cauliflowers sheltered their fair
complexion under a green umbrella, while the borage dishevelled her locks, and
braided them with native jewels of a finer than the finest sapphires. -- On the
sunny stopes, the cucumber and melon lay basking in the collected beams. On the
raised beds the artichoke seemed to be erecting a standard, while the asparagus
shot into ranks of spears. The level ground produced all manner of cooling
sallads and nourishing esculents; which, like the brows of the Olympic
conquerors, were bound with a fillet of unfading parsley; or, like the pictures
of the mountain nymphs, were graced with a chaplet of fragrant marjoram. -- In
short, nothing was wanting to furnish out the wholesome luxury of an
antediluvean banquet.

Soon a high wall intervenes, through which a wicket opens, and transmits them
into the regular and equidistant rows of ^n orchard. -- This plantation is so
nicely adjusted, that it looks like an arrangement of rural piazzas, or a
collection of diversified vistas. The eye is every where entertained with the
exactest uniformity, and darts, with unobstructed ease, from one end of the
branching files to the other. On all the boughs lay a lovely evolution of
blossoms, arrayed in milky white, or tinged with the softestred; crouding into
one general cluster, without relinquishing a vacant space for leaves, they
formed the fairest, the gayest, the grandest alcove that fancy itself can
imagine. -- It is really like the Court of Graces; none can approach it,
without sinding his ideas brightened, and feeling his temper exhilirated.

Contiguous to this correct disposition of things, nature has thrown a
wilderness, hoary, grotesque, and magnificently confused. It stretched itself
with a large circular sweep to the north, and secured both the olitory and the
orchard from incommoding winds. Copses of hazel and flowering shrubs filled the
lower spaces, while poplars quivered aloft in the air, and pines pierced the
clouds with their leafy spires. Here grew clumps of fir, clad in everlasting
green; there stood groves of oak, which had weathered for ages the wintry
storm. -- This woody theater was intersected by a winding walk, lined with elms
of an insuperable height, whose branches, uniting at the top, reared a majestic
arch, and projected a solemn shade. It was impossible to enter this losty
labyrinth, without being struck with a pleasing dread. As they proceed, every
inflexion diffuses a deeper gloom, and awakens a more pensive attention.

Having strolled in this darksome avenue, without a speck of sunshine, without
a glimpse of the heavens; on a sudden, they step into open day. -- Surprising!
cries Aspasio, what a change is this! what a delightful enchantment is here! --
One instant whelmed in Trophonius's cave, where darkness lours, and horror
frowns, transported the next into the romantic scenes of Arcadia, where all is
lightsome, and all is gay. Quick as thought the arches of heaven expand their
azure; turrets and spires shoot into the skies; towns, with their spacious
edifices, spread themselves to the admiring view. Those lawns, green with
freshest herbage, those fields, rich with undulating corn, where were they all
a moment ago? I brings to my mind that remarkable situation of the Jewish
lawgiver, when, elevated on the summit of Pisgah, he surveyed the goodly land
of promise -- surveyed "the rivers, the floods, the brooks of honey and butter"
-- surveyed "the mountains droping with wine, and the hills flowing with milk,"
-- Surveyed all with those eyes, which for forty tedious years had been
confined to dry sands, ragged rocks, and the irksome wastes of a desolate
howling wilderness.

On the first mossy hillock, which offered its couch, our gentlemen seated
themselves. The rising sun had visited the spot to dry up the dews and exhale
the damps that might endanger health, to open the violets, and expand the
primroses that decked the green. The whole shade of the wood was collected
behind them, and a beautiful, extensive, most diversified landscape spread
itself before them.

Thereon, according to his usual manner, made many improving remarks on the
prospect and its furniture. He traced the footsteps of an all comprehending
contrivance, and pointed out the strokes of inimitable skill. He observed the
grand exertions of power, and the rich exuberance of goodness, most signally,
most charmingly conspicuous through the whole. -- Upon one circumstance he
enlarged with particular satisfaction.

Thereon. See, Aspasio! how all is calculated to administer the highest delight
to mankind. -- Those trees and hedges which skirt the extremities of the
landscape, stealing away from their real bulk, and lessening by gentle
diminutions, appear like elegant pictures in miniature: those which occupy the
nearer situations, are a set of noble images, swelling upon the eye, in full
proportion, and in a variety of graceful attitudes; both of them ornamenting
the several appartments of our common abode, with a mixture of delicacy and
grandeur.

The blossoms that array the branches, the stowers that embroider the mead,
address and entertain our eyes with every charm of beauty; whereas, to other
creatures, they are destitute of all those attractives, which result from a
combination of the loveliest colors, and most alluring forms. Yonder streams
that glide with smooth serenity along the valleys, glittering to the distant
view like sheets of polished silver, or soothing the attentive ear with the
softness of aquatic murmurs, are no less exbilirating to the fancy, than to the
soil through which they pass. The huge enormous mountain, the steep and dizzy
precipice, the pendent horrors of the craggy promontory, wild and tremendous as
they are, furnish out an agreeable entertainment to the human mind, and pleass
even while they terrisy, whereas the beasts take no other notice of those
majestic deformities, than only to avoid the dangers they appear to threaten.

Aspasio. What a magnificent and charming scene! -- Hills on either side,
gently rising and widely spreading, their summits crowned with scattered
villages, and clustering trees. Their slopes divided into a beauteous
chequer-work, consisting partly of tillage, with its waving crops, partly of
pasturage, with its grazing herds. -- Before us the trefoil, the clover, and
variety of grassy plants, differently bladed, and differently branched, weave
themselves into a carpet of living green. Can any of the manufactures formed in
the looms, or extended in the palaces of Persia, vie with the covering of this
ample area? vie with it in grandeur of size, or delicacy of decoration?

What a profusion of the gayest slowers, fringing the banks, and embroidering
the plain! -- Nothing can be brighter than the luster of these silver daisies:
nothing deeper than the tinge of those golden crowfoots. Yet both seem to
acquire additional liveliness, by succeeding to the deformity of winter, and by
flourishing amidst the freshest verdure.

Thereon. Nature is truly in her prime. -- The vegetable tribes are putting on
their richest attire. Those chestnuts on our right hand begin to rear their
slowering pyramids; those willows on our left are tipped with tassels of gray,
while yonder poplars, which overlook the river, and seem to command the
meadows, are pointed with rolls of silver.

The hawthorn, in every Hedge, is partly turged with silken gems, partly
diffused into a milk white bloom. Not a straggling furze, nor a solitary
thicket on the Heath, but wears a rural nosegay. Even amidst that neglected
Dike, the arum rises in humble state; most curiously shouded in her leafy
tabernacle, and surrounded with luxuriant families, each distinguished by a
peculiar livery of green. Look wherever we will, all is a delightful display of
present fertility, and joyous pledge of future plenty. -- Now we experience
what the royal poet, in very delicate imagery, describes: "The winter is past;
the rain is over and gone. The flowers appear on the earth; the time of the
singing of bir^s is come; and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land. The
fig tree puts forth her green figs; and the vine with her tender grapes give
a good smell."

Asiasio. See! Thereon, what the cheering warmth, and the genial showers of
spring have ^one! The rough tree sostens into verdure. The ragged thorn is
robed with beauty. Even the uncultivated lanes teem with herbage. Such a
change, so pleasing and so ennobling, the gospel of CHRIST introduces into the
soul. -- Not a day, scarce an hour passes, but this season of universal
fecundity produces something new; something that improves the aspect, and
increases the riches of nature. And is there any state, or any circumstance of
life, in which the faith of CHRIST does not exert a similar efficacy? Does not
purify the heart, and bring forth fruit unto GOD.

Thereon. To me who have spent the greatest part of the winter in town, these
scenes of the country are inexpressibly pleasing. Take who will, the gilded
saloon, and the silken settee; so long as I can shelter myself under the canopy
of such a spreading beech, and use one of its coarse misshapen roots for my
seat.

It Is true we see no longer those splendid brocades and elegant toupee^ which
distinguish the Park and Mall. -- But we have full in our view a multitude of
honest rustics, pursuing their cheerful labors in yonder meadow; some mowing
the luxuriant herbage; some spreadin^ it to the sun, or raising it into regular
cocks; others loading their wagons with the hay, or clearing the ground with
their rakes; the ground, cleared of its sost incumberance, appears fresh and
green, like another spring, while the exhalations of the tedded grass, floating
in the air, gives a rural perfume to the gale. -- And which, my Aspasio, which
are the most valuable objects? the little laborers of the hive that enrich
themselves and regale their masters, or the gay flutterers of the garden, whose
life is nothing but sport, and their highest character is to be insignificantly
pretty?

Aspasio. In this, retirement we hear none of the wanton and corrupting airs of
the opera; no, nor the majestic and ennobling melody of the cratorio. -- But we
have a band of music stationed in the grove, and a concert of native harmony
warbling from the boughs. We are entertained with the music, which charmed the
human ear, long before Jubal found out his instruments, and thousands of years
before Handel composed his notes. -- The bullfinch, and a multitude of little
tuneful throats, strike the key. The thrush below and the sky-lark responsive
from above, diversify and exalt the strain. The blackbird, somewhat like the
solemn organ, with notes perfectly melodious, and gracefully sonorous, crowns
the choir, while the ^^rtle's m^^ancholy voice, and the murmuring water's
plaintive tone, deepen and complete the universal symphony.

Thereon. The inhabitants of yonder villages have never beheld the splendid
procession, which solemnizes the coronation of a monarch, nor the gaudy
illuminations which distinguish the anniversary of his birth: but they see,
almost every morning, a much nobler spectacle displayed in the east. They see
the great Ruler of the day, or rather the envoy from day's eternal SOVEREIGN,
making his entry amidst the spaces of the sky. The heavens are strewed with
colors which outvie the pinks and carnations. The grass is decked with dew
drops, and every plant is strung, as it were, with pearls. All around the
darkness retires, and sweet resreshing gales arise. At length the magnificent
luminary appears. And what is all the ostentatious pomp of kings? what is all
the glitter of the most brilliant courts, compared with his transcendent
luster? -- This spectacle we may behold, without loss of time, or prejudice to
health. Nay, we cannot behold it, without improving one and redeeming the
other. So beneficial are even the pleasures which nature yields! so serviceable
the diversions to which she invites!

Talking in this manner, they arrive at the Park. Which, the moment you enter,
fills the view with its bold, enlarged, and magnificent sweep. -- It was
diversified with level and rising ground. Here, scooped into mimic
Amphitheatres; with the Deer pendent on the little summit, or shooting down the
precipice. There, raised into gentle hillocks; some of which were canopied with
a large, solitary oak; others were tufted with a cluster of tapering and
verdent elms. Two or three Cascades, gleaming from afar, as they poured along
the slanting rock, or the grassy slope, gave a pleasing variation to the
prospect. While they startled the timorous unexperienced. Fawns, with their
foaming current, and watery roar. Grandeur and Simplicity seemed to be the
genius of the place. Every thing breathed an air of noble negligence and
artless majesty.

In the center of all, rose a curious romantic mount. -- Its form was exactly
round, somewhat like a sugar loaf whose cone is lopt off a little below the top
-- Not coeval with nature, but the work of human industry. Thrown up, it is
supposed, in those perilous times, when Britain was alarmed by foreign
invasions, or bled with intestine wounds. -- It was covered all around with
elder shrubs, whose ranks, gradually rising and spreading shade above shade,
composed a kind of woody theater, through which were struck two or three spiral
walks, leading, by a gentle ascent, and under embowering verdure, to the
summit. -- At proper intervals, and on every side of the hill, were formed
little arbours, with appertures cut through the boughs, to admit a prospect of
the country. -- In one or other of these leafy boxes, you command, at every
hour of the day, either the enlivening sun, or the refreshing shade. -- All
along the circling avenues, and all arounds the rests sprung daffodils,
primroses and violets; which, mingling with hyacinths and cowslips, composed
many a charming piece of natural Mosaic.

How agreeable as they climb and wind themselves round the hill, to reflect on
the happy change, which has now taken place! Where steely helmets gleamed, or
brazen shields clashed, the Goldfinches twitter their loves, and display their
painted plumes. The dens of rapine, or the horrid haunts of bloodshed, are
become the retreats of calm contemplation, and friendly converse. -- In yonder
lower spaces, where the armed troops were wont to patrole; from whence they
made excursions to ravage the villages, or terrify the swains; the Fallow-Deers
trip lightly, or the full-headed Stags stand at bay.

From a small eminence, but at a considerable distance, gushed a couple of
springs, which, rambling through a grove, lost one another in the shady
labyrinth. Emerging at length from the gloom, they approached nearer and
neater, and sell into embraces at the foot of this hill. They rolled in
amicable conjunction along the pebbly channel, which incircles its basis, and
added their sober melody to the sprightly warbling of the birds. Flowing off in
one common stream, they formed the fine pieces of water which beautified the
Park. From thence, they stole into the meadow, and widened into a River: there,
enamoured as it were with each other, they glide by wealthy towns, and sweep
through flowery vales, regardless of the blooming toys which deck the one, and
of the noisy crowds which throng the other.

So said Aspasio, may Thereon and his Selima pleasing and pleased with each
other, pass through the busy and the amusing scenes of life: neither captivated
by the one, nor anxious for the other. With such harmonious agreement, and
indissoluble union, may they pursue the course marked out by providence, their
happiness increasing, and their usefulness enlarging, as they draw nearer the
ocean of all good: then, parted by a gentle stroke of death, like the waters of
some ample stream severed by the piers of an intervening bridge, may they
speedily reunite! Reunite in consumate bliss, and never, never be separated
more.

A DESCRIPTION OF AN ARBOR AND CURIOUS FOUNTAIN IN THERON'S GARDEN.
STRONG and substantial plants of liburnum formed the shell, while the slender
and flexile shoots of syringa filled up the interstices. -- Was it to
compliment, as well as to accommodate their worthy guests, that the shrubs
interwove the luxuriant foliage? was it to represent those tender but close
attachments, which had united their affections, and blended their interests? --
I will not too positively ascribe such a design to the disposition of the
branches. They composed, however, by their twining embraces, no inexpressive
emblem of the endearments and the advantages of friendship. They composed a
canopy of the freshest verdure, and of the thickest texture; so thick, that it
entirely excluded the sultry ray, and shed both a cool refreshment, and an
amusive gloom, while every unsheltered tract glared with light, or sainted with
heat.

You enter by an easy ascent of steps, lined with turf, and fenced with a
balustrade of sloping bay-trees. -- The roof was a fine concave, peculiarly
elevated and stately. Not embossed with sculpture, not mantled over with
fret-work, but far more delicately adorned with the syringa's silver tusts, and
the liburnum's flowering gold; whose large and lovely clusters, gracefully
pendent from the leafy dome, disclosing their sweets to the delighted be, and
gently waving to the balmy breath of spring, gave the utmost enrichment to the
charming bower.

Facing the entrance lay a spacious grassy walk, terminated by an octangular
basin, with a curious Jet d' Eau playing in the center. The waters, spinning
from the lower orifices, were attenuated into innumerable little threads, which
dispersed themselves in an horizontal direction, and returned to the reservoir
in a drizling shower. Those, which issued from the higher tubes, and larger
appertures, either springed perpendicularly, or spouted obliquely, and formed,
as they fell, several lofty arches of liquid crystal, all glittering to the
eye, and cooling to the air.

Parallel to the walk, ran a parterre, planted with an assemblage of flowers,
which advanced, one above another, in regular gradations of height, of dignity,
and of beauty. First a row of daisies, gay as the sinile of youth, and fair as
the virgin snows. -- Next a range of crocuses, like a long stripe of yellow
satin, quilted with threads, or diversified with sprigs of green. A superior
order of ranunculuses, each resmebling the cap of an earl's coronet,
replenished the third story, with full-blown tufts of glossy scarlet. -- Beyond
this, a more elevated line of tulips raised their flourished heads, and opened
their enameled cups; not bedecked with a single tint only, but glowing with an
intermingled variety of radiant hues. Above all arose that noble ornament of a
royal escutcheon, the flowerde-luce, bright with etherial blue, and grand with
imperial purple; which formed, by its graceful projections, a cornice or a
capital of more than Corinthian richness, and imparted the most consummate
beauty to the blooming colonade.

The whole, viewed from the arbor, looked like a rainbow painted upon the
ground, and wanted nothing to rival that resplendent arch, only the boldness of
its sweep, and the advantage of its ornamental curve.

ANOTHER VIEW OF THERON'S PLEASURE GROUNDS AND HERMETICAL RETREAT, WITH A
DESCRIPTION OF NOON.
THEREON and Aspasio enter a spacious lawn, which lay opposite to the house, and
opened itself in the form of an expanded fan. The mounds, on either side, were
dressed in verdure, and ran out in a stanting direction. The whole, to an eye
placed at a distance, bore the resemblance of a magnificent vista, contracting,
by slow degrees, its dimensions, and lessening, at last, into a point, which
the regular and graceful seat, with all imaginable dignity, supplied.

Nature had sunk the lawn into a gentle decline, on whose ample sides were oxen
brov, zing, and lambs frisking. The lusty droves lowed as they passed, and the
thriving flocks bleated welcome music in their master's ear. Along the midst of
this verdant slope was stretched a spacious and extensive walk; which, coated
with gravel, and fenced with pallisadoes, looked like a plain stripe of brown,
intersecting a carpet of the brightest green. At the bottom, two handsome
canals, copiously stocked with fish, sometimes stood unmoved, "pure as the
expanse of Heaven." The waters, beheld from every room in the house, had a fine
effect upon the sight, not without a refreshing influence on the imagination.
-- At the extremity of one, was planted a stately c^l^nade: the roof elevated
on pillars of the Ionic order; the area slabbed with stones, neatly ranged in
the diamond fashion. Several forest-chairs accommodated the anglers with a
seat, while the bending dome supplied them with a shade.

Corresponding, and on the margin of the other canal, was erected a
summer-bouse, of a vey singular kind. -- The lower part had an opening toward
the north; it was cool, it was gloomy, and had never seen the sun. It carried
the romantic air of a grotto, or rather the pensive appearance of a hermit's
cell. The outside was coarse and rugged, with pertuberant stones; partly
overspread with ivy, partly with moss, it seemed to be the work of ancient
years. You descend by steps of turf, and are obliged to stoop as you pass the
door. A scanty iron grate, with certain narrow slits in the wall, transmit a
glimmering light, just sufficient to discover the inner structure, which
appears like one continued piece of rock-work, a cavern cut from the
surrounding quarry. -- Above hung an irregular arch with an aspect that seemed
to presage the fall, and more than seemed to alarm the stranger. Below lay a
paving of homely pebbles, in some places a little furrowed, as though it had
been worn by the frequent tread of solitary feet. All ar ound were rusticity
and solemnity; solemnity never more visibly seen than through a gloom. -- The
furniture all of the same grotiesque fashion with the apartment. A bench hewed,
you would suspect, by nature's chi^sel, out of the solid stone. A sort of
couch, composed of swelling moss, and small fibrous roots. -- From one corner
trickled a pure spring, which crept, with a bubbling moan, a^ong the channeled
floor, till its current was collected into a basin, rudely scoped from the
ground. On the edge of this little receptacle, lay chained a rusty bowl; and
over it stood an antique worm-eaten table. -- On the least obscure part of the
wall you discern, dimly discern, a parchment scroll, inscribed with that sage
but mortifying admonition, " Vanity of vanities! all is vanity!"

Over this recess, so pleasingly horrid, and adapted to solemn musings, arose an
open and airy Belviders. You ascend by winding stairs, and coming from the
uncouth abode below, are sweetly surprised with an elegant hexagon. -- The
ceiling lofty, and decorated with the softest, richest, almost flowing
fretwork. The wainscot, in large pannels of oak, retained its native auburn; so
beautifully plain, that, like an amiable countenance, it would have been
disfigured, rather than improved, by the most costly paint. On this were
disposed, in gilded frames, and to great advantage, a variety of entertaining
landscapes; but none surpassed, none equalled, all were a foil to the noble
lovely views which the windows commanded. The chimney-piece, of white shining
marble, streaked with veins of vivid red. Over it was carved a fine festoon of
artisicial, in it was ranged a choice collection of natural flowers. -- On a
table of glossy walnut, lay a portable telescope, attended with Thomson's
Seasons and Vanierii Pr^^dium Rusticum.

The whole was fitted up in the highest taste, and furnished with every
pleasurable ornament; on purpose to harmonize with that lavish gaity, which
seemed to smile over all the face of nature; on purpose to correspond with that
vernal delight which came breathing on the wings of every fragrant gale; I may
add, on purpose to remind the beholder of those immortal mansions, which are
decorated with images, infinitely more splendid, with objects unspeakably more
glorious; where holy beings will spend, not a few vacant hours in refined
amusement, but a boundless eternity in the consummation of joy. -- For, to a
well-turned mind, nature is a preceptor, and these are he instructive lessons.
To the pure in heart, even sense is edifying, and these are its most delicate
moralities.

The redundant waters of the canal rolled off in a spreading cascade; which,
tumbling from many a little precipice, soothed the air with a symphony of soft
and gurgling sounds; for ever intermitted the obliging office.

"From morn to room, from noon to dewy eve". But when the fanning breezes dropped
their wings, when the feathered choir were hushed in sleep, when not so much as
a chirping grasshopper was heard throughout the meads, this liquid instrument
played its solo; still pursued its busy way, and warbled, as it flowed
melodious murmurs.

The sun was fiercely bright, and the sky without a cloud. Not a breath fanned
the woods, not a gale curled the stream. -- The fields exposed to all the fiery
beams, were like a glowing hearth. -- The little brids, overcome by the potent
influence, lost for a while their tuneful notes. Nothing was heard in the
garden but the drowsy hum of bees, and the moan-like buz of winged insects. --
All nature seemed to languish. The flourishing meads looked sickly, the gayest
blossoms began to fade, the sprightliest animals, if not reposed under some
cooling shelter panted for breath, and hung their drooping heads amidst the
allsurrounding blaze and the unsusferable heat.

THERON'S RURAL ELOPEMENT DESCRIBED.
THEREON, as soon as the tea-equipage was removed, took his way, to the wood.
Longing for the thickest shade, he hastened to the center. The avenue,
consisting of a serpentine walk, which, after having presented you with several
species of plants, and several degrees of verdure, ends in a large circular
area; not covered with a Grecian or Roman temple, unmeaning imitation of Pagan
idolatry, but surrounded with aged and princely oaks, the coalition of whose
branches, threw over the grassy plot a majestic rural dome, and their unpierced
foliage "imbrowned the noontide hours."

In the midst, and elevated on a square base, was a statue representing the
venerable Elijah, in a posture of worship, with his hands stretched out, and
eyes listed up to Heaven. His attitude, his air, his every seature, were a most
lively comment on those strong, energetic expressions of scripture; "take hold
on GOD; wrestle with the ALMIGHTY; pour out your hearts before HIM." -- On one
side of the pedestal were engraven the priests of Baal, in frantic emotions
calling upon their senseless deity, and gashing themselves with unavailing
wounds. -- On the other was exhibited, in basso-relievo, the adorable
Tishbite's altar; his victim burning with fire from the Lord, even while the
water ran from every limb, and overflowed the trench below.

A remote cascade tumbled from a craggy rock. The very stream, like its master
seemed in haste to escape from the intense and raging heat. With hurry and
impetuosity it rushed into this grand arbor. But here, impressed as it were,
with the unexpected solemnity of the scene, it suddenly checked the tumultuous
wave: and having just saluted or kissed the skirts of this revered spot, turned
aside into a more sequestered path. As some heedless trifler who bolts unawares
into the royal presence, stands struck with reverence and awe, or retires with
precipitance and confusion.

The deep gloom, shedding a kind of night, even while the sun glared in the
sky. -- Not a whisper stirring, among so many millions of leaves, and all their
warbling natives hushed in silence. The sonorous toll of the distant cascade,
and the tinkling chime of the nearer rill. The profound adoration and fervent
devotion, which lived in the lineaments of the impassioned stone. -- All these
circumstances rendered the place peculiarly pensive and august. Not much unlike
the ancient oratories, where holy people withdrew from the giddy ring, and the
bustling crowd, to ennoble their minds with sublime contemplation; where they
bid a temporary adieu to the tumultuous world, its gay impertinence, in order
to maintain a more uninterrupted communion with that mighty Being, "who sits
upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers
before him."

THEREON AND ASPASIO'S CONVERSATION ON THE BEAUTIES OF NATURE.
THE morning had been wet. At noon the rain ceased, but the heavens still
continued gloomy. -- Toward evening a gentle eastern gale sprung up, which
dissipated the dead calm, and cleared the face of the sky. -- The sun, which
had been muffled in clouds, dropped the veil. Disengaged from the dusky shroud,
he shone forth with superior splendour. His beams, endeared by their late
suspension, were doubly welcome, and produced unusual gaiety.

At this juncture, Thereon and Aspasio walked abroad. They walked alternately on
the terraces, one of which was opposite to the country, the other contiguous to
the parterre, where the gales, impregnated with the freshest exhalations of
nature, breathed the smells of meads, and fields, and groves; or else, shaking
the clusters of roses, and sweeping the beds of fragrance, they flung balm and
odours through the air.

At a distance were heard the bleatings of the flock, mingled with the lowings
of the milky mothers, while more melodious music warbled from the neighboring
boughs, and spoke aloud the joy of their feathered inhabitants; and not only
spoke their joy, but spread an additional charm over all the landscape. For,
amidst such strains of native harmony, the breathing perfumes smell more sweet,
the streaming rills shine more clear, and the universal prospect looks more gay.

Then was experienced what Milton so delicately describes;

"As when, from mountain-tops the dusky clouds
"Ascending, while the north wind sleeps, overspread
"Heaven's cheerful face, the lowering element
"Scowl's over the darkened land escape snow or shower;
"If chance the radiant sun, with farewell sweet,
"Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
"The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
"^^est their joy, that hill and valley rings."
With wonder and delight our friends observed both the exquisite beauty and the
immense magnificence of things. They were struck with the most profound
veneration of that Almighty majesty, who hung the sun in vaults of azure, and
clothed his orb with robes of luster. Whose "right hand spanneth the Heavens,
and stretched them out as a tent," for innumerable creatures, worlds, and
systems to dwell in. -- Charmed they were at the consideration of the Creator's
boundless beneficence; who lifts up the light of his countenance, and joy is
shed; who opens his munificent hand, and plenty is poured throughout all the
regions of the universe; insomuch, that even inanimate beings seem to smile
under a sense of the blessings; and, though they find not a tongue to praise,
yet speak their acclamations by their gladdened looks.

THERON'S MORAL SOLILOQUY ON THE BENEFITS OF RURAL SOLITUDE.
THE sky was peculiarly beautiful, and perfectly clear; only where the fine
indigo received an agreeable heightening by a few thin and scattered clouds,
which imbibed the solar rays, and looked like pensile fleeces of purest wool.
-- All things appeared with so mild, so majestic, so charming an aspect, that,
intent as Thereon was upon a different subject, he could not but indulge the
following soliloquy.

"How delightful are the scenes of rural nature! especially to the philosophic
eye and contemplative mind. -- I cannot wonder that persons in high life are so
fond of retiring from a conspicuous and exalted station, to the covert of a
shady grove, or the margin of a crystal stream: are so desirous of quitting
the smoaky town, and noisy street, in order to breath purer air, and survey the
wonders of creation in the silent, the serene, the peaceful villa.

"'It Is true in the country, there are none of the modish, I had almo^^ said,
meritricious ornaments of that false politeness, which refines people out of
their veracity, but an easy simplicity of manners, with an unaffected sincerity
of mind. -- Here the solemn farce of ceremony is seldom brought into play, and
the pleasing delusions of compliment have no place; but the brow is the real
index of the temper, and speech the genuine interpreter of the heart.

"In the country, I acknowledge, we are seldom invited to see the mimic
attempts of human art; but we, every where, behold the grand and masterly
exertions of divine power. -- No theater erects its narrow stage, sour rounds
it with puny rows of ascending seats, or adorns it with a shifting series of
gorgeous scenery. But fields extend their ample area, at first lightly clad
with a scarf of springing green, then deeply planted with an arrangement of
spindling stalks; as a few more weeks advance, covered with a profusion of
bearded or husky grain, at last richly laden with a harvest of yellow plenty.

" Meadows disclose their beautiful bosom, yield a soft and fertile lap for the
luxriant herbage, and suckle myriads of the fairest, gayest flowers; which,
without any vain ostenation, or jealous anxiety, rival each other in all the
elegance of dress, -- Groves of various leaf, arrayed in freshest verdure, and
liberal of their reviving shade, rise in amiable, in noble prospect, all
around. -- Droves of ^urdy oxen, strong for labor, or fat for the shambles;
herds of sleeky kine, with milk in their udders, and violets in their nostrils;
flocks of well fleeced sheep, with their snowy lambkins frisking at their side;
these compose the living machinery. Boundless tracts of bending azure,
varnished with inimitable delicacy, and hung with starry lamps, or irradiated
with solar luster form the stately ceiling. -- While the early breezes and the
evening gales, charged with no unwholesome vapors, breeding no pestilential
taint, but fanning the humid buds, and waving their odoriferous wings, dispense
a profusion of sweets, mingled with the most sovereign supports of health. --
This is the school of industry! this the magazine of plenty! and are they not
incomparably more delightful, as well as infinitely less dangerous then those
seminaries of lewdness and impiety, where sin and ruin wear the mask of
pleasure? than those temples of prosusness and debauchery, where Belial is
daily or nightly worshipped with what his votaries call, modish recreation, and
genteel amusement?

"Here, indeed, is no tuneful veice to melt in strains of amorous anguish, and
transfuse the sickening fondness to the hearer's breast. No skilful artist to
inform the lute with musical enchantment; to strike infectious melody from the
viol, and sooth away the resolution and activity of virtue, in wanton desires,
or voluptuous indolence. -- But the plains low, the hills bleat, and the hollow
circling rocks echo with the universal song. Every valley remurmurs to the fall
of silver fountains, or the liquid lapse of gurgling rills. -- Birds, when the
cheerful morning rises, or the g^ntle evening descends, perched on a thousand
boughs, play a thousand airs, wildly, yet sweetly, harmonious. And did ever
music exceed their untaught sprightly warblings? or can any colors outvie
their gay and glossy plumage?

"Charmed, therefore, with the sinest views, lulled with the softest sounds,
and treated with the richest odours, what can be wanting to complete the
delight? here is every entertainment for the eye, the most refined
gratification for the ear, and a perpetual banquet for the smell, without any
insidious decoy, for the integrity of our conduct, or even for the purity of
our fancy.

"O ye blooming walks and flowery lawns surrounded with dewy landscapes? how
often have patriots and heroes laid aside the burden of power, and stole away
from the glare of grandeur, to enjoy themselves in your composed retreats! --
ye mossy couches and fragrant bowers, skirted with cooling cascades! how many
illustrious personages, after all their glorious toil for the public good, have
sought an honorable and welcome repose in your downy lap? ye venerable oaks and
solemn groves! woods that whisper to the quivering gale! clifts that overhang
the darkened flood! who can number the sages and saints that have devoted the
day to study, or resigned a vacant hour to healthy exercise beneath your sylvan
van portices and waving arches? that, far from the dull impertinence of man,
have listened to the instructive voice of God, and contemplated the works of
his ^dorable hand, amidst your moss-grown cells and rocky shades? -- How
inelegani, or how insensible is the mind, which has no awakened lively relish
for these sweet recesses and their exquisite beauties!"

A DESCRIPTION OF CAMILLUS'S GARDENS, AND THE BEAUTIFUL PROSPECT FROM HIS
SUMMER HOUSE.
THEREON and Aspasio walked several times along a close shady alley, arched with
the foliage of filberts. Here, hid from every eye, and the whole world
withdrawn from our view, we seemed like monks strolling in their cloisters. --
Turning short at the and, we enter a parallel range of majestic and uniformly
spreading walnut-trees. This transition was somewhat like advancing through a
low porch into the aisles of a magnificent cathedral. The broad leaf and large
trunk of those lordly trees, their very diffusive spread, added to their
prodigious height, give them an air of uncommon dignity. It swells the
imagination with vast ideas, and entertains us with a romantic kind of delight,
to expatiate amidst such huge columns, and under such superb elevations of
living architecture.

Quitting our cathedral, we turn once aagain, and pass into a grand colonade of
oaks; so regular in their situation, so similar in their size, and so
remarkably correspondent in every circumstance, that they looked like the twins
of nature, not only belonging to the same family, but produced at the same
birth. -- Through these lay a walk, straight, spacious, and gracefully long;
far exceeding the last in the extent of its area, though much inferior in the
stateliness of its ceiling. It put me in mind of that divine benignity, which
has allowed us the space of six days for the prosecution of our own
comparatively low affairs, and set apart but one in seven for the more
immediate attendance on the sublime duty of worshipping our Creator.

This walk was covered with the neatest gravel, and not a weed to be seen, nor
one blade of grass, through the whole extended surface. It stole into a
continual ascent; yet so very gradually, that the rise was scarce discernable,
either by the searching eye, the toiling feet, or the panting breath. -- At the
extremity, a handsome summer house showed a flight of steps, and half a
Venetian door. The rest of the building was hid by the low hung clustering
branches.

As soon as we enter the apartment, Camillus throws open the left hand sash,
and with it a most enlarged and amusive prospect. -- The structure appeared
situate on the brow of a considerable eminence, whose sides were partly
confused and wild with broken rocks, partly shagged and perplexed with thorny
shrubs. The spectator is agreeably surprised to find himself accommodated with
so elegant a mansion, on the summit of so rude and ruinous a spot. -- But how
greatly is his surprise and his satisfaction augmented, when he casts his eye
forward, and beholds the beautiful meads, which, from the foot of this ragged
hill, stretch themselves into a space almost unmeasurable^

Through the midst of this extensive vale, which was decked with the finest
verdure, and replenished with the richest herbage, a river rolled its copious
flood; rolled, in a thousand serpentine meanders, as though it was loath to
leave the flowery scene, and made repeated efforts to prolong its stay amidst
such lovely objects. -- Till, at last, having loitered in its own labyrinths,
and wandered more than twice the length of the meadows, having held a mirror to
the aspiring poplars and bending willows, having paid a welcome salute to
several ornamental villas, and passed through the arches of two or three
curiously pendent bridges; it seemed to meet the sky, and mingle with the
horizon.

Opposite to the front window, a cascade fell from the adjacent stream. It
flashed and foamed along the broad slope, indented with small pits, and jagged
with protuberant stones. The current, vexed and embarrassed, seemed to rave at
the intervening obstacles, and forcing its rapid, indignant, sonorous way,
struck the ear with a peal of liquid thunder. These fretful waters, let our
angry passions observe the admonition, and follow the example, soon forgot
their rage, soon recovered their temper: collected into a little rivulet, they
ran off in calm and silent lapse, till they lost themselves amongst beds of
osier, and plantations of alder.

The river, widening as it flowed, was parted here and there by several little
islands. Scattered as it were, by the hand of chance, and raising their green
heads in the midst of the lucid stream, they presented a most unexpected, and
most pleasing spectacle. Some were tusted with reeds, and surrounded with rocks
and shoals, the unmolested resort of swans. Some adorned with stately porticos
and splendid alcoves, the graceful retreats of rural pleasure. One, larger than
the rest, seemed to be furnished with cool embowering walks, fitted for
studious retirement, or sedate contemplation. -- On either side of the charming
valley, towns and villages lay thick, and looked gay, adding ornament and
variety to the scene, and receiving innumerable advantages from the passing
wave.

DESCRIPTION OF THE VARIOUS CHANGES OF NATURE, AND THEIR EFFECTS ON THE
NATURAL, AS WELL AS MORAL WORLD.
WHEN day arises on our benighted hemisphere, it breaks and spreads by a
gradual increase, forming, first, the gray twilight, next the blushing morn,
then the shining light, till all is heightened into the blaze and glow of noon.
-- When Spring revisits our wintry clime, she also advances by gentle degrees;
first, swells the bud, and protrudes the gem; then expands the leaf, and
unfolds the blossom. The face of things is continually changing for the bet
ter, till at length all the country is covered with bloom and verdure. -- This
leisurely process, renders the strong effulgence of the celestial orb more
supportable, and the lovely expansions of the vegetable creation more
observable.

All the entertainments of nature are calculated to secure our innocence, as
well as to gratify our fancy; and what is another very agreeable circumstance,
those gratifications which afford the sublimest pleasure to the mind, are
exhibited gratis.

THERON'S EVENING MEDITATIONS ON ASPASIO'S DISCOURSE.
THE last evening was one of the finest I ever saw. According to custom I made
an excursion into the open fields, and wanted nothing to complete the
satisfaction, but my friend's company. I could not but observe how much your
improving conversation heightened the charms of nature. When religion applied
philosophy, every thing was instructive, as well as pleasing. -- Not a breeze
swept over the plains to clear the sky, and cool the air; but it tended also to
disperse our doubts, and enliven our faith in the Supreme All-sufficient Good.
-- Not a cloud tinged the firmament with radiant colors, or amused the sight
with romantic shapes, but we beheld a picture of the present world. Its fading
acquisitions and fantastic joys were pourtrayed in the mimic forms and
transitory scene. -- Even the weakest of the insect tribe, that skim the air in
sportive silence, addressed us with the strongest incitements, and gave us the
loudest calls to be active in our day, and useful in our generation. They
cried, at least when you lent them your tongue,

"Such is vain life, an idle flight of days,
"A still delusive round of sickly joys,
"A scene of little cares, and trifling passions,
"If not ennobled by the deeds of virtue."
How often, at the approach of sober eve, have we sauntered through the dusky
glade, observing the last remains of light, now impurpling the western clouds,
now faintly gleaming on the mountain's brow, now creeping insensibly from all
the shady landscape. -- How often have we stole along the cloisters of some
leafy bower, attentive to the tale of a querulcus current, that seemed to be
struck with horror at the awful gloom, and complained with heavier murmurs as
it passed under the blackening shades, and along the root-obstructed channel.
-- Or else, far from the bubbling brook, and softly treading the grassy path,
we listened to the nightingale's song; while every gale held its breath, and
all the leaves forbore their n:otion, that they might neither drown nor
interrupt the melodious woe. -- From both which pensive strains, you
endeavored to temper and chas^se the exuberant gaiety of my spirits. You
covinced me that true joy is a serious thing; is the child of sedate thought,
not the spawn of intemperate mirth; nursed, not by the sallies of dissolute
merriment, but by the exercise of serene contemplation.

Sometimes at the gladsome return of morn, we have ascended an airy eminence,
and hailed the newborn day, gazed the dew-bright earth, and followed, with our
delighted eve, the mazes of some glittering stream. -- Here, rushing with
impetuous fury over the mountain's summits, tumbling from rock to rock, and
roaring down the craggy sleep. Impatient, as it were, to get free from such
rugged paths, and mingle itself with the adjacent mead. -- There, slackening
its headlong carcor, and soothing its eddies into a glassy surface, and a
gentle flow. While deep embosomed in they ^dant soil, it winds through the
cherished and smiling herbage; sometimes lost amidst the closing willows,
sometimes issuing with fresh luster from the verdant arch, always roving with
an air of amorous complacency, as though it would kiss the fringed banks, and
caress the flowery glebe. -- Reminded, by this watery monitor, of that constancy
and vigor with which the affections should move toward the great center of
happiness, Christ Jesus, -- of that determined ardour with which we should
break through the entanglements of temptation, and obstacles of the world, in
order to reach our everlasting rest -- and of the mighty difference between the
turbulent, the frothy, the precipitate gratifications of vice, and the calm,
the substantial, the permanent delights of religion.

DESCRIPTION OF A COUNTRY CHURCH.
IT was an ancient pile; reared by hands, that, ages ago, were mouldered into
dust; situate in the center of a large burial ground; remote from all the noise
and hurry of tumultuous life; the body spacious; the structure lofty; the whole
magnificently plain. A row of regular pillars extended themselves through the
midst; supporting the roof with fimplicity, and with dignity. The light that
passed through the windows, seemed to shed a kind of luminous obscurity, which
gave every object a grave and venerable air. -- The deep silence, added to the
gloomy aspect, and both heightened by the loneliness of the place, greatly
increased the solemnity of the scene. -- A sort of religious dread stole
insensibly on my mind, while I advanced, all pensive and thoughtful, along the
inmost aisle: such a dread, as hushed every ruder passion, and dissipated all
the gay images of an alluring world.

Meditations among the Tombs.

^ MORAL BEAUTIES: ^ MEDITATIONS.
^
EXAMINING the records of mortality, I found the memorials of a promiscuous
multitude. They were huddled, at least they rested, together, without any
regard to rank or seniority. None were ambitious of the uppermost rooms, or
chief seats in this house of mourning. None entertained sond and eager
expe^tations of being honorably greeted, in their darksome cells. The man of
years and experience, reputed as an orcale in his generation, was content to
lie down at the seet of a babe. In this house appointed for all living, the
servant was equally accommodated, and lodged in the same story, with his
master. The poor indigent lay as softly, and ^^^pt as soundly, as the most
opulent possessor. All the distinction that subsisted, was a grassy hillock,
^^^nd ^^th of^ers; or a sepulchral stone, ^^n^^^^ted with imagery.

THE SEPULCHRE'S PERTINENT ADDR^^S TO MAN.
BE ye always ready: for in such an hour as ye think not -- Important
admonition! methinks it reverberates from sepulcher to sepulcher; and addresses
me with line upon line, precept upon precept. -- The reiterated warning, I
acknowledge, is too needful; may cooperating grace render it effectual! The
momentous truth, though worthy to be engraven on the tables of a most tenacious
memory, is but slightly sketched on the transient flow of passion. We see our
neighbors fall; we turn pale at the shock; and feel, perhaps a trembling
dread. No sooner are they removed from our sight, but, driven in the whill of
business or lulled in the langours of pleasure, we forget the providence, and
neglect its errand. The impression made on our unstable minds, is like the
trace of an arrow, through the penetrated air; or the path of a keel in the
furrowed wave.

AN AFFECTING REPRESENTATION OF A DYING CHRISTIAN, WITH THE SORROW OF HIS
FAMILY.
THERE lies the affectionate husband; the indulgent parent; the faithful
friend; and the generous master. He lies in the last extremities, and on the
very point of dissolution. Art has done its all. The raging disease mocks the
power of medicine. It hastens with resistless impetuosity, to execute its
dreadful errand; to rend asunder the silver cord of life, and the more delicate
tie of social attachment, and conjugal affection.

A servant or two, from a revering distance, cast many a wishful look, and
condole their honored master, in the language offighs. The condescending
mildness of his commands, was wont to produce alacrity of obedience, and render
their service a pleasure. The remembrance of it both embitters their grief, and
makes it trickle plentifully down their honest cheeks. His friends, who have so
often shared his joys, and gladdened his mind with their enlivening converse,
now are miserable comforters. A sympathising and mournful pity, is all the
relief they are able to contribute; unless it be augmented by their silent
prayers for the ^^vine succor, and a word of consolation suggested from the
Scriptures. Those poor innocents, the children crowd around the bed; drowned in
tears, and almost frantic with grief, they sob out their little souls, and
passionately cry, "Will he leave us? leave us in a helpless condition^ leave us
to an injurious world"

A LIVELY PICTURE OF A TENDER WIFE, MOURNING THE EXPECTED LOSS OF AN INDULGENT
HUSBAND.
IN her, the lover weeps; the wife mourns; and all the mother yearns. To her,
the loss is beyond measure aggravated, by months and years of delightful
society, and exalted friendship. -- Where, alas! can she meet with such
unsuspected fidelity, or repose such unreserved considence? where find so
discreet a counselor; so improving an example; and a guardian so sedulously
attentive to the interests of herself, and her children? -- See how she hangs
over the languishing bed; most tenderly solicitous to prolong a life, important
and desirable far beyond her own. Or, if that be impracticable, no less
tenderly officious to sooth the last agonies of her dearer self. -- Her hands,
trembling under direful apprehensions, wipe the cold dews from the livid
cheeks; and sometimes stay the sinking head on her gentle arms, sometimes rest
it on her compassionate bosom. -- See! how she gazes, with a speechless ardor,
on the pale countenance, and meagre features. Speechless her ton^^^ but she
looks unutterable things. W^^^ all her soft passions throb with unavailing
fondness and her soul bleeds with exquisite anguish.

AN INTERESTING DESCRIPTION OF A GOOD MAN IN THE VIEWS OF DEATH.
THE sufferer, all patient and adoring, submits to the divine will; and, by
submission, becomes superior to his affliction. He is sensibly touched with the
disconsolate state of his attendants; and pierced with an anxious concern for
his wife and his children. His wise who will soon be a destitute widow; his
children, who will soon be helpless orphans. Yet, though cast down, not in
despair. He is greatly refreshed, by his trust in the everlasting covenant, and
his hope of approaching glory. Religion gives a dignity to distress. At each
interval of ease, he comforts his very comforters, and suffers with all the
majesty of woe.

The soul, just going to abandon the tottering clay, collects all her force,
and exerts her last efforts. The good man raises himself on his pillow; extends
a kind hand to his servants, which is bathed in tears; takes an affecting
farewell of his friends; clasps his wife in a feeble embrace; kisses the dear
pledges of their mutual love; and then pours out all that remains of life and
of strength, in the following words; -- I die my dear children: but GOD, the
everlasting GOD, will be with you. -- Though you lose an earthly parent, you
have a Father in Heaven who lives for evermore. -- Nothing, nothing but an
unbelieving heart, and irreligi ous life, can ever separate you from the
regards of his providence -- from the endearments of his love.

He could proceed no farther. His heart was full; but utterance failed. --
After a short pause, with difficulty, great difficulty, he added; -- You the
dear partner of my soul, you are now the only protector of our orphans. -- I
leave you under a weight of cares. -- But GOD, who defends the cause of the
widow -- GOD, whose promise is faithfulness and truth -- God has said I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee -- This revives my drooping spirits -- Let
this support the wife of my bosom -- And now, O Father of compassions, into thy
hands I commend my spirit -- encouraged by thy promised goodness, I leavemy
fatherless. --

Here he fainted; sell back upon the bed; and lay, for some minutes, berest of
his senses. As a taper, upon the very point of extinction, is sometimes
suddenly rekindled, and leaps into a quivering flame: so life, before it
totally expired, gave a parting struggle, and once more looked abroad from the
opening eye lids. -- He would fain have spoke; fain have uttered the sentence,
he began. More than once he essayed; but the organs of his speech were become
like a broken vessel, and nothing but the obstructing phlegm rattled in his
throat. His aspect, however, spoke asfection inexpressible. With all the
sather, all the husband still living in his looks; he takes one more view of
those dear children, whom he had so often beheld with a parental triumph. He
turnshis dying eyes on that beloved woman, whom he never beheld but with a glow
of delight. Fixed in this posture, amidst smiles of love, and under a gleam of
Heaven, he shines out his last.

THE CHAMBERS OR THE TOMB POURTRAYED.
YONDER entrance leads, I suppose to the vault. Let me turn aside, and take one
view of the habitation, and its tenants. The sullen door grates upon its
hinges; not used to receive many visitants, it admits me with reluctance, and
murmurs. -- What means this sudden trepidation; while I descend the steps,
and am visiting the pale nations of the dead? -- Be composed my spirits, there
is nothing to fear in these quiet chambers. Here, even the wicked cease from
troubling.

A beam or two finds its way through the grates, and reflects a feeble glimmer
from the nails of the coffins. So many of those sad spectacles, half concealed
in shades, half feen dimly by the baleful twilight, add a deeper hortor to
these gloomy mansions. -- I pore upon the inscriptions, and arn just able to
pick out, that these are the remains of the rich and renowned. No vulgar dead
are deposited here. The most illustrious and right honorable have claimed this
for their last retreat. And, indeed, they retain somewhat of a shadowy
pre-eminence. They lie, ranged in mournful order, and in a sort of silent pomp,
under the arches of an ample sepulcher; while meaner corpses. without much
ceremony, "go down to the stones of the pit.

THE TOMB KNOWS NO DISTINCTIONS OF TITLES OR ESTATES.
THOSE who received vast revenues, and called whole lordships their own, are
here reduced to half a dozen feet of earth, or confined in a few sheets of
lead. Rooms of state, and sumptuous furniture, are resigned for no other
ornament than the shroud, for no other apartment than the darksome niche. --
Where is the star that blazed upon the breast, or coronet that glittered round
the temples? the only remains of departed dignity are, the weather-beaten
hatchment, and the tattered escutcheon. I see no splendid retinue surrounding
this solitary dwelling. The lordly equipage hovers no longer about the lifeless
master. -- He has no other attendant than a dusty statue; which while the
regardless world is as gay as ever, the sculptor's hand has taught to weep.

IMPORTANT LESSONS TAUGHT BY THE TOMBS OF NOBLES.
I THANK you, ye relics of sounding titles and magnificent names. Ye have
taught me more of the littleness of the world, than all the volumes of my
library. Your nobility arrayed in a winding sheet; your grandeur mouldering in
an urn; are the most indisputable proofs of the nothing^^s of created things.
Never, surely, did Providence write this important point in such legible
characters as in the ashes of my lord, or on the corpse of his grace.

THE BENEFITS OR FAITH IN THE SON OF GOD.
OYE timorous souls, that are terrified at the sound of the passing bell; that
turn pale at the sight of an opened grave, and can scarce behold a coffin or a
skull, without a shuddering horror: ye that are in bondage to the grisly
tyrant, and tremble at the shaking of his iron rod, cry mightly to the father
of your spirits, for faith in his dear Son. Faith will free you from your
slavery. Faith will embolden you to tread on (this fiercest of) serpents. Old
Simeon clasping the child Jesus in the arms of his flesh, and the glorious
Mediator in the arms of his faith, departs with tranquillity and peace. That
bitter persecutor Saul, having won Christ, being found in Christ, longs to be
dismissed from cumbrous clay, and kindles into rapture at the prospect of
dissolution.

A PICTURESQUE DESCRIPTION OF A SUMMER'S MORN.
THE air was cool, the earth moist, the whole face of the creation fresh and
gay. The noisy world was scarce awake. Business had not quite shook off his
found sleep, and riot had but just reclined his giddy head. All was serene; all
was still: every thing tended to inspire tranquillity of mind, and invite to
serious thought.

Only the wakeful lark had left her nest, and was mounting on high to salute
the opening day. Elevated in air, she seemed to call the laborious husbandman
to his toil, and all her fellow-songsters to their notes.

SUNRISING DESCRIBED.
THE greyness of the dawn decays gradually. Abundance of ruddy streaks tinge
the fleeces of the firmament. Till at length the dappled aspect of the east is
lost in one ardent and boundless blush.

THE USEFULNESS OF THE SUN ILLUSTRATED.
WHAT were all the realms of the world but a dungeon of darkness without the
beams of the sun? All their fine scenes hid from our view, lost in obscurity.
-- In -- In vain we roll around our eyes in the midnight gloom. In vain we
strive to behold the features of amiable nature. Turn whither we will, no form
or comeliness appears. All seems a dreary waste, an undistinguished chaos; till
the returning hours have unbarred the gates of light, and let forth the morn.
-- Then what a prospect opens: The heavens are paved with azure, and strewed
with ^^s^s. A variety of the liveliest verdure a^^^ys the plains. The flowers
put on a glow of the richest colors. The whole creation stands forth dressed
in all the charms of beauty. The ravished eye looks found and wonders.

A DESCRIPTION OF RURAL NATURE.
THE fields are covered deep, and stand thick with corn. They expand the milky
grain to the sun, while the gales, now inclining, now raising each flexile
stem, open all their ranks to the agency of his beams; which will soon impart a
firm consistence to the grain, and a glossy golden hue to the ear, that they
may be qualified to fill the barns of the husbandman with plenty, and his heart
with gladness.

Yonder lie the meadows, smoothed into a persect level; decotated with an
embroidery of the gayest flowers, and loaded with spontaneous crops of herbage.
A winding stream glides along the flowery margin, and receives the image of the
bending skies, and waters the roots of many a branching willow.

The pastures, with their verdant mounds, chequer the prospect, and prepare a
standing repast for our cattle.

On several spots, a grove of trees, like some grand colonade erects its
towering head. Every one projects a sriendly shade for the beasts, and creates
an hospitable lodging for the birds. Every one stands ready to furnish timber
for a palace, masts for a navy, or, with a more condesc^nding courtesy, fuel
for our hearths.

A FRUIT GARDEN AND AN ORCHARD IN THEIR SUMMER ARRAY
NEARER the houses, we perceive an ample spread of branches, not so starely as
the oaks, but more amiable for their annual services. A little while ago, I
beheld them, and all was one beauteous boundless waste of blossoms. But now,
the blooming maid is resigned for the useful matron. The stower is fallen, and
the fruit swells out on every twig. -- Breathe soft, ye wiads! O spare the
tender sruitage, ye surly blasts! let the pear tree suckle her juicy progeny,
till they drop into our hands, and dissolve in our mouths. Let the plumb hang
unmolested upon her boughs, till she satin her deli^ious flesh, and cloud her
polished skin with blue. And as for the apples, that staple commodity of our
orchards, let no injurious shocks precipitate them immaturely to the ground,
till revolving suns have tinged them with a ruddy complexion, and concocted
them into an exquisite flavor.

A KITCHEN GARDEN AND ITS PRODUCTS.
IOBSERVE several small enclosures, which seem to be apprehensive of some
hostile visit from the north, and, therefore, are desended on that quarter by a
thick wood, or a losty wall. At the same time, they cultivate an uninterrupted
correspondence with the south, and throw open their whole dimensions to its
friendly warmth. -- One, in particular, lies within the reach of a
distinguishing view, and proves to be a kitchen-garden. It looks, methinks,
like a plain and frugal republic. Whatever may resemble the pomp of courts, or
the ensign of royalty, is banished from this humble community. -- A skilful
hand has parcelled out the whole ground into narrow beds, and incervening
alleys. Why does the parsley with her frizzled locks shag the border; or why
the celery, with her whitning arms, perforate the mould, but to render the
soups of the owner savoury? The asparagus shoots its tapering stems, to offer
him the first fruits of the season; and the artichoke spreads its turgid top to
give him a treat of vegetable marrow. The tendrils of the cucumber creep into
the sun; and, though basking in its hottest rays, they secret for their
master, and barrel up for his use the most cooling juices of the soil. The
beans stand firm, like files of embattled troops -- the peace rest upon their
props, like so many companies of invalids, while both replenish their pods with
the fatness of the earth, on purpose to pour it on their owner's table.

NATURE AND ART CONTRASTED.
HERE nature, always pleasing, every where lovely, appears with peculiar
attractions. Yonder she seems dressed in her dishabille: grand but irregular.
Here, she calls in her handmaid art, and shines in all the delicate ornaments
which the nicest cultivation is able to convey. Those are her common apartments
where she lodges her ordinary guests; this, is her cabinet of curiosities,
where she entertains her intimate acquaintance. -- My eye shall often expatiate
over those scences of universal fertility: my feet shall sometimes brush
through the thicket, or traverse the lawn, or stroll along the forest glade;
but to this delightful retreat shall be my chief resort. Thither will I make
excursions: but here will I dwell. An instance this of Mr. Hervey's
predilection in favor of a country life.


FLOWERY BEAUTIES PLEASINGLY REPRESENTED.
WHAT colors, what charming colors are here! These, so nobly bold, and those
so delicately languid. What a glow is enkindled in some! what a gloss shines
upon others! In one, methinks, I see the ruby with her bleeding radiance; in
another, the sapphire with her sky-tinctured blue! in all, such an exquisite
richness of dies, as no other set of paintings in the universe can boast. Some
assume the monarch's purple; some look most becoming in the virgin's white; but
black, doleful black, has no admittance into the wardrobe of Spring. The weeds
of mourning would be a manifest indecorum, when nature holds an universal
festival. Here stands a warrior clad with crimson, there sits a magistrate
robed in scarlet, and yonder struts a pretty fellow that seems to have dipped
his plumes in the rainbow, and glitters in all the gay colors of that
resplendent arch. Some rise into a curious cup, or fall into a set of beautiful
bells. Some spread themselves in a swelling turf, or crowd into a delicious
cluster. In some the predominant stain softens by the gentle diminutions, till
it has even stole away from itself.

THE GRAND CAUSE OF VEGETATION, AND THE GROWTH OF FRUITS AND FLOWERS.
THE moisture of the earth, and of the circumambient air, passed through proper
strainers, and disposed in a range of pellucid tubes: this performs all the
wonders, and produces all the beauties of vegetation. This creeps along the
fibers of the low spread moss, and climbs to the very tops of the lofty-waving
cedars. This, attracted by the root, and circulating through invisible canals;
this bursts into gems; expands itself into leaves, and clothes the forest with
all its verdant honors. -- This one plain and simple cause gives birth to all
the charms which deck the youth and maturity of the year. This blushes in the
early hepatica, and flames in the late advancing poppy. This reddens into blood
in the veins of the mulberry, and attenuates itself into leafen gold, to create
a covering for the quince. This breathes, in all the fragrant gales of our
garden; and weeps odorous gum in the groves of Arabia.

TULIPS AND PINKS, EMBLEMS OF THE DIFFERENCES AMONG CHRISTIANS.
IN a grove of tulips, or a knot of pinks, one perceives a difference in almost
every individual. Scarce any two are are turned and tinctured exactly alike. *
Each allows himself a little particularity in his dress, though all belong to
one family. -- A pretty emblem this of the smaller differences between
Protestant Christians. There are modes in religion which admit of variation,
without prejudice to sound faith or real holiness. Just as the drapery, on
these pictures of the spring, may be formed after a variety of patterns,
without blemishing their beauty, or altering their nature. -- Be it so then,
that, in some points of inconsiderable consequence, several of our brethren
dissent: yet let us all live amicably and sociably together; for we harmonize
in principles, though we vary in punctilios. If any strife subsists, let it be
to follow our Divine Master most closely, in humility of heart, and
unblameableness of life. Let it be to serve one another most readily, in all
the kind offices of a cordial friendship. Thus shall we be united, though
distinguished; united in the same grand fundamentals, though distinguished by
some small circumstantials, united in one important bond of brotherly love,
though distinguished by some slighter peculiarities of sentiment.

FLOWERS POURTRAYED IN LIVELY COLORS.
ACIRCUMSTANCE, recommending and endearing the flowery creation, is their
regular succession. They make not their appearance all at once, but in an
orderly rotation. While a proper number of these obliging retainers are in
waiting, the others abscond, but hold themselves in a posture of service, ready
to take their turn, and fill each his respective s^ation the instant it becomes
vacant. -- The snow-drop, foremost of the lovely train, breaks her way through
the frozen soil, in order to present her early compliments to her Lord. Dressed
in the robe of innocence, she steps forth, fearless of danger, long before the
trees have ventured to unfold their leaves, even while the iciles are pendent
on our houses. Next peeps out the crocus, but cautiously, and with an air of
timidity. She hears the howling blasts, and skulks close to her low situation.
Afraid she seems, to make large excursions from her root, while so many ruffian
winds are abroad, and scouring along the ether. -- Nor is the violet last in
this shining embassy of the year. Which, with all the embellishments that would
grace a royal garden, condescends to line our hedges and grow at the feet of
briars. Freely, and without any solicitation, she distributes the bounty of her
emissive sweets; while herself, with an exemplary humility, retires from sight,
seeking rather to administer pleasure, than to win admiration. Emblem,
expressive emblem, of those modest virtues which delight to bloom in obscurity;
which extend a cheering influence to multitudes, who are scarce acquainted with
the source of their comforts! Motive, engaging motive, to that ever active
beneficence, which stays not for the importunity of the distressed, but
anticipates their suit, and prevents them with the blessing of its goodness!
See herein a picture of charity without oftentation, beauty without vanity, and
merit without pride.


The poor polyanthus, that lately adorned the border with their sparkling
beauties, and transplanted into our windows, gave us a fresh entertainment, is
now more; I saw her complexion fade; I perceived her breath decay; till at
length she expired, and dropped into her grave. -- Scarce have we sustained this
loss, but in comes the auricula, and more than retrieves it. Arrayed she comes,
in a splendid variety of amiable forms, with an eye of crystal, and garments
of the most glossy satin, exhaling perfume, and powdered with silver. Scarce
one among them but is dignified with the character of renown, or has the honor
to represent some celebrated toast. But these also, notwithstanding their
illustrious titles, have exhausted their whole stock of fragrance, and are
mingled with the meanest dust. -- Who could forbear grieving at their
departure, did not the tulips begin to raise themselves on their fine wands, or
stately stalks? they slush the paterre with one of the gayest dresses that
blooming nature wears. Here one may behold the innocent wantonness of beauty.
Here she indulges a thousand freaks, and sports herself in the most charming
diversity of colors. Yet I should wrong her, were I to call her a coquette;
because she plays her lovely changes, not to enkindle dissolute affections, but
to display her Creator's glory. -- Soon arises the anemone, encircled at the
bottom with a spreading robe, and rounded at the top into a beautiful dome, In
its loosely flowing mantle you may observe a noble negligence; in its gently
bending tufts, the nicest symmetry. I would term it the fine gentleman of the
garden; because it seems to have learnt the singular address of uniting
simplicity with refinement, of reconciling art and ease. -- The same month has
the merit of producing the renunculus. All bold and graceful it expands the
riches of its foliage, and acquires by degrees, the loveliest enamel in the
world. Methinks nature improves in her operations. Her latest strokes are most
masterly. To crown the collection, she introduces the carnation, which
captivates every eye with a noble spread of graces, and charms every sense with
a profusion of exquisite odours. This single flower has ce^^red in itself the
perfections of all the preceding. The ^oment it appears, it so commands (...)
^^^ntion, that we scarce regret the absence of the rest. -- The gilly-flower,
like a real friend, attends you through all the vicissitudes and alterations of
the season. While others make a transient visit only, this is rather an
inhabitant, than a guest in your gardens; adds fidelity to complaisance.

THE TIME, ORDER AND ADJUSTMENT OT FLOWERS, EVIDENCE THE CREATOR'S WISDOM.
LET me add one remark upon the admirable adjustment of every particular,
relating to these fine colonies planted in the parterre. -- With such accuracy
and correctness is their structure finished, that any the least conceivable
alteration would very much impair their perfection. Should you see, for
instance, the nice disposition of the tulips attire fly abroad, disorderly and
irregular, like the flaunting wood-bine; should the jessamine rear her
diminutive head on those grand columns which support the holliho^k; should the
erect and manly aspect of the piony hang down with a pensive air, like the
(...) of the hyacinth; should ^ fringes which edge the pink, or the gaudy
stains which bedrop the iris; should those tapering pillars which arise in the
middle of its vase, and tipped with golden pendants, give such a luster to the
surrounding panels of alabaster -- should those shrink and disappear like the
chives which cover the heart of the anemone. -- In many of these cases, would
not the transposition be fantastical and awkward? in all to the apparent
prejudice of every individual?

Again; with regard to the time of their appearing, this circumstance is
settled by a remarkable foresight and precaution. -- What would become of the
sailor, if, in very stormy weather, he should raise a lofty mast, and crowd it
with all his canvass? Such would be the ill effect, if the most stately species
of flowers should presume to come abode in the blustering months. Ah! how would
they rue the imprudent boldness! Therefore, those only that shoot the shortest
stems, and display the smallest spread of leaves, or (if you please) carry the
least sail, are launched amidst the blowing seasons. -- How injudiciously would
the perfumer act, if he should unseal his finest essences, and expose them to
the northern winds, or wintry rains! our blooming artists of the aromatic
profession, at least the most delicate among them, seem perfectly aware of the
consequences of such a procedure. Accordingly they postpone their odoriferous
treasures, till a ferener air, and more unclouded skies grant a protection to
their amiable traffic, till they are under no more apprehensions of having
their spicy cells rifled by rude blasts, or drowned in incessant showers.

AN ARGUMENT FOR CHRISTIAN RESIGNANATION.
SINCE all the downward tracts of time
God's watchful eye surveys;
Oh! who sorwise to choose our lot,
And regulate our ways?
Since none can doubt his equal love,
Unmeasurably kind:
To his unerring gracious will,
Be every wish resigned.
Good when he gives, supremely good;
Nor less, when he denies;
Even crosses, from his sovereign hand,
Are blessings in disguise.
A COMMENT ON THE BEAUTIES OF CREATION.
THE earth is assigned to us for a dwelling. -- The skies are stretched over us
like a magnificent canopy, dyed in the purest azure, and beautified now with
pictures of floating silver, now with colorings of reflected crimson. -- The
grass is spread under us, as a spacious carpet, wove with silken threads of
green, and damasked with flowers of every hue. -- The sun, like a golden lamp,
is hung out in the ethereal vault; and pours his effulgence all the day to
lighten our paths. -- When night approaches, the moon takes up the friendly
office, and the stars are kindled in twinkling myriads, to cheer the darkness
with their milder luster, not disturb our repose by too intense a glare -- The
clouds, besides the rich paintings they hang around the heavens, act the part
of a shifting screen, and defend us, by their seasonable interposition, from
the scorching beams of summer. May we not also regard them as the great
watering-pots of the globe? which, wafted on the wings of the wind, dispense
their moisture evenly through the universal garden; and fructify, with their
showers, whatever our hand plants. -- The fields are our exhaustless granary.
-- The ocean is our vast reservoir. -- The animals spend their strength to
dispatch our business, resign their clothing to eplenish our wardrobe, and
surrender their very lives to provide for our tables. -- In short, every
element is a storehouse of conveniences; every season brings us the choicest
productions; all nature is our caterer. -- And, which is a most endearing
recommendation of these favors, they are all as lovely as they are useful. You
observe nothing mean or inelegant. All is clad in beauty's fairest robe, and
regulated by proportion's nicest rule. The whole scene exhibits a fund of
pleasures to the imagination, at the same time that it more than supplies all
our wants.

BUDDING FLOWERS EMBLEMATIC OF THE COVETOUS MAN.
ON every side I espy several budding flowers. As yet they are like bales of
cloth from the packer's warehouse. Each is wrapped within a strong enlosure,
and its contents are tied together by the firmest bandages; so that all their
beauties lie concealed, and all their sweets are locked up. Just such is the
niggardly wretch, whose aims are all turned inward, and meanly terminated upon
himself. Who makes his own private interests, or personal pleasures, the sole
center of his designs, and the scanty circumference of his actions.

ANTIDOTES AGAINST UNRULY PASSIONS.
DOES anger draw near with her lighted torch, to kindle the flame of resentment
in our breasts? does flattery ply our ears with her enchanting and intoxicating
whispers? would discontent lay her leaden hand upon our temper, and mould into
our minds her sour leaven, in order to make us a burden to ourselves, and
unamiable to others? instantly let us divert our attention from the dangerous
objects, and not so much endeavor to antidote, as to shun, the moral
contagion. Let us revolve in our meditations, that wonderful meekness of our
distressed Master; which, amidst the most abusive and provoking insults,
maintained an uniform tenor of unshaken serenity. Let us contemplate that
prodigious humiliation, which brought him from an infinite height above all
worlds, to make his bed in the dust of death. Let us sooth our jarring, our
uneasy passions, with the rememorance of that cheerfulness and resignation,
which rendered him, in the deepest poverty, unfeignedly thankful; and, under
the heaviest tribulation, most submissively patient.

IMPORTANT ADMONITIONS TO THE FAIR SEX.
HARBOR not, on any consideration; the betrayer of your virtue. Be deaf,
inflexibly deaf, to every beguiling solicitation. If it obtrude into the
unguarded heart, give it entertainment, no, not for a moment. To parley with
the enemy, is to open a door for destruction. Our safety consists in flight;
and, in this case, suspicion is the truest prudence; fear the greatef^ bravery.
Play not on the brink of the precipice: flutter not round the edges of the
flame: dally not with the stings of death, but reject, with a becoming mixture
of solicitude and abhorrence, the very first insinuations of iniquity; as
cautiously as the smarting sore shrinks even from the foftest hand, as
constantly as the sensitive plant recoils at the approaching touch.

CONSOLATIONS IN THE VIEWS OF DEATH.
FEAR not, thou faithful Christian, fear not, at the appointed time, to descend
into the tomb. Thy soul thou may trust with thy omnipotent Redeemer, who is
lord of the unseen world; "who has the keys of hell and of death." Most safely
may thou trust thy better part in those beneficient hands, which were pierced
with nails, and fastened to the ignominious tree for thy salvation. -- With
regard to the earthly tabernacle, be not dismayed. It is taken down, only to be
rebuilt upon a diviner plan, and in a more heavenly form. If it retires into
the shadow of death, and lies immured in the gloom of the grave; it is only to
return from a short confinement to endless liberty. If it falls into
dissolution, it is in order to rise more illustrious from its ruins, and wear
an infinitely brighter face of perfection and of glory.

A DESCRIPTION OF NOON.
THE sun blazes from on high; the air glows with his fire; the fields are rent
with chicks; the roads are scorched to dust; the woods seem to contract a
sickly aspect, and a russet hue; the traveller, broiled as he rides, hastens to
his inn, and intermits his journey; the labourer, bathed in sweat, drops the
scythe, and desists from his work; the cattle flee to some shady covert, or
else pant and toss under the burning noon. Even the stubborn rock, smit with
the piercing beams, is ready to cleave. All things languish beneath the
dazzling deluge.

BEES, CONTRASTED WITH BUTTERFLIES AND SPIDERS.
THE bees, that nation of chemists! to whom nature has communicated the rare
and valuable secret of enriching themselves, without impoverishing others. Who
extract the most delicious syrup from every fragrant herb, without wounding its
substance, or diminishing its odours. -- I take the more notice of these
ingenious operators, because I would willingly make them my pattern; while the
gay butterfly flutters her painted wings, and sips a little fantastic delight,
only for the present moment; while the gloomy spider, worse than idly busied,
is preparing his insidious nets for destruction, or sucking venom, even from
the most wholesome plant. This frugal community are wisely employed in
providing for futurity, and collecting a copious stock of the most balmy
treasures.

THE BEAUTIES OF A GARDEN.
HERE I behold, assembled in one view, almost all the various beautics which
have been severally entertaining my imagination. The vistas, struck through an
ancient wood, or formed by rows of venerable elms, conducting the spectator's
observation to some remarkable object, or leading the travelers footsteps to
this delightful seat: -- the walls, enriched with fruit trees, and faced with a
covering of their leafy extensions, I should rather have said, hung with
different pieces of nature's noblest tapestry: -- the walks, neatly shorn, and
lined with verdure, or finely smoothed, and coated with gravel: -- the alleys,
arched with shades to embower our noontide repose, or thrown open for the free
acession of air, to invite us to our evening recreation: -- the decent edgings
of box which enclose, like a plain selvage, each beautiful compartment, and its
splendid figures; -- the shapely ever-greens, and flowering shrubs, which
strike the eye, and appear with peculiar dignity in this distant situation: --
the basin, with its crystal fount, floating in the center, and diffusing an
agreeable freshness through the whole: -- the waters, falling from a remote
cascade, and gently murmuring as they flow along the pebbles.

THE EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD, WITH A REFERENCE TO THE SAVIOR OF THE WORLD.
HEAT, whose burning influence parches the Lybian wilds, tans into soot the
Ethiopian's complexion, and makes every species of life pant, and droop, and
languish. Cold, whose icy breath glazes yearly the Russian seas, often glues
the frozen sailor to the cordage, and stiffens the traveller into a statue of
rigid flesh. He, who sometimes blends you both, and produces the most agreeable
temperature, sometimes suffers you to act separately, and rage with intolerable
severity. That King of Heaven, and Controuler of universal nature, when
dwelling in the tabernacle of clay, was exposed to chilling damps, and smitten
by sultry beams. The stars, in their midnight watches, heard him pray; and the
sun, in his meredian fervors, saw him toil. -- Hence are our frozen hearts
dissolved into a mingled flow of wonder, love, and joy, being conscious of a
deliverance from those insufferable flames, which, kindled by divine
indignation, burn to the lowest hell.

MEADOWS AND FIELDS DESCRIBED, WITH A RFFERENCE TO THE GREAT REDEEMER OF
MANKIND.
YE luxuriant meadows; he who, without the seedsiman's industry, replenishes
your irriguous lap, with never-failing crops of herbage, enamels their cheerful
green, with flowers of every hue. -- Ye fertile fields; he who blesses the
labors of the husbandman, enriches your well-tilled plains with waving
harvests, and calls forth the staff of life from your furrows. He, who causes
both meadows and fields to laugh and sing, for the abundance of plenry. He was
no stranger to corroding hunger and parching thirst. He, alas eat the bitter
bread of woe, and had "plenteousness of tears to drink -- That we might partake
of richer dainties than those which are produced by the dew of heaven, and
proceed from the fatness of the earth.

PRECIOUS STONES DESCRIBED, WITH A REFERENCE TO THE GREAT CREATOR.
YE beds of gems, toy-shops of nature! which form, in dark retirement, the
glittering stone. Diamonds that sparkle with a brilliant water, rubies that
glow with a crimson flame, emeralds dipped in the freshest verdure of Spring,
sapphires decked with the fairest drapery of the sky, topaz emblazed with a
golden gleam, amethyst impurpled with the blushes of the morning. -- He who
tinctures the metallic dust, and consolidates the lucid drop; he, when
sojourning on earth, had no riches, but the riches of disinterested
benevolence; had no ornament, but the ornament of unspotted purity.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE SILK WORM.
SHALL I mention the annimal which spins her soft, her shining, her exquisitely
fine silken thread? whose matchless manufactures lend an ornament to grandeur,
and make royalty itself more magnificent. -- Shall I take notice of the cell,
in which, when the gaity and business of life are over, the little recluse
immures herself, and spends the remainder of her days in retirement? Shall I
rather observe the sepulcher, which, when cloyed with pleasure and weary of the
world, she prepares for her own interment? Or how, when a stated period is
elapsed, she wakes from a death-like inactivity, breaks the enclosure of her
tomb, throws off the dusky shroud, assumes a new form, puts on a more sumptuous
array, and, from an insect creeping on the ground, becomes a winged inhabitant
of the air.

THE HAPPINESS OF GLORIFIED SPIRITS.
YE spirits of just men, made perfect, who are released from the burden of the
slesh; and freed from all the vexatious solicitations of corruption in
yourselves, delivered from all the injurious effects of iniquity in others. Who
sojourn no longer in the tents of strife, or the territories of disorder, but
are received into that pure, harmonious, holy society, where every one acts up
to his amiable and exalted character, where God himself is pleased graciously
and immediately to preside. -- You find not without pleasing astonishment, your
hopes improved into actual enjoyment, and your faith superseded by the beatific
vision. You feel all your former shyness of behavior, happily lost in the
overflowings of unbounded love, and all your little differences of opinion
entirely bore down by tides of invariable truth.

EVENING THE TIME FOR REFLECTION.
THE evening, drawing her sables over the world, and gently darkening into
night, is a season peculiarly proper for sedate consideration. All
circumstances concur to hush our passions, and sooth our cares; to tempt our
steps abroad, and prompt our thoughts to serious reflection.

A PLEASANT RURAL WALK DESCRIEED.
THE business of the day dispatched, and the sultry heats abated, invited me to
the recreation of a walk. A walk, in one of the finest recesses of the country,
and in one of the most pleasant evenings which the summer season produced.

The limes and elms, uniting their branches over my head, formed a verdant
canopy, and cast a most refreshing shade. Under my seet lay a carpet of
nature's velvet; grass intermingled with moss, and embroidered with flowers.
Jessamines in conjunction with woodbines, twined around the trees, displaying
their artless beauties to the eye, and diffusing their delicious sweets through
the air. On either side, the boughs, rounded into a set of regular arches,
opened a view into the distant fields, and presented me with a prospect of the
bending skies. The little birds, all joyous and grateful for the favors of the
light, were paying their acknowledgments in a tribute of harmony, and soothing
themselves to rest with songs. While a French horn from a neighboring seat,
sent its melodicus accents, sostened by the length of their passage, to
complete the concert of the grove.

THE BLESSINGS OF LIBERTY AND PROPERTY.
LIBERTY, that dearest of names, and property, that best of charters, give an
additional, an inexpressible charm to every delightful object. -- See how the
declining sun has beautified the western clouds; has arrayed them in crimson,
and skirted them with gold. Such a refinement of our domestic bliss, is
property; such an improvement of our public privileges, is liberty. -- When the
lamp of day shall withdraw his beams, there will still remain the same
collection of floaring vapors; but O! how changed, how gloomy! the carnation
streaks are faded; the golden edgings are worn away; and all the lovely tinges
are lost in a leaden-coloured louring sadness. Such would be the aspect of all
these scenes of beauty, and all these abodes of pleasure, if exposed
continually to the caprice of arbitrary sway.

A DESCRIPTION OF SUNSET.
THE sun has almost finished his daily race, and hastens to the goal. He
descends lower and lower, till his chariot-wheels seem to hover on the utmost
verge of the sky. What is somewhat remarkable, the orb of light, upon the point
of setting, grows considerably broader. The shadows of objects, just before
they become blended in undistinguishable darkness, are exceedingly lengthened.
-- Like blessings, little prized, while possessed; but highly est^emed, the
very instant they are prepared for their slight; bitterly regretted when once
they are gone and to be seen no more.

The radiant globe is, now, half immersed beneath the dusky earth. Or, as the
ancient poets speak, is shooting into the ocean, and sinks into the western
sea. And could I view the sea, at this juncture, it would yield a most amusing
and curious spectable The rays, striking horizontally on the liquid element,
give it the appearance of floating glass; or reflected in many a different
direction, from a beautiful multiplicity of colors. -- A stranger, as he walks
along the sandy beach, and, lost in pensive attention, listens to the
murmurings of the restless flood, is agreeably alarmed by the gay decorations
of the surface. With entertainment, and with wonder, he sees the curling waves
here glistering with white, there glowing with purple; in one place, wearing an
auzure tincture, in another, glancing a cast of undulating green; in the whole,
exhibiting a piece of fluid scenery, that may vie with yonder pencil
tapistries, though wrought in the loom, and tinged with the dies of heaven.

THE APPEARANCE OF NATURE AFTER SUNSET.
THE great luminary is sunk beneath the horizon, and totally disappears. The
whole sace of the ground is overspread with shades, or with, what one of the
finest painters of nature calls, a dun obscurity. Only a few very superior
eminences are tipped with streaming silver. The tops of groves, and lofty towers,
catch the last smiles of day, are still irradiated by the departing beams. But
O! how transient is the distinction! how momentary the gift! like all the
blessings, which mortals enjoy below, it is gone, almost as soon as gra^^ed.
See! how languishingly it trembles on the leafy spire; and glimmers, with a
dying faintness, on the mountain's brow. The little vivacity that remains,
decays every moment. It can no longer hold its station. While I speak, it
expires; and resigns the world to the gradual approaches of night.

Every object, a little while ago, glared with light; but now, all appears
under a more qualified luster. The animals harmonize with the insensible
creation; and what was gay in those, as well as glittering in this, gives place
to an universal gravity. In the meadows, all was jo^ und and sportive; but now
the gamesome lambs are grown weary of their frolicks, and the tired shepherd
has imposed silence on his pipe. In the branches, all was sprightliness and
song; but now the lively green is wrapped in the descending glooms, and no
tuneful airs are heard, only the plaintive stock-dove, cooing mournfully
through the grove.

INTERESTING REFLECTIONS ON THE CLOSE OF DAY.
SHOULD I now be vain and trifling, the heavens and the earth would rebuke my
unseasonable levity. Therefore, be these moments devoted to thoughts, sedate,
as the closing day, solemn, as the face of things. And, indeed, however my
social hours are enlivened wi^n innocent pleasantry; let every evening, in her
sable habit, toll the bell to serious cons^ietation. Nothing can be more proper
for a person who walks on the borders of eternity, and is hasting continually
to his final audit; nothing more proper than daily to slip away from the circle
of amusements, and frequently to relinquish the the hurry of business, in order
to consider and adjust "the things that belong to his peace."

THE COOLNESS OF EVENING TWILIGHT, AND ITS BENEFITS.
AFTER all the ardors of the sultry day, how reviving is this coolness! -- This
gives new verdure to the fading plants; new vivacity to the withering flowers;
and a more exquisite fragrance to their mingled scents. -- By this, the air
also receives a new force, and is qualified to exert itself with great
activity. -- This I might call the grand alembec of nature, which dislils her
most sovereign cordial, the refreshing dews. Incessent heat would rob us of
their beneficial agency, and oblige them to evaporate in imperceptible
exhalations. Turbulent winds, or even the gentler motions of Aurora's fan,
would dissipate the rising vapors, and not suffer them to form a coalition. --
But, favored by the stillness, and condensed by the coolness of the night,
they unite in pearly drops, create that finely tempered humidity, which cheers
the vegetable world, as sleep exhilirates the animal.

THE ADVANTAGES OF SOLITUDE.
THE world is a troubled ocean; and who can erect stable purposes, on its
fluctuating waves? The world is a school of wrong, and who does not feel
himself warping to its penicious influences? on this sea of glass, how
insensibly we slide from our own stedfastness! some sacred truth, which was
struck in lively characters on our souls, is obscured; if not obliterated. Some
worthy resolution, which heaven had wrought in our breasts, is shaken if not
overthrown. Some enticing vanity; which we had solemnly renounced, again
practices its wiles, a gain captivates our affections. How often has an unwary
glance kindled a fever of irregular desire in our hearts? how often has a word
of applause dropped luscious poison into our ears; or some disrespectful
expression raised a gust of passion into our bosoms? our innocence is of so
tender a constitution, that it suffers in the promiscuous c^oud. Our purity is
of so delicate a complexion, that it scarce touches on the world, without
contracting a stain. We see, we hear, with peril.

But here safety dwells. Every meddling and intrusive avocation is secluded.
Silence holds the door against the strife of tongues, and all the impertinences
of idle conversation. The busy swarm of vain images, and cajoling temptations
which beset us, with a buzzing importunity, amidst the gaities of life, are
chased by these thickening shades. -- Here I may, without disturbance, commune
with my own heart, and learn the best of sciences, to know myself. Here the
soul may rally her dissipated powers, and grace recover its native energy. --
This is the opporcunity to rectify every evil impression, to expel the poison,
and guard against the contagion of corrupting examples. This is the place where
I may, with advantage, apply mysels to subdue the rebel within, and be master,
not of a scepter, but of myself. -- Throng then, ye ambitious, the levees of
the powerful; I will be punctual in my assignations with solitude. To a mind
intent upon its own improvement, solitude has charms in comparably more
engaging than the entertainments presented in the theater, or the honors
conferred in the drawing room.

THE BENEFITS OF AFFLICTION.
WHEN sickness has drawn a veil over the gaity of our hearts, when misfortunes
have eclipsed the splendour of our outward circumstances, how many important
convictions present themselves with the brightest evidence! Under the sunshine
of prosperity, they lay undiscovered; but, when some intervening cloud has
darkened the scene, they emerge from their obscurity, and even glitter upon our
minds. Then the world, that delusive cheat, confesses her emptiness: but Jesus,
the bright and morning star, beams sorth with inimitable luster. Then, vice
loses all her fallacious allurements; that painted strumpet is horrible as the
hags of hell; but virtue, despised virtue, gains loveliness from a louring
providence, and treads the shades with more than mortal charms. May this
reconcile me, and all the sons of sorrow, to our appointed share of suffering;
if tribulation tend to dissipate the inward darkness, and pour heavenly dew
upon our minds; welcome distress, welcome disappointment, welcome whatever our
froward flesh or peevish passions, would miscall calamities. These light
afflictions which are but for a moment, shall fit easy upon our spirits, since
they befriend our knowledge, promote our faith -- and so, " work out for us a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory."

DARKNESS AND LIGHT CONTRASTED.
HOW has this darkness snatched every splendid and graceful object from my
sight! It has dashed the sponge over the pictures of spring, and destroyed all
the delicate distinctions of things. Where are now the fine tinges, which so
lately charmed me from the glowing parterre? The blush is struck out from the
cheeks of the rose; and the snowy hue is dropped from the lily. I cast my eyes
toward a magnificent seat; but the aspiring columns, and fair expanded front,
are mingled in rude confusion. Without the sun, all the elegance of the
blooming world, is a mere blank; all the syme^ry of architecture, is a
soapeless heap.

THE WORKINGS OF FANCY IN SLEEP.
FANCY, extravagant fancy, leads the mind through a maze of vanity. The head is
crowded with false images, and tantalized with the most ridiculous
misapprehensions of things. Some are expatiating amidst fairy fields, and
gathering garlands of visionary bliss, while their bodies are stretched on a
wisp of straw, and sheltered by the cobwebs of a barn. Others, quite insensible
of their rooms of state, are mourning in a doleful dungeon, or struggling with
the raging billows. Perhaps with hasly steps, they climb the craggy cliff, and,
with real anxiety, sly from the imaginary danger -- or else, benumbed with
sudden fear, and finding themselves unable to escape, they give up at once
their hopes, and their efforts; and though, reclined on a couch of ivery, are
sinking, all helpless and distressed, in the furious whirlpool.

AN A^DRE^S TO THE VOTARIES OF MIRTH.
O THAT the votaries of mirth, whose life is a continued round of merriment and
whim, would bestow one serious reflection on the variety of human woes! It
might teach them to be less enamoured with the few languid sweets that are
thinly scattered through this vale of tears, and environed with such a
multitude of ragged thorns. It might teach them no longer to dance away their
years with a giddy rambling impulse, but to aspire with a determined ^im, after
those happy regions, where delights, abundant and unembittered, slow.

THE FOLLY OF THE ADVOCATES FOR VICE AND SENSUALITY.
SOME are prostituting their reputation, and sacrificing, their peace, to the
gratification of their lusts; sapping the foundation on their health, in
debaucheries; or shipwrecking the interests of their families in their bowls.
And, what is worse, are forfeiting the joys of an eternal heavon, for the
sordid satisfactions of the beast; for the transitory sensations of an hour. Ye
slaves of appetite, how far am I from envying your gross sensualities, and
voluptuous revels! little, ah! little are you sensible, that, while indulgence
showers her roses, and luxury diffuses her odours, they scatter poisons also,
and shed unheeded bane. Evils, incomparably more malignant than the wormwood
and gall of the sharpest affliction. -- Since death is in the drunkard's cup,
and worse than poignards in the harlot's embrace.

THE PROPER SPHERE OF REASON.
I AM far from decrying that noble faculty of reason, when exerted in her
proper sphere; when acting in a deferential subor dination to the revealed will
of Heaven. While she exercises her powers within these appointed limits, she is
unspeakably serviceable, and cannot be too industriously cultivated. But when
she sets up herself in proud contradistinction to the sacred oracles; when,
all-arrogant and self-sufficient, she says to the word of scripture I have no
need of thee: she is then, I must be bold to maintain, not only a glowworm,
but an ignis fatuus, not only a bubble, but a snare.

THE TENDENCY OF NOVELS, ROMANCES AND THEATRICAL AMUSEMENTS.
THE generality of our modern romances, novels and theatrical entertainments,
are commonly calculated to inflame a wanton fancy. Or, if conducted with so
much modesty, as not to debauch the affections; they pervert the judgment, and
bewilder the taste. By their incredible adventures, their extravagant parade of
gallantry, and their characters, widely different from truth and nature, they
inspire foolish conceits, beget idle expectations, introduce a disgust of
genuine history, and indispose their admirers to acquiesce in the decent
civilities, or to relish the sober satisfactions of common life.

A VIEW OF RURAL NATURE BY MOONLIGHT.
NOW the moon is risen, and has collected all her beams, the veil is taken off
from the countenance of nature. I see the recumbent flocks; I see the green
hedgerows, though without the feathered choristers, hopping from spray to
spray. In short, I see once again the world's great picture; not indeed in its
late lively colors, but more delicately shaded, and arrayed in softer charms.

What a majestic scene is here! the moon, like an immense crystal lamp, pendent
in the magniflcent ceiling of the heavens. -- The stars, like so many thousands
of golden tapers, fixed in their azure sockets. All pouring their luster on
spacious cities, and lofty mountains, glittering on the ocean, gleaming on the
forest, and opening a prospect, wide as the eye can glance, m^re various than
fancy can paint.

THE BENEFITS OF MOONLIGHT.
WELCOME, thrice welcome, this auspicious gift of Providence, to enliven the
nocturnal gloom, and line with silver the raven-coloured mantle of night! How
desirable to have our summer evenings illuminated! that we may be able to tread
the dewy meads, and breathe the delicious fragrance of our gardens; especially
when the sultry heats render it irksome and fatiguing, to walk a broad by day.
-- How cheering to the shepherd, the use of this universal lantern; as he tends
his fleecy charge, or late consigns them to their hurdled cots! How comfortable
and how advantageous to the mariner, as he ploughs the midnight main, to adjust
the tackling, to explore his way, and, under the influence of this beaming
sconce, to avoid the fatal rock! This celestial attendant is most exactly
punctual, at all the stated periods of her ministration. If we choose to
prolong our journey, after the sun is gone down, the moon, during her whole
increase, is always ready to act in the capacity of a guide. If we are inclined
to set out very early in the morning; the moon in her decrease prevents the
dawn, on purpose to offer her assistance. And because it is so pleasant a
thing, for the eyes to behold the light, the moon at her full, by a course of
unintermitted waiting, gives us, as ^c were, a double day.

A WALK BY MOONLIGHT, WITH THE EFFECTS OF NOCTURNAL DARKNESS ON RURAL SCENES.
I EXCHANGE the n^^^ retreats of art for the noble theater o^ ^ture. Instead of
measuring my steps, under the covert of an arbor, let me range along the
summit of this gently rising hill. There is no need of the leafy shade, since
the sun has quitted the horizon, and withdrawn his scorching beams. But see how
advantages and inconveniences are usually linked, and chequer our affairs
below! if the annoying heat ceases, the landscape, and its pleasing scenes, are
also removed. The majestic castle, and the lowly cottage, are vanished
together. I have lost the aspiring mountain, and its russet brow; I look round,
but to no purpose, for the humble vale and its flowery lap. The plains,
whitened with flocks, and the heath yellow with furze, disappear. The advancing
night has wrapped in darkness the long extended forest, and drawn her mantle over
the winding of the silver stream.

A VIEW OF THE STARRY HEAVENS.
HERE I enjoy a free view of the whole hemisphere, without any obstacle from
below to confine the exploring eye, or any cloud from above, to overcast the
spacious concave. It Is true; the lively vermilion, which so lately streaked the
chambers of the west, is all faded. But the planets, one after another, light
up their lamps; the stars advance in their glittering train; a thousand and a
thousand luminaries launch forth in successive splendors; and the whole
firmament is kindling into the most beautiful glow. The blueness of the ether,
heightened by the season of the year, and still more enlivened by the absence
of the moon, gives those gems of heaven the strongest luster.

A DESCRIPTION OF A FROSTY NIGHT AND MORNING.
THE sober evening advances to close the short-lived day. The firmament, clear
and unsullied puts on on its brightest blue. The stars, in thronging
multitudes, and with a peculiar brilliancy, glitter through the fair expanse.
While the frost pours its subtle and penetrating influence all around. Sharp
and intensely severe, all the long night the rigid ether continues its
operations. When, late and slow, the morning opens her pale eye, in what a
curious and amusing disguise is nature dressed! the icicles, jagged and uneven,
are pendent on the houses. A whitish film incrusts the windows, where mimic
landscapes rise, and fancied figures swell. The fruitful fields, are hardened
to iron; the moistened meadows are congealed to marble; and both resound (an
effect unknown before) with the peasant's hasty tread. The stream is arrested
in its career, and its overflowing sursace chained to the banks. The fluid
paths become a solid road, where the finny shoals were wort to rove, the
sportive youth slide, or the rattling chariots roll.

THE EFFECTS OF FROST ON NATURE, WITH MORAL REFLECTIONS.
THE air is all serenity. Refined by the nitrous particles, it affords the most
distinct views and extensive prospects. The seeds of infection are killed, and
the pestilence destroyed even in embryo. So the cold of affliction tends to
mortify our corruptions, and subdue our vicious habits. -- The crouding
atmosphere, constringe our bodies, and braces our nerves. The sp^^^ are
buoyant, and sally briskly on the execution of their office. Now, none loiters
0 in his path; none is seen with folded arms. All is in motion; all is
activity. Choice, prompted by the weather, supplies the spur of necessity.
Thus, the rugged school of misfortune often trains up the mind to a vigorous
exertion of its faculties. The bleak climate of adversity often inspirits us
with a manly resolution. When a soft and downy a^^luence, perhaps, would have
relaxed all the gen ral spring of the soul, and have left it ^^^rvated with
pleasure, or dissolved in indolence.

FROSTY WINDS, AND THEIR BANEFUL INFLUENCES.
COLD comes out of the north. The winds having swept those deserts of snow,
arm themselves with millions of frozen particles, and make a fierce descent
upon our isle. Under black and scowling clouds, they drive dreadfully whizzing
through the darkened air. They growl are ^^our houses; assault our doors, and,
(...) for entrance, fasten on our windows. Walls can scarce restrain them, bars
are unable to exclude them; through every cranny they force their way. Ice is
on their wings; they scatter agues through the land; and winter, all winter,
rages as they go. Their breath is as a searing iron to the little verdure, left
in the plains. Vastly more pernicious to the tender plants than the sharpest
knife; they kill their branches, and wound the very root.

A SHOWER OF HAIL DESCRIBED.
IF the snow composes the light-armed troops of the sky, methinks the hail
constitutes stitutes its heavy artillery. When driven by a vehement wind, with
what dreadful impetuosity does that stony shower fall! how it rebounds from
that frozen ground, and rattles on the resounding dome! It attenuates the
rivers into smoke, or scourges them into foam. It crushes the infant flowers;
cuts in pieces the gardiner's early plants, and batters the feeble
fortification of his glasses into shivers. It darts into the traveller's face:
he turns, with haste, from the stroke; or feels on his cheek, for the gushing
blood. If he would retreat into the house, it follows him even thither; and,
like a determined enemy that pushes the pursuit, dashes through the crackling
panes.

DESCRIPTION OF A RAINBOW.
BEHOLD a bow of no hostile intention! a bow painted in variegated colors on
the disburdened cloud. How vast is the extent, how delicate the texture of that
showery arch! it compasses the heavens with a glorious circle, and teaches us
to forget the horrors of the storm. Elegant its form, and rich its texture; but
more delightfui its sacred significancy. While the vio let and the rose blush
in its beautiful aspect, the olive branch smiles in its gracious import. It
writes, in radiant dies, what the angels sung in harmonious strains; "peace on
earth good will toward men." It is the stamp of insurance, for the continuance
of seedtime and harvest; for the preservation and security of the visible world.

THE ONLY METHOD OF REFORMING SINNERS.
IF ever a reformation is produced, it must, under the influences of the
eternal Spirit, be produced by the doctrines of free grace, and juscisicarion
through a Redeemer's righteousiness. Till these doctrines are generally
inculcated, the most eloquent harangnes from the pulpit, or the most correct
dissertations from the press, will be no better than a pointless arrow and a
broken bow.

TOO TRUE A PICTURE OF THE PRECENT AGE.
IF indolence, avarice, and venality; if pleasure, luxury, and prodigality; if
youth without principles, tradesmen without honesty, and nobles without honor;
if these are allowed to be, either provoking immoralities, or fatal symptoms, I
fear the ruin of England cannot be far off.

CHRIST COMPARED TO RIVERS OF WATER.
IN a dry place, burnt up for want of moisture, nothing is so desirable,
nothing so refreshing as water. To the poor sinful soul, of whose condition the
parched ground is a fit resemblance, Christ shall be, not barely as the morning
dew, not barely as the transient shower, but as a river; yea, as rivers of
water, that flow in copious and never failing streams through the thirsty soil.
Making even the sandy desert, green with herbage, and gay with flowers.

THE SECURITY OF BELIEVERS IN JESUS.
SHOULD ye be pursued by a conquering foe, determined to cut you in pieces, if
you turned into a castle, whose walls were stronger than brass, stronger than
adamant, stronger than all the rocks in the world, you might laugh at the
attempts of your, enemy. You are free from the power of the sword. So free are
you, and abundantly more free from danger, when you fly to the strong hold of
Christ's death and atonement.

THE DANGER OF COVETOUSNESS AND PRODIGALITY.
IF riches have been your idol, hoarded up in your coffers, or lavished out
upon yourselves; they will when the day of reckoning comes, be like the garment
of pitch and brimstone, put upon the criminal condemned to the flames.

THE BENEFITS OF CHRIST'S REDEMPTION.
FEAR not, says the Lord, for I have Redeemed thee, Isaiah, xliii, 1.
Redemption by Christ is a preservative from all terror, and an antidote against
every evil. When this blood is sprinkled, sin is done away; and God is
appeased; his promises are your portion, and his arm is your defense.

THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER, AND THE PRACTICE OF IT URGED ON ALL.
ALAS! how many of those, whom we call Christians, are strangers to prayer! how
many servants rise to their work, and neverbend a knee before their master in
heaven! how many masters set their servants an ungodly example! enter upon the
affairs of the day, without imploring the God of all grace either to prosper
their business, or to sanctify their souls! how many parents know not what it
is, to make earnest supplications for the conversion and salvation of their
children, how many children are as ignorant of the nature, the necessity, the
advantages of prayer, "as the wild ass's colt." Job, xi, 12.

A TIMELY WARNING TO THOUGHTLESS SINNERS.
IF this building was rocking over your heads and tottering on every side; if
the beams were bursting, and the walls cleaving; you would be struck with
astonishment. And how is it, that you are under no apprehensions, when the
indignation of an Almighty God is ready to fall upon you, and (worse than ten
thousand falling millstones) grind you to powder?

ALL THE PERFECTIONS OF DEITY HARMONIZE IN THE CROSS OF CHRIST.
HERE, Justice has set her most awful terrors in array; even while goodness
appears, with inexpressible loveliness, and and the most attractive beauty.
Here truth, more unshaken than a rock, takes her immovable stand; and mercy,
tenderer than the mother's tears, yearns with bowels of everlasting pity. -- In
a word, the cross of Christ is a conspicuous theater on which all the divine
perfections unite and harmonize, and shine forth with transcendent luster.

THE NATURE AND EFFECT OF FAITH IN JESUS.
THIS is a foundation of the sublimesf hope, and a fountain of the most
exuberant joy. This affords matter for the deepest humility, and yields fuel
for the most flaming love. Faith in our crucitied Jesus, is an ever-active
principle of the most cheerful and exact obedience: is an ample and
inexhaustible magazine, from which we may fetch arms to conquer; absolutely
conquer, the allurements of the world, the solicitations of the flesh, and the
temptations of the devil.

THE HAPPY INFLUENCES OF THE LOVE OF GOD.
ASENSE of his immensely rich goodness shall win your affections; shall incline
(what all the threatenings of damnation could never effect,) shall incline you
to loath your sins, and to love his service; shall smooth your path, and
expedite your progress to the regions of immortal honor and joy.

JESUS CHRIST WORTHY OF OUR HIGHEST REGARD.
WHO is more worthy of our choicest thoughts, affections, and honors, than that
divinely compassionate Savior, who offered himself, in the very prime of his
life, a bleeding victim for our sins, that his sacrifice might have every
recommending circumstance which could render it acceptable to God and available
for man?

THE HAPPINESS AND EMPLOYMENT OF THE SAINTS ABOVE.
THOSE happy beings, who stand around the throne, clothed with white robes,
serve their God day and night, for ever, in his temple. In the regions of
immortality they find a heaven, because there they have a never-ceasing and
eternal communion with God; because there they have an uninterrupted and
everlasting Sabbarh.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BIBLE HELD OUT AND RECOMMENDED.
IMIGHT recount the glorious privileges, exhibited in this blessed book; the
inestimable promises, made to the righteous; the tenderly compassionate
invitations, addressed to sinners; the refined and exalted displays of
morality; with many other noble particulars -- which is the prerogative of
scripture to contain -- the wisdom of mankind to believe -- and the only
felicity of our nature to be interested in, and infiuenced by them.

GOD'S METHOD OF DEALING WITH MAN.
GOD, to show his utter detestation of all iniqity; to manifest his singular
delight in all virtue; frequently takes occasion to denounce vengaance, or
promise happiness, when some notorious evil is committed, or some laudable good
performed.

THE BENEFITS OF ADVERSITY.
WE are taught in scripture, that the Almighty chastens whom he loves; and
scourges the men whom he receives to himself. Adversity is a school, in which
both private persons and public societies have learned the most heroic virtues.

NATURE AND DIVINE REVELATION SOMEWHAT ALIKE.
THE pages of scripture, like the productions of nature, will not only endure
the test, but improve upon the trial. The application of the miscroscope to the
one, and a repeated meditation on the other, are sure to display new beautics,
and present us with higher attractives.

THE LOVE OF GOD THE END OF ALL RELIGION.
THE love of God, that supremely glorious, and supremely gracious Being, is of
all other tempers, the most delightful and divine. A sacred flower, which its
early bud is happiness, and in its full bloom is heaven. To plant this noble
principle in the breast, to cultivate its growth, and bring it to maturity, is
the grand end of all reli gion, and the genuine fruit of faith unfeigned.

THE WORKS OF REDEMPTION TOO GREAT FOR ANGELS.
THE angels were absolutely incapable of executing so great a work. It required
a far abler agent to negociate our reconciliation. It must cost incomparably
more, to redeem guilty souls. Therefore the God of our salvation "laid the help
upon one that is mighty." He appointed, to the most momentuous of all offices,
the most illustrious of all beings,

THE WORK OF GOSPEL MINISTERS.
AS you are all, by nature, in bondage to sin, our business is, to take you by
the hand, and lead you out of this ignominious slavery, into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God; while the spirit of the most High breaks off your
shackles, and makes you free indeed. -- What manna can be more refreshing than
such a message? what balm more healing than such a service?

GOOD WORKS ABSOLUTELY INSUFFICIENT TO SAVE MANKIND.
GOD has not reconciled the world to himself by their own pious practices, but
by his son Jesus Christ. -- Can your charitable deeds expiate your innumerable
offenses? As soon may a single drop of pure water correct and sweeten the
unfathomable brin^ of the ocean. Can your defective performances satisfy the
demands of a perfect law, or your wandering devotions screen you from the
displeasure of an injured God? As well may your uplifted-hand eclipse the sun,
or intercept the lightning when it darts through the bursting cloud.

ON THE Religious Education OF DAUGHTERS.
Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it. Proverbs, xxii. 6.
IT has long been a prevailing report, that, among persons of education and
distinction, true religon is very rare. This, I would hope, is an invidious
rumor, rather than a true representation of the case. May it not be an
attifice of the grand enemy? calculated to bring the best and noblest of causes
into disrepute: as though politeness and piety were inconsistent: as though
grace and good-breeding were irreconcilable. -- Is then the faith of Christ
quite fatal to refined manners? as the rod of Moses was to the counterfeit
miracles of d^^^^gicians. No; it is rather like the influence of the sanctuary
on the rod of Aaron: which, while it remained at a distance from the
tabernacle, was a dry, sapless and barren stick; but, when deposited before the
ark, was quickened into vegetable light, was adorned with a milk-white bloom,
and enriched with full grown fruit; or as the sacred historian expresses this
surprising fact, "It brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded
almonds." Numb. xxii. 6.

I find, upon the list of saints, the most renowned kings, and victorious
generals, the ablest politicians, and the greatest philosophers men that have
bid the sun stand still, and prolong the parting day; have laid an embargo upon
darkness; and protracted the shades of night; have commanded the ground to
cleave asunder, and transmit their presumptuous foes to a strange and
inevitable des^^ction; have divided the impetuous waves, and led their
followers to safety and to conquest thought the depths of the sea. Men who have
walked in the burning fiery surnace, as under the shelter of an embowering
arbor; and sat in the lions den, amidst a herd of hungry monsters, with as
much serenity, and as much security, as amidst a circle of besom-friends.

I myself have known various persons, admired for their accomplished behavior,
and revered for their exalted station, who have thought it their highest honor
to be servants of Jesus Christ. My excellent friend Camillus, at whose house I
now reside, is one of the number. I cannot refrain from giving a portrait of
Camillus; or rather of a few of his most distinguishing features: for, to paint
him in full proportion, as he daily appears, in all the mild, the benign
majesty of domestic authority, parental government, and Christian zeal -- To do
this, would require a much abler hand than mine.

Camillus, not long ago, entertained in his house a young clergyman, who was
always treated with a respect suitable to the dignity of his office, and the
piety of his behavior. I having larely presented the worthy ecclesiastic to a
living, and always requiring residence on the benefice, he is now destitute of
a chaplain. Remembering, however, that all Christians are spiritual priests; he
thinks it no dishonor to have an immediate and personal audience with the King
of Heaven; not acting at all out of character to repesent the wants of his
household, with his own mouth, at the throne of grace.

Before supper is introduced, the evening incense ascends. This rather than a
later hour, is pitched upon, that the little congregation may join in the
sacred service, with a lively devotion. After a plentiful meal, when the limbs
are weary, people, even though kneeling, and in the presence of God, are more
inclined to nod, than to pour out their souls; are very apt to mistake the
cushion for a pillow. -- No servant is allowed to be absent, one only excepted,
whose presence in the kitchen is absolutely necessary. Acquainted with their
master's resolution, they are careful, so to manage their affairs, and dispatch
their business, that no unavoidable obstacle may intervene to detain them from
the stated worship.

When all are assembled, without either tumultuous disorder in their approach,
or a slovenly negligence in their apparel, a chapter is read. Camillus makes
the choice. -- He imagines it not so useful for his family, whose momories are
weak, and their capacities scanty, to read the lesson for the day. -- He has,
therefore, selected some of the most instructive and animating portions of
scripture; and judges it advisable to peruse these again and again, rather
than to go regularly through the whole inspired writings. -- The servants take
it by turns to read, which improves them in the practice, and keeps them awake.
If any of them discovers a disposi of sleep, to him the office is sure to be
assigned.

When the chapter is finished, Camillus singles out some one verse, of very
weighty and edifying import, which, for the space of five or six minutes, he
explains, applies, and affectionately urges upon their consciences. This done,
with great seriousness and profound reverence, he offers up evening prayers.
His prayers consists of short sentences, and the whole is performed in a little
time. Every part is pronounced with that deliberate slowness and solemn accent,
which command attention and create awe. He makes a very perceivable pause at
the close of each petition that every one may have leisure to add, in silence,
a hearty amen; and to recollect the merits of that blessed Redeemer, which
render every thanksgiving acceptable, and every supplication successful.

In the morning, before breakfast, the worship of the living God is renewed. At
this juncture Camillus omits the chapter, but requires one of his domestics to
repeat the verse on which he enlarged the proceeding night. None knows which
shall be called to this task, therefore every one is obilged to be properly
prepared. He throws the substance of his exhortation into a few scarening and
interesting questions, which he addresses to one of his children or servants --
for, in this prespect, no difference is made. -- All are equally enjoined to
remember. Some times he encourages those whose answers show that they have
given diligent heed to his instructions. Sometimes he puts on an air of
severity, mixed with tenderness, and reproves the notoricusly negligent. Always
he re-inculcates the principal points, charging them to retain the doctrines in
their memory, and revolve them in their thoughts, while they are pursuing their
respective business -- These doctrines are the seed of faith, the root of
godliness. Unless these be lodged in the mind, and operate on the heart, he
never expects to have his domestics commence true believers, or real
Christians. No more than the husbandman can reasonably expect a crop in harvest
without sowing his field, or the florist promise himself a blow of tulips,
without planting his parterre.

I have given a glimpse of Camillus at the head of his family; let me now show
my favorite in another attitude. -- Camillus is convinced that no trust is of
superior or of equal importance to the tuitionary cultivation of an immortal
soul. As providence has blessed him with two fine daughters, their present and
future happiness is the reigning object of his care. He has no interest so much
at heart as to give them a truly refined education, such as may render them an
ornament and a blessiing to society, while they pass the time of their
sojourning here below, and may train them up for a state of everlasting bliss,
when the world and its transitory scenes shall be no more.

Camillus never could persuade himself to admire the maxims of prudence said to
be gathered from the extravagant rant of our tragedies; and less is his esteem
for those modest dispositions, which people pretend to imbibe from the lucious
gallantries of comedy; for which reason he has no impatient desire to secure
for Miss Metissa and Miss Serena a place in the front box. -- However, as we
are apt immoderately to covet what is absolutely forbidden, he has himself
attended them, once or twice, to the theatrical entertainments and public
diversions; thinking it much the safest method, that their curiosity should be
gratified under his own inspection and hoping to make them sensible how much
they endanger their virtue, who too often frequent them; how shamefully they
debase their affections, who are passionately fond of them; and what mere
phantoms they follow, who seek for satisfaction in such delusory delights.

They learn to dance, in order to require a genteel air, and a graceful
demeanor; not to shine at a ball, or win the worthless admiration of fops. --
He is content to have them unacquainted with the wild and romantic fables of
heathen poetry. Nor is under any painful apprehensions of damping the
sprightliness of their temper, though they have no taste for the chimerical
adventures of our romances, and are strangers to the loose intrigues of our
novels; being fully persuaded, that there is as much sound sense as smartness
of thought in that celebrated saying,

"Retire, and read your bible to be gay:
"There truths abound of sovereign aid to peace"?
He has introduced them to the knowledge of history, and its instructive facts.
They have atolerable idea of the four universal monarchies, so eminent for
their great evenst, and so circumstantially foretold in scripture. They have
been led through the most remarkable transactions of our own country, and are
pretty well acquainted with the present state of Europe. They have all along
been taught to observe the wonderful revolutions of empires, and the adorable
procedure of Providence; that they may discern how the fashion of this world
passes away; and and how happy are the people, how happy are the persons who
have the LORD for their GOD. They have been taught to observe the honorable
success that has usually attended the practice of integrity, guided by
prudence; together with the scandal and ruin which have always pursued folly in
her senseless rambles, and dogged vice to her horrid haunts. That they may see
the rocks on which some have split, and avoid the destructive tract; see the
road which has conducted others to the haven of happiness, and steer the same
auspicious course.

They have been initiated in geography, and understand the several divisions of
the globe; the extent of its principal kingdoms, and the manners of their
various inhabitants. They will tell you the peculiar commodities which each
climate produces; whence comes the tea that furnishes their breakfast, and
whence the sugar that renders it palatable: what mountains supply them with
wines, and what islands send them their spices; in what groves the silkworms
spin the materials for their clothes, and what mines supply them with the
dimonds that sparkle in their earrings. -- A screen covered with a set of
colored maps, and a custom of referring from the public papers to those
beautiful draughts, has rendered the acquisition of this knowledge a diversion
rather than a task, has enticed them into a valuable branch of science, under
the inviting disguise of amusement. This serves to enlarge their apprehension
of things, gives them magnificent cent thoughts of the great Greater, and may
help to suppress that silly self-admi^ation, which p^ompts so many pretty idols
to fancy themselves the only considerable creatures under heaven.

They spell to perfection, and have obtained this art by a sort of play, rather
than by laborious application. Whenever they asked any little gratification, it
has been their papa's custom to make them spell the word, which if they
performed aright, they seldom sailed to succeed in their request. -- They are
mistresses of the needle; and the youngest, whose genius inclines that way, is
expert in using the pencil. Music is their recreation, not their business. The
eldest to a skilful finger, adds a melodious and well regulated voice. She
often entertains me with singing an anthem to her harpsichord. Entertains did I
say? -- she really edisies me. These truly excellent performances exalt the
desires, and compose the affections; they inspire 02 such a serenity of
delight, as leaves neither a sting on the conscience, nor a stain on the
imagination. Methinks they bring us a little antepast of heaven, and tune
cursouls for its harmonious joys.

Thoroughly versed in the most practical parts of arithmetic, they have each
her week, wherein to be entrusted with the management of a sum of money. This
they disburse, as cir^n n^tances require, for the smaller necessaries of the
family. Of this they keep an exact account, and make a regular entry of each
particular in their daybook. -- Not long ago a tenant of inferior rank came to
Camillus with his rent: instead of receiving it himself, he referred him to
Miss Serena. You would have been delighted to observe the behavior of our
little landlady on this occasion; the engaging condescension with which she
addressed the honest rustic; the tender goodnature with which she enquired
after his dame and the family at home; the ready dexterity with which she wrote
and subscribed a proper receipt; and, above all, her amiable generosity in
returning half a crown to buy a copy-book for his eldest son, who he said, "was
just going into joining hand, but the feared would never come to spell or write
half so well as her ladyship."

Though Camillus is careful to ground them betimes in the rules of economy, he
is equally careful to cultivate a spirit of discreet beneficence. A few days
ago, when my friend and his lady were abroad, Miss Metissa was informed of a
poor woman in the parish, just brought to bed, after a long and hard labor;
who, being unhappily married to a sot of a fellow, was, at a time when the
choicest comforts were scarcely sufficient, destitute of the meanest
conveniences. Upon hearing the calamitous case, she immediately dispatched a
servant with a crown from her weekly stock; part to buy for the afflicted
creature some present accomodations, and part to defray the expenses at such a
juncture unavoidable; but gave a strict charge, that the whole should be
employed for the relief of the distressed mother and her helpless infant, none
of it fingered or enjoyed by the worthless drone her husband. When Camillus
returned, he was so pleased with this seasonable and well judged charity, that,
besides his commendation and caresses, he farther rewarded our considerate and
matron like benefactress, by making her a present of Clarissa; for he always
contrives to make what tends to their improvement, the matter of their reward.
If they have committed a fault, they are forbid the priveledge of using their
maps. If they have behaved in a becoming manner, their recompense is, not a
piece of money, or a paper of sweetmeats, but some new instruction on the
globe, some new lesson on the harpsichord, which may at once delight and
improve them.

To prevent a haughty carriage, and to worm out all inordinate self-love, he
teaches them to consider their neighbors as members of the same universal
family, and children of the same Almighty Father. However poor in their
circumstances, or mean in their aspect, they are the objects of God's
infiniciely tender regards. -- Of that God, who has given his own Son to suffer
death for their pardon, and has prepared a heaven of endless bliss for their
final reception; for which reason they should despise none, but honor all;
should be as ready to do them good, as the hand is ready to sooth the eye when
if smarts, or ease the head when it aches. One afternoon, when he was going to
treat them with an orange, he bid each of them bring a fine toy, lately
received for a present. It was made in the shape of a knife, the handle of
ivory and inlaid with the gayest colors; the blade of glass most dazzlingly
bright, but without an edge. "Cut the orange in two," said their papa. When
they both tried with their pretty knives, and, to their no small mortification,
both failed. He furnished them with another of more ordinary appearance, but
tolerably sharp. With this they easily pierced the rhind, and came at the
delicious juice. "Who now," said Camillus, "would not prefer one such
serviceable, though plainutensil, toa hundred of those glittering but worthless
trifles? and you, my dear children, if you have no other recommendations than a
shewy person, and the trappings of dress, you will be as contemptible in your
generation as that insignificant bauble. But, if it is the desire of your
hearts and the endeavor of your lives, to be extensively useful, you will
gain, and what is better, you will deserve respect; your names will be
precious, and your memories blessed.

With equal watchfulness he discountenances all those acts of petulant
barbarity, which children are so apt to exercise on the reptile creation. He
will allow no court of inquisition to be erected within his house; no, not upon
the most despicable, or even the noxious animals. The very nuisances that are
endued with life, he thinks should be dispatched, not with a lingering butchery
but with a merciful expedition. To rend in pieces a poor fly, and feast their
eyes with the mangled limbs, shivering and convulsed in the pangs of death; to
impale a wretched infect on the needle or bodkin; and, what is still more
shocking, to take pleasure in hearing its passionate moan, and seeing its
agonizing struggles: such practices he absolutely forbids, as insufferable
violations of nature's law. Such as tend to extinguish the soft emotions of
pity, and inure the mind to a habit of inhumanity. -- He often informs his
lovely pupils, that every living creature is sensible of pain; that none can be
abused in this cruel manner, without suffering very exquisite mitery. To turn
their torments into pastime, and make sport with their anguish, is a rigor
more than tyrannical, worse than brutal; is the very reverse of that benign
Providence, whose tender mercies are over ALL his works.

He proposes to give them a taste of natural philosophy, and to accomodate them
with the best microscopes; that the use of these instruments, and a spice of
that knowledge, may inspire them with an early admiration of nature's works,
and with the deepest veneration of nature's almighty Author. Camillus has no
design to finish a couple of semale philosophers, or to divert their attention
from those domestic arts, which are the truest accomplishments of the sex; yet
neither would he have his daughters debarred from that rational and exalted
delight, which is to be found in contemplating the curiosities of the great
Creator's cabinet. Why may they not, without departing from their own, or
encroaching on the masculine character, why may they not be acquainted with the
accurately nice structure of an animal; or with the process and effects of
vegetation? why may they not learn the admirable operations of the air, or the
wonderfnl properties of the water? have some general notion of the immense
magnitudes, the prodigious distances, and the still more amazing revolutions of
the heavenly orbs? he apprehends it very practicable to con^luct an
entertainment with dignity, and order a family with propriety, even while they
retain some tolerable idea of these magnisicent laws which regulate the system
of the universe.

The microscope, whenever they are inclined to amuse themselves, will show them
a prosusion of splendid ornaments, in some of the most common and contemptible
objects. It will show them gold and embroidery, diamonds and pearl, azure,
green, and vermilion, where unassisted eyes behold nothing, but provocatives of
their abhorrence. This instrument will show them the brightesh v^nish, and the
most curious carving, even in the minutest scraps of existence. Far more
surprising than the mag^^ fears of the most dexterous ju^^ler, is will treat
their sight, not with delusive, but with re^^ wonders. A huge elephant shall
stalk, where a pony mite was wont to crawl. Blood shull bound from the beating
heart, and eyes sparkle with a lively ^us^re, limbs shall play the most
sp^ightly motions, or trand comp^sed in the most gracefulattitudes, where
nothing ordinarily appeared but a confused speck of animated matter. -- A
tincture of philosophy will be the cosinetic of nature; will tender all her
seenes lovely, and all her apartments a theater of diversion: diversions
infinitely superior to those dangerous delights, which are so apt to inveigle
the affections, and debauch the minds of young people. -- When philosophy lends
her optics, an unclouded morning, beautiful with the rising sun; a clear night,
brilliant with innumerable stars; will be a more pleasing spectacle, than the
gaudiest illuminations of the assembly-room. The melody of birds, and the
murmur of sountains; the humming insect, and the sighing gale, will be a higher
gratisication then the finest airs of an opera. A field covered with corn or a
meadow besprinkled with daisies; a marsh planted with osiers, or a mountain
shaded with oaks, will yield a far more agrecable prospect than the most
pompous scenes that decorate the stage. Should clouds overcast the heavens, or
winter disrobe the Rowers; an inquiry into the causes of these grand
vicissitudes, will more than compensate the transitory loss. A discovery of the
divine wisdom and goodness, in these seemingly disastrous changes, will impart
gaiety to the most gloomy sky, and make the most unornamented seasons smile.

It is for want of such truly elegant and satisfactory amusements, that so many
ladies of the first distinction, and sinest genius, have no employ for their
delicate capacities; but lose their happiness in slights of caprice, or fits of
the vapor; lose their time in the most insipid chat, or the most whimsical
vagaries; while thought is a burden, and re^^ection, is a drudgery; solitude
^ills them with horror and a serious discourse makes them melancholy.

Above all, Camillus is most earnestly desirous to have his tender charge
grounded in the principles, and actuated with the spirit of Christianity. No
scheme, he is thoroughly persuaded, was ever so wisely calculated to sweeten
their tempers, to exalt their affections, and form them to felicity, either in
this world, or another. It is therefore his daily endeavor, by the most easy
and endearing methods of instruction, to fill their minds with the knowledge of
those heavenly doctrines, and win their hearts to the love of that invaluable
book in which they are delineated. -- He longs to have a sense of God
Almighty's goodness impressed on their souls, From this source, under the
influences of the s^nctisying Spirit, he would derive all the graces and all
the duties of godliness. With this view he speaks of the divine Majesty, not
only as supereminently great, but as most transcendently possessed of every
delightful, every charming excellence. He represents all the comfort they
enjoy, and every blessing they receive, as the gists of his bountiful hand, and
as an earnest of unspea^ably richer favors (...) THEM, (...) whatever their
(...) Father commands, forbids, (...), proceeds from his overflowing kindness,
and is intended for their eternal good, if, by these expedients, he may awaken
in their minds an habitual gratitude to their everlasting Benefactor. The
actings of which noble principle are not only frui^ful in every good work, but
productive of the truest satisfaction; somewhat like the fragrant streams of
consecrated incense, which, while they honored the great object of devour
worship, regaled with their pleasing perfumes.

Nothing is more displeasing to Camillus than the fond flatteries which their
injudicious admirers bestow on their shape and complexion, the gracefulness of
their carriage, and the vivacity of their wit. He would fain make them sensible
that these embellishments are of the lowest value, and most fading nature; --
that, if they render their possessors vain and self-conceited, they are far
greater blemishes than a hump on the back, a wen in the neck, or stuttering in
the speech. -- He would have them thoroughly convinced, that, notwithstanding
all their silks, diamonds, and other marks of their superior circumstances,
they are ignorant, guilty, impotent creatures; blind to truths of the last
importance; deserving the vengcance of etetnal fire, and unable of themselves
to think a good thought. That, from such conviction, they may perceive their
absolute need of a Savior: a Savior in all his offices -- as a prophet, to
teach them heavenly wisdom -- as a priest, to atone for all their many, many
sins -- as a king, to subdue their iniquities, write his laws in their hearts,
and make them, in all their conversation, holy.

In short, the point he chiefly labors, is to work in their hearts a deep, an
abiding sense, that God is their supreme, their only good; that the blessed
Jesus is the rock of their hopes, and the fountain of their salvation: that all
their dependence for acquiring the beauties of holiness, and tasting the joys
of the sublimest virtue, is to be placed on the Holy Ghost the comforter. --
Amidst all these efforts of his own, he never fails to to plead that precious
promise of our unchangeable Jehovah; I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and
my blessing upon thy offspring; and they shall grow up in knowledge and grace,
as willows by the water-co^^^s.

A lady of brilliant parts, but no very extraordinary piety, told Camillus,
that he would spoil the pretty dears; would extinguish that decent pride, and
fondness for pleasure, which are shining qualifications in an accomplished
young lady, which gave her an clevation of sentiment, and a delicacy of taste,
greatly superior to the ignoble vulgar. -- To whom he replied: "Far from
extirpating their passions, I only attempt to turn them into a right channel,
and direct them to the worthiest objects. Willing I am that they should have a
decent ambition; an ambition, not to catch the the giddy coxcomb^s eye, or be
the hackneyed toast of rakes; but to please their parents, to make a husband
happy, and to promote the glory of God. -- They may entertain a fondness for
pleasure; but such pleasure as will ennoble their souls, afford them
substantial satisfaction, and prepare them for the fruition of immortal bliss.
-- Let them be covetous also, if you please, Madam; but covetous of redeeming
their time, and of gaining intellectual improvement; covetous of those riches,
which no moth can corrupt, nor thief steal, which neither time nor death can
destroy."

In all these instances of parental sollcitude, his beloved Emilia takes her
constant, her willing share. Contributes her ^dvice in every plan that is
concerted, and her hearty concurrence in every expedient that is executed;
every expedient for polishing the human jewel, and making their manners as
saultless as their forms. -- May the God of infinite goodness, the sacred
source of all perfection prosper their endeavors! that, as the young ladies
are adorned in their persons, with native beauty, they may be enriched in their
understandings, with refined knowledge, and dignified in their souls with the
spirit of the blessed Jesus. -- Then, surely, more amiable objects the eye of
man cannot behold: more desirable partners the heart of man cannot wish.

AN ELEGY.

AN ELEGY ON THE LATE REVEREND MR. JAMES HERVEY, A. M.
I.
FAR from the dwellings of commerciallife,
The toils of business and the haunts of pride;
Alike removed from envy, noise and strife,
Religion's patron, Hervey lived and died. See his Life.

II.
Of converse free, instructive and divine,
Of temper grave, yet innocently gay:
In him did virtue, truth and goodness shine,
The Christian's riches, and the saints array.
III.
Behold him preaching to the sericus few This term refers not to the number of
his hearers, for he had a very large congregation, but to the ^rof^ssors of
religion in the general who in comparison with the bulk of mankind, truly are
but few.

How fixed the attention, and how just the applause!
How sound his reasonings in the good man's view!
His zeal, how servent in his Master's canse!
IV.
How meek and humble, like his blessed Lord,
TO advance whose glory was his constant aim;
How would he gladly Jesu's love record,
And boldly spread the honors of his name.
V.
View him alone, within the hallowed fane, Meditations among the tombs.

Sagely conversing with the lettered floor;
Where Death, in triumph, registers his slain,
And titles, wealth and beauty charm no more.
VI.
From soulptur'd tombs of every rank and age,
What useful lessons does he give to all,
Our faith to strengthen, and our hopes engage,
While we with patience wait the solemn call.
VII.
Behold him walking midst the s^owery race, Meditations in a flower garder.

While birds me^odious hall the op^ning day;
How well he paints the wondrous works of grace,
From those of nature which the fields display!
VIII.
Then view him teaching all created things Descant on creation.

In heaven and earth, to sing their Maker's praise;
And join with them to adore the King of kings,
The God of nature, just in all his ways.
IX.
When evening draws her shadowy curtains round,
And gently darkens into peaceful night:
While stars unnumber'd deck the blue profound,
And rising Cynthia yields a silver light:
X.
Then trace his footsteps over the dewy meads,
While every object wrapped in silence lies;
And mount with him, as contemplation leads,
To view the planets rolling through the skies Meditations, on the Night and
Starry Heaveas.

XI.
When dreary winter rules the changing year,
And storms and tempests rage along the plains;
When Hervey wills, they speak inreason's ear
And tell they joyful news, A Savior reigns, See the Winter Piece.

XII.
When Jesu's righteousness becomes the theme,
And good Aspasio's every doubt removes,
Convinced with Thereon, bless the gracious scheme, Thereon and Aspasio, or
Dialogues on the most importan and interesting subjects.

Which Jesu's cross, our crown of glory proves.
XIII.
In various letters to his several friends
The pious Hervey does through all appear
The real Christian, whilst he recommends
The love of God, ingenuous and sincere See his Letters.

XIV.
And, though he is dead as man is born to die,
Ye weeping kindred give your sorrows over;
For, sure as Christ forever reigns on high John, xiv. 2 -- xvii. 24.

Hervey still lives above, to die no more.
G. W. FINIS

