John Lathrop, jun'rs. Oration.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED JULY 4, 1796, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY JOHN LATHROP, JUN.

BOSTON, PRINTED AND SOLD BY BENJAMIN EDES, Kilby Street, -- 1796.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned, in public Town-Meeting, assembled at
Faneuil-Hall, on Monday the 4th Day of July, A. D. 1796;
VOTED, THAT the SELECTMEN be and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait on
JOHN LATHROP, jun. Esquire. and in the Name of the Town to thank him for the
spirited and elegant ORATION this Day delivered by him, at the Request of the
Town, upon the ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
-- in which, according to the Institution of the Town, he considered the
Feelings, Manners, and Principles which led to that great National Event -- and
to request of him a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest, WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
AS an apology for gratifying the wishes of my Fellow Citizens must be
unnecessary and superfluous, I submit to their perusal the ORATION, which they
heared pronounced, with kind and candid attention.

I am, GENTLEMEN, Your obedient and obliged servant, JOHN LATHROP, jun.
JULY 5, 1796.
The Selectmen of Boston.
AN ORATION.
IT is now acknowledged as a fact in political biography, that Liberty
descended from Heaven, on the 4th of July, 1776. -- We are assembled on this
day, the twentieth anniversary of her advent, to sympathise in those pleasures
which none but freemen can enjoy; -- to exchange those mutual congratulations,
which none, but freemen can express.

THE first promulgation of the Gospel of Liberty, was the declaration of
American independence. Her apostles, the venerable congress, whose mode of
evangelizing, made many a Felix tremble, sealed the doom, and issued the
death-warrant of Despotism. The measure of her iniquity was filled up: The
decree was gone forth, and Americans were elected by God, to redeem from
bondage, the miserable victims of arbitrary power. But it would have been of no
avail, for them to publish to the enslaved the beauties of Freedom, describe
her charms, and urge the duty of possessing her, while they, themselves, were
declared by an act of the British legislature, liable to be bounden by the will
and laws of that overbearing kingdom, "IN ALL CASES WHATSOEVER." They disdained
an inconsistency of character: -- they presented the world with a glorious
example by effecting their own emancipation. Yes, my fellow countrymen! You
indignantly refused a base submission to the usurpation of Great Britain, -- to
the impositions of her parliament and the insolence of her ministry. After
opposing reasoning and argument to her absurd pretensions and dignified
remonstrance to her unjustifiable encroachments, the solemn appeal was made to
Heaven -- the sword was drawn, and the once inseparable tie of connection
between the two countries, severed in twain. The mighty blow resounded through
the universe. The nations of the earth were astonished -- dumb with surprise or
trembling with apprehension. The deep rooted thrones of aged monarchies were
shaken to their centres. The bastiles of Tyranny, riven by the shock,
reluctantly admitted the rays of hope to gladden the desponding hearts of their
wretched tenants, and opened to their view a distant prospect of scenes
illumined with Liberty's full and perfect day. --

WHAT were the feelings, manners and principles, which produced the great
national event, the subject of our anniversary commemoration? Sprung from an
ancestry ennobled by their virtue and their bravery, and inheriting from their
dauntless sire that ardent spirit, that high-souled honor, which equally
disdained a quiet submission to an insult or an injury, Americans could not
disguise their abhorrence of that system of policy, which had for its object
the increase of regal prerogative, and the consequent diminution of the
privileges of the people. They had learned the nature of the rights of man,
among the earliest rudiments of their education. That GOD never created a human
being to be a slave, was in their opinion, an axiom so self evident, so sacred
an article of natural and revealed religion, that it would have been blasphemy
to have deemed it problematical. Convinced that all men are born free and
equal, they never could comprehend the arguments adduced to support the
pretensions of dignified descent or hereditary honor. They loved their natal
soil, for it was subdued and cultivated by their fathers, the abode of all
their hearts held dear, and congenial with the rapid and luxuriant growth of
the towering oak of Independence. -- What then were their feelings, when they
were declared slaves by the most insolent of all the decrees that ever emanated
from the polluted source of usurped authority? What their feelings when the
advice of a CAMEDEN was rejected -- when the eloquence of a CHATHAM, their
im^^^^ial advocate, was unregarded by the infatuat^^ projectors of American
subjugation? Such their feelings -- as those which inspired the patriots of
ancient days and the heroes of former times -- impelled them to vengeance
against tyrants and urged them to godlike achievements. Such as glowed in the
authors of Roman and Grecian, of Belgic and Helvetic liberty -- in the Catos,
the Tells, the Nassaus, the Hampdens, the Adamses and the Washingtons, who have
maintained and supported the rights of the people, and by preserving their
freedom, given life its best grace and existence its brightest charm.

THEIR manners, -- Americans! May those manners and those feelings, which
inspired the actions and were expressed in the conduct of the patriots of 1776,
be exhibited in the deportment of our latest posterity! They were incapable of
dissimulation -- they could not conceal their thoughts, nor did they blush to
communicate to their sovereign, their sorrows and their fears. They prayed for
an alleviation of their burdens; but they firmly contended that they ought not
to be taxed by any political body, of which they were not a constituent part,
and in which they were not represented. They petitioned, they argued, they
remonstrated. -- Their petitions were treated with silent contempt -- their
arguments were addressed to the deaf ears of pride and obstinacy -- their
remonstrances were construed into over acts of treason, for which, they were
sentenced to suffer the severest punishment that Cruelty could devise or
Despotism inflict. Their manners, pure and unadulterated, were the strong
language that expressed the sensations which agitated their bosoms. They
unequivocally demonstrated their determined courage, and were dignified as the
resolutions of their enthusiastic souls. -- Enthusiastic! Yes! and it was a
glorious enthusiasm, which inspired with one sentiment and one intent, more
than three millions of brave men, and kindled those unquenchable flames, which
melted the manacles of tyranny, and illumined with luster divine, an
EMANCIPATED world!

SUCH feelings -- such manners could have originated only from the noblest, the
most uncorrupted and steady principles; from principles founded in virtue, the
criterion of whose excellence has been unerring Experience. Such, warmed the
breast of him, who consecrated Utica to eternal fame, and who, when Caesar had
banished Liberty from his country, flew after her, to enjoy her blessings among
the gods. Such, fired the hardy and valiant opposers of despotism, when the
second Phillip of Spain, like the third George of Britain, forced a brave
people to become free and independent by oppressing and endeavoring to bind
them in chains.

THAT the best way for a great empire to tax her colonies is to confer benefits
upon them, and, that no rulers have a right to levy contributions upon the
property, or exact the services of their subjects, without their own, or the
consent of their immediate representatives, were principles never recognized by
the ministry and parliament of Great Britain. Fatally enamoured of their
selfish systems of policy, and obstinately determined to effect the execution
of their nefarious purposes, they were deaf to the suggestions of reason and
the demands of justice. The frantic, though transient energy of intoxicated rage
was exhibited in their every act, and blackened and distorted the features of
their national character. On the contrary, Americans had but one object in
view, for in Independence are concentrated and condensed every blessing that
makes lifedesirable, every right and every privilege which can tend to the
happiness or secure the native dignity of man. In the attainment of
Independence, were all their passions, their desires, and their powers engaged.
The intrepidity and magnanimity of their armies, -- the wisdom and inflexible
firmness of their Congress -- the ardency of their patriotism -- their
unrepining patience, when assailed by dangers and perplexed with aggravated
misfortunes, have long and deservedly employed the pen of panegyric and the
tongue of eulogy. -- Through the whole revolutionary conflict, a consistency
and systematic regularity were preserved, equally honorable as extraordinary.
The unity of design and classically correct arrangement of the series of
incidents which completed the epic story of American Independence, were so
wonderful, so well wrought, that political Hypercriticism was abashed at the
mighty production, and forced to join her sister Envy, in applauding the
glorious composition. --

IT is my pleasing duty, my fellow citizens, to felicitate you on the
establishment of our national sovereignty; and among the various subjects for
congratulation and rejoicing, this is not the most unimportant, that heaven has
spared so many veterans in the art of war, so many sages, who are versed in the
best policies of peace; men, who are able to instruct and to govern, and whose
faithful services, whose unremitted exertions to promote the public prosperity,
entitle them to our firmest confidence and warmest gratitude. -- Thank GOD!
Uniting in the celebration of this anniversary, I behold many of the
illustrious remnant of that band of patriots, who, despising danger and death,
determined to be free or gloriously perish in the cause. Their countenances
beam inexpressible delight -- our joys are increased by their presence, our
raptures are heightened by their participation. The feelings which inspired
them in the "times which tried men's souls," are communicated to our bosoms. We
catch the divine spirit which impelled them to bid defiance to the congregated
host of despots; which, enabled them to dart the lightnings and hurl the bolts
which their Franklin had wrested from Jove's right hand, at their proud
oppressors and ruthless foes. We swear to preserve the blessings they toiled to
gain, which they obtained by the incessant labors of eight distressful years;
-- to transmit to our posterity, our rights undiminished, our honor
untarnished, and our freedom unimpaired.

AFTER encountering the combined force of European tyrants in the field, in
1783, the claims of America were acknowledged, and her requisitions complied
with, by the self-titled queen of the isles and mistress of the ocean. Britain,
humbled and exhausted -- worn down with the burden of an unsuccessful war, and
bleeding with unnumbered wounds, yielded to the imperious control of necessity,
and declared the thirteen United States to be free, sovereign and independent.
-- Columbia, reclined at her ease beneath the shade of her laurels. The roses
of peace were interwoven with the wreath of glory that encircled her brows. The
sword, which she had wielded in the cause of Liberty was committed to the hands
of Agriculture, and furrowed the soil she had fertilized with the blood of her
enemies. But the work was not accomplished: other labors were yet to be
performed, other difficulties to be vanquished. During the critical time, when
harmony of sentiment united the different States; -- when they were all engaged
in the attainment of their freedom; -- when all their interests were involved
in the event of the conflict and the success of their arms, the old system of
confederation was adequate to the purposes for which it was instituted. But,
when danger was over and the ardent passions which inspired every bosom with
the generous glow of sympathy and affection, -- of manly courage and fraternal
solicitude, had subsided, the situation of our country was discovered to be
truly alarming. Having once suffered so severely from the rod of arbitrary
power, the people were jealous, even of the rulers they had appointed by their
own suffrages. But I will not enlarge on the scenes which followed, on that
disasterous state of America, which was remedied alone by a political
revolution, more wonderful than the sanguinary one, which effected her
separation from Britain. The merchant recollects his dismantled shipping and
his useless stores -- the husbandman, the perished produce of his farms -- the
mechanic, how idle were his tools, how fatal his unavoidable leisure. The white
pinions of Commerce were furled, and she wept at her inability to waft over the
Atlantic's waves the luxuriant harvests of her sister Plenty. The debilitated
confederation of the States -- the inefficacy of a recommendatory system, where
the obstinacy or envy of one inferior department of government "could put a
negative upon the collected wisdom of the union" -- the absolute weakness and
nominal supremacy of Congress, were productive of uncounted evils, of continual
jargon and perpetual feuds. And, upon minute inspection, the whole structure of
our national sovereignty -- the temple where were to reside the power and
dignity of the United States, appeared so feeble, built of such slight
materials, so disproportioned in its form, and incompetent to the design of its
erection, that it was pronounced unworthy the trouble and expense of alteration
or repair. The decaying edifice was peaceably taken down, by consent of the
people, and the majestic fabric of the Federal Constitution, reared in its
stead. Sublimely towering to the heavens, its high dome concentrates the
admiration and applause of all the kingdoms and dominions of the earth.
Supported by its massive columns, it shall stand unshaken and uninjured, until
in one general conflagration the great globe that we inhabit, shall be
dissolved in the undistinguishable ruin of suns and of worlds!

AMERICANS could not hesitate in their choice of a chief magistrate. From the
calm shades of Mount Vernon, called by the voice of his country, he, who was
our cloud and pillar, during our pilgrimage and warfare, arose to govern and
guard us in peace. Every heart beat with transports -- every tongue hailed him
welcome, thrice welcome! -- Under his wife and unequalled administration, all
ranks and degrees of our fellow citizens have been happy and prosperous. The
lofty pyramid of American glory has been completed. As our struggles for
freedom were unparallelled in their force and success, so our sense of its
value has been estimated and proportioned. We have secured it by the best
constitution, that ever was devised by the wisdom of man; we have defended it
as well from foreign invasion as from the more dangerous attacks of domestic
ambition. And although a few aspiring and discontented Exotics, have sounded
the alarm and rung dismal peals upon the Tocsin; -- the real friends to their
country, have remained easy and unappalled, grateful to GOD for their numerous
blessings, and industriously laboring in the city and the field, to deserve
and be favored with a continuance of them. And though ingratitude has dared to
impeach the most inflexible integrity; -- though disappointed ambition has
emitted all its venom to blacken the fair reputation of unsullied virtue;
though the best intentions have been misrepresented and the noblest motives
ascribed to viler purposes than ever were conceived by a Clodius or a Cataline,
the confidence of the AMERICAN PEOPLE can never be removed, nor their
affections diverted from their long tried, their long loved WASHINGTON.

AS Americans we should be jealous of our national character; let us not
present it to the world, colored with the mottled appearance which will be
given, by division of feelings, difference of manners and a servile submission
to any foreign influence. We have a right -- a right dearly purchased -- a
right, which we ought sooner die than relinquish, to act, speak and think for
ourselves. Possessing resources inexhaustible, we can command the wealth of
other countries to flow into our own depositories. Our long extent of sea coast
indented with capacious bays and numerous harbors; -- our unmeasurable interior
territory intersected with navigable rivers and fertilizing streams, ensure
success to the enterprise of Commerce, and an abundant reward to the labors of
Agriculture. In what region of the globe has not our constellated flag been
borne? It has been displayed in Boreal blasts, it has been fanned by the gentle
breezes of milder climes.

INTELLIGENCE is the soul of Liberty. Impressed with a due sense of this
important truth, our ancestors instituted seminaries of learning, and engrafted
the scions of literature, on their political constitutions. The venerable walls
of Harvard, are monuments to their eternal honor. An American, who can neither
read nor write, is as rare a phenomenon as the visit of a comet to our
hemisphere. Enlightened, honest, and independent, the citizens of our populous
towns, the inhabitants of our villages and hamlets, act, reason and determine
for themselves, on subjects of the greatest moment, with such propriety, that
the voice of the American people, may with justice be termed the voice of God.
Let us then be Americans. Our alliance will be courted so long as we behave
with that dignified reserve, which refuses, alike, to urge foreign intimacies
when they are unnecessary, and the adoption of foreign principles and habits.
Remote from the theater of European contests, we may profit by their variances
without involving ourselves in their wars. No one member of the great family of
nations has a right to interfere in our domestic concerns, or to impose upon us
partial, and particular obligations. -- To France, we owe unbounded gratitude.
When assailed by the tempests, and tossed by the rough billows of War, she
burst in all the radiance of her power, upon our dreary situation, and
illumined our passage to the haven of Freedom. -- Ah! Do we not pay the
tributary sigh to the memories of those Gallic heroes who fell in our cause, or
have been sacrificed, the victims of revolutionary rage in that country, for
which, they would have cheerfully shed the last drop of their blood? Can we
check the tear that Gratitude claims, when in mournful idea, we visit the dark
dungeon of FAYETTE and listen to the clanking of his chains? But I forbear --
France is at length free -- View her rising from the glooms which had so long
lowered around her -- blackened her prospects, and eclipsed her glory, and
splendid with the unbounded effulgence of Liberty!

FOR Britain, we feel anxious as patriots and as men. Her success would serve
to increase the pride of her ministry, and strengthen the arm of royal
prerogative. Her fall -- would subjugate a brave people to foreign domination.
Britons are valiant and enlightened; we respect their virtues, we love the
amiable traits of their character, while, we lament the necessity of a reform
in their whole system of government. Alas! The prospect of peace which so
lately glimmered in the political horizon is vanished and gone! Again the
lightnings flash, the thunders roll -- and the tempest wildly rages over
wretched Europe, its duration incalculable, desolating in its course, and
resistless in its progress! May the guardian God of Columbia preserve our land
from the ravage of the storm! and the fury of the conflicting elements!

TO form a treaty with Britain, was an exercise of national right: The merits
or demerits of that treaty, are subjects, which I do not feel myself warranted
in considering on this day, when the hatchet of Party should be buried, when
fraternal love, and congeniality of feeling, ought to glow in every bosom, and
brighten every countenance. May its effects be propitious to our commerce! May
the conviction that the dictates of Prudence are infinitely more worthy of
observance, than those of Resentment, induce an universal acquiesence in the
proceedings of our constituted authorities!

AMERICANS!

TO preserve, to perpetuate the independence of our country, is the duty, not
only of our civil rulers, but of every individual. Much depends, frequently,
upon the exertions and designs of a single member of society. The fate of
Empires has been decided by an aspiring demagogue, or an ambitious hero!

INTRIGUE and Faction, are the instruments which designing and artful men
employ to produce the destruction of good government, and the consequent
annihilation of order and of law. When those infernal agents, are at work, he
who bellows loudest for Liberty, intends to be the tyrant in chief. Let us be
jealous of those Sempronii -- unmantle their nefarious intentions, and convince
them of the fallacy of their hopes to effect their purposes in the midst of an
enlightened people.

THAT a well-regulated militia is necessary to protect our freedom and our
happiness; to guard the temple of Justice from the outrages of the lawless and
abandoned, and to wreak the vengeance of an insulted and powerful nation upon
the insolent invaders of our soil, is a truth too generally acknowledged, to
require any support from argument or from eloquence. Our brave and hardy
yeomanry, strong and vigorous, compose an army, whose force would be as
irresistible, as their hatred of tyrants is unconquerable. Disciplined and
patriotic -- their soldierly appearance would make the slaves of Hesse or
Waldeck tremble, though those wretched hirelings have not sense to discern or
respect the ardent virtue of their dauntless bosoms.

AMERICA, the birth place of Liberty, the trophied abode of victory, the only
and fairest residence of Peace -- the asylum of the oppressed, -- presents to
the world an object for admiration, -- to superior beings a subject for
applause. -- Independent and free -- she is subject to no extraneous control --
but, preserving her equal neutrality and persisting in her dignified refusal to
enlist under the banners of either of the parties which have made Europe but an
ample aceldama, she has pursued that system of policy best calculated to ensure
her own happiness and advantage, without giving cause of offense to any of her
foreign connections or violating her public engagements. -- May her peace, like
her glory and freedom, be perpetual!

ON the last page of Fate's eventful volume, with the raptured ken of prophesy,
I behold COLUMBIA'S name recorded; her future honors and happiness inscribed.
-- In the same important book the approaching end of Tyranny and the triumph of
Right and Justice are written in indelible characters -- The struggle will soon
be over -- the tottering thrones of Despots will quickly fall and bury their
proud incumbents in their massy ruins!

THEN Peace on earth shall hold her easy sway,
And man forget his brother man to slay --
To martial arts, shall milder arts succeed;
Who blesses most, shall gain the immortal meed.
The eye of Pity shall be pained no more,
With Victory's crimson banners stained with gore.
Thou glorious era come! Hail blessed time!
When full-orb'd Freedom shall unclouded shine,
When the chaste Muses cherished by her rays,
In olive groves shall tune their sweetest lays --
When bounteous Ceres shall direct her car,
Over fields now blasted by the fires of war --
And angels view with joy and wonder joined,
The golden age returned to bless mankind!
END.

