Shun Ignorance and Vice in early Youth
Allured by Virtue, and allied to Truth.


THE Modern Story Teller.

CONTENTS.

THE HISTORY OF THE THREE BROTHERS. THE HISTORY OF THE THREE SISTERS. THE
CONTRAST. FATAL EFFECTS OF DELAY. THE NOSEGAY. COURAGE INSPIRED BY FRIENDSHIP.
AND, THE DIVERTING HISTORY OF JOHN GILPIN.
EMBELLISHED WITH ENGRAVINGS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY H. AND P. RICE; SOLD ALSO BY J. RICE AND CO.
MARKET-STREET, BALTIMORE. 1796.

THE THREE BROTHERS.
EUGENE, RICHARD, and CASSANDER, were the sons of Mr. Smithson, a reputable
merchant in the North of Old England, who having no other children besides
them, and being in pretty affluent circumstances, resolved to have them
educated immediately under his own eye. For this purpose he invited into his
house a Mr. Markham, a gentleman of learning and approved morals, to be their
tutor, whose care and attention to their improvement afterward fully answered
all his expectations.

These Three Brothers, from their earliest infancy, were play-mates and
companions. They had never been sent out of their father's house, either to
nurse or even to a school: as Mrs. Smithson, their mother, whose education
rendered her perfectly equal to the task, undertook to put them through the
first rudiments of learning, and to prepare them for whatever studies a tutor
might afterward direct them to. Whether it was their constant society from
their earliest childhood; in the course of which, notwithstanding the
difference of two years, between the age of Cassander and that of Eugene, each
shared invariably in the studies as well as the amusements of the other two; or
whether it was the natural bent of their dispositions, I know not, but they
were remarkable for bearing toward each other a degree of affection that is
rarely to be found amongst brothers in general. In their sports they were
inseparable; the inequality of their number was never an obstacle to their all
partaking of the same pastime, though it might originally have been intended
but for two; and notwithstanding there would now and then arise a trifling
dispute amongst them concerning their play, all differences were usually
settled and reconciled before the conclusion of the game, so that they never
parted from each other in a pet; but, on the contrary, after they were tired of
play, it was no uncommon thing to see them linked all three arm in arm,
sauntering up and down the garden walks, which were commonly the scene of their
amusements; and in that friendly attitude communicating to each other their
little fancies, discussing the remarkale stories that occurred in the course of
their lessons, or else laying their heads together to plan and strike out some
new mode of diversion.

Thus agreeing, and unanimous in all things, they entered with pleasure upon
the course of study laid down to them by Mr. Markham, their tutor. Mrs.
Smithson had never, while her sons were under her care, made their lessons a
painful or disagreeable task; the novelty therefore of Mr. Markham's first
examination, under whom they found that they were to learn both Latin and
Greek, so charmed and delighted them, that they all three jumped for joy when
their Papa showed them three Latin Grammars, which they were to begin the next
day.



Besides, their satisfaction at not being obliged to leave their dear parents,
nor to be separated from each other, might not a little ^^^tribute to the
alacrity they showed on this occasion. In effect the quickness of their
progress surprised and delighted Mr. Markham, their present tutor, as well as
their former one, that is their Mama, to whom they would run every day in
raptures of joy to communicate the contents of their several lessons.

Hitherto we have seen Eugene, Richard* and Cassander, perfectly alike and
equal in all things; it is necessary now to show in what respects they were
unlike, and how the particular character and disposition of each, though
leading to actions extremely different from what the others would pursue, yet
always uniformly concurred in the exertion of that amiable principle, brotherly
love.

Eugene, therefore, with much generosity and something of fire in his
composition, was at the same time a little arch, or what is called waggish. His
pranks in general were the most innocent in the world, it is true, and he could
say at least, that he never meant to hurt: if, however, it would sometimes
happen, which after all was seldom the case, that any of his little jokes cost
either of his brothers a tear; that tear, it was easy to be seen, gave Eugene
infinitely more pain than any he himself shed: but the open frankness and
ardent good nature, with which he would console his weeping brother, seldom
failed to dry it up in a moment. He would never justify his own mistakes or his
awkwardness; and thus he seldom felt the reproaches of his companions, because
they always found him ready to submit to them heartily, and, whenever it so
happened, to own himself in the fault.

Richard, on the other hand, was all simplicity: he had not the least shadow of
design in him; and were it not for the extraordinary apprehension that he
showed in his learning, in which he outstripped both his brothers, he might be
said not to have a thought of his own. Thus Richard, though as cheerful as the
day, seldom laughed unless Eugene or Cassander led the joke. He never proposed
a new sort of play, or invented a fresh plaything, but always was ready, with
the greatest good humor, to join in the one and admire the other, if offered
to his attention by either of his brothers. He might even be said to have no
wants or likings of his own, but as they put him in mind of them. If Eugene
said to the maid, "Molly, I want to go to bed;" Richard would add, "so do I
too." If Cassander said, "Mama, pray give me a piece of bread and butter,"
Richard, if present, would commonly join, "Aye, and me too." And this
disposition of Richard was the happiest in the world; for preserving the
friendship of the Three Brothers; since, whatever advantage or superiority he
might have in his learning, all his amusements, all the pleasure that he
enjoyed from society, depended wholly on Eugene and Cassander.

This last was neither so volatile as his elder brother, nor so simple as
Richard: he had something grave even in his countenance, and though youngest of
the three, was allowed to be much the most prudent; by which means he balanced,
as it were, the opposite defects of his brothers, and frequently would act as
their adviser and censor, by reproving Eugene for his too great vivacity, which
led him so often into scrapes, and Richard for his thoughtless absence and
extreme credulity. But though he sometimes took this freedom, it was always
with the greatest tenderness, being accustomed from his infancy to treat his
elders with respect, particularly his brothers. Indeed a respect for their
elders and superiors Mrs. Smithson took early care to inculcate on the minds of
all her children. Richard was commanded to yield in every thing to Eugene, and
Cassander to Richard; and all three to behave with proper deference to those
who were more advanced in life than themselves. This injunction had a good
effect more ways than one: it prevented any childish contests for the
preference, as each knew and was contented with his own rank, and always waited
his proper turn. Besides, it made them behave with good manners to strangers,
let their condition in life be what it will; nor was any one of them ever known
to speak or act with petulance even to a beggar.

After remaining a competent time under the instruction of Mr. Markham, it was
their father's pleasure that they should all three enter the University
together, and pursue their studies there, in order to qualify themselves for
whatever of the learned professions they might afterward choose. This
circumstance gave them infinite pleasure. The love that they bore to each other
while children, was now ripening into a steady, ardent friendship, which no
time could alter or diminish; and they saw before them a prospect of being
happy in each other's society during the whole course of their lives. But human
events are uncertain, and the shades of misfortune often intervene unexpectedly
to chequer the most equal and placid sunshine of prosperity. Mr. Smithson was
still in trade, and therefore liable to accidents and crosses which merchants
frequently experience. It happened, in the beginning of the war, that two
ships, containing property of his to a very considerable amount, uninsured,
were taken by the enemy. The deficiency produced in his capital by this
misfortune, joined to several other smaller losses, obliged Mr. Smithson to
become a bankrupt; after which, conceiving a distaste to his native place, he
determined to take a voyage to the West Indies, in order to look after an
estate in land which had been bequeathed him as a legacy by some distant
relation since the time of his failure. At his departure, not judging it
expedient to take his wife along with him, he left her a small sum of ready
money, but promised to send over remittances whenever the property, of which he
went to take possession, could be turned to any account.

Our Three Brothers were inconsolable at parting with their father: this was
the first time in their lives that they might be said to feel the grief of
absence from their beloved parents; for while at College they could hardly be
called absent from home, as they conversed weekly, nay almost daily, by
letters, either with Mr. or Mrs. Smithson. But their sorrow was considerably
increased, when, after two years had elapsed without any tidings from their
father, they received a melancholy epistle from Mrs. Smithson, informing them
of her utter inability to maintain them any longer at College, and requesting
their immediate return, in order to consult how they should dispose of
themselves for their future settlement in life.



During the last two years that they had spent at the University, nothing but
the strictest economy, on the part of the Brothers, as well as that of their
indulgent parent, could have enabled them to subsist; yet notwithstanding the
general dissipation of the place, their temperance and frugality did not hinder
them from supporting an amiable character, and being highly esteemed by all who
knew them. They were remarked for an obliging, affable demeanor, an
unexceptionable attention to their College duties, but particularly for the
strict intimacy and happy degree of unanimity which they always appeared to
maintain. They were indeed distinguished by the title of the Three Brothers;
and the wits of the place spoke of them as an exception to that remark of the
poet, Friendship, like love, is but a name,
Unless to one you stint the flame.
However, there was a considerable difference in their dispositions, which,
without the least impairing their affection, grew every day more and more
conspicuous. Eugene was now ambitious, enterprising, and changeable: his parts
were rather brilliant than solid. Cassander, on the contrary, was steady in his
opinions and resolutions, which he built on the soundest and most mature
reflection: he appeared more slow in apprehending the difficulties of science
than his elder brother; but, in return, his memory was more faithful and
retentive, and whatever knowledge he once made his own was ever after at his
command; for, as Mr. Pope elegantly observes, Where beams of warm imagination
play,
The memory's soft figures melt away.
Richard was a sort of medium between these opposites: with something of
Eugene's vivacity and the steadiness of Cassander, he had an ardent and
insatiable thirst of knowledge; in effect, he had recommended himself so
powerfully to his superiors, by the extent and splendor of his seize,
that he was at this very time of Mrs. Smithson's writing for him and his
brothers, pointed out to a nobleman, equally respectable for his rank and
principles, as a proper person to be private tutor to his Lordship's two sons,
who were lately entered at the University.

At their return, therefore, upon the summons of their mother, when she laid
before them the melancholy state of their affairs, the disappointment of their
expectations, and, to crown all, the dreadful apprehensions that she
entertained of the loss of her husband, either at sea or by the casualties of
war; concluding with the tenderest advice to them, to unite their efforts
toward the re-establishing of their circumstances by a steady course of
industry in whatever professions they might adopt: upon this occasion it was
that the advantages of superior application and a more rapid progress in
learning appeared conspicuous. While Eugene and Cassander endeavor to comfort
Mrs. Smithson by the strongest assurances of their future diligence and the
exertion of their industry in some line or other that might afford themselves
and her a decent maintenance, Richard had the happiness of being able to make
his mother and brothers the immediate tender of a small competency from the
salary which his noble patron was to allow him, who only waited for his answer
to invest him with the care of his children's education. This prospect was a
seasonable relief to Mrs. Smithson from the despondency into which the present
gloom of her affairs had thrown her. It is true, the iron hand of want had not
as yet begun to pinch her and her children, but the near approach of that
unwelcome visitor (without such a resource as Richard now suggested), was
sufficient to fill her mind with the most melancholy ideas and dismal presages
of adversity and distress.

Now therefore at length, by the irresistible decree of necessity, were our
Three Brothers obliged to part, and take different walks on the vast theater of
life. Richard, returning to the University, attached himself with so much
success to the education of his noble pupils, and to his own improvement, that,
besides being able for the present to contribute to the comforts of his mother,
and those whom he held most dear next to her, he had the prospect before him of
obtaining an ample settlement in the church, through the interest of his
munificent patron, whose favor he enjoyed in as full a measure as his numerous
good qualities entitled him to it. Eugene, having procured recommendations to a
merchant in London, repaired thither, and, applying himself steadily to
business, in the course of four years gave such proofs of his integrity and
other good qualifications, that he was taken by the merchant into partnership.
Cassander, in the mean time, fearing to become a burden on the moderate
pension that Richard allowed his mother, embraced the offer of a Newcastle
trader, who, having formerly been an intimate friend of Mr. Smithson's agreed
to take Cassander a voyage to the East country upon trial. Cassander was still
but young, being no more than sixteen at the time of his entering upon a sea
life, and after his voyage of trial he prudently made it his choice, in
preference to waiting for the uncertain chance of some more brilliant
establishment. In effect, what with the advantage of an excellent education, a
patient and humane disposition, and the uncommon character (for a seaman) of
being remarkably sober and frugal, he in a very few years so improved himself
in the knowledge of trade and navigation, that he was appointed mate of a
vessel trading to Russia, the owners of which were so well pleased with his
activity and good conduct, that they were determined, notwithstanding his
youth, to send him out master of one of their ships, the first opportunity that
offered.

Thus, for some years after the separation of the Three Brothers, fortune
seemed to recompense the severe loss that they had felt in the person of their
father, concerning whom, all this time, notwithstanding every possible inquiry,
not the smallest intelligence had been received. But now, alas! once more,
sorrow and adversity came hand in hand to disquiet the feeling hearts of our
three youths, by an hour of trial such as they had never yet experienced. The
news of their mother's death was the severe prelude to their misfortunes.
Richard had scarcely recovered the shock of this, when the death of his patron
totally dissipated all the flattering hopes that he had formed of fortune and
preferment in the church, in which he had already taken orders. Eugene, and his
partner had for some time felt their affairs in a critical condition; but this
did not hinder him from exerting his native generosity in the service of an
ancient friend. Indeed, the voice of friendship and gratitude always met with a
favorable hearing from Eugene, let their summons be ever so pressing and
importunate. His old tutor, Mr. Markham, under whom he and his brothers had
spent some of the happiest years of their life, was at this time in London.
Disabled by sickness and infirmity, advancing fast toward helpless old age,
and sorely galled by poverty and the neglect of the world, he was almost
without a friend. In this crisis, chance threw his generous pupil in his way,
who amply supplied the place of one to him. Besides furnishing him with the
means of supplying his present necessities; Eugene, and by his persuasion his
partner, became security for the payment of a very considerable debt, which was
on the point of consigning Mr. Markham to a gaol, where he might probably have
passed the remainder of his life. But how ill did fortune requite Eugene for
this friendly action! Mr. Markham died in less than three months after, when of
course the debt devolved upon those who had given security for him. Immediately
upon the heels of this misfortune followed another. The affairs of Eugene's
partnership growing desperate, they were obliged to declare themselves
bankrupt, and this very kindness which he showed Mr. Markham, was reckoned
among the misfortunes that contributed to his ruin. The shock that Eugene's
spirits suffered upon this occasion, as he found himself now unable to fulfill
engagements which he looked upon as sacred, drove him from one act of rashness
and despair to another; till in the end, reduced to extremity of want, in an
obscure country place; he madly and precipitately threw himself among a company
of traveling players, and, to crown all, in this unpromising state of life,
being barely able to subsist himself, he had the desperate imprudence to marry.
It seems he had formed a slight acquaintance with a young lady (the daughter of
a clergyman), who was so struck with his figure and accomplishments, that she
yielded to his solicitations to be united with him in the ties of clandestine
wedlock; thereby utterly forfeiting all her expectations of fortune, together
with the friendship of every one of her relations. The consequence of this
unadvised step, which brought poverty and her train into Eugene's habitation in
shapes unknown before, he bore with as much fortitude and philosophy as usually
falls to the share of five and twenty, that is, with very little if any at all.
Some time before this, Cassander, who had made two or three voyages for his
north-country owners, was invited to London by his brother and his partner, to
take the command of one of the large ships in which they were principal
proprietors. Overjoyed at this invitation, which would give him an opportunity,
or rather indeed lay him under the necessity, of being frequently with his
brother while on shore, he came to town with all speed* and was just time
enough to be witness to the unfortunate failure of Eugene and his associate in
trade.

Thus were the Three Brothers plunged into circumstances of the most helpless
distress, just at a time when they entertained hopes (apparently well founded)
of fixing themselves to their satisfaction for life in their respective
professions. Had any one of them been exempt from the pressure of misfortune,
the other two would have been sure of partaking with him in the comforts that
depend on a competency of wealth. But all three were equally reduced; and the
only remnant of happiness, that they could call their own, was the sense of
their mutual affection, which still continued unalterable, amidst the most
pinching trials of disappointment and calamity. In this situation were the
Smithsons, when an incident happened which put that affection to the proof, and
brought forth instances of self-denial and generosity that well deserve to be
recorded. In the course of Eugene's wanderings as a country player, fortune
conducted him to Gravesend where, as he was exhibiting before an audience,
chiefly composed of seafaring people, the same fortune unaccountably led his
father to become a spectator of his performance. In order to explain the sudden
appearance of Mr. Smithson, it will be necessary to relate what befell him after
his departure from England. The reader will remember that this gentleman had
set sail for the West Indies, in order to take possession of an estate in one
of the islands there; but, having pretty early intelligence that the enemy were
masters of the island, and therefore apprehending numberless obstacles to his
obtaining clear and quiet possession of the estate; he formed the immediate
resolution of getting out, if possible, to the East Indies, where he trusted
that, by his general knowledge of trade, he should in a short time be able to
retrieve his shattered circumstances, and to return to his native country with
a fortune sufficient to render the remaining years of his life easy and
comfortable. At the same time he took another resolution (the source of
infinite grief and disquiet to his family), which was, never to inform them of
the place of his retirement until he had gained wealth sufficient to release
them from the state of indigence and obscurity into which, he was pursuaded,
his absence must have plunged them. This object he amply accomplished in ten
years, during all which time his family considered him as dead; and at the end
of that period he was now returning to share his riches with those whom he held
most dear; when the first sight that saluted his eyes after he went on shore
was his unfortunate son figuring in the humble profession of a stroller. It is
impossible to express the rage, sorrow, and disappointment, which at once took
possession of Mr. Smithson's breast, when he was at length convinced that his
eyes and ears did not deceive him. He suddenly left the theater, or rather
barn, before the play was half over, and taking no farther notice of his son
than to leave a note directed for him, and filled with the bitterest
reproaches, he hurried on board the ship. Upon his arrival in London, finding
his anxious wishes and all the projects of his affection disconcerted by his
eldest son's imprudence; his next care was to make inquiry about Richard and
Cassander; for his wife's death he had been informed of by mere accident a
short time before he left India. Richard he soon found out, who, upon the first
summons, flew to embrace his long lost parent. Mr. Smithson, after briefly
relating to him the circumstances of his voyage to and success in the East
Indies, began, bitterly to lament his misfortune in having a son so abandoned
to modefy and discretion, as he styled the unfortunate Eugene. He added, that
the bulk of the fortune which he had realized abroad, he intended now to divide
between his two younger sons, the elder having proved himself so unworthy of
his favor: that he did not mean to keep them in expectation until his death,
but would put each of them in immediate possession of an ample fortune;
reserving for himself what he was determined should be sufficient for his
necessities during the remainder of his life. He concluded with insisting, that
whatever he meant thus to dispose in favor of his younger sons, he would take
care to see settled in such a manner, that neither Eugene nor his posterity
should ever inherit a penny of it.

Richard modestly thanked his father for the affectionate care that he
testified for his interest, but tenderly entreated him not to form too
precipitate a resolution to the prejudice of his eldest born. He used many
arguments to excuse, or at least to palliate Eugene's indiscretion; represented
the sorrowful effects that a continuance of his father's resentment might have
upon a mind so exquisitely feeling as his; and ended with these words: "As to
what regards my own personal advantage, I assure you Sir, I feel myself
naturally very indifferent; and were I not so by nature, the profession that I
have embraced, the precepts of which I have with my whole heart consented to
obey, that profession commands me to fix my thoughts and expectations upon
matters of a far different nature. Besides, had I the most worldly regard for
my own interest, the affection that I have ever borne, and still bear to my
brother Eugene, would stand as a bar to my accepting any fortune to which he
had the most distant claim, I am not without hopes, my dear father, that when
your present anger subsides, you will once more look upon him with the
tenderness of a parent, in which case you will, I trust, applaud the principle
that induces me to decline your liberal offer." Mr. Smithson, with astonishment
in his countenance, asked his son if he was serious in refusing so handsome a
fortune; and finding him fixed in the determination that he had before
expressed, he rose up with evident marks of vexation and disappointment; and
casting some uncharitable reflections on the destiny which, he said, pursued him
through life, baffling and frustrating the most favorite and even laudable
wishes of his heart, he added in a tone of voice, somewhat softened, "Little
did I expect, when I sent for you, to find you an abettor of that profligacy
which has alienated my heart from your elder brother. I fondly thought that my
children would pay such deference to my authority as even to adopt my
prejudices; but since you have determined to think for yourself, be your own
master. Thank Heaven, I have yet one son left." Richard endeavored in the most
respectful manner, to represent the motives of his conduct, but perceiving that
whatever he said only tended to irritate his father, and that it was
impossible, for the present, to obtain a calm hearing, he reluctantly withdrew,
leaving his father in a situation not to be envied by a parent.

Nothing could arrive more opportunely to relieve the depression of Mr.
Smithson's spirits, than the news that he heard next morning; which was, that a
ship, in which Cassander had gone out in the capacity of a mate, after the
failure of Eugene, was returned from her voyage in the river. His resentment
was now not only pointed at Eugene for his indiscretion, but at Richard for his
too scrupulous, uncomplying principles. He was therefore determined to bestow
his whole fortune upon Cassander. But what language can express the amazement
of Mr. Smithson, when, upon his proposing to do so, the generous seaman,
without the least hesitation or preamble, flatly refused to accept a penny of
it! He thought, however, that respect to his father required him to give the
reasons on which he grounded his refusal. He did so, and with arguments nearly
the same as those used by his brother Richard, he endeavored to convince his
father that passion had a much greater share than mature deliberation in the
sentence which he was going to pass upon his eldest son: "We are all liable to
go astray," said Cassander: "happy is he who has the fewest faults. If we do
not forgive those of a son, or a brother, Heaven help us when our own come to
be judged! As for me, I have lived contented with a little, and am not
unacquainted with hardship and distress. God forbid, therefore, that I should
grasp at my brother's birth right. -- But I declare, were Eugene no brother of
mine, knowing as I do his generous nature and the warmth of his honest heart, I
would go before the mast all my life long, sooner than accept, to his
prejudice, a property which nature and reason so clearly adjudge to him."

There was something so ingenuous in this address of Cassander's, something
that spoke so feelingly to his father's breast, that, in spite of a short
conflict which resentment endeavored to excite there, he found himself
constrained to yield the point, and while he wiped away a tear, the offspring
of returning tenderness and affection, he took his son by the hand:
"Cassander," said he, smiling, "thou have conquered. Surely there must be
something of extraordinary merit in Eugene, since he has found two so resolute
advocates in his favor as you and your brother Richard. -- Well, I forgive all
the past -- it shall be buried in oblivion. -- Convince me, as I doubt not you
will, that my eldest son possesses qualities worthy to excite such sentimnets
as you have both expressed in his favor, and I shall be happy indeed."

It is needless to add, that the joy produced by this favorable change in Mr.
Smithson's feelings was soon diffused in the breasts of his two disconsolate
sons. Eugene, upon the receipt of his father's note, had hurried up to town
from Gravesend, like one distracted, and was now at Richard's lodgings,
indulging the most passionate effusions of grief and despair; while Richard,
depressed with a load of sorrows, sat moping in silence, without a word of
comfort to offer to his brother. They hardly perceived Cassander enter the
room; but when he met their eyes, they started as at the sight of an angel.
Something prophetic whispered comfort to their minds even before he spoke. But
how full was the measure of their joy when he announced to them his father's
invitation to repair immediately to his presence! The sequel is easy to be
imagined: all was reconciled: the past was forgotten, and the future opened a
prospect of happiness before them more smiling than they had ever enjoyed
before.

Thus the Brothers, by the efforts of their mutual affection, increased the
happiness that prosperity afforded them, sustained each other under the
pressure of misfortune, and, by persevering in unalterable friendship to each
other, at length ensured both their own happiness and that of their dearest and
first friend on earth -- their Father.

THE THREE SISTERS.
NOT many years ago there returned from Bengal a man whom we will call John
Sterling: he had been well educated, was sprung from a decent family, and
brought home the same good heart which he carried out with him from Britain. As
his fortune was now very large, and he had formed no matrimonial connexions,
his first care, on his arriving in his native land, was to discover what
relations he had still remaining, and to inquire into their circumstances, in
order to bestow on the most deserving of them, part of his great acquisitions.
It chanced that the person to whom he applied, was able to assist in his
search. "Some at least," said he, "of your family, I can give you a pretty good
account of: you have two cousins settled in London; they are sisters, and are
by no means in distressed circumstances, but are perfect contrasts to each
other in their manner of living. The eldest of them is avaricious to an
extreme, lives in a paltry lodging, keeps but one maid servant, and in short
seems to have no pleasure on earth, except that of heaping up money. Not so her
younger sister; she takes care to spend to the very extremity of her income.
She takes great delight in dress, equipage, and every specie of luxury, but her
expenses of the showy kind never prevent the exertions of her humanity: there
passes no week in which she does not distribute, on an appointed day, money,
clothes, and victuals to a number of beggars, who crowd around her door to be
relieved." "This last cousin of mine," said our Indian, "I like well enough, by
your account; but as to the other, not a penny of mine shall she have, to add
to her heaps, an old avaricious skin-flint!"

With these sentiments, John Sterling set out to visit his youngest relation.
From her he met with a polite and hospitable reception, and departed from her
house in a perfect good humor with her and her manner of living.

It happened that the only maid servant who lived with the eldest sister, was
acquainted in the family of the person from whom Sterling had received his
intelligence concerning the characters of the two sisters. Some of the
domestics had overheard the conversation, and took the first opportunity to
reproach the girl for the parsimony of her mistress, which they told her had
lost her the sharing of a fine sum of money. This soon reached the ears of the
female miser, whose vexation, at hearing what she had missed, was almost
insupportable. The large fortune, which by dint of the most penurious economy
she had scraped together, now appeared to her less than nothing, when she
considered the immense treasures of her cousin, all of which she thought might
have been her own, had she but managed so as to gain the good graces of the
owner. "Perhaps," said she to herself, "it may not, even now, be too late to
retrieve my error. Some of my money I must sacrifice, it is true, but then if I
succeed, I shall be nobly reimbursed. It will go to my heart, indeed, to part
with what has been the whole joy of my life to procure, but I see no other
chance in my favor, and this scheme must be tried." Having taken her
resolution, she determined, as the first step, to contrive to fall into company
with her opulent relation. This she soon brought about, by meeting him at her
sister's, where he was almost always to be found. She now endeavored, by every
wining grace in her power to captivate his attention, and when she thought she
had in some measure succeeded, she took an opportunity to reproach him for
appearing to have forgotten that he had such a relation as herself. "No,
Madam," said the blunt Sterling, "I had by no means forgotten you, but the
plain truth is, that finding on inquiry, that your turn and mine were as widely
different as light and darkness, I thought that no good could arise from any
connection between us." "I comprehend you, Sir," (replied the lady,) you have
heard me represented in the most odious colors, as a pattern of meanness and
avarice. How cruel is the tongue of defamation! I have laid up money, it is
true, but Heaven knows with what intent! The service of my indigent
fellow creatures has been my real motive, and it was only to amass a sum
sufficient to lay the foundation of a new Hospital, that I have deprived myself
of not only the superfluities, but almost of the necessaries of life. At length
I have attained to my wish, and tomorrow I intend to deposit, in the hands of
proper trustees, five hundred guineas, which I mean to be laid out in the
purchase of land for the edifice to stand upon." The honest Indian was
completely taken in by this maneuver. "How unjustly," said he to himself,
"have I thought of this poor woman! Here has she denied herself every
gratification for the sake of the poor, and I have looked on her as a
self-interested miser! Well, well, I must contrive to make her amends." Then
turning to the lady, "Madam," said he, "hitherto I have mistaken your
character, but I now honor you as much as a few hours past I despised you. But
you must not prevent me from sharing with you the merit of the noble work which
you have taken in hand; tomorrow I will attend upon you, and will add my part
to the donation which you are about to make." He kept his word, and accompanied
her the next morning: he then saw her make a deposit of the sum which she had
mentioned, to which he joined a much more considerable present for the same
charitable purpose.

The worthy Sterling was recounting the adventures of the day to his friend,
and was telling him how very unjustly he had thought of the elder of his
cousins, when he was told that an old domestic of the family earnestly
entreated to speak with him. "Perhaps," said the good East Indian, "he may need
my assistance; let him come in." The poor fellow entered. "Can I, my good
friend, be of any service to you?" said Sterling. "I am very unfortunate," said
the suppliant, "and it is only the report which I have heard of your goodness,
which has tempted me to this application. I lived twenty years in the service
of your worthy uncle: I married, and when I lost my good master, I set up a
little shop: when I was going on with tolerable success, I was utterly ruined
by an unfortunate fire, which consumed my whole stock. Since that cruel event I
have been unable to provide for my young and numerous family, and I now presume
to hope that your goodness will enable me to put my poor children into some way
of business."

"But why, in the name of wonder, did you not apply to my two cousins!" "Alas,
good Sir, I addressed myself to them in the beginning of my misfortunes; but
from the eldest I met with a positive refusal; and the other lady, though she
offered me some relief, yet she accompanied that offer with the condition of my
coming publicly along with other poor, to receive charity at her door; and
indeed, Sir, it appeared hard to one who had been a reputable, tradesman, to be
reduced to beg his bread at a door in a public street. No Sir, I rather chose
to get into a service, which I fortunately contrived to do."

"And what my good friend became then of your children?"

"My eldest daughter, Sir, has had the happiness of being protected by your
Honor's cousin, Madam Sophia, who is goodness itself, and who, although in
very narrow circumstances, yet finds opportunities of doing a thousand good
actions."

"How?" said the good Sterling, "and have I another cousin? And is she poor,
and yet is she charitable? And have I, like a blockhead as I am, been ignorant
of her very existence?"

"There is such a one, I assure you, Sir; she is the daughter of your uncle,
and youngest of the three sisters."

"Is this possible?" said the East Indian, "and if so, how comes it about that
neither of her sisters have mentioned her name to me? Where has she lived? How
came she so poor?"

"The good lady, Sir, trusted her fortune in the hands of a merchant who became
a bankrupt, and lost nearly the whole of it. She then retired, with what little
she had remaining, to a village in the country, where she boarded at the house
of a friend of here is who married a clergyman. There, from her small income, she
found means to be of infinite service to her poor neighbors; she visited the
sick, she instructed the young, and by her example and advice, she reclaimed
the idle, and encouraged the worthy members of society. As to her name not
being mentioned to you by her sisters, I fear their motive for keeping you in
ignorance concerning her, was their consciousness of her superior claim to your
favor and protection."

"This," cried Sterling, "is the exact person that I am looking for. Come, my
lad, get your boots ready, tomorrow you shall be my guide to the village where
this precious cousin of mine resides; trouble yourself no more about your
children; they shall hence forward be my care: and as to yourself, quit your
service as soon as you can with decency; you are too old to wear a livery, I
will provide for you comfortably for the rest of your life."

"Oh, Sir," said the old servant, "be assured that what is left of that life
shall be employed in praying for blessings on you, and on my kind benefactress
Madam Sophia."

Sterling soon reached the village. He alighted at the parsonage, and inquired
of the minister concerning his amiable cousin. "She is an angel," said the
priest; "notwithstanding the loss of her fortune, her countenance expresses the
happy tranquillity of her mind. Nothing, in short, can deprive her of her
benevolence, and that benevolence must always insure her tranquillity." "Tell
her, I entreat you, Sir," said Sterling, "that a relation, whom she has never
seen, begs to be introduced to her." Sophia received her cousin with unaffected
regard and natural politeness. "I am enchanted with you, my sweet cousin!" said
the East Indian. "In your modest, neat, linen gown, you look more like a woman
of fashion than your showy sister in her gayest dresses; and poor as you are,
your features are illuminated by an air of content which never appears on the
visage of that other sister of yours; that rich lady that founds hospitals! But
tell me now, honestly, cousin Sophy, how has it happened that neither of my
cousins ever made mention of your name to me since my arrival? Have you fallen
out with them? Or do they not know where you reside?"

"Believe me, Sir," replied Sophia, "I love them both too well to keep them in
ignorance of my place of abode, and within these last three days I have written
to each of them" "Hard-hearted wretches!" exclaimed the good Sterling; "can I
ever forget their indifference to so amiable a relation?" "Excuse them this one
time," said the gentle Sophia; "I doubt not but that they meant to have made me
amends for this omission, by the future kindness of their behavior." "No, no,"
said her cousin, "I know the vileness of their hearts. They were conscious of
your superior merit, and dreaded, lest I should reward it by bestowing on you
that fortune which each of them already grasped as her own: but their odious
cunning and greediness shall be disappointed. To your ostentatious sister I
will not give one farthing; she does good, indeed, but it is merely for the
sake of being talked of abroad as a woman of unbounded charity. Your penurious
sister I am still less disposed to encourage. The donation which she has made
in favor of the poor, has her own interest so immediately in view, that it
gives me infinitely more disgust than pleasure. You, my worthy cousin, who do
good actions merely because it is right and fitting to do them, you I declare
to be my sole inheritrix; and from this moment I insist on your making use of
my fortune as if it were your own. I know that fortune is by no means necessary
to your happiness; but I know, at the same time, that your being rich will be
the means of communicating happiness to numbers of sufferers, whom, until now,
you could only pity and not relieve."

THE CONTRAST.
FREDERIC was the son of a lady of fortune, who, having retired to her estate
in the country, bestowed most of her time on his education. In return for her
attachment to him, Frederic was modest, studious, and humane; he felt the
obligations which he was under to his parent, and did his best to requite them
by pursuing her instructions with care, and by preferring her company to that
of any other person. Jacob, a lad of the same age with Frederic, and whose
mother's cottage stood near the park-pale of the lady we have just spoken of,
was in every respect of a character directly opposite to that of his amiable
neighbor. He was loved by no one, not even by his poor mother, all whose
endeavors could never prevail on him even to take the pains of learning to
read. The most innocent way in which he spent his time was in loitering from
place to place, and lounging about; at other seasons he was the plague of his
comrades, and, in consequence, the detestation of the village. Frederic was too
well bred up to choose so vile a boy for a play-fellow; Jacob, however, taking
advantage of the opportunities which the situation of his mother's tenement
gave him, stole, one day, into the room where Frederic's playthings were kept,
broke to pieces his violin and his chariot, completely spoilt his bird organ,
and carried off in triumph his hobbyhorse.

The author of this mischief was soon discovered, and Frederic, in the first
emotions of resentment, was running, by the advice of a servant, to acquaint
the mother of Jacob with the exploits of her son. "But, no," said he checking
his speed, "she is a severe woman, and she will horsewhip him without mercy,
and, may be, shut him up in an out-house for a week together. How should I like
that for myself? No, no, I had better forgive him, for this once."

Not long after this, Frederic was walking out with his beloved mother, when
unluckily they strolled near a place where the thoughtless, wicked Jacob was
amusing himself by throwing stones with all his little force at every object
within his reach, totally regardless of the mischief which he might occasion.
One of these unluckily hit the little Frederic on the head, and fetched the
blood; but Frederic was too much of a man to cry at a little pain. -- "Mama,"
said the spirited lad, "this stone has hurt me a little, but I dare say the
pain will soon be over." As his forehead, however, was all covered with blood,
his mother went directly home with him and had every proper care taken of his
wound. It was an ugly one, and brought on a fever, and it was the end of seven
or eight days before he was permitted to walk out, and his mother being engaged
with company, ordered a servant to accompany him. As they were walking, the
discourse turned on the wickedness of Jacob; and just as the domestic was
hopeing that they might see nothing of him during their walk, they heard a
rustling noise in a tree behind them, and down, at once, came Jacob, screaming
and crying, from the top of an elm, which his usual spirit of mischief had
tempted him to climb in pursuit of a crow's nest. "I fear," said Frederic,
exerting his utmost endeavors to raise the poor wretch, "that you have hurt
yourself sadly." Jacob still continued his groans and cries; and well he might,
for, upon examination, his leg appeared to be, broken in two places. "Poor
fellow," said the benevolent Frederic, "how he must suffer! let us contrive
some how or other, to convey him home to his mother. -- Unhappy woman! what
distress must she not feel when she sees the condition of her unlucky son!" Her
distress was great indeed. "Poor as I am," she exclaimed, "I can just support
myself and this ungracious lad; but how shall I ever be able to pay the long
demand which the surgeon will have upon me, by the time that Jacob recovers."
Little Frederic, who was a witness to her complaints, afforded to them those
tears which his own suffering could never extort from him. -- "Make yourself
easy, my good neighbor," said the amiable boy, "and oblige me so far as to
accept this new crown-piece, which my good Mama has just given me, that I might
buy me a fairing, but I can do without it better than you can." The afflicted
mother looked at him with silent admiration. Frederic proceeded to assure her,
that he was conscious of the smallness of the sum, (though it was his all) he
would use his interest with his parent for a larger supply, and did not doubt
to obtain it. The unfortunate woman now found her tongue, and expressed in the
most affecting terms, her astonishment at seeing his earnestness in relieving
that worthless lad, by whose mischievous hand his forehead was still smarting.
"This," said she, "is truly to return good for evil!" Frederic now returned to
his mother, and after giving her the history of the whole occurrence, "How
comes it, Mama," said he, "that although I was truly sorry for poor Jacob's
misfortune; and though I feel both for him and his mother, yet, on the whole, I
am more pleased than grieved?" "Child," said the lady, "you have had an
opportunity of doing well, and you have made use of it; and, believe me,
throughout life you will find, that the consciousness of having done a
benevolent action will be the most effectual cordial for every painful
sensation."



THE DIVERTING HISTORY OF JOHN GILPIN; SHOWING How he went Farther than he
intended, and came safe Home again.
JOHN GILPIN was a citizen
Of credit and renown;
A train-band captain eke was he
Of famous London town.
John Gilpin's spouse said to her dear --
"Though wedded we have been
"These twice ten tedious years, yet we
"No holiday have seen.
"Tomorrow is our wedding day,
"And we will then repair,
"Unto the Bell at Edmonton,
"All in a chaise and pair.
"My sister and my sister's child,
"Myself and children three,
"Will fill the chaise; so you must ride
"On horseback after we."
He soon replied -- "I do admire
"Of womankind but one,
"And you are she, my dearest dear,
"Therefore it shall be done.
"I am a linen-draper bold,
"As all the world does know,
"And my good friend the callender
"Will lend his horse to go."
Quoth Mrs. Gilpin -- "That Is well said;
"And, for that wine is dear,
"We will be furnished with our own,
"Which is both bright and clear."
John Gilpin kissed his loving wife;
O'erjoy'd was he to find,
That, though on pleasure she was bent,
She had a frugal mind.
The morning came, the chaise was brought,
But yet was not allowed
To drive up to the door, lest all
Should say that she was proud.
So three doors off the chaise was staid,
Where they did all get in,
Six precious souls, and all agog
To dash through thick and thin.
Smack went the whip, round went the wheels,
Were never folks so glad;
The stones did rattle underneath,
As if Cheapside were mad.
John Gilpin, at his horse's side,
Seized fast the flowing mane,
And up he got, in haste to ride,
But soon came down again.
For saddle-tree scarce reached had he,
His journey to begin,
When, turning round his head, he saw
Three customers come in.
So down he came; for loss of time,
Although it grieved him sore,
Yet loss of pence, full well he knew,
Would trouble him much more.
'Twas long before the customers
Were suited to their mind,
When Betty, screaming, came down stairs,
"The wine is left behind!"
"Good lack!" quoth he -- "yet bring it me,
"My leathern belt likewise,
"In which I bear my trusty sword
"When I do exercise."
Now Mrs. Gilpin -- careful soul --
Had two stone bottles found,
To hold the liquor that she loved,
And keep it safe and sound.
Each bottle had a curling ear,
Through which the belt he drew,
And hung a bottle on each side,
To make his balance true.
Then over all, that he might be
Equipped from top to toe,
His long red cloak, well brushed and neat,
He manfully did throw.
Now see him mounted once again
Upon his nimble steed,
Full slowly pacing over the stones,
With caution and good heed.
But finding soon a smoother road
Beneath his well-shod feet,
The snorting beast began to trot,
Which galled him in his seat.
So, "Fair and softly," John he cried,
But John he cried in vain;
That trot became a gallop soon,
In spite of curb and rein.
So stooping down, as needs he must
Who cannot sit upright,
He grasped the mane with both his hands,
And eke with all his might.
His horse, who never in that sort
Had handled been before,
What thing upon his back had got
Did wonder more and more.
Away went Gilpin, neck or naught,
Away went hat and wig;
He little dreamt when he set out,
Of running such a rig.
The wind did blow, the cloak did fly,
Like streamer long and gay,
Till loop and button failing both,
At last it flew away.
Then might all people well discern
The bottles he had slung;
A bottle swinging at each side,
As has been said or sung.
The dogs did bark, the children scream'd,
Up flew the windows all;
And every soul cried out, "Well done!"
As loud as he could bawl.
Away went Gilpin -- who but he!
His fame soon spread around --
"He carries weight! -- he rides a race! --
"'It Is for a thousand pound!"
And still, as fast as he drew near,
'Twas wonderful to view,
How, in a trice, the turnpike-men
Their gates wide open threw.
And now as he went bowing down
His reeking head full low,
The bottles twain behind his back,
Were shattered at a blow.
Down ran the wine into the road
Most piteous to be seen,
Which made his horse's flanks to smoke
As they had basted been.
But still he seemed to carry weight,
With leather girdle braced;
For all might see the bottle-necks
Still dangling at his waist.
Thus all through merry Islington,
These gambols he did play,
And till he came unto the Wash
Of Edmonton so gay;
And there he threw the Wash about
On both sides of the way,
Just like unto a trundling mop,
Or a wild goose at play.
At Edmonton his loving wife
From the balcony spied
Her tender husband, wondering much
To see how he did ride.
"Stop, stop, John Gilpin! here is the house!"
They all at once did cry;
"The dinner waits, and we are tired!" --
Said Gilpin -- "So am I."
But yet his horse was not a whit
Inclined to tarry there;
For why? -- his owner had a house
Full ten miles off, at Ware.
So like an arrow swift he flew,
Shot by an archer strong;
So did he fly -- which brings me to
The middle of my song.
Away went Gilpin out of breath,
And sore against his will,
Till at his friend the callender's
His horse at last stood still.
The callender, amazed to see
His neighbor in such trim,
Laid down his pipe, flew to the gate
And thus accosted him --
"What news! what news! your tidings tell,
"Tell me you must and shall --
"Say, why bare-headed you are come,
"Or why you come at all?"
Now Gilpin had a pleasant wit,
And loved a timely joke;
And thus unto the callender
In merry guise he spoke --
"I came because your horse would come;
"And, if I well forebode,
"My hat and wig will soon be here;
"They are upon the road."
The callender, right glad to find
His friend in merry pin,
Returned him not a single word,
But to the house went in:
Whence straight he came with hat and wig,
A wig that flowed behind,
A hat not much the worse for wear,
Each comely in its kind.
He held them up, and, in his turn,
Thus showed his ready wit --
"My head is twice as big as yours,
"They, therefore, needs must fit.
"But let me scrape the dirt away
"That hangs upon your face;
"And stop and eat -- for well you may
"Be in a hungry case!"
Said John -- "It is my wedding day,
"And all the world would stare,
"If wife should dine at Edmonton,
"And I should dine at Ware."
So turning to his horse, he said,
"I am in haste to dine;
"'It Was for your pleasure you came here --
"You shall go back for mine."
Ah! luckless speech and bootless boast,
For which he paid full dear;
For, while he spoke, a braying ass
Did sing most loud and clear:
Whereat his horse did snort, as he
Had heard a lion roar,
And gallopp'd off with all his might,
As he had done before.
Away went Gilpin -- and away
Went Gilpin's hat and wig;
He lost them sooner than at first,
For why? -- they were too big.
Now Mistress Gilpin, when she saw
Her husband posting down
Into the country far away,
She pulled out half-a-crown;
And thus unto the youth she said
That drove them to the Bell,
"This shall be yours, when you bring back
"My husband safe and well."
The youth did ride, and soon did meet
John coming back again,
Whom in a trice he tried to stop,
By catching at his rein;
But not performing what he meant,
And gladly would have done,
The frighted steed he frighted more,
And made him faster run.
Away went Gilpin -- and away
Went post-boy at his heels,
The post-boy's horse right glad to miss
The lumb'ring of the wheels.
Six gentlemen upon the road,
Thus seeing Gilpin fly,
With post-boy scamp'ring in the rear,
They raised the hue-and-cry.
"Stop thief! -- stop thief! -- a highwayman!"
Not one of them was mute;
And all and each that passed that way
Did join in the pursuit.
And now the turnpike gates again
Flew open in short space,
The toll-men thinking, as before,
That Gilpin rode a race.
And so he did, and won it too;
For he got first to town,
Nor stopped till where he had got up
He did again get down.
Let Us sing -- "Long live our President;
"And Gilpin, long live he;
"And when he next does ride abroad,
"May I be there to see!"

FATAL EFFECTS OF DELAY.
CHARLES STANLEY was the second son of a gentleman, who possessed a small
estate in Yorkshire, (Old England) which at his death was designed for his
eldest son, and the youngest was to be brought up to some genteel business, by
which he might improve the little fortune which his father intended for him.
Charles gave early marks of a sweet and engaging temper; he was dutiful to his
parents, he tenderly loved his brother, and was so obliging to the servants,
that he became the favorite with them all. Every little boy in the village
talked of the good nature of little Charles, and of his willingness to part
with his sweetmeats and playthings.

When Charles was about four years old, his father sent him to a neighboring
school, where he was very soon as much remarked for the progress he made in
learning as he had been for his sweet temper. He read better than any boy in
the school, and whenever he went before his master to spell, he was certain to
get the first place. This great quickness gave much delight to his fond parents
and his tutor, though they observed that with all his good qualities, Charles
had one capital fault; instead of going directly to school he would often
loiter in the fields till long after the other boys had gone in, and his books
were always to be sought for at the very time when he should have taken them to
his master.

At a proper age, Charles was placed by his father at a great school, where he
no longer found the indulgence to his faults, which he had met with from the
village tutor. He was not allowed to defer the morning's task till the
afternoon, and it was remarked to him that he was inferior in learning to many
who were his juniors in age. Charles was stung with the remark; he knew that he
was able to excel, and be resolved that he would at some time take great pains,
and obtain the same rank he had held in the village school; but he thought he
might defer this till some future time. His work, while he was under the eye of
his master, was performed as well, and in less time than that of most of his
school-fellows; but the tasks which he had to perform out of school hours were
always deferred, and every thing furnished Charles with an excuse for delay;
not that he passed his vacant time in play; instead of that he was often
employed in writing exercises for his school-fellows while they were amusing
themselves, and his own task was deferred till the morning, when there was
little time to perform it well, and he was punished for the faults. Thus poor
Charles seldom enjoyed the proper season for play. He was compelled to complete
his task, when his companions were enjoying themselves in innocent sports, and
he was seldom set free from work till they were retiring to rest.

Charles continued in this situation till the age of fourteen, and was every
day remarked for his abilities to excel, and for those habits of delay which
often destroyed all the advantages he naturally possessed. Mr. Stanley then
took him to London, and placed him with a Merchant, a friend of his, in the
city, to whom he hoped Charles would become so agreeable, as in time to be
admitted into partnership with him. In this situation Charles gave the
strongest proofs of integrity, sweet temper, and great abilities, but delay
attended whatever he undertook; he was not dressed till some hours after he
should be at the desk; he did not get to the Custom-House till the books were
shut, nor appear upon Change, till every man of business had deserted it. With
more virtues, and greater ability, than almost any man of his acquaintance, he
became a general object of ridicule and derision, and when the term of his
apprenticeship expired, he found that, with a character which was shaded with
only one foible, all intimate connexions with him were shunned by the sober
part of the trading world.

About this time Charles had the misfortune to lose his father, who bequeathed
him such a fortune as entitled him to expect a partnership in some respectable
house. But his known habit of delay prevented his friends from making the
offer; and though he fully intended to seek such a connection, yet he continued
to defer it till he had greatly lessened his little patrimony. His father had
introduced him to several friends who might have assisted him greatly, but he
had disgusted them by his conduct, by deferring his visits to unseasonable
hours, and by protracting them till the repeated yawns of the family informed
him that it was time to depart. Charles, who saw himself in a situation where
he was very likely to be without either friends or fortune, now resolved to
exert himself, and to follow the plan which his father had traced out for his
conduct in life. He could not, indeed, meet with an agreeable partnership, but
he determined to enter into a mercantile line by himself; and his friends, who
were delighted with his exertions, formed such extensive connexions for him,
that he had the greatest chance of being in a few years one of the richest men
in the city. But alas! his habit of delay had acquired more strength than he
was aware of, and his efforts to conquer it were but transient. Charles soon
relapsed into his former indolence. He deferred business till he had not time
to transact it. He neglected to comply with the orders of his correspondents
till the goods they sent for were no longer wanted; and he omitted insuring his
vessels, not because he intended to risk the loss, but because, as he did not
see them sinking he thought he might defer the business to some future time. In
a short time his business declined, several of his vessels had either been
taken or lost, his creditors poured in from every quarter, his property could
not answer their demands; and Charles Stanley, whose integrity was respected by
all, was hurried to prison, with the conviction that his misfortunes were the
consequence of his folly.

In this wretched situation Charles was a prey to sorrow. His heart was melted
at the misery which many poor and innocent families must have suffered from his
failure; and he thought of the uneasiness he must have given to his mother with
agony. Firmly did he resolve, that if he could ever again be established, he
would atone by his future diligence for his past misconduct; but where could he
look for assistance? His mother had no more than was sufficient for her
support; and his brother had already given him whatever he could afford.
Charles was sitting alone, reflecting upon the sad situation of his affairs,
when he was informed that a gentleman inquired for him below, and in a few
moments he beheld a brother of his mother's, whom the family had believed to be
dead, but who was just returned from India with a large fortune. Mr. Hilton was
much grieved at the misconduct and misfortunes of his nephew; but was so much
affected by his ingenuous account of his past faults, and his resolutions of
amendment, that he generously discharged all his debts, and enabled him to
appear again amongst his old acquaintance with credit.

Charles, fully sensible of the miseries from which he had been delivered, was
very earnest to settle himself in some business which would afford him support;
and his kind uncle, who hoped that a new scene would be favorable to his
new-formed plans, earnestly advised him to embark for India, promising to
return with him that he might see him well settled. This goodness filled the
heart of Charles with the warmest gratitude; he fell at his feet, and declared
with tears, that he would exert himself to the utmost to fulfill the commands of
his generous benefactor. Every thing was ordered for their departure, and when
the time arrived for the sailing of the ship, Mr. Hilton went on board with
some goods which were in readiness, leaving his nephew to follow him to the
Downs with those which were not quite finished. But delay again appeared in the
conduct of Charles; he omitted inquiring after them till an express arrived
from Mr. Hilton, with the account that the vessel was to sail the next day, and
that he must hasten down immediately. Charles then began to execute the orders
which his uncle had left, but was detained so long before he could get the
goods, that when he reached the Downs he found the ship had sailed some hours.
Almost distracted with this account, and with the thoughts of what his kind
uncle must think of his misconduct, he wandered about for some time in the
greatest distress, and at length having become almost desperate, he hired a
quick-sailing boat, in hopes of being able to overtake the ship. For some time
they advanced rapidly, and gained sight of the India ship, and the heart of
Charles was alternately agitated by hope and fear. But suddenly the sky was
overcast, the sea swelled, the wind roared, and the boatmen declared that there
was every appearance of an approaching storm, which soon raged round them with
the utmost fury. The vessel, which was too light to resist its force, was
tossed about at the mercy of the wind and waves, and the only hope the unhappy
Charles had of saving his own life, and those of his companions, was by
reaching the ship which they saw at a small distance before them. But they
exerted every effort in vain; a great sea broke over the bark, and Mr. Hilton
had the misery of seeing it sink for ever into the bosom of the ocean, and to
lament the loss of the unfortunate Charles, who, though possessed of such
talents as made him loved and admired by all, yet by one unhappy foible was
rendered miserable and ridiculous through life, and subjected to a dreadful and
premature death.

THE NOSEGAY.
CAPTAIN DORMER, and his amiable Lady, had lived during several years at their
seat in Dorsetshire, happy in themselves, and beloved by all around them, when
they received the unwelcome account that the Captain was commanded to join his
regiment, which was ordered to embark for America. The news of this event
filled all the country with sorrow. The rich grieved for the loss of so
excellent a neighbor; the poor mourned for the departure of their kind and
constant benefactor; and the tenants and servants wept aloud at the thoughts of
being separated from a master who had always treated them more like children
than dependants. But in vain were their entreaties that he would remain; honor
called upon him to depart, and Mrs. Dormer saw, with the utmost sorrow, that to
honor he would sacrifice the strongest feelings of his breast. She resolved,
however, not to be left behind, and in a short time they exchanged the tranquil
pleasures of Belmount, for the horrors of carnage and war.

Mrs. Dormer had not been long in America before she lay-in of twins, both
daughters, and very beautiful. In the care of these sweet children she found
some relief during the frequent absences of her husband, and would often
indulge the hope of returning peace, when the Captain, instead of engaging in
the slaughter of his fellow creatures, might enjoy the delight of improving his
little Fanny and Sophia. The children daily became more fond of their parents,
often clinging to their father when they saw him preparing to go out, and
always clapping their little hands with joy when they saw him return. As soon
as they were able to speak, Mrs. Dormer taught them to say Papa, and in a short
time, when they saw him at a distance, they would directly leave their play,
and running up to Mama, would cry out, Papa is come, dear papa is come to see
his little girls.

The improvement of the children became more visible every day, and they were
daily more dear to their parents, when Captain Dormer, returning from a
foraging party, was fiercely and suddenly attacked by the Indians, and a
desperate engagement ensued. The time when Mrs. Dormer had expected his return
had long passed, and she sat in silent agony looking at her dear children, whom
at one moment she feared were deprived of their parent, and the next, stepping
to the room door, she anxiously listened to every noise, and was fearful, lest
even the sound of her own breath should prevent her from hearing the well-known
step of her beloved husband. At length a sound reached her ears -- it came
nearer; it increased, and she flew down stairs in the fond hope of welcoming
the return of what was most dear to her. The door was opened, but it no longer
opened to admit the tender husband and fond father joyfully returning from the
labors of the day; Captain Dormer was brought in a mangled lifeless corpse.

Thus cruelly deprived of her husband, Mrs. Dormer resolved to return to
England, and to employ her time in the education of her little girls. She took
them down into Dorsetshire, and instructed them herself; and little Fanny and
Sophia Dormer were soon remarked as the neatest work-women in the country. But
their good Mama did not direct their attention merely to the little arts of
making trifling ornaments: she taught them that virtue was superior to
accomplishments, and that what was useful was more excellent than what was
merely elegant. Little Fanny soon understood, that though music gave her great
delight, it was still more delightful by her own sweetness to charm all around
her; and Sophia learned that no pleasure was equal to the pleasure of doing
good to her fellow creatures.

In this happy retirement Mrs. Dormer continued for some years improving her
sweet girls in real virtue and useful knowledge. At this time Lady Aubrey, a
relation of Mrs. Dormer's paid her a visit, and upon her return would gladly
have prevailed with the good mother to suffer both her daughters to spend some
time with her in London. This, however, Mrs. Dormer could not agree to; but as
Fanny had shown a strong affection for her Ladyship, and earnestly wished to
see London, she consented to her going; and Sophia, who preferred the company
of her Mama to any other enjoyment, was left at home. At first indeed, she felt
uneasy without her sister; she found a solo on the harpsichord was not half so
agreeable as a duet, and the beautiful alcove in the garden was not near so
pleasant, as when Fanny sat with her there, at her drawing or needle work. By
degrees, however, she became reconciled to her loss, but frequently thought
that Fanny could not enjoy half the pleasure in London that she did at
Belmount, in assisting her Mama to work for the poor people of the village, or
in going with her to visit those who were sick. But her greatest delight was in
the office which Mrs. Dormer had given her of distributing the broken victuals,
which were given away to the poor every day at her gate. This was the highest
pleasure Sophia could receive. She flew with rapture to the housekeeper to
obtain her welcome burden, under which she tottered to the door. She exulted in
seeing so many poor creatures made happy by her bounty, and delighted to hear
them say, Here comes the good little girl; she will, one day, be as good a lady
as her Mama; and she often thought with great pleasure of the joy which her
sister Fanny would have, when she returned, in this new employment.

But Fanny's visit to Lady Aubrey unfitted her for the innocent pleasures of
Belmount. She never heard of such a thing as working for the poor from her
Ladyship; and cards, dress, and elegant equipages, engaged the attention of all
the circles to which Fanny was admitted. She almost learned to forget the poor;
and when she returned to Belmount, she spoke haughtily to the servants, and
scarcely noticed her inferiors; and when the poor came to receive their daily
allowance, instead of serving them, she either turned away, or suffered her
little favorite dog, Surly, to bark at them, and shake their tattered clothes.
All the village talked of her pride, and lamented that the good Mrs. Dormer
should have such a naughty little girl; but the good and gentle Sophia was
loved by them all. They presented her with the choicest flowers in their
gardens, and the most beautiful bantams and pea-fowls were sent to the
poultry-yard of the good little girl that behaved so well to every one. When
Mrs. Dormer came from church, all the farmers and their wives made their best
bows and curtsies to the good lady, who spoke kindly to them all. She was
followed by Fanny, who never turned her head aside; but when Sophia came near,
the children plucked one another, and said, Here comes the good young lady, see
how good humoured she looks: she will ask us all how we do.

Fanny could not avoid seeing how disagreeable her pride made her to every
body, and she found herself much less happy than she was before she went to
London; but she had learned there to think that such behavior was right, and,
if it was an error, she foolishly resolved rather to adhere to it than to own
she had been wrong. She was one day invited with her sister to a ball at the
house of a lady in the neighborhood, where she was to meet all the young
people in that country. Her heart exulted in the thoughts of this gay party,
and she resolved to behave in the same manner she had seen some fashionable
ladies do in London. Upon entering the room she advanced to a small knot of
young ladies of her acquaintance; and, without speaking to the rest of the
company, began to make remarks upon their dress and manners in a whispering
voice, but in a tone loud enough to be heard. After some time a young lady,
whom she had never seen before, entered the room, in a dress made up in a
manner very different from any that Fanny had ever observed; she directly began
to sneer at her, and declared, that for her part she was surprised such strange
figures should think of mixing with people of fashion, and wondered where they
came from. The young lady, confounded at so rude a reception, retired to a
corner, where she was joined by the good humoured Sophia, who chatted with her
till the lady of the house returned into the room, and introduced her into the
company as the eldest daughter of the Duke of Dorset, who was just returned
from a tour to France. Nothing could exceed the chagrin of Fanny, when she
found that the young lady whom she had been ridiculing was the principal person
in the company, and that the dress she had despised, was the admiration of all
who saw it. She had not the assurance to endeavor to repair her fault by
apologies, or to press her acquaintance upon the lady whom she had so grossly
affronted. Indeed she saw that neither her excuses nor intimacy would be
accepted, and she had the mortification of hearing her sister Sophia receive a
very pressing invitation to Dorset House, in which she was not included.

Fanny was greatly mortified at this incident, and she resolved never to behave
in such a manner again. She ought, indeed, directly to have endeavored to
conquer every feeling of pride, and to return to that behavior which made her
beloved by every body; but she only resolved that she would not again laugh
aloud at a stranger in a genteel company, and run the risk of offending her
superiors. As to the poor and miserable, she thought them beneath her regard.

Some time after this, Fanny and Sophia were again invited to the house of a
lady, whom, as Fanny regarded her as a person of great taste, she was desirous
to please her by appearance. She put on all her little finery, but found that
one thing was necessary to complete her dress, which was a Nosegay, and this
she was determined to buy when they reached the town. They set off in the
carriage, attended only by servants, and by Fanny's little dog, which ran at
the side of the chariot. Fanny could talk of nothing but of calling at the
florist's, and of the elegant Nosegay with which she should be adorned. At
length they saw a little tattered girl laying asleep upon the side of the road,
whom Surley directly attacked, and began to shake her ragged clothes. Sophia
called him hastily away, and would have succeeded before he had awakened the
poor little girl, but Fanny encouraged him to proceed; upon this the child
starting up, aimed a blow at the dog, which he avoided, and made a snap at her
leg. The poor terrified girl then endeavored to run away, but in running
missed her step, and fell down the bank into the ditch. She had hurt her foot,
and lay crying in the ditch till Sophia ordered the servant to take her up,
and, contrary to the advice of Fanny, desired him to place her in the chariot
that they might convey her home. She then began to comfort the poor child, and
inquired about her hurt; but she continued to cry out, "O my poor mammy, my
poor mammy, what will she do, now I cannot run about and beg for her and my
daddy!" "Who is your mammy," said Sophia, "and what shall we do for your foot?"
"Oh! don't mind my foot," said the child, "give me only some bread for my poor
mammy and daddy, and my little brother, and I don't care what becomes of my
foot."

The child had scarcely finished her speech when the carriage stopped at the
door of a cottage, which the little girl said was her home. When she attempted
to get out, she found herself unable to walk, and was obliged to be carried by
the footman, who, accompanied by Sophia, entered the house, while Fanny
remained in the carriage sullenly pouting at her sister's condescension, and
very angry to be so delayed. She was indeed sorry to see the poor child so
hurt, and when she was taken out of the carriage gave her what money she could
spare; but she took care to keep enough to buy her elegant Nosegay. When Sophia
entered the house, she found a scene of misery which she could not have
conceived. The father of the little girl had long labored under an ague and
fever, her mother was worn down with poverty and fatigue, and her little
brother crying for hunger in a corner of a poor cottage, striped of almost of
all its furniture, which had been sold to buy necessaries. Sophia found that
little Sally had gone out in the morning to beg something for this afflicted
family, and that, quite exhausted with hunger and fatigue, she set down upon
the bank and cried herself to sleep. The tender heart of Sophia was greatly
affected by this distress; she empitied her pocket of every farthing which it
contained, and gave it to the good woman of the house, and would not keep
enough to buy the collar which she had once intended for her little favorite
squirrel. She then prepared to leave the cottage, but before she went, desired
the poor people to get what was necessary, and told them she would soon return
with her good Mama, who would give them clothes and victuals enough.

The sisters then proceeded to their visit. Fanny bought her Nosegay, which was
very beautiful: but the sweetness of Sophia, and the cheerfulness which the
thoughts of the good action she had been performing inspired her with, made her
so agreeable, that all the company were charmed with her, but paid little
attention to Fanny. At night, when they returned, Mrs. Dormer noticed Fanny's
Nosegay, which, though it had begun to fade, was still very beautiful. This
pleased Fanny, and she cried out, "Ah! Mama, I was sure you would like it, it
is so very pretty, and my sister liked it very much indeed." "Then why did she
not buy one?" said Mrs. Dormer; Fanny hung down her head, and in a faultering
tone answered, "Because she had no money." Mrs. Dormer, surprised at this, for
she had given some to each of them that very morning, inquired from Sophia what
was become of it; Sophia then recounted to her mother the condition in which
she had seen the poor people at the cottage, but took care not to mention a
word of Fanny's ill behavior: she then told her the way in which she had
disposed of her money, and the promise she had made of taking her Mama to the
cottage; and ended by begging that she would go with her in the morning.
Transported with her conduct, Mrs. Dormer pressed her virtuous child to her
bosom, and promised to take care of the wretched family, for whom Sophia was so
much interested. Then looking with anger at Fanny, she said, "Did you then give
nothing to these poor unhappy creatures?" Fanny hung down her head in silence,
for she was ashamed to speak; but Sophia said, "Oh yes, Mama, indeed she gave
them all the money she had; except just enough to buy her Nosegay and a trinket
for her little watch; and I am sure if she had gone into the cottage and seen
their misery, she would have given them that too." "She sat at the door then,"
said Mrs. Dormer, "while you went in." Then turning to Fanny, "Proud and
unfeeling girl," said she, "who could prefer vain and trifling ornaments to the
delight of relieving the sick and miserable! Retire from my presence; take with
you your trinket and Nosegay, and receive from them all the comforts which they
are able to bestow."

Sophia would gladly have retired with her sister; she was grieved at the
displeasure she had incurred from her Mama, and she wished earnestly to sooth
and comfort the dejected Fanny. Mrs. Dormer, however, chose that she should be
left alone, and Fanny was obliged to pass the night by herself. She then began
to reflect upon the happiness which she had known before she went to visit Lady
Aubrey: she was then beloved by every one, every body met her with a smile; all
the servants were ready to oblige her, and all the neighbors loved her: now
all was changed, and no one except Sophia, no, not even her Mama, seemed to
love her. At this thought she wept bitterly. "And why am I not beloved?" said
she. "And why does every one shun me, at the very time that they are so fond of
my sister? Alas! it is because I am not so good as she." Fanny then thought of
the vexatious situations into which she had been brought by her vanity and
pride. They had caused her to be shunned not only by her inferiors, but by
those above her, and had made her generally hated or despised. Heartily ashamed
of her conduct, and grieved at its consequences, she passed the greatest part
of the night in weeping, and resolved that she would again be good, and again
behave in such a manner as should make her beloved by all, and happy in herself.

Toward morning Fanny fell asleep, and, as she was much tired with lying awake
so long, she slept till it was pretty late; the next day when she awoke, she
inquired for her Mama, and was resolved to ask her forgiveness, and to inform
her of her sorrow for her past faults, and her resolutions to amend. She was
informed that Mrs. Dormer and Sophia were gone to the cottage, and had taken
clothes, and other necessaries for the family, and had sent for a physician to
attend the sick man. "Ah!" said she, "Sophia is happy, and she deserves to be
so, for she is good; I was not worthy to have the pleasure of going to the
cottage, but I will be good and happy too." She then rose, and the first thing
she saw was her Nosegay, which the maid had carefully put into a pot of water
the night before. "This Nosegay," said Fanny, "shall be the constant memorial
of my faults, and of my repentance." She then reached her pallet, and making a
beautiful sketch of the almost dying flowers, she wrote under them in a large
hand, Virtue never fades, and placed the drawing in the most conspicuous part
of the room. When Mrs. Dormer returned, she was struck with this elegant
performance, and calling for Fanny, had the delight of hearing from herself
what had passed in her mind during the past night, and her resolutions of
amendment. After some time, during which Fanny had entirely laid aside her
haughty behavior, the indulgent Mrs. Dormer would have removed the drawing
that it might no longer mortify her child; but Fanny begged it might remain,
and whenever she found herself inclined to return to her former folly, she
placed herself before the picture, which soon became, not merely the shameful
memorial of past faults, but the elegant monument of her return to virtue.

COURAGE INSPIRED BY FRIENDSHIP.
TWO sailors, a Frenchman named Robert, and a native of Spain, called Antonio,
were slaves to the same master at Algiers Friendship is the only consolation of
persons in distress. Antonio and Robert happily enjoyed this consolation --
they communicated to each other their mutual griefs; they conversed perpetually
about their families, their countries, and of the exquisite delight which the
recovery of their liberty, should it ever be granted to their wishes, would
afford them. Their conferences always ended in a flood of affectionate tears,
and this expansion of their hearts enabled them both to support the hard
labor, which was their daily lot, with uncommon fortitude.

The task appointed them was the construction of a road on the top of a cliff
which overhung the sea. One morning the Spaniard resting for a moment from his
toil, and casting an anxious look on the sea, "My friend," said he, "all my
vows, all my hopes, are directed toward the opposite bounds of that vast
liquid plain; why can I not, in company with the partner of my woes, attain
those happy shores? My wife, my children, are ever before my eyes, eagerly
longing for my arrival, or bitterly lamenting my supposed death." Antonio
perpetually indulged himself in these gloomy reflections, and every day that he
was summoned to his work on the cliff, he turned his eyes to the ocean, and
regretted the fatal expanse which separated him from his friends and his
country.

It chanced that one day a Christian ship appeared at anchor not very distant
from the shore. "There friend," cried the Spaniard, "do you see that vessel?
She brings us life and liberty. Though she will not touch here, (for every one
avoids these barbarous coasts) yet tomorrow if you choose it, Robert, our woes
shall end, and we will be free! Yes, tomorrow that ship will pass within a
league of the shore, and we will plunge into the sea from this rock, or perish
in the attempt; for even death is preferable to this cruel slavery." "If you
can save yourself," replied Robert, "I shall support my unhappy lot with
greater resignation. You know, Antonio, how dear you are to me; my friendship
for you will only terminate with my life. I have only one favor to ask of you;
endeavor to find out my father -- If grief for my loss, and old age, have not
already destroyed him, tell him" -- "What do you mean?" answered Antonio; "I
seek your father! -- And do you think I could live happily a single moment with
the idea of having left you in chains?" "But I cannot swim," cried Robert; "and
you know" -- "I know that I have the strongest friendship for you," replied the
Spaniard, embracing him, and shedding tears of affection: friendship will give
me redoubled strength: you shall hold upon my belt, and we will both save
ourselves. In vain did Robert represent the danger there would be of his
perishing himself, and dragging his preserver down with him to destruction;
nothing could overcome the resolution of Antonio. We will both escape, or both
perish together, he cried. "But we draw the attention of our savage keepers;
even some of our companions would be base enough to betray us -- Farewell -- I
hear the bell that calls us from our work; we must separate; farewell till
tomorrow!"

They now returned to their dungeon. -- Antonio was wrapped up in the idea of
his project: he fancied he had already passed the Mediterranean, and was in the
arms of his friends, his wife, and his children. But Robert formed to himself a
very different picture: he saw his friend falling a victim to his own
generosity, and dragged by him to the bottom of the sea, and perishing by that
means, when, if he had only consulted his own safety, he might have preserved
himself, and been restored to the bosom of his family, who most probably were
continually lamenting his loss. "No," said the unfortunate Frenchman to
himself, I will not give way to the solicitations of Antonio; I will not repay
so generous a friendship by being the cause of his death. He will be free. My
unhappy father will at least learn that I am alive, and that my affection for
him is unabated. Alas! I could wish to be the support and consolation of his
age. He wanted my assistance -- perhaps he is now perishing in poverty, and
wishing to see and embrace his son. However, if Antonio is happy, I shall die
with less regret.

The slaves were not taken from their prison the next morning at the usual
hour. The Spaniard was all impatience, while Robert was in doubt whether he
should rejoice or grieve at the disappointment. At length they were called to
their labor, but they could not speak to each other, for their master went
with them. Antonio could only look at Robert and sigh. Sometimes he cast his
eyes toward the sea, and could hardly suppress his emotions. At length night
arrives, and they find themselves alone. "Let us seize this opportunity," cries
the Spaniard, "Come!" "No," replies the other: my friend I never will consent
to endanger your life: farewell, Antonio! I embrace you for the last time. Save
yourself, I conjure you; you have no time to lose. Remember our friendship. I
only request you to remember your promise in regard to my father. He must be
very old, and much in distress; go and console him. If he should want
assistance, I am sure my friend" -- At these words the voice of Robert failed
-- he shed a torrent of tears -- his bosom was torn with anguish. "You weep,
Robert," says Antonio; "it is not tears, but courage, that we now want: resist
no longer; a moment's delay may ruin us; we may never have the opportunity
again; either deliver yourself to my direction, or I will dash my head against
those rocks."

The Frenchman threw himself at the feet of the generous Spaniard: he still
represented the hazard of the attempt, and pointed out the inevitable danger
that must attend his resolution of endeavoring to preserve him. Antonio made
no reply, but catching him in his arms, he ran to the edge of the precipice,
and plunged with him into the sea. At first they both sunk; but, rising to the
surface, Antonio exerted all his force, and swimming himself, kept Robert also
above the water, who seemed to refuse his assistance, and to fear lest he
should involve him in his own destruction.

The people in the ship were struck with an object which they could not well
distinguish. They thought it was some sea monster that approached the vessel.
Their curiosity was now called another way; they saw a boat leave the shore and
hastily pursue what seemed to them a monstrous sea-animal. These were the
soldiers who guarded the slaves, and who were anxious to overtake Antonio and
Robert. The last saw them approach, and, casting his eyes on his friend, and
perceiving that he grew weak, he made an effort and got loose from Antonio,
saying to him at the same time. "We "are pursued. Save yourself, and let me
perish; I only retard your course." He had hardly finished these words when he
sunk. A new transport of friendship animates the Spaniard; he darts toward the
Frenchman, and seizing him as he is just ready to expire, they both disappeared.

The boat, uncertain which way to pursue, stopped; while another was sent from
the vessel to discover what the object was which they had seen. The waves began
to grow rough; at last they discovered two men, the one supporting the other,
and trying to reach the vessel. They rowed to them as fast as possible, and
came up with them just as Antonio's strength began to fail. They took them both
on board. Antonio cried out feebly, Assist my friend -- I die; -- and his
countenance seemed convulsed with the agonies of death. Robert, who was in a
swoon, recovering at the instant, and seeing Antonio without any sign of life
extended by his side, was almost distracted; he threw himself on the body of
his friend. "Antonio!" he cried, "my dear Antonio, my friend, my deliverer,
have I been your murderer? Alas! you cannot hear me. Is this your recompense
for having saved my life? But what is life? Who can support it after the loss
of such a friend?"

Saying this, he started up in the boat, and, seizing a sword, would have
plunged it into his bosom, if he had not been disarmed; but in the midst of his
lamentations and distraction, Providence, apparently to reward an affection so
sincere, interposed in his favor -- Antonio breathed a sigh. Robert flew to
the assistance of his friend, who, lifting up his languid eyes, tried to find
the Frenchman, and, as soon as he perceived him, cried out with a transport
beyond his strength, "I have saved my friend!"

They were both conveyed on board the vessel. Their exemplary friendship
diffused a respect for them among the whole crew. And, such is the effect of
virtue even on the roughest minds, every one contended with his fellows in
showing them attention. Robert arriving in France flew to his father, who was
ready to die with excess of joy at seeing him, and was appointed to a genteel
office under the Government. But the Spaniard, who was likewise offered a very
advantageous post, for one in his situation of life, chose rather to return to
his wife and family. But absence did not diminish his friendship; he continued
still to correspond with Robert, and their letters, which are masterpieces of
simplicity and affection, do honor to the sentiment which was capable of
producing so heroic an action.

THE DUEL; OR THE MAN OF TRUE COURAGE.
MELCOUR lost his parents at an age when he could not be sensible of the
greatness of his misfortune. One of his uncles took him home, brought him up
with his own son, and paid the utmost attention to his education. Florival and
Melcour, already united by the ties of kindred, were soon more so by those of
friendship, which, from their living constantly together, grew stronger every
day. They were both designed for the army. When they were of a proper age, they
got commissions in the same regiment. Florival always hated application, and
the dissipation that naturally attends a military life still inclined him less
to it. As for Melcour, he had not only a very good natural genius, but a strong
inclination to cultivate it. His studies had been properly directed; and a
generous and humane disposition, joined with a habit of thinking seriously, led
him to condemn the criminal practice of fighting duels on trivial occasions, a
custom too prevalent in the army.

Different pursuits lessened, by degrees, the friendship of the two young men.
Florival was blinded by the love of pleasure, he ran into all sorts of
extravagance, and became involved in debt. Melcour lamented his folly, assisted
him with his purse, and endeavored to save him from the ruin into which he was
going to plunge. He represented to him how much his conduct degraded him in the
eyes of sensible people. "Even those," said he to him, "who now applaud your
extravagance, will be the first to upbraid you when they see you in distress.
They call themselves your best friends, and you believe them; they have
estranged you from me. They have painted me to you in the most unfavourable
colors, and if they have not entirely extinguished the friendship that
subsisted between us, at least they have greatly weakened it. The wretches well
knew my sincere affection for you; they are informed of the pains I have taken
to discover to you their perfidious designs, and they wish to punish me for
them. O, my friend, if they should succeed in robbing me of your esteem, their
triumph will be too complete! But, my dear Florival! I do not speak on my own
account only. I conjure you, by every sentiment of virtue that united our
infancy, not to plunge a dagger in the heart of the best of fathers. If he were
to know the excesses you run into he would die with sorrow."

These remonstrances touched the heart of Florival. He promised to amend; but
his perfidious friends represented vice to him in so amiable a form, that he
was unable to resist. Melcour being informed, that, after having lost a great
sum of money at play, he was gone to dissipate his sorrow by infamous
debauchery, immediately went to him, and urged to him, with some vehemence, the
duties of his situation, and the promises he had made to fulfill them.

Florival was no longer master of himself; he fell into a most violent rage
against his cousin; he even drew his sword on him; and on Melcour's refusing to
fight him, he abused him in the grossest terms, and was almost tempted to
strike him. His cousin still kept his temper: unworthy as Florival appeared of
his affection, he yet only regarded him as a friend and relation.

Overcome by this steadiness, he at length recovered his temper. He was ashamed
of his behavior, and begged pardon of Melcour for his violence, which was
immediately granted by the generous youth, and an immediate and perfect
reconciliation took place.

An officer belonging to another regiment happened to be present during the
affair; he had been witness to the provocation given by Florival, and he
imputed the coolness of his cousin to want of courage. He did not fail to make
many sarcastic remarks on it, and they came at length to the ears of some of
Melcour's friends. The least suspicion is deemed injurious to the honor of a
soldier. After many inquiries, it was discovered whose conduct had given rise
to the scandal. They were told the honor of the corpse was wounded through
them, and it was their duty to vindicate it. The means were evident. If the
report was true, they must fight each other; if false, they must punish the
author of it. Melcour was truly miserable. His principles disapproved of
duelling in any instance; and in this, if he obeyed the injunctions of his
corpse, he was reduced to the terrible necessity of plunging his sword into the
bosom of his relation and friend. But, in vain did he represent his feelings to
his brother officers, they would hear of nothing but the choice of weapons,
time, and place. His sorrow was unutterable: he retired to his apartment.
Florival, who went to look for him, found him leaning on a table, hiding his
face with his hands, his eyes streaming with tears, and his continual sighs
only interrupted by the frequent repetition of the name of Florival. At such a
sight he was not able to contain himself; he threw himself at the feet of his
friend. His appearance recalled to Melcour all the horror of his situation --
"What! in a moment I am called upon to pierce your heart, and do you come to
seek me? -- O Florival!" said he, his voice almost choked with tears, "should
my arm deprive you of life, I would not survive you. What should I say to your
father? did he take so much care of my infancy, to see me stained with the
blood of his son? O, wretched old man, whatever may be the event of this horrid
duel, it will be an eternal source of anguish for you!"

At this instant some of the officers forced open the door; they came to tell
Melcour he could not delay the combat any longer without giving room to call
his courage in question. What a terrible situation! At this instant the two
friends were embracing each other -- they were unable to return any answer.

Florival was the first who broke this mournful silence. In him the mistaken
principles of honor at present prevailed over those of friendship. He got up,
and extended his arm to assist Melcour, without daring to look at him. He arose
and walked about the room in the greatest agitation; he fancied he saw his
relation and friend murdered by his hands, and his distracted uncle demanding
vengeance for the blood of his son. At length, recovering himself, he turned to
the officers, and said to to them in a firm and resolute tone of voice: I will
no longer hesitate to act that part which is pointed out to me by the voice of
religion, of reason, and of humanity, be the consequence what it may. My
determination is fixed. Go, and inform those who sent you, that Melcour prefers
an imaginary dishonor to a real crime, and that no consideration upon earth
shall tempt him to point his sword against the bosom of his friend. This answer
determined his fate. His brother officers informed him with the sincerest
regret, that, as he had refused to fight, it was impossible for them to roll
with him, and that he must quit the regiment. Who can describe the feelings of
Florival, when he heard this sentence? it was he who had brought Melcour into
this terrible situation. The disgrace of his cousin was owing to his follies.
These thoughts almost drove him to distraction. His friends were alarmed for
the consequences, and removed him by force from the mournful scene.

Melcour, left to himself, soon determined what steps to take. He was
determined not to return home, to be there exposed to a disgrace he was
conscious of not deserving. He resolved to endeavor to improve the talents
which Nature had endowed him with by traveling, till time should either
obliterate the memory of this unfortunate adventure, or show it in its true
light. That very evening he made the proper preparations for his journey, and
wrote a letter to his cousin, acquainting him with his intended expedition.
"Inform my uncle," he added, "of all that has happened; let him know that they
wanted to compel me to become your murderer. He will shudder at the thought.
Though these barbarians, guided only by a false sense of honor, think me
unworthy to serve my king and country, he at least will applaud the courageous
efforts I have made to preserve us both from a crime. This lesson, my dear
Florival, will be of advantage to you; your eyes are now opened to the conduct
of your companions. Still continue your regard for me; and never esteem me
unhappy while I preserve a place in your friendship."

He set out at daybreak the next morning, accompanied by a single servant. He
had not gone many miles from the garrison when he saw a large detachment of the
enemy on the point of defeating an inferior number of French troops. He could
not behold his countrymen in danger of being vanquished without burning with
ardour to assist them. Regardless of the danger of the attempt, he only
listened to the call of glory; and this Melcour, whose courage his brother
officers had presumed to question, flew to the field of battle, performed
prodigies of valor, took one of the enemy's colors, and animating his
countrymen by his example, they obtained the victory.

The general officer who commanded the detachment was charmed with the bravery
of the young warrior, and earnestly desired to know his name. "Sir," he
replied, "I will tell you who I am directly; but, will you give me leave first
to ask, what is the immediate destination of your detachment?" "It is going,"
said he, "to reinforce the neighboring garrison," (naming that which Melcour
had left,) "of which I am to take the command." "Then, Sir," said Melcour, "if
you will permit me, I will attend you thither, and receive there those marks of
your approbation that you shall be pleased to honor me with."

They arrived. "Sir," said Melcour, "the only favor I ask of you, is to call
together the officers of the regiment of ***" (that which he had quitted); they
assembled, and Melcour appeared. "Behold, gentlemen," said he, "the unfortunate
victim of a false honor, to which you sacrifice every thing, though it often
renders you cruel and unjust. Because I refused to stain my hands with the
blood of a relation younger than myself, and who had expiated a very slight
offense by the most unequivocal marks of sorrow and repentance; because I
listened to the voice of religion and humanity; because I respected the laws,
you have judged me unworthy to carry arms in the service of my country. Blinded
by prejudice, you have dared to accuse me of cowardice. For that accusation I
have taken ample revenge. These colors, taken from the enemy, are a sufficient
testimony of my courage." His brother officers surrounded him, and embracing
him, by the praises they lavished on him, and the excuses they made, they
atoned for the rash suspicions they had entertained of him.

The general, astonished and charmed with the behavior of Melcour, pressed him
to resume his rank for the present, till he could have an opportunity of
reporting so gallant an action to the minister. Melcour yielded to his
solicitations, seconded by those of the officers of the regiment. "Accept,"
said the general, "that commission you was deprived of yesterday, as a tacit
avowal of the injustice of that prejudice which condemned you, and may your
example entirely root it out!" Then turning to the officers who surrounded him,
he added: "Let the behavior of this virtuous young man teach you, for the
future, not to accuse that person of cowardice, who, obedient to the laws of
true honor, and of his country, refuses to become a murderer. Renounce,
gentlemen, that fatal error, which shows you the man of true courage in him who
is not afraid to wash out an injury in the blood of his fellow citizen: behold
him rather in the person who has greatness of soul to be above the desire of
revenge. For the future, defer your quarrels till the day of battle, and let
the contests for superior resolution be decided in the face of the enemies of
your king and country. Or, if the insult offered you is amenable to the laws,
let the laws fix that ignominy on your adversary that his conduct may deserve.
But, let your warmest praises be bestowed on Melcour, and on those who have the
magnanimity to follow the example he has this day given us."

It is impossible to describe the transports of Florival during this affecting
scene. From that moment he renounced his fatal errors, and, strictly keeping
the solemn promises he had made to his friend, and profiting by his example,
they both were raised to the highest stations in the army, which they filled
with the greatest honor to themselves, their family, and their country.

THE Folly of unrestrained Indulgence; OR THE HISTORY OF EMMELINE AND JENNY.
Ye doting parents, of your charge beware,
The richest soil requires the greatest care.
Ah, then destroy each baneful weed betimes!
Remember this -- that faults will grow to crimes,
If no correcting hand, with well-aim'd skill,
Avert their power, and bend the stubborn will.
How often must reason whisper in your ear,
A blighted spring will make a barren year.

EMMELINE was the daughter of a gentleman of large fortune; she was always
dressed in the most elegant manner; her nursery was filled with the most
expensive toys, and she had several servants to wait upon her. If she wished
for any thing, however absurd in itself, or incapable of pleasing her when
obtained, yet Emmeline must be indulged. Not a servant in the house was
suffered to contradict her, and sometimes, if they happened to displease her,
she would scratch and beat them in the most violent manner. Notwithstanding her
finery, and her superfluity of toys, notwithstanding she had every thing at her
command which riches could procure, and every one was striving to make her
happy, she was a most miserable little girl. Her tyrannical temper made her
universally disliked, even by those who were obliged to be subservient to her,
and her fretfulness and ill humor was a constant thorn in her own bosom.

At the entrance of her father's park stood a lodge, which was inhabited by a
poor man who had also one daughter. Little Jenny was one of the best tempered
girls in the world; she was never seen crying and out of humor like Emmeline,
but on the contrary, was civil and obliging to every body. There was not a
servant at the hall but loved her as if she had been their own child; and never
did they go down to the lodge, but they were sure to carry her an apple, or a
piece of plum-cake, or something nice in their pockets. It frequently happened
that Jenny was sent for to play with Emmeline, which she did not like at all,
for the young lady was so whimsical it was impossible to please her, and
frequently would desire Jenny to do what was very improper. On such occasions
she would never comply; for though she paid the haughty little girl every
respect which was due to her rank, she never forgot what was due to herself:
well knowing that a wrong action is equally culpable, whether the person who
tempts us to commit it, be poor or rich. If in their play they happened to
break any thing, Emmeline would desire Jenny to say it was one of the servants
who did it; and when she refused to be guilty of so wicked an action, Emmeline
would put herself in a violent passion, and frequently beat her. In short it is
not to be conceived how disagreeable she made herself. She was also very
ignorant; she could neither read, nor write; for though she had several
masters, not one of them attended her more than three or four lessons. Mrs.
Gordon would not permit her to be reprimanded, and no one could long endure her
unrestrained insolence. She was therefore unacquainted with the most common
branches of learning, and when Jenny, who was nearly the same age, could read
very well, Emmeline scarcely knew her letters. Jenny was one day as usual sent
for to the hall, and when she arrived she found the young lady in the parlour
with her Papa and Mama, who were endeavoring to divert her by a great variety
of very pretty prints, which they had sent for from London. She looked at them
a little time, and then being tired, tossed them away. Jenny took one to look
at, when Emmeline snatching it from her, asked her how she dared touch it? I
beg your pardon, Miss Emmeline, said she but I was only going to look at it.

Emmeline. And who gave you leave? To be sure you are a mighty fine lady with
your stuff gown to give yourself such airs.


Jenny. I thought, Miss Emmeline, you sent for me to play with you, and not to
laugh at my dress; it is the best my father and mother can afford, and I am
much obliged to them for it; many very good little girls have much worse.


Emmeline. Well to be sure they must be very good, if they have not a gown.


Jenny. Can peoples' dress, Miss, make any difference in their goodness?


Emmeline. Oh I do not know: pray don't ask me such questions. Come let us go
and play.


They went into the garden, accompanied by a servant, for Emmeline was never
suffered to move without one. As they were running about, Emmeline happened to
fall, and scratch her arm against a gooseberry bush. She immediately began to
cry and shriek so loud, that in a few minutes her Papa, Mama, and half the
servants came running to see what was the matter. Mrs. Gordon chided the
servant very much for the accident, though she well knew it was in no servant's
power to prevent her daughter's doing what she liked. Mr. Gordon took her in
his arms, and carried her into the house; but it was some hours before she
could be pacified. Such was the child, whom unbounded indulgence had totally
spoiled, for Emmeline had not naturally bad dispositions. With increasing
years, her faults increased also, and her parents then began to see, and lament
the folly of their conduct. Every pleasure, every comfort of their lives were
totally destroyed. They could not enjoy their own home from the wretched temper
of their daughter, nor were they happier when abroad, as their fears for her
safety were ever awake. They knew no one could control her, and that however
dangerous what she had a fancy for, that, she would do. They were invited to
spend a month at a gentleman's seat at some miles distance. Not without great
reluctance did they accept the invitation; but at length it was determined
Jenny should stay with Emmeline during their absence. Poor Jenny dreaded the
persecution she knew she must endure, and when she put on her bonnet to go to
the hall, she could not help crying. The first day of her visit was spent much
as usual; but the second, Emmeline was if possible, more ill-tempered than
ever; and Jenny, tired beyond all endurance, thus addressed her: Miss Emmeline,
I am come here, not because I wish it, but because your Mama, has desired it;
do not therefore think that I will be treated in this manner. I know that I am
poor, and you are rich; but yet, Miss Emmeline I would not change situations
with you. Of what use to you is your rank, but to enable you to torment others,
and to make every one as unhappy as yourself? I do not believe the poorest
beggar suffers more than you do. You have riches, but you do not know how to
enjoy them, and though you call yourself great, nobody loves you.

This was language Emmeline had never before heard; she would have uttered the
effusions of her passion, but shame kept her silent. She felt a sensation she
had never experienced; and inferiority wholly new. How much did this little
peasant appear superior to herself? how was all her boasted consequence
dwindled to nothing?

Such is the power of Virtue, that even the wicked are awed by it. From that
time Emmeline felt a veneration for Jenny she knew not how to account for. She
saw how happy she always appeared, how much she was beloved, and in short, how
different she was in every respect to herself. These reflections first convinced
her of her folly, in imagining she could ever be happy if she was not good. She
resolved to imitate the conduct she could not but admire, and, if possible, to
become amiable. But she found this a very hard task; she had not only virtues
to acquire, but faults to conquer which had grown with her growth, and
strengthened with her strength. But yet, though it was difficult, it was not
impossible; she told her resolution to Jenny, who could scarcely contain the
raptures she felt at hearing this declaration; and she thought Emmeline had
never appeared so lovely as in that moment. Her countenance was no longer
clouded by frowns and tears; she began to feel what happiness virtue can
bestow, and that it is she alone who makes us truly great.

Very often did she relapse into her former habits, but reflection, by pointing
out their folly, and experience, by showing their misery, fortified her mind to
resist their attacks; Jenny too was near, and assisted her to conquer them.
Hitherto the profusion of money, which the too great indulgence of her parents
had allowed her, had been spent in cakes, sugar-plums, and toys; but now, a new
source of delight was opened to her; she tasted the charms of benevolence, and
her bosom was warmed by the emanations of charity. The poor of the village saw
in her a rising benefactress, and the widow and the orphan prayed for her
happiness. The servants too, whom she now treated in a very different manner,
respected her as much as they had before despised her; and every one was eager
to wait upon, and oblige her. As for Jenny, by whose example and advice the
little tyrant had been reclaimed (for it was she who had taught her to pray
Heaven to assist her good intentions) it is impossible to say with what warmth
of affection she loved her. Her stay at the hall was no longer disagreeable to
her, no longer occasioned dread and uneasiness.

Mr. and Mrs. Gordon had been persuaded by their friends to extend their visit
a month longer. So uncomfortable was their own home, that they agreed to it
with much less reluctance than they would otherwise have done. Two months,
therefore, they had been absent, when they began to prepare for their return.
The pleasure they would have felt in seeing Emmeline after this long absence,
was much damped by the consciousness how ill she deserved their affection: yet
themselves only had they to blame; for her heart was good, and naturally
inclined to virtue; but so destructive are the consequences of unrestrained
indulgence, that human nature is vitiated by it.

The first glance Emmeline caught of the carriage among the trees, her heart
began to beat with unusual sensations. She felt the painful emotions of
conscious shame; she knew how ill she had requited the tenderness of her
parents, and after a struggle with some few remaining sparks of pride, she
determined to confess her faults, and entreat her parents' forgiveness. As soon
as they entered the house, she expressed in a manner very different from her
former habits, the joy she felt at seeing them. They clasped her to their
bosoms, and looked at each other in silent astonishment. They now began to
display the profusion of toys, which they had brought her home, and asked her
how she liked them? She made no answer, but bursting into an agony of tears,
threw herself on her knees before them, and declared her conduct had hitherto
made her unworthy their goodness, but she would in future endeavor to deserve
it more.

Inexpressible were the raptures of Mr. and Mrs. Gordon, they could not find
words to declare their feelings, but each endeavored to exceed the other in
the most affectionate caresses. She now constituted their happiness as truly as
she had before been the cause of their forrow. Her bad habits had been too long
indulged to yield to any thing but time and resolution; yet her relapses were
short, and the contrition she felt, was her best security against their return.
When her parents were informed it was to Jenny they were in a great measure
indebted for their daughter's reformation, they determined their gratitude
should equal her virtue.

Emmeline had very soon a worthy woman provided as a governess for her, to whom
she was docile, obedient, and attentive; and made so rapid a progress in her
studies, that she astonished all who had known her former ignorance. Jenny was
kept at the hall, and shared in the pleasure and instructions of her friend, to
whom she every day became dearer.

From this story, my little readers may learn the benign influence of Virtue.
Vain are riches, vain the boast of power without it! They can never raise any
one so high as Virtue.

Let them consider Emmeline and Jenny. How much was the latter, though clothed
in the simplest manner, superior to her haughty friend, even when decked in the
most costly attire! Let none then despise Poverty, it is often found the
residence of Virtue. Let them pay to merit what is always its due, though found
in the humblest walks of life. And let every one remember there is no real
superiority but that of Goodness; and that it is equally the part of Wisdom and
Virtue, to efface the wild inequality, the distinctions paid alone to rank and
riches, which pride and folly have introduced into the world.



LUCRETIA AND THE ANTS.
Read Nature's book! that wondrous power revere
Who formed each being for its proper sphere;
But who to man superior bliss has given,
Bliss, which the virtuous find matur'd in Heaven.
Yet ah! disdain not those who sporting, gay,
Range unconfined, the tenants of a day!
In joy and freedom, let their moments flow,
Nor take that life which thou can never bestow!

LUCRETIA was one fine morning walking in the fields with her Mama, when she
took notice of several small masses of earth which seemed to have been
purposely thrown up; Pray, Mama, said she, why do the people make these lumps?
I think they are very ugly.

Mrs. Mountain. They are ant-hills, and are formed by those little creatures
you have sometimes seen in the garden.


Lucretia. 'And why do they make them?'


Mrs. Mountain. Look here; do not you observe several holes? Well, if you could
see within those, you would behold a city.


Lucretia. A city, Mama! are you not joking?


Mrs. Mountain. No, indeed I am very serious; and I assure you what I say is
perfectly true. The ants dig some depth into the earth, and by throwing out the
mould, as you here see, they leave a hollow space within.


Lucretia. But does not the earth fall back again into the place underneath?


Mrs. Mountain. It certainly would do so, if these ingenious little creatures
did not contrive a method to prevent it. They collect such pieces of stick as
they judge necessary, which several of them carry to the spot where they intend
to build their city; they then lay them across the top of their streets,
forming by this means a roof. They also consolidate the earth with a kind of
glue, and then cover the pieces of wood with moss, grass, or dry rushes.


Lucretia. And is it possible, Mama, that these little creatures should be
capable of doing so much?


Mrs. Mountain. Yes, indeed it is, and even a great deal more; for they form
these roofs in a shelving posture, by which means the current of water is
turned from them. They divide their city into different departments; lay up
provisions of all kinds in their magazines, and conduct all their business with
the greatest care and regularity. They are likewise the tenderest parents to
their young, nurse them with the greatest affection, and amply supply all their
wants.


Lucretia. Really, Mama, it is very wonderful, but yet I can easily credit it;
for I recollect a few days since, when I was walking by the honey-suckle bower,
I observed a vast number of ants crawling about. I stood some time to observe
them, and I do assure you I saw one of them carry a part of a dead fly in its
mouth.


Mrs. Mountain. That is by no means uncommon with them, for they are
indefatigable in their labors.


Lucretia. I have often heard you say Mama, how much pleasure the study of
natural history afforded you. Will you teach me it? I am sure I should like it
very much.


Mrs. Mountain. Most readily: for there is no science which more strongly
displays the wisdom and power of the creator. It is a science which ought to
teach us humility, as it shows us the wonderful powers which some of the animal
tribes possess; and as many of these are employed for our advantage, they ought
to secure to their possessors the kindest treatment.


The next morning Lucretia begged some grains of corn of one of the servants,
with which she immediately hastened to the spot where she had before seen the
ants. She laid her treasure on the ground, and in about a quarter of an hour
several of these industrious insects came to it. Their numbers soon increased;
she called her Mama to observe them, who told her, she had no doubt but this
was nearly the whole colony, as it is well known the ants kept spies, whose
business it was to discover any thing worth amassing, which was no sooner done
than they gave information of it, and the whole party immediately sallied out.

Mrs. Mountain and her daughter stood some time to observe the little
laborers, and saw them take all the corn to deposit it in their granaries. The
pleasure of Lucretia was very great in beholding their industry, and she
frequently placed corn or fruit that she might observe them carrying it away.
Nor was her curiosity gratified, nor did her researches end here. Natural
history by degrees was familiar to her; botany, that repository of wonder and
pleasure, soon became the favorite study of her hours of recreation. Her mind
being thus enriched with useful knowledge, no vacuum was left for those
trifling amusements, which are equally a disgrace to the head and heart.

Those who observe the beauties of Nature, who accustom themselves not merely
to look at, but to see all around them, can never be at a loss for employment.
Every bird that skims the air, every beast that ranges the field, will furnish
them with sufficient amusement, and lead them to the contemplation of that
Being whose wisdom and goodness are equally conspicuous in all that He has made.

THE END.
BOOKS, For Sale by the PUBLISHERS hereof.
1. The surprising Voyages, Travels, and Adventures of a REPROBATE, including a
Sketch of the Manners and Customs of the Algerines. By HENRY BROOK, Esquire.
Author of the Fool of Quality, etc. etc. 2. The BLIND CHILD, or ANECDOTES OF
THE WYNDHAM FAMILY. Written for the use of young persons, and embellished with
a handsome engraved Frontispiece.

The above valuable little work has been written with the laudable hope of
repressing that excessive softness of heart, which too frequently involves its
possessor in a train of evils, and which is by no means true sensibility, that
exquisite gift of heaven, which cannot be esteemed too highly; though its abuse
should serve more and more to convince, it can never be sufficiently
discouraged.

3. The SEVEN WISE MASTERS OF ROME, containing many curious and entertaining
Stories. 4. The SEVEN WISE MISTRESSES OF ROME, wherein the Treachery of evil
Counselors is discovered, Innocence cleared, and the Wisdom of the SEVEN WISE
MISTRESSES displayed. 5. The Seven Voyages of SINBAD THE SAILOR; ALADDIN and
his WONDERFUL LAMP; the Story of LITTLE HUNCHBACK; and the BARBER and his SEVEN
BROTHERS. 6. HYMNS for the Amusement of Children, by the Rev. Christopher
Smart, A. M. to which are added WATTS's DIVINE SONGS for Children, embellished
with a number of Engravings. 7. An easy Introduction to the Knowledge of
Nature, adapted to the capacities of Children. By Mrs. Trimmer. 8. The
Catechism of Nature, by Dr. Martinet. 9. The Catechism of Health, for the use
of Families and Schools. By Dr. Faust. 10. PAUL and VIRGINIA, an INDIAN STORY.
From the French of H. B. De. St. Pierre, by H. HUNTER, D. D. A new EDITION,
embellished with three handsome Engravings.

The same FRENCH and ENGLISH.

The same in FRENCH.

11. The INDIAN COTTAGE, by De St. Pierre, Author of Paul and Virginia.

