THE DEFENSE OF WARNER MIFFLIN

Against Aspersions cast on him on Account of his endeavors To promote
RIGHTEOUSNESS, MERCY AND PEACE, AMONG MANKIND.

Seeing It is good to be zealously affected with a good thing; and I therefore
your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth GAL. CHAP. IV.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY SAMUEL SANSOM, jun. No. 27, MULBERRY-STREET. 1796

WARNER MIFFLIN'S DEFENSE.
I WAS born and chiefly raised on the Eastern Shore of Virginia; and although
my Parents were of the religious Society called Quakers, and exemplary in their
Lives, yet I witnessed great incitements to a departure from the principles
held by that People, there being none of the Profession, except our Family
within sixty Miles; and my Associates were of those, who tenaciously held the
prevailing sentiments in favor of Slavery: So that I had no opportunity of
having my heart and views enlarged on this interesting Subject, by conversing
with such of my Brethren in Profession, who had come to see the necessity of an
impartial enquiry into the nature and tendency of this atrocious practice.

Thus situated and my Father then possessing a number of Slaves, I was in great
danger of becoming blinded by the influence of Custom, the bias of Education,
and the delusions of self-interest; from whence I certainly must have become
fettered as in the Chains of wrong habits, had not the emanations of divine
Light and Grace (which I had been early instructed to pay attention to)
powerfully prevailed in successive visitations, so operating as to subvert the
effects of dangerous prepossessions, and disposing my mind to yield to the
influences of best wisdom, on this, to my present view, one of the worst of
sins.

And it is with peculiar satisfaction I have to remark, that my Father was not
long behind me in espousing the cause of Liberty: After sealing the sincerity
of his professions by the liberation of about an hundred Blacks,
notwithstanding the discouragement of a Law then existing, he became a zealous
Advocate and intercessor for them with their Masters, and in many instances
were his labors successful: Often appearing alone in Courts of Law, amidst
surrounding Opponents, to plead the Cause of Individuals of the African Race,
who had a claim to freedom.

An occurrence took place about the fourteenth year of my Age, that tended to
pave the way for the reception of those impressions which have since been
sealed with indelible clearness on my understanding. Being in the Field with my
Father's Slaves, a young Man among them questioned me Whether I thought it
could be right, that they should be toiling to raise me, and I sent to school,
and by and by their children must do so for mine also? Some little irritation
took place in my mind at first; but his reasoning finally so impressed me as
never to be erased -- The idea of losing so much property as what I might
probably expect from the great number my Father possessed, seemed hard on first
view to reconcile: however, before I arrived at Manhood I determined never to
be a Slave holder -- Yet on settling in a Married life commenced the proving of
my Faith on this head -- I became posessed of several Minor Slaves by my Wife
and diverse came from my Fathers on different errands, with a conclusion to
abide with me, without any move thereto on his part or mine: As also several
that never lived with him, that were of my Mothers family of Blacks from Kent
County Maryland -- Thus all I then had of lawful Age, being Volunteers, I sat
down quiet in the use of them, until at length I became almost persuaded I
could not do without them -- And when the subject of freeing Blacks was treated
on, the prevailing sentiment was, that Negroes were such Thieves they would not
do to be free; and though this was chiefly the plea of Slave holders, yet I was
glad to embrace it as a pretext for keeping mine, but I was not suffered long
to rest unreproved in this spot; my sig leaf covering of excuse was stripped
off and my state discovered to me by the penetrating Rays of that Light which
makes manifest for whatsoever makes manifest is light; from whence
considerable conflict arose in my soul; when after continuing for some time
debating, resolving and re-resolving, a period arrived, when he who has his
way in the Clouds, in the Whirlwind, the Earthquake, and thick darkness, was
pleased to arouse me to greater vigilance by his terrors for Sin, for having
omitted what had appeared clearly as my duty in this business, when in a time
of thunder storm, every flash appeared as though it might be the instrument to
dispatch me into a state of fixedness, and with the measure of my duty herein
not filled up; what then could I expect if taken in that condition, but an
eternal separation from heavenly enjoyment? And though these sensations may
appear strange to some, who neither fear God nor regard Man yet I still retain
a willingness, that such seasons of convulsion in the outward Elements, may be
impressive of solid instruction to my mind.

It then settled on my understanding, that I should indeed be excluded from
happiness if I continued in this breach of the divine Law, written upon my
heart as by the finger of Heaven; although want and disgrace to my family had
presented with threatening aspect, should I adhere to its dictates. After
which, in the Year 1774, I manumited those I had by my Wife, flattering myself
such who came of their own accord I might retain while they chose to continue
as heretofore, still being visited with affliction, on the presentation of an
awful Eternity, a willingness was wrought in me to cast my care on a merciful
Providence, and to resign up at all events to what I did believe was called for
at my hands, that of bearing a faithful Testimony against the abominable
practice of enslaving fellow Men, I therefore let my Father know, he must take
the Blacks away or authorize me to set them free, He readily told me I might do
as I would, on which in 1775 I executed another deed of Emancipation for all I
held as mine. --

About the 24th year of my Age I was put into the Commission of the Peace,
which tended to excite considerable thirst for preferment in Government, a
taste that had much impeded the progress of my Testimony against Slavery, as it
furnished an Idea of additional necessity for Slaves to support me in that mode
of Life. Yet after those reasons of conflict before hinted at, I became
impressed with a belief that it was right for me to decline this Office, and
with it any future advancement to stations in Power. -- Although I revere
Magistracy, confiding in the Sacred Text, that it is an Ordinance of God, and
believing it a great benefit to mankind when executed under, his holy and
preserving fear -- But in the present state of Governments, I apprehend my
Brethren cannot be active therein consistent with our high profession, of being
called to become, through a faithful adherence to divine monitions, even as some
of the first fruits of the Nations unto God, in the support of our principle
against War, with which the various Governments, among Men have so much
affinity -- I was solemnly impressed with the importance of the trust when
about undertaking the Commission, and resolved to discharge my duty therein
fully; yet though I endeavored to perform this to the best of my understanding,
I never felt that peace of Soul I desired, during my continuance in Office,
this brought me into a strict scrutiny, and a confirmation succeeded of the
Truth of our great Masters declaration My Kingdom is not of this World. My mind
has remained, steadfastly attached to these sentiments, when at different times
since I have been solicited to accept of any station either in the Legislative
or Executive departments of Government, especially as it considerably unfits
for the promulgation of peace and good will among Men, when there is an
embarkation in human policy, on its floating Sea of party Spirit; that
gendereth envy, malice, revenge, rents, divisions and War -- And the abundant
use of Oaths, with frequent perjuries, in what relates to matters of
Government, appears to me not only a manifest violation of Christ's injunction
to his followers Swear not at all, as what exceeds the simple and plain
communication of Yea yea, and nay, nay, comes of evil but is also a
profanation of the Sacred Name.

And indeed I have felt scrupulous of taking an active part at Elections, least
I should not only become tinctured with a Spirit of party, but also contribute
by my Vote to the placing those in power who might become oppressors of tender
Consciences. If we give no just occasion of offense, but are in other respects
useful Members of the Community, we may be admitted without censure to the
exercise of these scruples: and it would be more to the honor as well as
blessing of the World, if the tender Conscience was more cherished.

To resume the thread of my Narrative -- I was concerned with two Estates, to
which belonged many of the African Race: in one they were willed to the Heirs
particularly named, and as Executor I conceived I must exercise the government
over them, to enable me to settle with the Heirs. But I was turned solidly to
consider, that I should not be justified in doing that for another, which I was
fully convinced was a sin to do on my own Account -- The prospect being clear,
a solemn impression took place at the time, that I believed to be the language
of holy certainty, That neither I nor mine should ever suffer by my discharging
them; which I believe was never doubted by me. I called them in and let them
know, so far as I had power they were free; some who were hired by their own
consent, I informed they must continue the time out and they should have their
Wages, and likewise all their earnings from their Masters death; which was
fully complied with on my part to the best of my knowledge, and according to my
faith so was the event, the several Heirs as they arrived at age, liberated the
Slaves and released me.

I also found an engagement to make restitution to those I had held in a State
of bondage, for the time so held, which was done according to the judgment of
indifferent Men agreed on by myself and the blacks. And on reflection I found I
had so much hand in selling some, as to put me under an obligation to release
them; which I did to a considerable amount, on my own account, my then Wife's,
and some who belonged to her Father and Grandfather. --

About this time I was appointed on a Committee to labor with the members of
our Society who held Slaves, in order for the convincement of their
understandings, of the inconsistency of this practice with Christianity; which
labor was so far blessed that in a little time most of our Members liberated
theirs. -- Now great stir was made as if the Country was going to be overturned
and ruined. It appeared as if the Lying Spirit had gone forth to deceive the
People -- On my setting mine free, I thought it best to put them from me, to
manifest they were so, it was circulated that Mifflin had set free a parcel of
lazy worthless Negroes; he could make nothing by them, therefore set them at
liberty. This reflection had some weight with me, however unjust, and regarding
Scripture injunction, not to let our good be evil spoken of, I thought if
expedient to propose their having Land and Teams, and in return they should
give me half their produce, which was put in execution with those who chose to
accept the Terms. Immediately the tune was turned, that Mifflin was making more
Money by his Negroes now than ever, and keeping them in more abject Slavery,
under the pretense of their being free. I then determined to do what I did
believe to be right, not regarding the unbridled Tongues of Men, and so I have
endeavored to act 'till this time, pressing through both good and evil report.

Another trial occurred, I felt religiously engaged in Testimony against the
pernicious use of ardent Spirits, so generally prevalent, particularly in time
of Harvest -- We had been in the superfluous use of it in my family, and laying
myself out as a candidate for promotion in Government as before hinted, when in
the Commission of the Peace, I frequently kept the Bottle and Bowl on the Table
from Morning 'till Night; it being then, and I fear is yet too much, the
corrupt manner by which worldly promotion is commonly attained: I now found a
sore conflict was to be experienced, in attempting a practice so reverse to
what I had been in, and in which I should stand alone. And having discharged my
Slaves, I feared I might never be able to save my Grain or carry on my farm to
support my family, but the conviction of its rectitude was such, that I felt
impelled to make the attempt, I had a number of People in my field, a Master
Mason with diverse of his hands, among others, I thought if he became reconciled
it would tend to settle the minds of his Companions, therefore began to
discourse with him while he was reaping; when in a most shocking manner he
damned religion and said he would have Rum; this to affected me, I left the
field, apprehending I should never be able to stem such a torrent;, but
seriously pondering on it, and the subject enlarging in my view with increasing
weight, it sealed on my Spirit, that if I should hand out this Liquor, and any
Life by its means be lost, as I had several times seen a danger of being the
case, I should not be clear of the blood of such, on which I determined through
divine assistance never to use it again on any like occasions, and with
thankfulness I may acknowledge I have been favored never to suffer damage
through the disuse of it in my fields, and so preserved from the misapplication
of it since, that in all my concerns there has not been one pint used, except
on particular Occasions as Medicine, and that but little. The late Revolution
now began to make its appearance and as I was religiously restrained from
taking any part therein, I had the epithet of Toryism placed on me by
interested holders of Slaves, insinuations were thrown out that my laboring
for the freedom of the blacks, was in order to attach them to the British
interest, notwithstanding I had liberated mine on the ground of religious
conviction, before this revolutionary period arrived -- Added to this, on the
issue of the Bills of Credit by Congress, I felt restricted from receiving
them, left I might thereby, in some sort defile my hands with one of the
Engines of War; from whence I was further dipped into sympathy with the
condition of the blacks, in acting so as to be declared an Enemy to my Country,
and like them, thrown out from the benefit of its Laws, and this for no other
Crime, but yielding to the impulses of divine Grace or Law of God written in my
heart, which I ever found the safest ground to move upon -- Abundant threats
were poured out, that my house should be pulled down over my head, that I
should be Shot, Carted etc; this proved a fiery trial, my soul was almost
overwhelmed left I should bring my family to want, and it might be through a
deception. I left my house in the night season and walked into a field in the
bitterness of my soul, and without any sensible relief returned back, on
stepping into the door I espied a Testament, and opening it in the I3th Chap.
of Revelations, found mention there made of a time, when none should buy or
sell, but those who received the mark of the Beast in the right Hand or
forehead: and it fixed in my mind, that if I took that Money after those
impressions, I should receive a mark of the bestial spirit of War in my right
hand; and then the penalty which is annexed in the ensuing Chapter must follow
-- I then resolved through the Lords assistance, which I craved might be
afforded, let what would follow, never to deal in any of it, this afforded me
some relief, and finding my Wife so far united with me as to refuse it likewise
(saying though she did not feel the matter as I did, yet through fear of
weakening my hands, she was most easy not to touch it) I became much
strengthened and resigned to suffer what might be allotted, feeling at times
the prevalence of that power, which delivers from all fear of the malice of Men
or infernal spirits, and reduces the soul into perfect subjection to the holy
will and ordering.

Light seems to be increasingly spreading on this subject, or at least more are
disposed to yield to its emanations thereon than heretofore; an instance of
which is a pamphlet written by a Clergyman in England and lately reprinted by
D. Humphreys, in Philadelphia which I would recommend to the perusal of my
Readers, in which he remarks, Such is the dread of singularity in dissenting
from opinions sanctioned by public approbation and applause, that but few have
courage to forsake the beaten track and think for themselves, in matters
confessedly of the highest importance: And thus the specious reasonings and
conclusions of men, who have no better claim to infallibility than ourselves,
are suffered to divert us from a simple attention to the example and
unambiguous precepts of him, who has presented to us, in his own sacred person,
celestial excellence, and the most complete pattern of all moral virtue -- On
subjects which do not relate to the great truths of Religion, we may be
indifferent, and it is doubtless, best not to be earnest and tenacious for
either side of the Question; but when doctrines, upon the establishment and
promulgation of which, the temporal and perhaps the eternal welfare of Millions
in some measure depends, it is the duty and interest of every one to search for
Truth as for hid treasure; to be fully persuaded in his own Mind, that his
principles are founded in immutable truth and unerring rectitude -- Let such
then unfold the sacred volume, which contains the charter of our eternal
salvation, and say in what part of it they can find any passage that will
either directly or indirectly, prove war to be justifiable on Christian
principles -- that will furnish one argument in favor of a Christians
endeavoring to injure his fellow Creature, even his most bitter and inveterate
enemy, so much as in thought; or what is more; that can justify him in
dislodging a human Soul from its appointed tabernacle, by destroying that life
which he neither gave nor can restore? Do not the doctrines of the new
Testament uniformly declare against it, and most expressly and unequivocally
prove that War is directly opposed to the very aim and end of Christianity,
which offers reconciliation to the greatest offenders, and makes our acceptance
with God absolutely to depend on our forgiveness of those by whom we ourselves
have been injured? --

Suicide, that lifts his guilty arm against his own sacred person, naturally
excites such horror in the mind, that he who has impiously dared to infringe
upon the prerogative of his Maker, by putting a period to his own life, is held
to be unworthy the common rites of sepulture -- The Laws of this Country rank
duelists and their seconds in the class of murderers, since they impiously
wanton with their own lives and those of their fellow Creatures (see
Blackstones Commentaries.) the gratification of revenge, the darling passion of
narrow, savage, and untutored minds, may, perhaps, be pleaded by some, as an
excuse for the encounters of these gentlemen-like murderers: -- But what can be
said in extenuation of the guilt of those who set others on to War, who never
saw each others faces, nor ever had any possible occasion for hatred or
animosity? Who can say that such are more innocent than the duelist and
suicide, or less deserving the punishment due to such heinous offenses against
the divine Law, etc. The War advancing with increasing distress, gloomy
prospects opened, and close provings seemed at the door of such who were
measurably redeemed from the spirit of party. Not only our Testimony against
War, in the support of which our religious Society have been often brought under
trials; but that against pulling down or setting up of Governments was brought
to the Test. As there are those, who from full experience know, that it is not
a cunningly devised Fable, but the Truth of God revealed in the heart, through
his Light and good Spirit, that shows us we are called to raise the pure
Standard of the Prince of Peace, above all party rage, strife, contention,
rents and divisions, in the spirit of meekness and wisdom; and in quietness and
confidence, patiently to suffer what may arise for the promotion of this
peaceable Government of the Shiloh; in and through an innocent life and
conversation; wherein the language is felt of Glory to God in the highest, on
Earth peace and good will to Men: And this was the experience of many, I am
bold to assert it, even during the late cruel War, when thousands of Men were
endeavoring in its fierce and voracious spirit to destroy one another -- Such
have been my own sensations, when at one view I have beheld both parties, and
had to risk a passage through them -- I counted none my enemy, I felt no fear
from any thing on my part in thought, word, or deed; many times concluding, I
should have had no objection for the two contending Generals to have known my
whole heart and conduct, having at an early period of that Calamity been
convinced, it would not do for me, even in idea, to wander without the
boundaries of my professed principles; or I could not expect to be sustained by
the secret aid of the God of the faithful, whose everlasting Arm of help, with
humble gratitude I may acknowledge, has been stretched out for my
strengthening and confirmation in a variety of instances: One of which was,
when called upon among others for the support of Truth, to appear before the
Assembly of Pennsylvania, on behalf of our Friends who were banished from
Philadelphia to Virginia, for the well known forgery and unjust charge on our
Society, dated from Spank Town, respecting which, some yet undertake to vilify
us, though it has been so fully refuted and cleared up. After which
occurrence, I queried with an American Officer of high rank, whether he did
believe that could have been wrote in any of our Meetings? to which he replied,
He believed it was wrote in a Meeting House -- I told him it would be hard for
us to be answerable for all the crimes committed in our Meeting houses, when
they chose to take them from us by force, but did he believe it was wrote by
any of the Society? his answer was 'He believed Genesis Sullivan knew who wrote
it' -- And when on the day of the battle of Germantown, our Yearly Meeting
issued a Testimony respecting our peaceable principles, denying said charge I
was one among others, appointed pointed to present this to the Commander in
Chief of each Army, which was a proving time; to pass through opposing Armies,
most of whose minds were perhaps agitated, and many of them afresh fired by the
Spirit of War, from their recent engagement; and with no passport or shield to
protect us from any merciless attack, but our own innocence sheltered by the
wing of divine preservation: Herein I was brought into renewed sympathy with
our oppressed African Brethren, who are many of them exposed to the
uncontrouled power of Man, without any tribunal on all the Earth whereunto they
can appeal for redress of grievances. --

After many similar exercises, with frequent calls for, but little seizure of
my property, 'till the close of the War (when great spoil was made), through a
steady perseverance things began to wear a different aspect, hard speeches,
four looks and threats gradually abated so that through the whole I had not an
insult offered to me in Person.

Congress having publicshed a declaration, that they hold these Truths to be
self evident. that all Men are created equal; that they are endowed by their
Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty and
the pursuit of happiness. That, to secure these rights, Governments are
instituted among Men. Seeing it was the very substance of the doctrine I had
been concerned to promulgate for years, I became animated with a hope, that if
this was sincere in the Representatives, and by them inculcated among the
People generally; a blessing to this Nation would accompany those endeavors.
To serve my Country by exertions to remove one cause of impending Judgments, I
was concerned to unite with my Brethren in representing this matter to
different Legislative bodies -- In the Year I782 we appeared before the
Assembly of Virginia; which was attended with great satisfaction, having a set
of Liberal spirited Members to deal with, when a Law took place admitting of
emancipation; to which Law Judge Tucker says in his late publication, may be
attributed the liberation of some thousands of blacks -- In I783 we presented a
Memorial to Congress respecting the Slave Trade and met with encouragement. And
afterward in the Assemblies of Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Delaware, some
important steps were taken. Also in our after application to Congress it was
evident, that a large part of that Body were favorably disposed toward the
rights of this People. From these encouraging circumstances I was induced to
hope that Divine favor might yet be continued to this Land; though often
impressed with fears, that our progress in this business was not proportionably
great to the light that had arisen -- And indeed it is a mournful
consideration, that this Nation should yet be stained with the blood of the
African Trade; and that 700,000 Slaves, according to latter calculation, should
continue to groan in a Land of boasted Liberty. My heart has been grieved and
soul lamented for this afflicted Race, as well as the condition of my Country;
having often felt as I did at the beginning of the Revolution, apprehensive, the
hand of Judgment was ready to be opened and outstretched upon a guilty People,
if there was not greater reformation in this point, so as to appease offended
Justice; as the outrages committed therein against humanity, I consider as
alone sufficient to draw down sovereign indignation, exclusive of those other
evils and vices too prevalent in the Land.

An occurrence took place which produced renewed exercise of mind, and in the
hour of affliction sealed further instruction on this object. I received a
severe hurt on my Leg, and whilst under extreme anguish in dressing it, was
brought into Sympathy with a poor Soldier, whose Leg being fractured and he
left without help in the field of Battle. The sensation was so powerful, I told
my Wife, that ever since arriving to years capable of judging, I had a
Testimony against War, but never so powerfully as at that time; feeling so,
that if every farthing we were possessed of, was seized for the purpose of
supporting War, and I was informed it should all go, except I gave voluntarily
one shilling, that I was satisfied I should not so redeem it.

Shortly after which, an account arrived that a Vessel from the West Indies was
run a shore at Lewis Town by the English, and the Militia were called upon to
keep them from plundering her, on which this clear presentation took place --
Here is the Channel through which in a Time of national Hostility those sweets
I am so fond of come; at a manifest risk of the lives of fellow Men. I remember
powerfully what were David's sensations when his valiant Men rushed through the
Philistine Army to bring him Water from a Well which he longed for; he was
struck with sympathy for their situation; and because they went in Jeopardy of
their Lives, was not easy to gratify his palate therewith, but poured it out in
dedication to the Lord. In like manner I felt -- a prohibition from using
Foreign imports, and during the continuance of the War, never touched
therewith, except what seasoning of Salt might have been in my food when from
home -- And being brought into a deep feeling for the oppressions of the poor
Africans in the West Indies; have never been easy with indulging in the produce
of their Labors since; least it should even in a small degree contribute
toward the continued existence of a Trade, which interests the Planters in
keeping up the number of their groaning laborers.

And fully believing that Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a shame
to any People I am anxioussly desirous we may be numbered with the wise
promoters of the Public good. And indeed I am persuaded, that the growing Sins
of America, if persisted in, will be finally attended with dreadful
consequences, according to the Testimony of the sacred Records, that Verily
there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that judges in the
Earth; and in the due exercise of his Judgment, taking cognizance of the
actions of Men, he will assuredly recompense to all according to the fruit of
their doings, to Nations as well as to individuals, let the Sophist 'speculate
as he will about sacred things, in that wisdom which darkens counsel by words
without (true) knowledge.

It is from a sense of duty both to myfelf and Country that I make these
observations, and state some things interesting to both. It was on this ground
I became engaged with others, to urge the subject of our concern to different
Legislatures; to remove legislative obstacles from those disposed to liberate
their Slaves, and to protect those set free. And though salutary Laws have been
enacted in some States, for which I believe a blessing will or does descend
upon them, yet still the evil is continued in other parts of America in a most
glaring degree: Where conscientious persons are discouraged from Liberating, as
by existing Laws the blacks are liable afresh to be taken into Captivity, by a
dissolute People disposed to avail themselves of unrighteous Laws; in many
instances great numbers have been cruelly seized and sold into renewed bondage
-- Does not this excite a fearful apprehension that the measure of their
iniquity is filling, up who so act, and that they are ripening for that
chastizement which shall be poured forth on the workers of iniquity? and is not
the consideration of it a loud call on that state where such evils prevail, to
arouse, and by a more righteous procedure endeavor if possible, to avert the
impending stroke? and what may be expected both in that and other States, where
there is an increase of cruel and barbarous separation suffered between the
nearest Connections in life for gain, even where they have had magnanimity
enough to give some check to the African Trade! an additional Enormity
prevailing, is the frequent kidnapping of free blacks, carrying them off and
selling them for Slaves, in some instances of whole families, and in others
separating them one from another.

It is urged as a very great objection to the emancipation of blacks, their
disposition to pilfering, but is not the worst of Robbery in depriving them of
that most valuable Property, Liberty, and keeping them under the oppression of
Slavery, the very cause of this fault? being pinched at times for almost every
necessary of life, they naturally put forth a hand to partake of what their
labor gives them some claim to in equity from their possessors, where due
support is withheld; and these practices becoming habitual, in their
impoverished condition, they discriminate not sufficiently between the property
of those they labor for and others; but when opportunity presents frequently
supply their wants from all alike, except where a principle of religious
rectitude restrains from all such acts: I attempt not to palliate the crime. I
have endeavored what lies in my power to reprobate such proceedings, laboring
to inculcate the Christian doctrine of returning good for evil, whereby they
may know an overcoming evil with good; and to point out the necessity of
departing from these practices, being objections speciously alleged against
their general liberation: But as Slavery decreases and is exploded, we may
reasonably hope its concomitant habits will also decrease, and a greater
nobility of Soul take place. I believe the Almighty has arisen to Judgment in
this business, and that his voice will be found to exceed the sound of many
Waters, or all the clamours of the People; overpowering all opposition
whatsoever.

If we proved more faithful in the discharge of our duty toward God and this
People, I believe they would act differently toward us -- But where does Negro
crimes exceed the Crimes of White Men? when we view them, selling tender Babes
from a fond Mother, a beloved Wife from an affectionate Husband, or an aged
Father from his offspring with whom he has lived from their early years; and
although a Slave, capable of the ties of affection and enjoying consolation in
their Society; and now, as to this life, forever parted -- Ah! what language
can paint in its genuine Colors this abominable practice? how rejoicing would
it be to me, if with divine allowance, I might be placed in an allotment exempt
from that continued grief of soul, which is almost daily renewed, from seeing
and hearing of those acts of inhumanity committed by my countrymen! could I
have believed myself authorized by the approbation, of Heaven, I should long
'ere this time have sought an asylum in some other Quarter -- but I desire to
be found in my proper allotment the little time I may be continued here --
faithfully discharging my duty toward my Creator and my Country.

And now my fellow Citizens, let me call your serious attention to the present
condition of our Land, you more especially who believe in a God, in the
superintendance of his Providence, and in the Sacred Records: Let us ruminate
on what is perpetrated within its borders; we who have been so highly favored
of the Almighty; and make so great profession respecting liberty to the World,
I believe it can be proved, that since the Revolution, even within the small
compass of the State of Delaware and its adjoining part of Maryland, there has
been more free blacks kidnapped and carried into Slavery, than there has been
of American Citizens captured by the Algerines. Where are the feeling Parents,
who suffered inexpressible grief on account of their darling Children stripped
from them in the late War? are not these in any degree brought to feel another
woe?

Some advance that Negroes pay no regard to the natural ties of Husband and
Wife, Parent and Child -- I know to the contrary; unnatural and hardened
characters there are in all Nations, but that such abound more among this
People than others, in proportion to their circumstances, I cannot admit. Where
such instances have arisen, to whom must we apply the guilt? on the poor tried
blacks, or on nominal professors of the blessed name of Christ? who with
relentless tyranny can advertize amongst other stock on a farm, a number of
these Brethren by Creation; and when the afflicted sufferers are called up for
Sale, reluctantly advancing with tears falling from their Eyes -- Oh blush
Americans at this! perhaps a Trader in human flesh from Georgia, bids off a
Mother and her Child, the Master of this dreadful Tragedy demanding more to be
brought forward -- an adventurer from Kentucky proves the highest bidder for
the Father and another Child -- Thus are Families torn asunder, the Marriage
Tie violated and made of no account, and their Cup of human misery filled up
with mingled bitters -- And perhaps among the spectators, yea in other Lots
sold, of these hapless victims to Avarice, even among the Speculators, may be
found professed Ministers of the Gospel, who not only behold without reproof
these proceedings, but are partakers of this gain of oppression. Numerous are
the instances that might be adduced to show the inhuman cruelties inflicted on
these helpless People, under the public countenance given to the Spirit of
Oppression and Tyranny; a few cases may suffice to give the general features of
those Enormities, of the certainty whereof I have no doubt of my Authority.

In the County of Kent on Delaware, a Negro man, not long since, having
petitioned the Court far his freedom and security being required for his
appearance in case he should be adjudged a Slave, his security took him home to
his house to remain till Trial, the pretended Master or his agents went armed
to the House when the Master of the Family was from home, violently seized the
black man, much terrified the Family, carried him off, tied a Rope round his
Neck, fastened it to a Horse, and drove so fast as to keep the poor black on a
run, being thus dragged in such a manner, and so mangled and bruised that he
died next Morning. No further notice appears to be taken of this brutality, by
legal Authority, but the formality of a Warrant issued by the chief Justice.

Two Negro Men at Snow Hill Maryland, being charged with breaking into a Store,
whereof on due examination they were found perfectly innocent, but previously
in order to convict them, they were inhumanly and illegally tortured to make
them confess, by the application of Thumb-screws, until their Thumbs burst with
the pressure. --

A Negro Man charged with breaking into a Smoke house in Northampton County,
Virginia, had his Feet put to the Fire to bake till they broiled into Blisters,
to torture him into confession; but he was afterward acquitted of the Fact by
Confession of the Evidence which had been suborned against him.

Of like detestable Practices a Volume might be filled; but a more particular
enumeration would not comport with the brevity intended in the present
Representation.


-- Is there any spirited disapprobation manifested against this kind of
Traffic where it prevails, is there not too generally a silent acquiescence
therewith? and have I advanced ought but undeniable truths on the subject? not
saying any thing of their hard fare in tyrannical families; though I
acknowledge with satisfaction their condition is much meliorated in a general
way within the last twenty Years, as to their domestic usage, yet, more
distressing separations have taken place among them within that space of time
than heretofore; Let us then my Countrymen put our Souls in their Souls stead,
let us imagine how it would feel, to be groaning under the Iron hand of
oppression and no tribunal on Earth whereunto we might apply for relief.

It has been infused into the minds of the People by the spirit of seduction,
that I have persuaded the blacks to run from their Masters, that I gave them
passes without discriminating between those who are free and others, whenever
they apply; and that I keep a large number of absconded Slaves in clearing my
Swamps; which was recently thrown before the Members of a Legislative Body, to
counteract any influence I might possibly have there; together with an
insinuation that I had offered a bribe to a connection of one then present, on
a Negro affair; all which assertions I deny as originating from the Father of
Lies; and made I believe to lay waste any possible influence I might have
against Slavery.

Added to these things are the curses, threats and hard speeches, that have
been thrown out against me, for acting only consonant with the principles of
the late Revolution, in peaceably vindicating the natural Rights of Men, on the
grounds of Humanity and obligations of the Christian Religion. And I think I
may assert, that I never violated the Laws of Men in this business, unless
feeding the hungry can be termed a violation; to some of those poor distressed
People, when absconding as they have represented, on account of very rigorous
treatment, I have indeed pitied and given them food, in which I considered
myself warranted by the Law of God, and principle of human sympathy, to relieve
for a little space a suffering fellow Creature, who called for assistance,
hungry and weary. But it is the reverse of my judgment of propriety, in
preserving the peace of Society, to persuade these People from their Claimers
service, and beneath the uprightness of my Profession to recommend any as free
People who are not such. I believe a cause that is sanctioned by Omnipotence,
needs no such effort to make it successful, but the more pure and upright are
its espousers, the more will it be advanced. I am of the faith, the voice of
the Spiritual Moses has been as intelligibly sounded in the Ears of Americans,
as ever the voice of Moses formerly was heard by the Egyptians, even the Lord
from Heaven, who is a quickening Spirit and If they escaped not who refused him
that spoke on Earth, how much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
him who speaks from Heaven? who I believe is advancing to lay waste all
opposition in this business; which he will effect in his own time. And it
appears by a large part of the Wills latterly made, that many who retain their
senses, are unwilling to risk a passage into an awful eternity and leave fellow
Beings as Slaves; I marvel there are not many more.

I am troubled at feeing any run from their Masters, and generally counsel
such, that it is my judgment they had better remain at home in quiet
resignation as much as possible to their allotment, and that, if through a good
conduct they should obtain favor of their Maker, he could change the hearts of
these their possessors and induce them to liberate. On which ground of inward
conviction it is, I wish to see the work carried forward. Some have taken my
counsel and returned, others have judged best to pursue their own prospects be
the event as it would; and some others, who by accounts met with hard treatment
at home, I could say but little to on the subject, only as they were Slaves, it
would not do for them to tarry at my house, as I could not by that means do
them any good, and it would only give offense to their Claimers.

Is there a White Man among thousands, who if captured among the Algerines,
would not embrace his liberty should opportunity present: If I were a humane
Algerine residing in their Land, and an American in escaping from his Master
ventured to call at my house, informing he had not eat any thing for several
Days; would my Countrymen judge it criminal in me to feed him! what then should
be the conduct of the higher professors of Christianity, in a similar case,
toward a People, who differ from us by a few darker shades in the skin. Is
there any part of our Religion that would authorize us to seize such and drag
them again into Chains? or would it not be as great a violation of the
righteous Law of God, who Scripture testifies is no respecter of Persons, but
who has created of one blood all nations of Men, to seize on one of a dark
complexion as one of a fairer hue? -- Is it not through the principles of
tyranny and despotism yet too prevalent in America, in cherishing ideas of too
much distinction among Men on this subject, that they are not only yet retained
in Slavery, but even, when from a sense of religion and justice their Masters
have dispensed to them the blessing of liberty, they have not an equitable
chance to vindicate their right, when it is encroached upon by kidnapping: For
even where these acts are known in many Neighbourhoods, what a dastardly Spirit
pervades the Minds of the People, lest they should offend some Neighbor,
afraid to step forward in a prosecution, and if any are impelled to undertake
it from this Sympathy with the sufferer, they are often put to great difficulties
for want of suitable evidence; as those Whites who may have due knowledge of
the matter, often evade giving their Testimony through fear of making Enemies;
and thus in seeing the Thief, yet by silence consenting, according to
Scripture, they become equally guilty; and if there were thousands of blacks
who could give clear evidence, the Law will not admit it as valid -- Is not
this arbitrary and very unjust?

I dread the consequence of a continuance of wrong things in our Land, have we
not seen evident tokens of divine displeasure? has not the Sword, the Famine,
and Pestilence made their appearance in various parts? and as a gentle rod
shaking over us, are calling loudly to greater degrees of humility, repentance
and amendment of life; lest offended Omnipotence should pour forth upon us more
abundantly the Vials of his Wrath, and tribulation, anguish and woe, be the
complicated portion of the Inhabitants of America -- Let us then by a strict
attention to the discharge of our duty toward God and Man so act as to invite
the Lords' blessings upon us, who is ever ready to shower down his favors on
the Obedient workmanship of his hands -- Which that it may be our happy
experience, is the desire and prayer of a Lover of his Country, and Countrymen,
a peaceable Subject to its Laws, and an Universal friend to Mankind.

WARNER MIFFLIN
. Kent, on Delaware 11 Month 1796.

