THE LIFE OF WILLIAM ANNESLY, Together with its singularly interesting
Appendages, being AN ORIGINAL COMPILATION, AND ENTERTAINING FRAGMENT FROM The
MAN of the WORLD. A CELEBRATED MORAL NOVEL.

-- "Live as becomes a Man and a CHRISTIAN! -- Live as becomes one who is to
live FOREVER."

ANNESLY'S parting advice to his Son. Printed in BENNINGTON, VERMONT, by
ANTHONY HASWELL, in the Year 1796.

INTRODUCTION
MR. William Annesly of whom the following pages are designed principally to
treat, was the son of a worthy, though not very opulent parent, a Clergyman in
England: who losing his ^miable consort in early life, became (...) absorbed in
parental love to his son William and his daughter Harriet. -- His son whom ^e
placed in the University of Oxford, being of a sprightly genius, possessing a
high flow of spirits, and encircled with the gay and the proffligate of
manners, gave free scope to an in^ale love of pleasure; and soon, neglecting
the parental solicitude and wise precepts (...) his respected father, dropped
into proffligacy, and by natural gr^ation into the vices of debauchery and
g^ning.

These practices naturally led to anxiety and distress, which were apperently
pitied and relieved by Sir Thomas Sindal; a MAN of the WORLD, a dissolute
character, possessed of ingenuity and singular intrigue, who led the
inexperienced Annesly, from step to step, until presuming on the sc^^e of the
obligations he had laid him (...), he dared attempt to eng^e him in (...)
design upon the honor of his sister. Finding him however inc^nsed to a high
degree, he made the most solemn asse^e^a^^ons, that he had no evil intention,
professed the utmost detestation of such practice, and a^erred by had only
propos^ed it to try the strength of Annesly's virtue^ and the (...) affection
he (...) amiable ^er.

Though Annesly was at (...) to account for so singular an in^e (...) du^ yet
(...) in his nature be ^ed the artful apology of Sir Thomas and dropped the
resentment which such behavior had naturally (...)*

The unprincipled Sindall finding Annesly, though easily misguided into follies
and vites in general, no (...) likely to assist him in his licentious scheme
against his sister, and dreading his resentment even should be succeed,
contrived to allure him up to London, under pretense of making a foreign tour,
and there by means of his unprincipled accomplices and creatures, to embarras
him beyond the possibility of his endurance, by ^eaning him ^ney to encourage
his attempts in ^ing, and distressing him for it when they knew he had not a
farthing at command*

Reduced to despondency be made a last attempt at play, fortune proved (...),
be p^ed his sword for two g^eas, to make a final effort, he lost them, and in
an instant quitted the room in all the agony of dark despair.

So agitated was the mind of Annesly, that instead of taking the direct st^
toward his lodging, he wondered into (...) obscure they, where he was ^osted by
(...) robber, who* presenting a pistol to his (...) demanded his money. Annesly
w^e^^ed the pistol from the robber, who instantly made his escape.

He stood for a moment entranced in thought* "Whoever thou art," said he, "I
thank thee; by Heaven, thou instucted a^ ^mest me. This may provide for
tomorrow, or make its provisions unnecessary*" He now returned with a hurried
pace to the mouth of the alley, where, in the shade of a justing wall, he could
mark, unperceived, the objects in the street. He had stood there but a few
seconds, and began already to wave in his purpose, when he saw come out of the
gaming house which he had left, the very man who had plundered him of his all.
The richness of the prize, with immediate ^evenge, awakened together in his
mind* and the suspicion of foul play, w^h his companion had hinted the night
before, gave them a sanction of something like justice. He waited till the
chair, in which the gamester was conveyed, came opposite to the place where he
stood; then covering his face with one hand, he pulled out his pistol, and
commanded the leading chairman to stop. This effected, he went up to the chair,
and the gentleman within having let down one of the glasses to know the reason
of its stop, the stopper clapped the pistol to his breast, and threatened him
with instant death if he (...) not deliver his money. The other, after some
little hesitation, during which Annesly repeated his threats with the most
horrible oaths, drew a purse of gold from his pocket, which Annesly snatched
out of his hand, and running down the alley, made his escape at the other end*
and, after turning through several streets, in different directions, so as to
elude pursuit, arrived safely at home with the booty he had taken.

Meantime the gamester returned to the house he had just quitted, with the
account of his disaster. The whole fraternity, who could make no allowance for
a robbery of this sort, were alarmed at the accident; every one was busied in
inquiry, and a thousand questions were asked about his apearance, his
behavior, and the route he had taken. The chairmen* who had been more
possessed of themselves, at the time of the robbery, that their master, had
remarked the circumstance of the robber's wanting a hat. This was no sooner
mentioned, than a buz ran through the company, that the young gentleman who had
gone off a little while before, had been observed to be uncovered when he left
the house; and upon search made, his hat was actually found with his name
marked on the inside* This was a ground of suspicion too strong to be
overlooked: the messengers were dispatched it quest of the friend who had
introduced him there the preceding night. Upon his being found, and acquainting
them of Annesly's lodgings, proper means were obtained for a search.

When he arrived at home he was met on the stairs by a girl he kept, but to
whom, from the derangement of his finances, he had ^ly paid but little
attention. The manner of his reception, and being taken follow^ (...) from the
history. --

She inveighed against the cruelty of his neglect, in thus leaving her to pine
alon^, without the comforts of a miserable life. Her censure indeed was the
more violent, as there was little reason for its violence; for the ha^ that
moment dismisses at a backdoor, gallant who was more alternative than Annesly.
He who could very well allow the grounds of her complaint, urged trouble for
his exouse he could but mutter this apology in imperfect words for the
perturbation of his mind almost deprived him of the powers of speech. Upon her
taking notice of this, he beckoned her into a chamber, and dashing the purse on
the floor, pointed to it with a look of horror, as an answer to her upbraidings.

"What have you done for this?" said she, taking it up. He threw himself into a
chair, without answering a word.

At that moment the officers of justice, who had lost no time in prosecuting
their information, entered the house; and some of them accompanied by an
attorney, employed by the gentleman who had been robbed, walked softly up
stairs to the room where Annesly was; and bursting into it before he could
prepare for any defense, laid hold of him in rather a violent manner; which the
lawyer observing, defied them to use the gentleman civilly, till he should ask
him a few questions. "I will answer none, said Annesly; do your duty." "Then,
Sir, replied the other, you must attend us to those who can question you with
better authority; and I must make bold to secure this lady, she must answer
some questions also." The lady saved him the trouble; for being now pretty well
satisfied, that her hero was at the end of his career, she thought it most
prudent to break off a connection where nothing was to be gained, (...) make a
merit of her endeavors to bring she offender to justice. She called therefore,
this leader of the party into another room, and being informed by him that the
young gentleman was suspected of having committed a robbery scarce an hour
before, she pulled out the purse which she had just received from him, and
asked the lawyer if it was that which had been taken from his client? "Ay, that
it is, I Will be sworn, said he; and here (pouring out its contents) is the ring
he mentioned at the bottom." -- "But, said she, pausing a little, it will prove
the ^thing as well without the guineas." "I protest returned the lawyer, thou
art a girl of excellent invention -- Hum -- here are four score; one half of
them might have been spent or dropped out by the way, or -- any thing may be
supposed; and so we shall have twenty a piece. Some folks to be sure would ta^e
more, but I love conscience in th^se matters."

Having finished this, transaction in such a manner as might give no offense to
the conscience of this honest petitsogger, they returned to the prisoner, who
contented himself with darting (...) look of indignation at his female
betrayer; and, after being sometime in the custody of the lawyer and his
assistants, he was carried, in the morning, along with her, before a
majestrate. The several circumstances I have related being sworn to, Annesly
was committed to Newgate, and the gamester bound over to prosecute him.

Annesly was soon brought to trial, the result of which here follows in full.

When he was asked, in the customary manner, to plead, he stood up, and,
addressing himself to the judge --

"I am now, my Lord, said he, in a situation of all others the most solemn. I
stand in the presence of God and my country, and I am called to confess or deny
that crime for which I have incurred the judgment of both. If I have offended
my Lord, I am not yet an obdurate offender. I fly not to the subtersuge of
villainy, though I have fallen from the dignity of innocence; and I will not
screen a life which my crimes have disgraced, by a coward lie to prevent their
detection. I plead guilty, my Lord, and await the judgment of that law, which
though I have violated I have not forgotten to revere."

When he ended a confused murmur ^an through the court, and for some time
stopped the judge in his reply. Silence obtained, that upright majestrate,
worthy the tribunal of England, spoke to this effect:

"I am sincerely sorry, young gentleman, to see one of your figure at this bar,
charged with a crime for which the public safety has been obliged to award an
exemplary punishment. Much as I admire the heroism of your confession, I will
not suffer advantage to be taken of it to your prejudice. Reflect on the
consequences of a plea of guilt, which takes from you all opportunity of a
legal defense, and speak again, as your own discretion or your friends may best
advise you."

"I humbly thank your Lordship, said Annesly, for the candor and indulgence
which you show me, but I have spoken the truth, and will not allow myself to
think of retracting it."

I am here, returned his Lordship as the dispenser of justice, and I have
nothing but justice to give; the province of mercy is in other hands; if, upon
enquiry the case is circumstanced as I wish it to be, my recommendation shall
not be wanting to enforce an application there."

Annesly was then convicted of the robbery, and the sentence of the law passed
upon him, which however was changed, through the intercession of the judge,
from death to fourteen years transportation.

This we conceive gives the reader a sufficient clue to the history of our
hero, we shall therefore quit him, and attend to the story of Miss Harriet
Annesly, the unfortunate mother of Miss Lucy Sindall.

Sir Thomas pursued his cursed intentions* until by the most artful and wicked
of stratagems he got Harriet into his power, by pretending to rescue her from a
violent attack which he caused to be made upon her on the highway. After
conveying her to the house of one of his creatures, with the help of the
abandoned mistress of it, he persuaded the hapless Harriet to swallow a
cordial, into which he had infused a powerful annodyne. He then permitted her
to retire, robbed her o^ her virtue, and reduced her to misery and temporary
distraction. Being however equally versed in wickedness and dissimulation he
pleaded the violence of his love in excuse of his brutality, swore eternal
constancy, and promising speedy marriage, so far restored her to her senses, as
to enable her to reflect on the best mode of procedure in her distress; the
consequence of which was that she permited him to convey her to her father, who
had been in a state little short of distraction during her absence, and
experienced a revers^ but a slight remove from it when he found her in the
protection, as he thought of his friend Sir Thomas Sindall.

O^ her return her father introduced an old acquaintance of his to her, a Mr.
Rawlinson, who had just returned from a foreign residence, possessed of an
immense fortune. This gentleman, though many years older than Harriet,
conceived an honorable passion for her, and was favored with the approbation of
her father, but his suit being disapproved of by the young lady, he declined
the pursuit, preserving the most disinterested friendship for the lady and her
father; and on the decease of the latter, which happened soon after, in
consequence of the villainous baronet's removing the lady, to prevent the
consequences of their intimacy becoming public, he received from him will, in
his trust for his absent children, with a conveyance of the whole to himself in
case they were never found.

The broken hearted Harriet was finally delivered of a daughter, whose birth
she survived but a short time; in a few years after the worthy Mr. Rawlinson
likewise died, bequeathing his ample estate to Mr. Henry Bolton; to whom he
became attached from gaining an acquaintance with the virtues of his heart, and
to whom, in his last illness, he committed the papers he had received in trust,
from his friend Annesly.

THE LIFE OF William Annesly; From that Celebrated Modern NOVEL, THE MAN OF THE
WORLD.
MR. HARRY BOLTON having passed several years of his life in the town which he
was now engaged to ^isit, trusted implicitly to his own knowledge of the way;
but soon after his leaving the inn the moon was totally darkened, and it rained
with such violence, accompanied with incessant peals of thunder, that in the
confusion of the scene, he missed his path, and had wandered a great way over
the adjacent common before he discovered his mistake* When he endeavored to
regain the road, he found himself entangled in a very thick brake of furze,
which happened to lie on that side whence he had turned; and, after several
fruitless efforts to make his way through it, he was obliged to desist from the
attempt, and tread back the steps he had made, till he returned to the open
part of the heath. Here he stood, uncertain what course to take* when he
observed at a distance the twinkling of a light, which immediately determined
him. On advancing somewhat nearer, he found a little winding track that seemed
to point toward the place; and after following it some time he could discern
an object which he took for the house to which it led.

The lightning, which now flashed around him* discovered on each hand the earth
raised into mounds that seemed graves of the dead, and here and there a bond
lay mouldering on the walk he trod. A few paces farther, through a narrow
Gothic door, gleamed a light, which faintly illuminated a length of vault
within. To this Bolton approached, not without some degree of fear* when he
perceived at the farther end a person, in a military uniform, sitting by a fire
he had made of some withered brush wood piled up against the wall. As Harry
aproached him, the echo of the place doubled the hollow sound of his feet. --
"Who is there?" cried the stranger, turning at the noise, and half un^heathing
a hanger which he wore at his side. "A friend," replied Harry, bowing, "who
takes the liberty of begging a seat at your fire." "Your manner (said the
other) belies your garb; but whoever you are, you are welcome to what shelter
this roof can afford, and what warmth my fire can give. We are for the time,
joint lords of the mansion; for my title is no other than the inclemency of the
night. It is such a one as makes even this gloomy shelter enviable; and that
broken piece of mattock and this f^int are precious, because they lighted some
bits of dry straw, to kindle the name that warms us. By the mols-grown altar,
and the frequent figures of the cross, I suppose these are the remains of some
chapel devoted to ancient veneration. Sit down on this stone, if you please,
Sir, and our offering shall be a thankful heart over some humble fare which my
knapsack contains."

As he spoke, he pulled out a loaf of co^rse bread, a piece of cheese and a
bottle of a^e. Bolton expressed his thanks for the invitation, and partook of
the repast. "I sear, Sir," said his companion, "you will be poorly supped* but
I have known what it is to want even a piece of bread. You look surprised, but
though I am poor I am honest." "Pardon me," answered Harry, "I entertain no
suspicion; there is something that speaks for you in this bosom, and answers
for your (...)* It may be in my power to prevent for the future, those
hardships, which I fear you have formerly endured." The soldier held forth the
^it of bread he was putting to his mouth "He to whom this is a ^ury, can
scarcely be dependent; yet my gratitude to you, Sir, is equally due; -- if I
have felt misfortune, I have deserved it." He sighed, and Harry answered him
with a sigh. "I see a sort of question in your face Sir; and, I know not why it
is there are some faces I cannot easily resist. If my story out^ is the st^rm,
it will take from the ^ness of its duration."

The Stranger relates the History of his Life.
IT is now upwards of twenty years since I left my native country. You are too
young, Sir, to have obtained much knowledge of mankind; let me warn you from
sad experience to beware of those passions, which at your years I was unable to
resist, and which in the comme^ce of the world will find abundant occasion to
overcome incantious and inexperienced youth. Start not when I tell you, that
you see before you ^^e, whom the laws of his country had doomed to expiate his
crimes by death; though from the mercy of his prince, that judgment was
mitigated into a term of transportation some time ago elapsed. This punishment
I incured from the commission of a robbery, to which some particular
circumstances, joined to the poverty consequent on dissipation and extravagance
had tempted me.

The master to whom my service was adjudged in the West Indies, happened to die
^oon after my arrival there. I got my freedom, therefore, though it was but to
change it for a service as severe as my former: I was enlisted in a regiment
then stationed in the island, and being considered as a felon, unworthy of any
mild treatment, was constantly exposed to every hardship which the hardest
duty, or the most continual exposure to the dangers of the climate could
inflict.

Had I revealed my story, and taken advantage of that distinction which my
birth and education would have made between the other convicts and me, it is
probable I might have prevented most of the evils both of my former and present
situation: but I set out from the first with a fixed determination to bear
every part of my ^hment which the law allots to the meanest and most
unfriended. All the ^^verities therefore, which were now imposed upon me, I
bore without repineing, and from an excellent natural constitution, was not
only able to overcome them, but they served to render me still more patient of
fatigue, and less susceptible of impression from the vicissitudes of the
weather; and from a sullen disregard of life, with which the remembrance of
better days inspired me, my soul became as fearless as my body was robust.
These qualities made me be taken notice of by some of the officers of the
regiment* and afterward, when our regiment was ordered to America, and went on
some indian expeditions, were still more serviceable, and more attractive of
observation.

By these means I began to obliterate the disgrace which my situation at
enlisting had fixed upon me, and it still regarded as a russian, I was at least
acknowledged to be a useful one.

Not long after, on occasion of a piece of service I performed for an officer
on an advanced guard, that was attacked by a party of hostile indians, I was
promoted to a halbert.

The stigma, however, of my transportation was not yet entirely forgotten, and
by some it was the better remembered, because of my present advancement. One of
those, with whom I was not on good terms, was particularly offended at being
commanded, as he termed it, by a jail-bird; and one day, when I was on guard,
had drawn on the back of my coat, the picture of a gallows, on which was hung a
figure in caricature, with the initials of my name written over it.

This was an affront too gross to be borne; having sought out the man, who did
not deny the charge, I challenged him to give me satisfaction by fighting me.
But this, from the opinion conceived of my strength and fer^city, he would not
accept: on which I gave him so severe a drubbing, that he was unable to mount
guard in his turn, and the surgeon reported his life was in danger. For this
offense I was tried by a court martial, and sentenced to receive five hundred
lashes, as a punishment. When their sentence was communicated to me, I
petitioned that it might be changed into death; but my request was refused.

That very day, therefore* I received one hundred lashes, (for the sentence was
to be executed at different periods) and next morning was to suffer as many
more. The remainder, however, I resolved, if possible, to escape, by an act of
suicide. This I was only prevented from putting in execution by the want of
opportunity, as I had been stripped of every the smallest weapon of offense,
and was bound with ropes to one of the vests of my ^ed* I contrived,
nevertheless about midnight, to reach the fire place with my feet, and having
drawn out thence a live em^ disposed it immediately under the most combustible
part of the bed. It had very soon the effect I desired* the room was set on
f^e, and I regained my liberty, by the ^pe^* with which I was tied being (...).
At that moment the desire of life (...) rekindled by the possibility (...)* The
flames bur^ out fiercely at one side of the house where I ^y, the attention of
the soldiers, whom the fire had awakened, was principally turned to that
quarter, and I had an opportunity of stealing off unperceived at the opposite
side. We were then in (...) of wooden huts which had been built for our
accommodation on the outside of one of our frontier forts; so that, ^hen I had
run two or three hundred yards, I found myself in the shelter of a wood, pretty
secure from pursuit; but, as there it was impossible for me long to subsist,
and I had no chance of escaping detection if I ventured to approach the
habitations of any of my countrymen, I formed the resolution of endeavoring to
join the indians, whose scouting parties I had frequently seen at a small
distance from our out posts.

I held therefore in a direction the most probable for falling in with them and
a very little after day break discovered a party, seated after the manner of
their country, in a ring, with the ashes of their newly extinguished fire in
the middle. I advanced slowly to the place, which I had almost reached before I
was perceived* When they discovered me they leaped up on (...) feet, and,
seizing their arms, screamed out the war who^p, to alarm the different small
parties near them.

One of them presenting his piece took aim at me, but I fell on my knees and
showed them my defenseless state, holding out my hands as if imploring their
mercy and protection Upon this one of the oldest amongst them made a sign to
the rest, and advancing toward me, asked me in broken french, mixed with his
own language, of which too I understood something, what was my intention, and
whence I came? I answered as distinctly as I could to these interrogatories;
and showing the sores on my back, which I gave him to understand had been
inflicted at the fort, made protestations, both by imperfect language and
significant gestures, of my friendship to his countrymen and hatred to my own.

After holding a moment's conversation with the rest, he took my hand, and
leading me a little forward, placed me in the midst of the party. Some of them
examined me attentively, and upon some farther d^course together, brought the
baggage, with which two prisoners lately made from some adverse tribe had been
loaded, and put it upon me. This burden, which to any man would have been
sufficiently heavy, you may believe was much more intolerable to me, whose
flesh was yet raw by my whipping; but as I knew that fortitude was an
indispensible virtue among the indians, I bore it without wincing, and we
proceeded on the route which the party I had joined were destined to pursue.
During the course of our first day's march t^^y often looked steadfastly in my
face (...) see if I showed any signs of unea^iness. When they found that I did
not, they lightened my load by degrees* and at last the senior chief who had
first taken notice of me freed me from it altogether, and at the same time
chewing some h^rbs he found in the woods, applied them to my sores which in a
few days were entirely healed. I was then entrusted with a tomahawk, and
shortly after with a gun, to the dexterous use of both which weapons I was
frequently exercised by the young men of our party, during the remainder of our
expedition, which lasted some me^ during which time I had also become tolerably
acquainted with their language. At the end of this excursion, in which we
warred against some other indian nations, they returned to their own country,
and were received with all the barbarous demonstrations of joy peculiar to that
people.

In a day or two after their arrival, their prisoners were bro't into a large
plain, where the kindred of those who had been stain by the nations to which
the c^ptives belonged, assembled to see them. Each singled out his expiatory
prisoner; and, having taken him home to his hut, such as chose that kind of
satisfaction, adopted them in place of the relations they had lost; with the
rest they returned to their former place of meeting, and began to celebrate the
festival of their revenge. You can hardly conceived a species of inventive
cruelty which they did not inflict on the wretches whom fortune had thus put
into their power; during the course of which, not a groan escaped from the
sufferers; but while the use of their voices remained* they sung in their rude,
yet forci^ manner, the g^^ry of their former victories, and the measure they
had received from the death of their foes; concluding always with the hopes of
revenge from the surviving warriors of their nation.

Nor was it only for the pleasure of the reflection that they coroled thus the
triumphs of the past; for I could observe, that, when at any time the rage of
their tormentors seemed to subside, the^ po^re^ f^rth those beautiful strains,
in order in rekindle their fury, that in^ of pain might not be wanting in the
trial of their f^rtitude. I perceived the old man when I have before mentioned,
keep his eye fixed upon me during the (...)* and frequently, ^hen an (...)
degree of forbear (...) with that calmness (...) I (...) ^escribed, he would
point with (...) look, to (...), as if he had desired me (...) take a
particular notice of his resolution.

I d^^ not ^he^^fully (...) the meaning of (...)* (...) I afterward understood
it (...) preparatory (...) of what I myself ^word to endure* for the next
morning upon the last surviving prisoner had expired, I was seized by three or
four indians, who (...) me of what little clothes I had, (...) me in a
hor^zontal posture, between the branches of two large trees* (...) had (...)
the ground, and after (...) had (...) round me* (...) of a barbaroes ^o^l, they
(...) to react upon me nearly the (...) they had been engaged in the day before.

After each of a certain select number had stuck his knife into my body, though
they carefully avoided any mortal wound they rubbed it over, bleeding as it was
with gunpowder, the salts of which gave me the most exquisite pain. Nor did the
ingenuity of these ^ri^ed tormentors stop here. They afterward laid quantities
of gunpowder on different parts of my body and set (...) to them, by which I
was burnt in some places to the (...).

But I see you ^^udier at the horrid recital* Suffice it to say, that these,
and some other such experiments of wanton cruelty, I boreandpunc; with that
patience, with which nothing (...) a life of hardship, and a certain ob^^^^c^
of spirit, proceeding from ^ contempt of existence, could have endowed me.

After this (...) was over, I was loosed from my bonds, and set in the middle
if a circle who showed the cry of victory, and my aged friend brought me a bowl
of water, mixed with some spirit^, for drink. He took me then home to his hut,
and laid ^pplications of different simples to my mangled body.

When I was so well recovered as to be able to walk abroad, he called together
certain elders of his tribe, and, acknowledging me for his son, gave me a name,
and fastened round my neck a belt of wampum.

"It is thus, said ^e, that the valiant are tried, and thus are they rewarded*
for how should thou be as one of (...) the soul ^ere as the (...) little
(...) worthy to ^^^t the ^^^chet with the Cherok^es, to whom so (...)
intolerable then the stab of the knife, or the burning of the fire."

A continuation of the stranger's story.
IN this society I lived, till about a year and a half ago; and it may seem
extraordinary to declare, yet it i^ certainly true, that during the life of the
old man who had adopted me, even had there been no legal restraint on my return
to my native country, scarce any inducement could have tempted me to have left
the nation to which he belonged; except perhaps the desire of visiting a parent
and a sister whom I had left in England, sunk beneath that ignom^^y which the
son and the brother had drawn on his guiltless con^^^ions. When we consider the
perfect freedom subsisting in this rude and ample ^e^^^ of society, where rule
is only acknowledged for the purpose of immediate utility to those who obey and
ceases whenever that purpose of subordination is accomplished; where greatness
cannot use oppression, nor wealth create envy; where the desires are native to
the heart, and the langour of satiety is unknown; where, if there is no refined
sensation of delight, there is also no ideal source of calamity; we shall the
less wonder at the inhabitants feeling no regret for the want of those delicate
pleasures of which a more polished people is possessed.

Certain it is, that I am far from being a single instance, of one who had even
obtained maturity in Europe, and yet (...) his mind to accommodated* by the
habit of a few years, to (...) manners* as to leave that country with regret*
The death of my parent by adoption loosened, indeed, my attachment to it; that
event happened a short time before my departure from America.

"The composure with which the old man met his dissolution, would have done
honor to the firmest philosopher of antiquity. When he found himself near his
end, he called me to him, to deliver some final instructions respecting my
carriage to his countrymen. He observed, at the close of his discourse, that I
remained so much of the European, at to shed some tears while he delivered it.

"In those tears" said he, there is no wisdom, for there is no use. I have
heard, that in your country, men prepare for death, by thinking on it while
they live; this also is folly, because it loses the good, by anticipating the
evil. We do otherwise, my son, as our fathers have better instructed us, and
take from the evil by reflecting on the good* I have lived a thousand moons,
without captivity and without disgrace: In my youth I did not fly in battle,
and in age the tribes listened while I spoke. If I live in another land after
death, I shall think of these things with pleasure if the present is our only
life to have done thus is to have used it well. You have sometimes told me of
your countrymen's account of a land of souls; but you were a young man when you
came among us, and the cunning amongst them may have deceived you, for the
children of the french king call themselves after the same God that the English
do; yet their discourses concerning him cannot be true, because they are
opposite one to another. Each says that God shall burn the other with fire,
which could not happen if both were his children.

Besides, neither of them act as the sons of truth, but us the sons of deceit;
they say their God hears all things, yet do they break the promises which
they have called upon him to hear; but we know that the spirit within us
listeneth, and what we have said in its hearing that we do.

If in another country the soul lives, this witness shall live with it; whom
it has here reproached, it shall there disquiet; whom it has here honored, it
shall there reward.

Live therefore my son as your father has lived, and die as he dies, fearless
of death.

With such sentiments the old man resigned his breath, and I blushed for the
life of Christians, while I heard them.

I was now become an independent member of the community, and my behavior had
been such, that I succeeded to the condition of my father, with the respect of
a people, amongst whom honor is attainable only by merit. But his death had
dissolved that tie, which gratitude, and indeed affection for the old man had
on my heart; and the scene of his death naturally awakened in me the
remembrance of a father in England, whose age might now be helpless, and call
for the aid of a long lost son to solace and support it. This idea, once
roused, became every day more powerful; and at last I resolved to communicate
it to the tribe, and tell them my purpose of returning home.

"They heard me without surprise or emotion; as indeed it is their great
characteristic not to be easily awakened to either.

" You return," said one of the elders, " to a people who sell affection to
their brethren for money; take therefore with you some of the commodities which
their traders value. Strength, agility, and fortitude are sufficient to us, but
with them they are of little use; he who possesses wealth, having no need of
virtue, amongst the wealthy it will not (...) found.

" The last your father taught you, and amongst us you have practiced; the
first he had not to leave, (...) have we to bestow; but take as many
^e^^e^-skins as you can carry on your journey, that you may reach that parent
whom, you tell us, you go to cherish*"

"I returned thanks to the old man for his council, and to the whole tribe for
their kindness; and having, according to his advice, taken a few of the furs
they offered me, I resumed the tattered remains of the European dress which I
had on when I escaped from the sort, and took the nearest road to one of our
back settlements, which I reached without any accident, by the assistance of an
Indian who had long shown a particular attachment to me, and who now attended
me on my way. " Yonder smoke," said my conductor, " rises from the dwellings of
your countrymen. You now return to a world which I have heard you describe as
full of calamity; but the soul you possess is the soul of a man. Remember that
to fortitude there is no sting in adversity, and in death no evil to the
valiant."

When he left me, I stood some minutes, looking back, on one hand to the wilds
I had passed, and on the other, to the cultivation which European industry had
formed; and it may surprise you to hear, that though there wanted not some
rekindling attachment to a people amongst whom my first breath had been drawn,
and my youth spent, yet my imagination drew, on this side, fraud, hypocrisy,
and sordid baseness, while on that seemed to preside honesty, truth, and savage
nobleness of soul.

"When I appeared at the door of one of the houses in the settlement that was
nearest me, I was immediately accosted by its master, who, judging from the
bundle of furs which I carried, that I had been tra^ing among the Indians,
asked me, with much kindness, to take up my lodging with him. Of this offer I
was very glad to accept, though I found a scarcity of words to thank my
countryman for his favor; as, from want of use my remembrance of the English
language had been so much effaced, as not only to repress fluency, but even to
prevent an ordinary command of expression; and I was more especially at a loss
for ceremonial phraseology, that department of language being unknown in the
country whence I was just returned. My landlord was not a little astonished,
when I could at last make shift to inform him of my having passed so many years
among the Indians.

He asked a thousand questions about customs which never existed, and told a
multitude of things, of which all the time I had lived in that country I had
never drea^ed the possibility. Indeed, from the superiority of his expression,
joined to that fund of supposed knowledge which it served to communicate, a
by-stander would have been led to imagine that he was describing, to some
ignorant guest, a country with whose manners he had been long conversant, and
amongst whose inhabitants he had passed the greatest part of his life.

At length, however, his discourse centered upon the fur trade, and naturally
glided from that to an offer of purchasing my beaver skins. These things, I was
informed by my courteous entertainer, had fallen so much in their price of
late, that the traders could hardly defray their journey in procuring them;
that himself had lost by some late bargains in that way; but that, to oblige a
stranger, the singularity of whose adventures had interested him in his behalf,
he would give me the highest price at which he had heard of their being sold
for a long time past. This I ^^^ented without (...), as I had neither lang^^ge
(...) for hagg^: and having (...) as (...) me to (...) part* I proceeded (...)
my journey, (...) by an (...) of (...), who was (...) from an an^al (...) to a
(...) on the back (...) which he (...) purchased (...), who (...) upon*

He seemed to be (...) and, (...) my former (...), that I (...) several years
among the (...) all the (...) with (...) their country (...) as he was less
(...) of his (...) knowledge in the (...)* I was the (...) i^^ (...) a g^^a^^^
(...) made himself (...) some of my (...) regiment in which I had served, down
to the day on which I delivered my recital.

When I mentioned my having sold my beaver-skins for a certain sum, he started
aside, and then lifting up his eyes in an ejaculatory manner, expressed his
astonishment how a Christian could be guilty of such monstrous dishonesty,
which he said, was no hefter than one would have expected in a savage* for that
my (...) were worth three times the money. I smiled at his (...) of comparative
morality, and (...) the intelligence with a calmness the seemed to more his
admiration ^e thanked God that all were not so ready to take advantage of
ignorance or misfortune* and (...) my hand, begged me to make (...) at
Willemb^rg my own* (...) as I could procure my passage to England.

Conclusion of the stranger's story.
"PURSUANT to this friendly ^^vitation, I accompanied him to his (...) on our
arrival at this place, my landlord behaved to me in a most friendly manner, and
furnished me of (...) own accord, with linen and wearing a^arel several ar^ of
which the (...) necessaries in the (...) society of those amongst wh^ I now
(...), my idea of (...) simplicity ma^e ^e consider super^.

"During this time I frequently attended him at (...) store, while he was
receiving consignments of goods^ and assisted him and his servant in the
disposal and a^ortment of them. At first he received this assistance as a
favor; but I could observe that he soon began to (...) as a matter of right
and called me to bear a hand, as be (...) in a manner rather too per^ (...) my
pride to (...) to.

At last, when (...) me with some (...) of (...) ^lity, I (...) him I (...) not
consider myself his dependant, any farther than gratitude for his favors
demanded. Upon which he let me know, that he looked upon me as his servent* and
that, if I did not immediately obey his command* he would find a way to be
revenged of me. This declaration heightened my resentment and confirmed my
refusal.

I desired him to give me an account of what money he had expended, in those
articles with which he had supplied me, that I might pay him out of the small
sum I had in my possession, and if that was not sufficient, I would rather fell
my new habiliments, and return to my rags, than be indebted for a farthing to
his generosity. He answered, that he would clear accounts with me by and by. He
did so, by making oath before a magistrate, that I was a deserter from his
majesty's service, and according to my own confession, had associated with the
savages, enemies of the province.

As I could deny neither of those charges, I was thrown into prison, where I
should have been in danger of starving, had not the curiosity of some of the
town folks induced them to visit me, when they commonly contribute^ some trifle
toward my support till at length, partly, I suppose, from the abatement of my
accuser's anger, and partly from the flagrancy of detaining me in pri^ without
any provision for my maintenance, I was suffered to be enlarged* and a vessel
being the^ ready to sail for England, several of whose hands had deserted her
the master agreed to take me on board for the consideration of my working the
voyage. For the indeed I was not in the (...) qualified as to s^ill; but my
strength and perseverance made up, in some operations, for the want of it.

"As this was before the end of the war, the ship in which I failed was taken
by a French privateer, who carried her into Breast. This, to me, who had already
anticipated my arrival at home, to comfort the declining age of a parent, was
the most mortifying accident of any I had hitherto met with* but the captain
and some passengers who were aboard of us, seemed to make light of their
misfortune. The ship was insured, so that in property the owners could suffer
little; as for ourselves said they, the French are the politest enemies in the
world, and till we are exchanged, will treat us with that civil demeanor, so
peculiar to their nation. We are not (addressing themselves to me) among
savages, as you were.

How it fared with them I know not, but I and other inferior members of the
crew were thurst into a dungeon, dark, damp, and loathsome* where from the
number confined in it, and the^ want of proper circulation, the air became
putrid in the most horrible degree; and the allowance of our provision was not
equal to two pence a day.

To hard living I could well enough submit, who had been frequently accustomed
among the Cherokees, to subsist three or four days on a stalk of indian corn,
moistened in the first brook I lighted on; but the want of air and exercise I
could not so well endure. I lost the use of my limbs and lay motionless on my
back in a corner of the hole we were confined in, covered with vermin, and
supported in that wretched state, only by the infrequent humanity of some
sailor, who crammed my mouth with a bit of his coarse brown bread, softened
with stinking water. The natural vigor of my constitution however; bore up
against this complicated misery, till upon the conclusion of the peace, when we
regained our liberty, I had not strength to enjoy it; and after my companions
were gone, was obliged to crawl several weeks about the streets of Breast, where
the charity of some well disposed Frenchmen bestowed now and then a trifle, on
the pauvre sauvage, as I was called, till I recovered the exercise of my limb^,
and was able to work my passage in a dutch merchantship bound to England. The
mate of this vessel happened to be a scotchman; who hearing me speak the
language of Britain, and having enquired into the particulars of my story,
humanely attached himself to my service, and made my situation much more
comfortable than any I had for some time experienced. We sailed from Breast with
a fair wind but had not been long at sea till it shifted, and blew pretty fresh
at East, so that we were kept for several days beating up channel; at the end
of which it increased to so violent a degree that it was impossible for us to
hold a course, and the ship was suffered to scud before the storm. At the close
of the second day the wind suddenly chopped about in a westerly point, though
visibly without any abatement of (...) violence, and very soon after day break
of the third we were driving on the south west craft of England right (...)
leeward. The consternation of the crew became now so great that if any
expedient had remained to save us, it would have scarce allowed them to p^ it
in practice. The mate, who seemed to be the ablest sailor on board, exhorted
them at least to endeavor running the ship into a bay, which opened a little on
our starboard quarter, where the shore was flat and sandy: comforting them with
the reflection, that they should at least be cast on friendly ground and not
among savages. His advice and encouragement had the desired effect; and
notwithstanding the perils with which I was surrounded, I looked with a gleam
of satisfaction on the coast of my native land, which for so many years I had
not seen. Unfortunately a ridge of rocks ran almost across the babason into
which, with infinite labor, we were directing our course; and the ship struck
upon them, about the distance of half a league from the shore. All was now
uproar and confusion. The long boat was launched by some of the crew, who, with
the captain, got immediately into her, and, brandishing their long knives,
threatened with instant death any who should attempt to follow them, as she was
already loaded beyond her burden

"Indeed there remained in the ship at this time only two sailors, the mate,
and myself; the first were washed overboard while they h^ng on the ship's side
attempting to leap into the boat, and we saw them no more; nor had their hard
hearted companions a better rate; they had scarcely rowed a cable's length from
the ship, when the boat overset, and every one on board her perished.

"There now remained only my friend the mate, and I, who consulting a moment
together, agreed to keep by the ship till she should split, and endeavor to
save ourselves on some broken plank which the storm might drive on shore.

"We had just time to come to this resolution, when, by the violence of a wave
that broke over the ship, her mainmast went by the board, and we were swept
off the deek at the same instant. My companion could not swim; but I had been
taught that art by an Indian friend to the greatest degree of expertness.

"I was more uneasy about the honest Scotchman's fate than my own, and quitting
the mast, of which I had caught hold in its fall, swam to the place where he
first rose to the surface, and, catching him by the hair, held his head
tolerably above water, till he was able so far to recollect himself, as to
cling by a part of the shrouds of our floating mainmast, to which I bore him.
In our passage to the shore on this slender float, he was several times obliged
to quit his hold, from his strength being exhausted; but I was always so
fortunate as to be able to replace him in his former situation, till, at last,
we were thrown upon the beach, near to the bottom of that bay at the mouth of
which our ship had struck.

"I was not so much spent by my fatigue, but that I was able to draw the mate
safe out of the water* and, advancing to a crowd of people whom I saw assembled
near us, began to e^treat their assistance for him in very pathetic terms;
when, to my utter astonishment, one of them struck at me with a bl^dgeon, while
another making up to my fellow sufferer, would have beat out his brains with a
stone, if I had not run up nimbly behind him, and dashed it from his uplifted
hand. This man happened to be armed with a hanger which he instantly drew, and
made a furious blow at my head. I parried his blow with my arm, and at the same
time seizing his wrist, gave it so sudden a wrench, that the weapon dropped to
the ground. I instantly possessed myself of it, and stood astride my companion
with the aspect of an angry lioness guarding her young from the hunter. The
appearance of strength and fierceness which my figure exhibited, kept my
enemies a little at bay, when fortunately we saw advancing a body of soldiers,
headed by an officer, whom a gentleman of humanity in the neighborhood had
prevailed upon to march to the place for the preservation of any of the crew
whom the storm might spare, or any part of the cargo that might chance to be
thrown on shore.

"At sight of this detatchment the crowd dispersed, and left me master of the
field.

"The officer very humanely took charge of my companion and me, brought us to
his quarters in the neighborhood, and accommodated me with these very cloths
which I now have on. From him I learned that those Englishmen, who (as our mate
by the way of comfort observed) were not savages, had the idea transmitted them
from their fathers, that all wrecks became their property by the immediate hand
of God; and, as in their apprehension that denomination belonged only to ships
from which there landed no living thing, their hostile endeavors against the
Scotchman's life and mine proceeded from a desire of bringing our vessel into
that supposed condition.

After having weathered so many successive storms, I am at last arrived near
the place of my nativity; fain would I hope that a parent and a sister, whose
tender remembrance mixed with that of happier days, now rushes on my soul, are
yet alive to pardon the wanderings of my youth, and receive me, after those
hardships to which its ungoverned passions have ^u^e^ (...). Like the prodigal
son I bring no worldly wealth along with me; but I return with a mind conscious
of its former errors, and seeking that peace which they destroyed. -- To have
used prosperity well is the first favored lot of heaven; the next is his whom
adversity both not smitten in vain*

Bolton and his companion meet with an uncommon adventure.
WHEN the stranger had finished his narration* Bolton expressed in very strong
terms, his compassion for the hardships he had suffered.

" I do not wish," said he, " to be the prophet of evil; but If your
expectations of the comfort your native country is to afford you be
disappointed, it will give me the truest pleasure to shelter a head on which so
many vicissitudes have beat, under the roof of which Providence, has made ^e
master."

He was interrupted by the trampling of horses at a distance. His fears,
wakeful at this time, were immediately roused; the stranger observed his
confusion.

" You seem uneasy, Sir, said he, but they are not the retreats of houseless
poverty, like this, that violence and rapine are wont to attack."

" You mistake (answered Harry, who was now standing at the door of the chapel)
the ground of my alarm; at present I have a particular reason for my fears,
which is nearer to me than my own personal safety."

He listened -- the noise grew fainter; but he marked by the light of the moon,
which now shone out again, the direction whence it seemed to proceed, which was
over an open part of the common.

" They are gone this way," he cried, with an eagerness of look, grasping one
of the knotty branches which the soldier's fire had spared. "If there is danger
in your ways said his companion, "you shall not meet it alone."

They sallied forth together, but had not proceeded above a quarter of a mile,
when they perceived at a distance, the twinkling of lights in motion; their
pace was quickened at the sight; but in a few minutes those were extinguished,
the moon was darkened by another cloud, and the wind began to howl again. They
advanced, however, on the line in which they imagined the lights to have
appeared, when, in one of the pauses of the storm, they heard shrieks* in a
female voice, that seemed to issue from some place but a little way off.

They rushed forward in the direction of the sound till they were stopped by a
pretty high wall. Having made a shift to scramble over this, they found
themselves in the garden belonging to a low built house, from one of the
windows of which they saw the glimmer of a candle through the openings of the
shutters. But the voice had failed, and all was silent within. Bolton knocked
at the door but received no answer, when suddenly the screaming was repeated
with more violence than ever.

He and his companion now threw themselves with such force against the door, as
to burst it open. They rushed into the room whence the noise proceeded; when
the first object that presented itself to Bolton was Miss Sindal on her knees,
her cloths torn, and her hair dishevelled, with two servants holding her arms,
imploring mercy of Sir Thomas, who was calling out in a furious tone, " Damn
your pity, rascals, carry her to bed by force."

" Turn, villain," cried Harry, " turn and defend yourself."

Sindal started at the well known voice, and pulling out a pistol, fired it
within a few feet of the other's face; he missed, and Bolton pushed forward to
close with him, when one of the servants, quitting Miss Sindal, threw himself
between him and his master, and made a blow at his head with the but end of a
hunting whip; this Harry catched on his stick, and in return levelled the
fellow with the ground. His master now fired another pistol, which would have
probably taken more effect than the former, had not Bolton's now acquaintance
struck up the muzzle just as it went off, the ball going through a window at
Harry's back,

The baronet had his sword now drawn in the other hand, and, changing the
object of his attack, he made a furious pass at the soldier, who parried it
with his hanger.

At the second lounge Sir Thomas's violence threw him on the point of his
adversary's weapon, which entered his body just below the breast. He staggered
a few paces backwards, and, clapping one hand on the place, leaned with the
other on a table that stood behind him, and cried out, that he was a dead man.

" My God!" exclaimed the stranger, " are not you Sir Thomas Sindal?" "Sir
Thomas Sindal!" cried a woman, who entered half dressed, with the mistress of
the house.

" It is, it is Sir Thomas Sindal," said the land-lady, " for God's sake, do
his honor no hurt."

" I hope," said the other, with a look of earnest wildness, " you have not
been a bed with that young lady?" -- She waited not a reply -- " for as sure as
there is a God in heaven, she is your own daughter."

Her hearers stood aghast as she spoke! -- Sindal stared wildly for a moment,
then, giving a deep groan, fell senseless at the feet of the soldier, who had
sprang forward to support him.

What assistance the amazement of those about him could allow, he received;
and, in a short time, began to recover; but as he revived, his wound bled with
more violence than before. A servant was instantly dispatched for a surgeon; in
the mean time the soldier procured some lint, and gave it a temporary dressing.

He was now raised from the ground, and supported in an elbow chair. He bent
his eyes fixedly on the woman -- Speak," said he, " while I have life to hear
thee."

On the faces of her audience sat astonishment, suspense, and expectation; and
a chilly silence prevailed, while she delivered the following recital.

A prosecution of the discovery mentioned in the last chapter.
"I HAVE been a wicked woman -- May God and this lady forgive me! But Heaven is
my witness, that I was thus far on my way to confess all to your honor,
(turning to Sir Thomas Sindal) that I might have peace in my mind before I died.

"You well remember, Sir, that this young lady's mother was delivered of her at
the house of one of your tenants where a Mr. Camplin (I think that was his
name) brought her for that purpose. I was entrusted with the charge of her as
her nurse, along with some trinkets, such as young children are in use to have,
and a considerable sum of money to provide any other necessaries she should
want.

At that very time I had been drawn in to associate with a band of pilfering
vagrants, whose stolen goods I had recived into my house, and helped to dispose
of.

"Fearing therefore that I might one day be brought to an account for my past
offenses, if I remained where I was, and having at the same time the temptation
of such a booty before me, I formed a scheme for making off with the money and
trinkets I had got from Mr. Camplin; it was, to make things appear as if my
charge and I had been lost in crossing the river, which then happened to be in
flood. For that purpose, I daubed my own cloak and the infant's wrapper with
mud and sleech, and left them close to the overflow of the stream, a little
below the common ford.

"With shame I confess it, I was more than once tempted to drown the child,
that she might not be a burden to me in my flight; but she looked so innocent
and sweet, while she clasped my fingers in her little hand, that I had not the
heart to execute my purpose.

"Having endeavored in this manner to account for my disappearing, so as to
prevent all farther inquiry, I joined a party of those wretches whose associate
I had some time been, and left that part of the country altogether. By their
assistance too, I was put on a method of disguising my face so much, that had
any of my acquaintance met me, of which there was very little chance, it would
have been scarce possible for them to recollect it. My booty was put into the
common stock, and the child was found useful to raise compassion when we went a
begging, which was one part of our occupation.

"After I had continued in this society the best part of a year, during which
time we met with various turns of fortune, a scheme was formed by the remaining
part of us (for several of my companions had been banished, or confined to hard
labor in the interval) to break into the house of a wealths farmer, who, we
understood, had a few days before received a large sum of money on a bargain
for the lease of an estate, which the proprietor had redeemed.

"Our project was executed with success; but a quarrel arising about the
distribution of the spoil, one of the gang deserted, and informed a neighboring
justice of the whole transaction, and the places of our retreat. I happened to
be a fortune-telling in this gentleman's house, when his informer came to make
the discovery; and, being closeted with one of the maid servants, overheard him
inquiring for the justice, and desiring to have some conversation with him in
private I immediately suspected his design, and having got out of the house,
eluded pursuit by my knowledge in the bye paths and private roads of the
country.

"It immediately occured to me to disburden myself of the child* as she not
only retarded my flight, but was a mark by which I might be discovered. But,
abandoned as I had then become, I found myself attached to the child by that
sort of affection which women conceive for the infants they suckle. I would
not, therefore, expose the child in any of those unfrequented places through
which I passed in my flight, where her death must have been the certain
consequence, and two or three times, when I would have dropped her at some
farmer's door, I was prevented by the fear of discovery.

"At last, I happened to meet with your honor. You may recollect, Sir, that the
same night on which this lady, then an infant, was found, a beggar asked a^ms
of you at a farrier's door, where you stopped to have one of your horse's (...)
fastened. I was that beggar; and, hearing from a boy who held your horse, that
your name was Sir Thomas Sindal, and that you were returning to a hunting seat
you had in the neighborhood, I left the infant on a narrow part of the road a
little way before you, where it was impossible you could miss of finding her,
and stood at the back of a hedge to observe your behavior when you came up.

"I saw you make your servant pick up the child, and place her on the fadble
before him. Then having, as I thought, sufficiently provided for her, by thus
throwing her under the protection of her father, I made off as fast as I could,
and continued my flight, until I imagined I was out of the reach of detection.

"But being sometime after apprehended on suspicion, and not being able to give
a good account of myself, I was advertised in the papers and discovered to be
an accomplice in the robbery I have mentioned, for which some of the gang had
been already condemned and executed.

I was tried for the crime and cast for transportation. Before I was put on
board the ship that was to carry me and several others abroad, I wrote a few
lines to your honor, acquainting you of the circumstances of my behavior
toward you daughter; but this I suppose, as it was entrusted to the boy that
used to go on errands for the prisoners, you never received. Not long ago I
returned from transportation, and betook myself to my old course of life again,
but I happened to be seized with the small pox, that raged in a village I was
passing through, and partly from the violence of the distemper, partly from
want of proper attendance in the first stages of it, was brought so low, that
the physician whose humanity had induced him to attend upon me, utterly
despaired of my recovery. And I found that the terrors of death on a sick bed,
had more effect on my conscience, than all the hardships I had heretofore
undergone.

Under these impressions I began to look back with the keenest remorse on a
life so spent as mine had been. It pleased God, however, that I should recover,
and have since endeavored to make some reparation for my past offenses, by my
penitence.

"Among other things, I often reflected on what I had done with regard to the
child; and being some days ago accidentally near Sindal park, I went thither,
and tried to learn something of what had befallen her.

"I understood, from some of the neighbors, that a young lady had been brought
up from her infancy with her aunt, and was said to be the daughter of a friend
of yours, who had committed her to your care at his death. But upon enquiring
into the time of her being brought to your house, I was persuaded that she must
be the same I had conjectured, imputing the story of her being another's, to
your desire of concealing that she was yours, which I imagined you had learned
from the letter I wrote before my transportation; till meeting, at a house of
entertainment* with a servant of your honor's, he informed me, in the course of
our conversation, that it was reported you were going to be married to the
young lady who had lived so long in your family.

On hearing this I was confounded, and did not know what to think; but, when I
began to fear that my letter had never reached you, I trembled at the thought
of what my wickedness may occasion, and could have no ease in my mind till I
should set off for Bilswood to confess the whole affair to your honor.

"I was tonight overtaken by the storm near this house, and prevailed on the
landlady, though it seemed much against her inclination, to permit me to take
up my quarters here.

"About half an hour ago I was waked with the shrieks of some person in
distress, and upon asking the landlady, who lay in the same room, what was the
matter, she bid me be quiet and say nothing; for it was only a worthy gentleman
of her acquaintance, who had overtaken a young girl, a foundling, he had bred
up, that had stolen a sum of money from his house, and ran away with one of his
footmen. At the word foundling, I felt a kind of something I cannot describe,
and I was terified when I overheard some part of your discourse, and guessed
what your intentions were. I rose therefore, in spite of the landlady* and had
got thus far dressed, when we heard the door burst open, and presently a noise
of fighting above stairs. Upon this we ran up together, and to what has
happened since, this company has been witness."

Miss Sindal discovers another relation.
IT is not easy to describe the sensations of Sindal or Lucy, when the secret
of her birth was unfolded. In the countenance of the last were mingled the
indication of fear and pity, joy and wonder; while her father turned upon her
an eye of tenderness chastened with shame.

" Oh! thou injured innocence! said he, for I know not how to call thee, child,
can thou forgive those -- Good God! Bolton, from what have thou saved me!

Lucy was now kneeling at his feet. " Talk not, Sir," said she, " of the errors
of the past; methinks I look on it as some horrid dream, which it dizzies my
head to recollect. My father! Gracious God! have I a father? -- I cannot speak;
but there are a thousand things that beat here! Is there another parent to whom
I should also kneel?"

Sir Thomas cast up a look to heaven and his groans stopped, for a while, his
utterance.

" Oh! Harriet! if thou art an angel of mercy, look down and forgive the wretch
that murdered thee!"

" Harriet!" exclaimed the soldier, starting at the sound, " what Harriet? what
Harriet? Sindal looked earnestly in his face -- " Oh! heavens!" he cried, " art
thou -- sure thou art Annesly? Look not, look not on me -- thy sister -- but I
shall not live for thy upbraidings -- thy sister was the mother of my child! --
Thy father -- to what does this moment of reflection reduce me! -- thy father
fell with his daughter, victims of that villainy which overcame her innocence!"

Annesly looked sternly upon him, and anger for a moment inflamed his cheeks,
but it gave way ^o softer feelings. -- " What both! both!" -- and he burst into
tears.

Bolton now stepped up to his new acquired friend. " I am" said he, "
comparatively but a spectator of this fateful scene; let me endeavor to comfort
the distress of the innocent, and alleviate the pangs of the guilty. In Sir
Thomas Sindal's present situation resentment would be injustice. See here, my
friend, (pointing to Lucy) a mediatri^^, who forgets the man in the father."

Annesly gazed upon her. " She is, she is," he cried, " the daughter of my
Harriet; that eye, that lip, that look of sorrow!"

He ^lung himself on her neck; Bolton looked on them enraptured; and even the
langor of Sindal (...) was crossed with a gleam of momentary pleasure.

Sir Thomas's servant now arrived accompanied by a surgeon, who, upon examining
and dressing his wound, was of opinion, that in itself it had not the
appearance of imminent danger, but that from the state of his pulse he was
apprehensive of a supervening fever. He ordered him to be put to bed, and his
room to be kept as quiet as possible. As this gentleman was an acquaintance of
Bolton's, the latter informed him of the state in which Sir Thomas's mind must
be from the discoveries that the preceding hour had made to him. Upon which the
surgeon begged that he might for the present, avoid seeing Miss Sindal or Mr.
Annesly, or talking with any one on the subject of those discoveries; but he
could not prevent the intrusion of thought; and not many hours after, his
patient fell into a ^oving ^ort of slumber, in which he would often start, and
m^tter the words Harriet, Lucy, Murder, and Incest!

Bolton and Lucy now enjoyed one of th^se luxurious interviews, which absence,
and hardships during that absence, pro^^^e to souls formed for each other. She
related to him all her past distresses.

When she came to the close of her recital, the idea of that relation in which
she stood to him for whom these outrages were suffered, stopped her tongue; she
blushed and faultered.

" This story," said she, I will now forever forget, except to remember that
gratitude which I owe to you." During the vicisitudes of her narration he had
clasped her hand with a fearful earnestness, as if he had shared the dangers
she related, he pressed it to his lips. " Amidst my Lucy's present momentous
concerns, I would not intrude my own, but I am selfish in the little services
she a^knowledges; I look for a return." She blushed again: " I have but little
art," said she, " and cannot disguise my sentiments; my Henry will trust them
on a subject, which at present I know his delicacy will forbear."

Annesly now entered the room, and Bolton communicated the trust he was
possessed of in his behalf, offering to put him in immediate possession of the
sum which Mr. Rawlinson had bequeathed to (...) management, and which that
gentleman had more than doubled since the time it had been left by Annesly's
unfortunate father.

" I know not," said Annesly, " how to talk of those matters, unacquainted as I
have been with the manners of polished and commercial nations.

" When I have any particular destination for money, I will demand your
assistance; in the mean time, consider me as a m^^or, and use the trust already
reposed in you for my advantage, and the advantage of those whom misfortune has
allied to me."

Sir Thomas's situation. The expression of his penitence.
NEXT morning* Sindal, by the advice of his surgeon was removed in a l^tter to
his own house, where he was soon after attended by an eminent physician in aid
of that gentleman's abilities.

Pursuant to his earnest encreaties, he was accompanied thither by Annesly and
Bolton. Lucy, having obtained leave of his medical attendants, watched her
father in the character of a nurse.

Sir Thomas seemed to feel a sort of Melancholy satisfaction in having the
company of those he had injured assembled under his roof.

He confessed the plans of seduction by which he triumphed over the virtue of
Annesley, and the honor of his sister; and acknowledged the just retribution of
heaven, in commissioning the hand of the injured, to avenge itself, a parent
and a sister, by cuting off their assassin in the midst of his days.

In vain were all attempts to persuade him he might recover being told that in
the punishments of the divinity there was no idea of vengeance; and that the
infliction of what we term evil, serves equally the purpose of universal
benignity, with the dispensation of good.

" I feel," he replied, " the force of that observation; the pain of this
wound; the presentiment of death which it instills; the horror with which the
recollection of m^ incest^ous passion strikes me; -- all these are in the
catalogue of my blessings. They indeed take from me the world; but they give me
myself."

A visit from his physician interrupted their discourse; that gentleman did not
prognostic^e so fatally for his patient; he found the frequency of his pulse
considerably abated, and expressed his hopes, that the succeeding night his
rest would be better than it had been. In this he was not mistaken; and the
next morning the doctor continued to think Sir Thomas fast mending; but himself
persisted in the belief that he should not recover.

For several days, however, he appeared rather to gain ground than to lose it;
but afterward he was seized with hectic fits at stated intervals, and when
they left him, he complained of a universal weakness and depression.

During all this time, Lucy was seldom away from his bed side: From her
presence he derived peculiar pleasure; and sometimes, when he was so low as to
be scarce able to speak; would mutter out blessings on her head, calling her
his saint, his guardian angel.

After he had exhausted all the powers of medicine, under the direction of some
of the ablest of the faculty, they acknowledged all further assistance to be
vain, and one of them warned him, in a friendly manner, of his approaching end.

He received this information with the utmost composure, as an event he had
expected from the beginning, thanked the physician for his candor, and desired
that his friends might be summoned around him, while he had yet strength enough
to bid them adieu.

When he saw them assembled, he delivered into Bolton's hands (...) paper,
which he told him was his wi^*

" To this," said he, " I would not have any of those privy, who are interested
in its bequests; and therefore had it executed at the beginning of my illness,
without their anticipation."

" You will find yourself, my dear Harry, master of my fortune, under a
condition, which, I believe you will not esteem a hardship."

" Give me your hand; let me join it to my Lucy's; -- there! if Heaven receives
the prayer of a penitent, it will pour its richest blessings upon you."

" There are a few provisions in that paper, which Mr. Bolton, I know, will
find a pleasure in fulfilling. Of what I have bequeathed to you, Mrs. Wistanly,
the contentment you enjoy in your present situation makes you independent; but
I intend it as an evidence of my consciousness of your deserving."

" My much injured friend, for he was once my friend, (addressing himself to
Annesly,) will accept of the memorial I have left him. Give me your hand, Sir;
receive my forgiveness for that wound which the arm of Providence made me
provoke from yours; and when you look on a parent's and a sister's tomb, spare
the memory of him whose death shall then have expi^ted the wrongs he did you!

Tears were the only answer he received. He paused a moment; then looking round
with something in his eye more elevated and solemn, " I have now," said he, "
discharged the world. Mine has been called a life of pleasure; had I breath, I
could tell you how false the title is."

" Alas! I knew not how to live. Merciful God! I thank thee -- thou have taught
me how to die."

At the close of this discourse, his strength, which he ha^ exerted to the
utmost, seemed altogether spent; and he sunk down in the bed, in a state so
like death, that for some time his attendants imagined him to have actually
expired. When he did revive, his speech appeared to be lost; he could just make
a feeble sign for a cordial that stood on the table near his bed: He put it to
his lips, then laid his head on the pillow, as if resigning himself to his fate.

Lucy was too tender to bear the scene* her friend, Mrs. Wistanly, led her
almost fainting out of the room. " That grief, my dear Miss Sindal," said she,
" is too amiable to be blamed* but your father suggested a conso^^^ion which
your piety will allow. Of those who have led his life, how few have closed it
like him!"

THE END

