LETTERS OF HELVIDIUS: WRITTEN IN REPLY TO PACIFICUS, ON THE PRESIDENT's
PROCLAMATION OF NEUTRALITY. Published originally in the Year 1793.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY SAMUEL H. SMITH, No. 118, CHESTNUT STREET. M DCC.XCVI.

LETTERS OF HELVIDIUS.
No. I.
SEVERAL pieces with the signature of PACIFICUS were lately published, which
have been read with singular pleasure and applause, by the foreigners and
degenerate citizens among us, who hate our republican government, and the
French revolution; whilst the publication seems to have been too little
regarded, or too much despised by the steady friends to both.

Had the doctrines inculcated by the writer, with the natural consequences from
them, been nakedly presented to the public, this treatment might have been
proper. Their true character would then have struck every eye, and been
rejected by the feelings of every heart. But they offer themselves to the
reader in the dress of an elaborate dissertation; they are mingled with a few
truths that may serve them as a passport to credulity; and they are introduced
with professions of anxiety for the preservation of pcace, for the welfare of
the government, and for the respect due to the present head of the executive,
that may prove a snare to patriotism.

In these disguises they have appeared to claim the attention I propose to
bestow on them; with a view to show, from the publication itself, that under
color of vindicating an important public act, of a chief magistrate, who
enjoys the confidence and love of his country, principles are advanced which
strike at the vitals of its constitution, as well as at its honor and true
interest.

As it is not improbable that attempts may be made to apply insinuations, which
are seldom spared when particular purposes are to be answered, to the author of
the ensuing observations, it may not be improper to premise, that he is a
friend to the constitution, that he wishes for the preservation of peace, and
that the present chief magistrate has not a fellow-citizen, who is penetrated
with deeper respect for his merits, or feels a purer solicitude for his glory.

This declaration is made with no view of courting a more favorable ear to
what may be said than it deserves. The sole purpose of it is, to obviate
imputations which might weaken the impressions of truth; and which are the more
likely to be resorted to, in proportion as solid and fair arguments may be
wanting.

The substance of the first piece, sifted from its inconsistencies and its
vague expressions, may be thrown into the following propositions: That the
powers of declaring war and making treaties are, in their nature, executive
powers: That being particularly vested by the constitution in other
departments, they are to be considered as exceptions out of the general grant
to the executive department: That being, as exceptions, to be construed
strictly, the powers not strictly within them, remain with the executive: That
the executive consequently, as the organ of intercourse with foreign nations,
and the interpreter and executor of treaties, and the law of nations, is
authorized, to expound all articles of treaties, those involving questions of
war and peace, as well as others; -- to judge of the obligations of the United
States to make war or not, under any casus federis or eventual operation of the
contract, relating to war; -- and, to pronounce the state of things resulting
from the obligations of the United States, as understood by the executive: That
in particular the executive had authority to judge whether in the case of the
mutual guaranty between the United States and France, the former were bound by
it to engage in the war: That the executive has, in pursuance of that
authority, decided that the United States are not bound: -- And, That its
proclamation of the 22d of April last, is to be taken as the effect and
expression of that decision.

The basis of the reasoning is, we perceive, the extraordinary doctrine, that
the powers of making war and treaties, are in their nature executive; and
therefore comprehended in the general grant of executive power, where not
specially and strictly excepted out of the grant.

Let us examine this doctrine; and that we may avoid the possibility of
mistating the writer, it shall be laid down in his own words: a precaution the
more necessary, as scarce any thing else could outweigh the improbability, that
so extravagant a tenet should be hazarded, at so early a day, in the face of
the public.

His words are -- "Two of these [exceptions and qualifications to the executive
powers] have been already noticed -- the participation of the senate in the
appointment of officers, and the making of treaties. A third remains to be
mentioned -- the right of the legislature to declare war, and grant letters of
marque and reprisal."

Again -- "It deserves to be remarked, that as the participation of the Senate
in the making treaties, and the power of the legislature to declare war, are
exceptions out of the general executive power, vested in the President, they
are to be coastrued strictly, and ought to be extended no farther than is
offential to their execation."

If there be any countenance to these positions, it must be found either 1st,
in the writers, of authocity, on public law; or 2d, in the quality and
operation of the powers to make war and treaties: or 3d, in the constitution of
the United States.

It would be of little use to enter far into the first source of information,
not only because our own reason and our own constitution, are the best guides;
but because a just analysis and discrimination of the powers of government,
according to their executive, legislative and judiciary qualities are not to be
expected in the works of the most received jurists, who wrote before a critical
attention was paid to those objects, and with their eyes too much on
monarchical governments, where all powers are confounded in the sovereignty of
the prince. It will be found however, I believe, that all of them, particularly
Wolfius, Burlamaqui and Vattel, speak of the powers to declare war, to conclude
peace, and to form alliances, as among the highest acts of the sovereignty; of
which the legislative power must at least be an integral and pre-eminent part.

Writers, such as Lock and Montesquieu, who have discussed more particularly
the principles of liberty and the structure of government, lie under the same
disadvantage, of having written before these subjects were illuminated by the
events and discussions which distinguish a very recent period. Both of them too
are evidently warped by a regard to the particular government of England, to
which one of them owed allegiance; The chapter on prerogative, shows how much
the reason of the Philosopher was clouded by the royalism of the Englishman.
and the other professed an admiration bordering on idolatry. Montesquieu,
however, has rather distinguished himself by enforcing the reasons and the
importance of avoiding a confusion of the several powers of government, than by
enumerating and defining the powers which belong to each particular class. And
Lock, notwithstanding the early date of his work on civil government, and the
example of his own government before his eyes, admits that the particular
powers in question, which, after some of the writers on public law he calls
federative, are really distinct from the executive, though almost always united
with it, and (...) to be separated into distinct bands. Had he not lived under
a monarchy, in which these powers were united, or had he written by the lamp
which truth now presents to lawgivers, the last observation would probably
never have dropped from his pen. But let us quit a field of research which is
more likely to perplex than to decide, and bring the question to other tests of
which it will be more easy to judge.

2. If we consult, for a moment, the nature and operation of the two powers to
declare war and make treaties, it will be impossible not to see that they can
never fall within a proper definition of executive powers. The natural province
of the executive magistrate is to execute laws, as that of the legislature is
to make laws. All his acts, therefore, properly executive, must pre-suppose the
existence of the laws to be executed. A treaty is not an execution of laws: it
does not pre-suppose the existence of laws. It is, on the contrary, to have
itself the force of a law, and to be carried into execution, like all other
laws by the executive magistrate. To say then that the power of making treaties
which are confessedly laws, belongs naturally to the department which is to
execute laws, is to say, that the executive department naturally includes a
legislative power. In theory, this is an absurdity, -- in practice a tyranny.

The power to declare war is subject to similar reasoning. A declaration that
there shall be war, is not an execution of laws; it does not suppose
pre-existing laws to be executed: it is not, in any respect, an act merely
executive. It is, on the contrary, one of the most deliberative acts that can
be performed; and when performed, has the effect of repealing all the laws
operating in a state of peace, so far as they are inconsistent with a state of
war: and of enacting as a rule for the executive, a new code adapted to the
relation between the society and its foreign enemy. In like manner, a
conclusion of peace annuls all the laws peculiar to a state of war, and revives
the general laws incident to a state of peace.

These remarks will be strengthened by adding that treaties, particularly
treaties of peace, have sometimes the effect of changing not only the external
laws of the society, but operate also on the internal code, which is purely
municipal, and to which the legislative authority of the country is of itself
competent and complete.

From this view of the subject in must be evident, that although the executive
may be a convenient organ of preliminary communications with foreign
governments, on the subjects of treaty or war; and the proper agent for
carrying into execution the final determinations of the competent authority;
yet it can have no pretensions from the nature of the powers in question
compared with the nature of the executive trust, to that essential agency which
gives validity to such determinations.

It must be further evident that, if these powers be not in their nature purely
legislative, they partake so much more of that, than of any other quality, that
under a constitution leaving them to result to their most natural department,
the legislature would be without a rival in its claim.

Another important inference to be noted is, that the powers of making war and
treaty being substantially of a legislative, not an executive nature, the rule
of interpreting exceptions strictly, must narrow instead of enlarging executive
pretensions on those subjects.

3. It remains to be enquired whether there be any thing in the constitution
itself which shows that the powers of making war and peace are considered as of
an executive nature, and as comprehended within a general grant of executive
power.

It will not be pretended that this appears from any direct position to be
found in the instrument.

If it were deducible from any particular expressions it may be presumed that
the publication would have saved us the trouble of the research.

Does the doctrine then result from the actual distribution of powers among the
several branches of the government? Or from any fair analogy between the powers
of war and treaty and the enumerated powers vested in the executive alone?

Let us examine.

In the general distribution of powers, we find that of declaring war expressly
vested in the Congress, where every other legislative power is declared to be
vested, and without any other qualification than what is common to every other
legislative act. The constitutional idea of this power would seem then clearly
to be, that it is of a legislative and not an executive nature.

This conclusion becomes irresistible, when it is recollected, that the
constitution cannot be supposed to have placed either any power legislative in
its nature, entirely among executive powers, or any power executive in its
nature, entirely among legislative powers, without charging the constitution,
with that kind of intermixture and consolidation of different powers, which
would violate a fundamental principle in the organization of free governments.
If it were not unnecessary to enlarge on this topic here, it could be shown,
that the constitution was originally vindicated, and has been constantly
expounded, with a disavowal of any such intermixture.

The power of treaties is vested jointly in the President and in the Senate,
which is a branch of the legislature. From this arrangement merely, there can
be no inference that would necessarily exclude the power from the executive
class: since the senate is joined with the President im another power, that of
appointing to offices, which as far as relate to executive offices at least, is
considered as of an executive nature. Yet on the other hand, there are
sufficient indications that the power of treaties is regarded by the
constitution as materially different from mere executive power, and as having
more affinity to the legislative than to the executive character.

One circumstance indicating this, is the constitutional regulation under which
the senate give their consent in the case of treaties. In all other cases the
consent of the body is expressed by a majority of voices. In this particular
case, a concurrence of two thirds at least is made necessary, as a substitute
or compensation for the other branch of the legislature, which on certain
occasions, could net be conventiently a party to the transaction.

But the conclusive circumstance is, that treaties when formed according to the
constitutional mode, are consessedly to have the force and operation of laws,
and are to be a rule for the courts in controversies between man and man, as
much as any aber laws. They are even emphatically declared by the constitution
to be the supreme law of the land.

So far the argument from the constitution is precisely in opposition to the
doctrine. As little will be gained in its favor from a comparison of the two
powers, with those particularly vested in the President alone.

As there are but sew, it will be most satisfactory to review them one by one.

"The President shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the United
States, and of the militia when called into the actual service of the United
States".

There can be no relation worth examining between this power and the general
power of making treaties. And instead of being analogous to the power of
declaring war, it affords a striking illustration of the incompatibility of the
two powers in the same hands. Those who are to conduct a war cannot in the
nature of things, be proper or safe judges, whether a war ought to be
commenced, continued, or concluded. They are barred from the latter functions
by a great principle in free government, analogous to that which separates the
sword from the purse, or the power of executing from the power of enacting laws.

"He cray require the opinion in writing of the principal officers in each of
the executive departments upon any subject relating to the duties of their
respective offices; and he shall have power to grant reprieves and pardon for
offenses against the United States, except in case of impeachment." These
powers can have nothing to do with the subject.

"The President shall have power to fill up vacancies that may happen during
the recess of the senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end
of the next section." The same remark is applicable to this power, as also to
that of "receiving ambassadors, other publicministers and consuls". The
particular use attempted to be made of this last power will be considered in
another place.

"He shall take care that the laws shall be faithfully executed and shall
commission all officers of the United States." To see the laws faithfully
executed constitutes the essence of the executive authority. But what relation
has it to the power of making treaties and war, that is, of determining what
the laws shall be with regard to other nations? No other certainly than what
subsists between the powers of executing and enacting laws; no other,
consequently, than what forbids a coalition of the powers in the same
department.

I pass over the few other specified functions assigned to the President, such
as that of convening the legislature, etc. etc. which cannot be drawn into the
present question.

It may be proper however to take notice of the power of removal from office,
which appeans to have been adjudged to the President by the laws establishing
the executive departments; and which the writer has endeavored to press into
his service. To justify any favorable inference from this case, it must be
thewn, that the powers of war and treaties are of a kindred nature to the power
of removal, or at least are equally within a grant of excutive power. Nothing
of this fort has been attempted, nor probably will be attempted. Nothing can in
truth be clearer, than that no analogy, or shade of analogy, can be traced
between a power in the supreme officer responsible for the faithful execution
of the laws, to displace a subaltern officer employed in the execution of the
laws; and a power to make treaties, and to declare war, such as these have been
found to be in their ^^ture, their operation, and their consequences.

Thus it appears that by whatever standard we try this doctrine, it must be
condemned as no less vicious in theory than it would be dangerous in practice.
It is countenanced neither by the writters on law; nor by the nature of the
powers themselves; nor by any general arrangements or particular expressions,
or plausible analogies, to be found in the constitution.

Whence then can the writer have borrowed it?

There is but one answer to this question.

The power of making treaties and the power of declaring war, are royal
prerogatives in the British government, and are accordingly treated as
Executive prerogatives by British commentators.

We shall be the more confirmed in the necessity of this solution of the
problem, by looking back to the era of the constitution, and satissying
ourselves that the writer could not have been misled by the doctrines
maintained by our own commentators on our own government. That I may not ramble
beyond prescribed limits, I shall content myself with an extract from a work
which entered into a systematic explanation and defense of the constitution,
and to which there has frequently been ascribed some influence in conciliating
the public assent to the government in the form proposed. Three circumstances
conspire in giving weight to this cotemporary exposition. It was made at a time
when no application to persons or measures could bias: The opinion given was
not transiently mentioned, but formally and critically elucidated: It related
to a point in the constitution which must consequently have been viewed as of
importance in the public mind. The passage relates to the power of making
treaties; that of declaring war, being arranged with such obvious propriety
among the legislative powers, as to be passed over without particular
discussion.

Though several writers on the subject of government place that power (of making
treaties) in the class of Executive authorities, yet this is evidently an
arbitrary dispesition. For if we attend carefully, to its operation, it will be
found to partake more of the legislative than of the executive character,
though it does not seem strictly to fall within the definition of either of
them. The essence of the legislative authority, is to enact laws; or in other
words, to prescribe rules for the regulation of the society. While the
execution of the laws and the employment of the common desence, seem to
comprize all the functions of the Executive magistrate. The power of making
treaties is plainly neither the one nor the other. It relates neither to the
execution of the subsisting laws, nor to the enaction of new ones, and still
less to an exertion of the common strength. Its objects are contracts with
foreign nations, which have the force of law, but derive it from the
obligations of good faith. They are not rules prescribed by the sovereign to
the subject, but agreements between sovereign and sovereign. The power in
question seems therefore to form a distinct department, and to belong properly
neither to the legislative nor to the executive. The qualities elsewhere
detailed as indispensible in the management of foreign negociations, point out
the executive as the most fit agent in those transactions: whilst the vast
importance of the trust, and the operation of treaties as laws, plead strongly
for the participation of the whole or a part of the legislative body, in the
office of making them. Federalist, vol. 2. p. 273. It will not fail to be
remarked on this commentary, that whatever doubts may be started as to the
correctness of its reasoning against the legislative nature of the power to
make treaties: it is clear, consistent and confident, in deciding that the
power is plainly and evidently not an executive power.

No. II.
THE doctrine which has been examined, is pregnant with inferences and
consequences against which no ramparts in the constitution could defend the
public liberty, or scarcely the forms of Republican government. Were it once
established that the powers of war and treaty are in their nature executive;
that so far as they are not by strict construction transferred to the
legislature, they actually belong to the executive, that of course all powers
not less executive in their nature than those powers, if not granted to the
legislature, may be claimed by the executive; if granted, are to be taken
strictly, with a residuary right in the executive; or, as will hereafter
appear, perhaps claimed as a concurrent right by the executive; and no citizen
could any longer guess at the character of the government under which he lives;
the most penetrating jurist would be unable to scan the extent of constructive
prerogative.

Leaving however to the leisure of the reader deductions which the author
having omitted might not choose to own, I proceed to the examination of one,
with which that liberty cannot be taken.

"However true it may be (says he) that the right of the legislature to declare
war includes the right of judging whether the legislature be under obligations
to make war or not, it will not follow that the executive is in any case
excluded from a similar right of judging in the execution of its own functions."

A material error of the writer in this application of his doctrine lies in his
shrinking from its regular consequences. Had he stuck to his principle in its
full extent, and reasoned from it without restraint, he would only have had to
defend himself against his opponents. By yielding the great point, that the
right to declare war, though to be taken strictly, includes the right to judge
whether the nation be under obligation to make war of not, he is compelled to
defend his argument not only against others but against himself also. Observe
how he struggles in his own toils.

He had before admitted that the right to declare war is vested in the
legislature. He here admits that the right to declare war includes the right to
judge whether the United States be obliged to declaire war or not. Can the
inference be avoided, that the executive instead of having a similar right to
judge, is as much excluded from the right to judge as from the right to declare?

If the right to declare war be an exception out of the general grant to the
executive power; every thing included in the right must be included in the
exception; and being included in the exception, is excluded from the grant.

He cannot disentangle himself by considering the right of the executive to
judge as concurrent with that of the legislature. For if the executive have a
concurrent right to judge, and the right to judge be included in (it is in fact
the very essence of) the right to declare, he must go on and say that the
executive has a concurrent right also to declare. And then what will he do with
his other admission, that the power to declare is an exception out of the
executive power.

Perhaps an attempt may be made to (...) out of the difficulty through the
words "in the execution of its functions." Here again he must equally sail.

Whatever difficulties may arise in defining the executive authority in
particular cases, there can be none (...) on an authority clearly (...) by the
constitution in another department. In this case the constitution (...)
authority; though it may not have clearly decided in every case what shall be
so deemed. The (...) of war is expressly made a legislative function. The
judging of the obligations to make war; is admitted to be included as a
legislative function. Whenever then a question occurs whether war shall be
declared, or whether public stipulations require it, the question necessarily
belongs to the department to which those functions belong -- And no other
department can be in the executive of its preper functions, if it should
undertake to decide such a question.

There can be no refuge against this conclusion, but in the pretext of a
concurrent right in both departments to judge of the obligations to declare
war, and this must be intended by the writer when he says, "it will not sollow
that the executive is excluded in any case from a similar right of judging,
etc."

As this is the ground on which the ultimate defense is to be made, and which
must either be maintained, or the works erected on it, demolished; it will be
proper to give its strength a fair trial.

It has been seen that the idea of a concurrent right is at variance with other
ideas advanced or admitted by the writer. Laying aside for the present that
consideration, it seems impossible to avoid concluding that if the executive
has a concurrent right with the legislature to judge of obligations to declare
war, and the right to judge be essentially included in the right to declare, it
must have the same right to declare as it has to judge; and by another analogy,
the same right to judge of other causes of war, as of the particular cause
found in a public stipulation. So that whenever the executive in the course of
its functions shall meet with these cases, it must either infer an equal
authority in all, or acknowledge its wants of authority in any.

If any doubt can remain, or rather if any doubt could ever have arisen, which
side of the alternative ought to be embraced, it can be with those only who
overlook or reject some of the most obvious and essential truths in political
science.

The power to judge of the causes of war as involved in the power to declare
war, is expressly vested where all other legislative powers are vested, that is,
in the Congress of the United States: It is consequently determined by the
coastitution to be a Legislative power. New omitting the enquiry here in what
respects a compound power may be partly legislative, and partly executive, and
accordingly vested partly in the one, and partly in the other department, or
jointly in both; a remark used on another occasion is equally conclusive on
this, that the same power cannot belong in the whole, to both departments, or
be peoperly so vested as to operate separately in each. Still more evident is
it, that the same specific function (...), cannot possibly belong to the two
departments, and be separately exerciseable by each.

Legislative power may be concurrently vested in different legislative bodies.
Executive powers may be concurrently vested in different executive magistrates.
In legislative acts the executive may have a participation, as in the qualified
negative on the laws. In executive acts, the legislature, or at least a branch
of it, may participate, as in the appointment to offices. -- Arrangements of
this sort are familiar in theory, as well as in practice. But an independent
exercise of an executive act, by the legislature alone, or of a legislative act
by the executive alone, one or other of which must happen in every case where
the same act is exerciseable by each, and the latter of which would happen in
the case urged by the writer, is contrary to one of the first and best maxims
of a well organized government, and ought never to be founded in a forced
construction, much less in opposition to a fair one. Instances, it is true, may
be discovered among ourselves where this maxim, has not been faithfully
pursued; but being generally acknowledged to be errors, they confirm, rather
than impeach the truth and value of the maxim.

It may happen also that different independent departments, the legislative and
executive, for example, may in the exercise of their functions, interpret the
constitution differently, and thence lay claim each to the same power. This
difference of opinion is an inconvenience not entirely to be avoided. It
results from what may be called, if it be thought fit, a concurrent right to
expound the constitution. But this species of concurrence is obviously and
radically different from that in question. The former supposes the constitution
to have given the power to one department only; and the doubt to be to which it
has been given. The letter supposes it to belong to both; and that it may be
exercised by either or both, according to the course of exigencies.

A concurrent authority in two independent departments to perform the same
function with respect to the same thing; would be as awkward in practice, as it
is unnatural in theory.

If the legislature and executive have both a right to judge of the obligations
to make war or not, it must sometimes happen, though not at present, that they
will judge differently. -- The executive may proceed to consider the question
to day, may determine that the United States are not bound to take part in a
war, and in the execution of its functions proclaim that determination to all
the world. Tomorrow, the legislature may follow in the consideration of the
same subject, may determine that the obligations impose war on the United
States, and in the execution of its functions, enter into a constitutional
declaration, expressly contradicting the constitutional proclamation.

In what light does this present the constitution to the people who established
it? In what light would it present to the world, a nation, thus speaking,
through two different organs, equally constitutional and authentic, two
opposite languages, on the same subject and under the same existing
circumstances?

But it is not with the legislative rights alone that this doctrine interferes.
The rights of the judiciary may be equally invaded. For it is clear that if a
right declared by the constitution to be legislative, and actually vested by it
in the legislature, leaves, notwithstanding a similar right in the executive
whenever a case for exercising it occurs, in the course of its functions; a
right declared to be judiciary and vested in that department may, on the same
principle, be assumed and exercised by the executive in the course of its
functions; and it is evident that occasions and pretexts for the latter
interference may be as frequent as for the former. So again the judiciary
department may find equal occasions in the execution of its functions, for
usurping the authorities of the executive; and the legislature for stepping
into the jurisdiction of both. And thus all the powers of government, of which
a partition is so carefully made among the several branches, would be thrown
into absolute hotchpot, and exposed to a general scramble.

It is time however for the writer himself to be heard, in defense of his text.
His comment is in the words following: "If the legislature have a right to make
war on the one hand, it is on the other the duty of the executive to preserve
peace, till war is declared; and in fulfilling that duty, it must necessarily
possess a right of judging what is the nature of the obligations which the
treaties of the country impose, on the government; and when in pursuance of
this right it has concluded that there is nothing inconsistent with a state of
neutrality, it becomes both its province and its duty to enforce the laws
incident to that state of the nation. The executive is charged with the
execution of all laws, the laws of nations, as well as the municipal law which
recognizes and adopts those laws. It is consequently bound, by faithfully
executing the laws of neutrality, when that is the state of the nation, to
avoid giving a cause of war to foreign powers."

To do full justice to this master piece of logic, the reader must have the
patience to follow it step by step.

If the legislature have a right to make war on the one hand, it is on the
other, the duty of the executive to preserve peace till war is declared.

It will be observed that here is an explicit and peremptory assertion, that it
is the duty of the executive to preserve peace till war is declared.

And in fulfilling that duty it must necessarily possess a right of judging
what is the nature of the obligations which the treaties of the country impose
on the government: That is to say, in fulfilling the duty to preserve peace, it
must necessarily possess the right to judge whether peace ought to be
preserved; in other words whether its duty should be performed. Can words
express a flatter contradiction? It is self evident that the duty in this case
is so far from necessarily implying the right, that it necessarily exchudes it.

And when in pursuance of this right is has concluded that there is nothing in
them (^^ligations) inconsistent with a state of neutrality, IT BECOMES both its
province and its duty to enforce the laws incident to that state of the nation.

And what if it should conclude that there is something inconsistent? Is it or
is it not the province and duty of the executive to enferce the same laws? Say
it is, you destroy the right to judge. Say it is not, you cancel the duty to
obey.

Take this sentence in connection with the proceeding and the contradictions are
multiplied. Take it by itself, and it makes the right to judge and conclude
whether war be obligatory, absolute, and operative, and the duty to preserve
peace, subordinate and conditional.

It will have been remarked by the attentive reader that the term peace in the
first clause has been silently exchanged in the present one, for the term
neutrality. Nothing however is gained by shifting the terms. Neutrality means
peace, with an allusion to the circumstance of other nations being at war. The
term has no reference to the existence or nonexistence of treaties or
alliances between the nation at peace and the nations at war. The laws incident
to a state of neutrality, are the laws incident to a state of peace, with such
circumstantial modifications only as are required by the new relation of the
nations at war: Until war thercfore be duly authorized by the United States
they are as actually neutral when other nations are at war, as they are at
peace (if such a distinction in the terms is to be kept up) when other nations
are not at war. The existence of eventual engagements which can only take
effect on the declaration of the legislature, cannot, without that declaration,
change the actual state of the country, any more in the eye of the executive
than in the eye of the judiciary department. The laws to be the guide of both,
remain the same to each, and the same to both.

Nor would more be gained by allowing the writer to define than to shift the
term neutrality. For fuppose, if you please, the existence of obligations to
join in war to be inconsistens with neutrality, the question returns upon him,
what laws are to be enforced by the executive until effect shall be given to
those obligations by the declaration of the legislature? Are they to be the
laws incident to those obligations, that is incident to war? However strongly
the doctrines or deductions of the writer may tend to this point, it will not
be avowed. Are the laws to be enforced by the executive, then, in such a state
of things, to be the same as if no such obligations existed? Admit this, which
you must admit if you reject the other alternative, and the argument lands
precisely were it embarked -- in the position, that it is the absolute duty of
the executive in all cases to preserve peace till war is declared, not that it
is " to become the province and duty of the executive" after it has concluded
that there is nothing in those obligations inconsistent with a state of peace
and neutrality. The right to judge and conclude therefore so solemnly
maintained in the text is lost in the comment.

We thall see whether it can be reinstated by what follows --

The executive is charged with the execution of all laws, the laws of nations
as well as the municipal law which recognizes and adopts those laws. It is
consequently bound, by faithfully exccuting the laws of neutrality when that is
the state of the nation, to avoid giving cause of war to foreign powers.

The first sentence is a truth, but nothing to the point in question. The last
is partly true in its proper meaning, but totally untrue in the meaning of the
writer. That the execurive is bound faithfully to execute the laws of
neutrality, whilst those laws continue unaltered by the competent authority, is
true; but not for the reason here given, to wit; to avoid giving cause of war
to foreign powers. It is bound to the faithful execution of these as of all
other laws internal and external, by the natura of its trust and the sanction
of its oath, even if turbulent citizens should confider its so doing as a cause
of war at home, or unfriendly nations snould consider its so doing, as a cause
of war abroad. The duty of the exceutive to preserve external peace, can no
more suspend the force of external laws, than its duty to preserve internal
peace can suspend the force of municipal laws.

It is certain that a faithful execution of the laws of neutrality may tend as
much in some cases, to incur war from one quarter, as in others to avoid war
from other quarters. The executive must nevertheless execute the laws of
neutrality whilst in sorce, and leave it to the legisiature to decide whether
they ought to be altered or not. The executive has no other discretion than to
convene and give intormation to the legislature on oceasions that may demand
it; and whilst this diseretion is duly exercised the trust of the executive is
satisfied, and that department is not responsible for the consequences. It
could not be made responsible for them without vesting it with the legislative
as well as with the executive trust.

These remarks are obvious and conclusive, on the supposition that the
expression "laws of meutrality" means simely what the words import, and what
alone they can mean, to give force or color to the i-ference of the writer
from his own premises. As the inference itself however in its proper meaning,
does not approach toward his avowed object, which is to work out a prerogative
for the executive to judge, in common with the legislature, whether there be
cause of war or not in a public obligation, it is to be presumed that "in
faithfully executing the laws of neutrality" an exercise of that prerogative
was meant to be included. On this supposition the inference, as will have been
seen, does not result from his own premises, and has been alneady so amply
discussed, and, it is conceived, so clearly disproved, that not a word more can
be necessary on this branch of his argument.

No. III.
IN order to give color to a right in the Executive to exercise the
Legislative power of judging, whether there be a cause of war in a public
stipulation -- two other arguments are subjoined by the writer to that last
examined.

The first is simply this, "It is the right and duty of the Executive to judge
of and interpret those articles of our treaties which give to France particular
privileges, in order to the enforcement of those privileges," from which it is
stated as a necessary consequence, that the Executive has certain other rights,
among which is the right in question.

This argument is answered by a very obvious distinction. The first right is
essential to the execution of the treaty as a law in operation, and interferes
with no right invested in another Department. The second is not essential to
the execution of the treaty or any other law; on the contrary the article to
which the right is applied, cannot as has been shown, from the very nature of
it be in operation as a law without a previous declaration of the Legislature;
and all the laws to be enforced by the Executive remain in the mean time
precifely the same, whatever be the disposition or judgment of the Executive.
This second right would also interfere with a right acknowledged to be in the
Legislative Department.

If nothing else could suggest this distinction to the write, he ought to have
been reminded of it by his own words "in order to the enforcement of those
privileges" -- Was it in order to the enforcement of the article of guaranty,
that the right is ascribed to the Executive?

The other of the two arguments reduces itself into the following form: The
Executive has the right to receive public Ministers; this right includes the
right of deciding, in the case of a revolution, whether the new government
sending the Minister, ought to be recognized or not; and this again, the right
to give or refuse operation to pre-existing treaties.

The power of the Legislature to declare war and judge of the causes for
declaring it, is one of the most express and explicit parts of the
Constitution. To endeavor to abridge or affect it by strained inferences, and
by hypothetical or singular occurrences, naturally waras the reader of some
lurking fallacy.

The words of the Constitution are "he (the President) shall receive
Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls." I shall not undertake to
examine what would be the precise extent and effect of this function in various
cases which fancy may suggest, or which time may produce. It will be more
proper to observe in general, and every candid reader will second the
observation, that little if any thing more was intended by the clause, than to
provide for a particular mode of communication, almost grown into a right among
modern nations; by pointing out the department of the government, most proper
for the ceremony of admitting public Ministers, of examining their credentials,
and of authenticating their title to the privileges annexed to their character
by the law of nations. This being the apparent design of the Constitution, it
would be highly improper to magnify the function into an important prerogative,
even where no rights of other departments could be affected by it.

To show that the view here given of the clause is not a new construction,
invented or strained for a particular occasion -- I will take the liberty of
recurring to the cotemporary work already quoted, which contains the obvious
and original gloss put on this part of the Constitution by its friends and
advocates.

The president is also to be authorized to receive Ambassadors and other public
Ministers. This, though it has been a rich theme of declamation, is more a
matter of (...) than of: authority. It is a circumstance, that will be without
consequence in the administration of the government, and it is far more
convenient that it should be arranged in this manner, than that there should be
a necessity for convening the Legislature or one of its branches upon every
arrival of a foreign Minister, though it were merely to take the place of a
departed predecessor. Fed. Vol. II. p. 237.

Had it been foretold in the year 1788 when this work was published, that
before the end of the year 1793, a writer, assuming the merit of being a friend
to the Constitution, would appear, and gravely maintain, that this function,
which was to be without consequence in the administration of the government,
might have the consequence of deciding on the validity of revolutions in favor
of liberty, "of putting the United States in a condition to become an associate
in war," -- nay "of laying the legislature under an obligation of declaring
war," what would have been thought and said of so visionary a prophet?

The moderate opponents of the Constitution would probably have disowned his
extravagance. By the advocates of the Constitution, his prediction must have
been treated as "an experiment on public credulity, dictated either by a
deliberate intention to deceive, or by the overflowings of a zeal too
intemperate to be ingenuous."

But how does it follow from the function to receive Ambassadors and other
public Ministers that so consequential a prerogative may be exercised by the
Executive? When a foreign Minister presents himself, two questions immediately
arise? Are his credentials from the existing and acting government of his
country? Are they properly authenticated? These questions belong of necessity
to the Executive; but they involve no cognizance of the question, whether those
exercising the government have the right along with the possession. This
belongs to the nation, and to the nation alone, on whom the government
operates. The questions before the Executive are merely questions of fact; and
the Executive would have precisely the same right, or rather be under the same
necessity of deciding them, if its function was simply to receive without any
discretion to reject public Ministers. It is evident, therefore, that if the
Executive has a right to reject a public Minister it must be founded on some
other consideration than a change in the government or the newness of the
government; and consequently a right to refuse to acknowledge a new government
cannot be implied by the right to refuse a public Minister.

It is not denied that there may be cases in which a respect to the general
principles of liberty, the effential rights of the people, or the overruling
sentiments of humanity, might require a government, whether new or old, to be
treated as an illegitimate despotism. Such are in fact discussed and admitted
by the most approved authorities. But they are great and extraordinary cases,
by no means submitted to so limited an organ of the national will as the
Executive of the United States; and certainly not to be brought, by any torture
of words, within the right to receive Ambassadors.

That the authority of the Executive does not extend to question, whether an
existing government ought to be recognized or not, will still more clearly
appear from an examination of the next inference of the writer, to wit, that
the Executive has a right to give or refuse activity and operation to
pre-existing treaties.

If there be a principle that ought not to be questioned within the United
States, it is, that every nation has a right to abolish an old government and
establish a new one. This principle is not only recorded in every public
archive, written in every American heart, and sealed with the blood of a host
of American martyrs; but is the only lawful tenure by which the United States
hold their existence as a nation.

It is a principle incorporated with the above, that governments are
established for the national good and are organs of the national will.

From these two principles results a third, that treaties formed by the
government, are treaties of the nation, unless otherwise expressed in the
treaties.

Another consequence is that a nation, by exercising the right of changing the
organ of its will, can neither disengage itself from the obligations, nor
forfeit the benefits of its treaties. This is a truth of vast importance, and
happily rests with sufficient firmness on its own anthority. To silence or
prevent cavil, I insert however, the following extracts: Since then such a
treaty (a treaty not personal to the sovereign) directly relates to the body of
the State, it subsists though the form of the republic happens to be changed,
and though it should be even transformed into a monarchy -- For the State and
the nation are always the same whatever changes are made in the form of the
government -- and the treaty concluded with the nation, remains in force as
long as the nation exists." Vattel, B. II. 85. -- It follows that as a treaty,
notwithstanding the change of a democratic government into a monarchy,
continues in force with the new King, in like manner; if a monarchy becomes a
republie, the treaty made with the King does not expire on that account, unless
it was manifestly personal. Burlam. part IV. c. IX, 16, 6.

As a change of government then makes no change in the obligations or rights of
the party to a treaty, it is clear that the Executive can have no more right to
suspend or prevent the operation of a treaty, on account of the change, than to
suspend or prevent the operation, where no such change has happened. Nor can it
have any more right to suspend the operation of a treaty in force as a law,
than to suspend the operation of any other law.

The logic employed by the writer on this occasion, will be best understood by
accommodating to it the language of a proclamation, founded on the prerogative
and policy of suspending the treaty with France.

Whereas (...) treaty was concluded on the -- day of -- between the. United
States and the French nation, through the kingly government, which was then the
organ of its will: And whereas the said nation has since exercised its right
(no wise abridged by the faid treaty) of changing the organ of its will, by
abolishing the said kingly government, as inconsistent with the rights and
happiness of the people, and establishing a republican in lieu thereof, as most
favorable to the public happiness, and best suited to the genius of a people
become sensible of their rights and ashamed of their chains: And, whereas, by
the constitution of the United States, the Executive is authorized to receive
ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls: And whereas a public minister,
duly appointed and commissioned by the new Republic of France, has arrived and
prefented himself to the Executive, in order to be received in his proper
character: Now be it known, that by virtue of the said right rested in the
Executive to receive ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, and of
the rights included therein, the Executive has refused to receive the said
minister from the said republic, and has thereby caused the activity and
operation of all treaties with the French nation, bitterto in force as supreme
laws of the land, to be suspended until the Executive, by taking off the said
suspension, shall revive the same; of which all persons concerned are to take
notice, at their peril.

The writer, as if beginning to feel that he was grasping at more than he could
hold, endeavors all of a sudden, to squeeze his doctrine into a smaller size,
and a less vulnerable shape -- The reader shall see the operation in his own
words.

"And whereas a treaty antecedently exists between the United States and such
nation (a nation whose government has undergone a revolution) that right (the
right of judging whether the new rulers ought to be recognized or not) involves
the power of giving operation or not to such treaty. For until the new
government is acknowledged, the treaties between the nations as far at least as
regards public rights, are of course suspended."

This qualification of the suspending power, (...) reluctantly and inexplicitly
made, was prudent, for two reasons; first, because it is pretty evident that
(...) rights, whether of judiciary or executive cognizance, may be carried into
effect without the agency of foreign government; and therefore would not be
suspended of course by a rejection of that agency. Secondly, because the
judiciary, being an independent department, and acting under an oath to pursue
the law of treaties as the supreme law of the land, might nor readily follow
the executive example, and a right in one expositor of treaties, to consider
them as not in force, whilst it would be the duty of another expositor to
consider them as in force, would be a phenomenon not so easy to be explained.
Indeed as the doctrine stands qualified, it leaves the executive the right of
suspending the law of treaties in relation to rights of one description,
without exempting it from the duty of enforcing it in relation to rights of
another description.

But the writer is embarked in so unsound an argument, that he does not save
the rest of his inference by this sacrifice of one half of it. It is not true,
that all public rights are of course suspended by a refusal to acknowledge the
government, or even by a suspension of the government. And in the next place,
the right in question does not follow from the necessary suspension of public
rights, in consequence of a refulsal to acknowledge the government.

Public rights are of two sorts; those which require the agency of government;
those which may be carried into effect without that agency.

As public rights are the rights of the nation, not of the government, it is
clear that wherever they can be made good to the nation, without the office of
government, they are not suspended by the want of an acknowledged government,
or even by the want of an existing government; and that there are important
rights of this description, will be illustrated by the following case: Suppose,
that after the couclusion of the treaty of alliance between the United States
and France, a party of the enemy had surprised and put to death every member of
congress; that the occasion had been used by the people of America for changing
the old confederacy into such a government as now exists, and that in the
progress of this revolution, an interregnum had happened. Suppose further, that
during this interval, the states of South Carolina and Georgia, or any other
parts of the United States, had been attacked, and been put into evident and
imminent danger of being irrecoverably loft, without the interposition of the
French arms; is it not manifest, that as the Treaty is the Treaty of the United
States, not of their government, the people of the United States, could not
forfeit their right to the guarantee of their territory by the accidental
suspension of their government; and that any attempt, on the part of France, to
evade the obligations of the Treaty, by pleading the suspension of government,
or by refusing to acknowledge it, would justly have been received with
universal indignation, as an ignominious perfidy?

With respect to public rights that cannot take effect in favor of a nation
without the agency of its government, it is admitted that they are suspended of
course where there is no government in existence, and also by a refusal to
acknowledge an existing government. But no inference in favor of a right to
suspend the operation of Treaties, can be drawn from either case. Where the
existence of the government is suspended, it is a case of necessity; it would
be a case happening without the act of the executive, and consequently could
prove nothing for or against the right.

In the other case, to wit, of a refusal by the executive to recognize an
existing government, however certain it may be, that a suspension of some of
the public rights might ensue; yet it is equally certain, that the refusal
would be without right or authority; and that no right or authority could be
implied or produced by the unauthorised act. If a right to do whatever might
bear an analogy to the necessary consequence of what was done without right,
could be inferred from the analogy, there would be no other limit to power than
the limit to its ingenuity.

It is no answer to say, that it may be doubtful whether a government does or
does not exist; or doubtful which may be the existing and acting government.
The case stated by the writer is, that there are existing rulers; that there is
an acting government; but that they are new rulers; and that it is a new
government. The full reply, however, is to repeat what has been already
observed; that questions of this sort are mere questions of fact; that as such
only, they belong to the executive; that they would equally belong to the
executive, if it was tied down to the reception of public ministers, without
any discretion to receive or reject them; that where the fact appears to be,
that no government exists, the consequential suspension is independent of the
executive; that where the fact appears to be, that the government does exist,
the executive must be governed by the fact, and can have no right or
discretion, on account of the date or form of the government, to refuse to
acknowledge it, either by rejecting its public minister, or by any other step
taken on that account. If it does refuse on that account, the refusal is a
wrongful act, and can neither prove nor illustrate a rightful power.

I have spent more time on this part of the discussion than may appear to some,
to have been requisite. But it was considered as a proper opportunity for
presenting some important ideas, connected with the general subject, and it may
be of use in showing how very superficially, as well as erroneously, the writer
has treated it.

In other respects so particular an investigation was less necessary. For
allowing it to be, as contended, that a suspension of treaties might happen
from a consequential operation of a right to receive public ministers, which is
an express right vested by the constitution; it could be no proof, that the
same or a similar effect could be produced by the direct operation of a
constructive power.

Hence the embarrassments and gross contradictions of the writer in defining,
and applying his ultimate inference from the operation of the executive power
with regard to public ministers.

As first it exhibits an "impertant instance of the right of the executive to
decide the obligation of the nation: with regard to foreign nations."

Rising from that, it confers on the executive, a right "to put the United
States in a condition to become an associate in war."

And, at its full height authorizes the executive "to lay the legislature under
an obligation of declaring war."

From this towering prerogative, it suddenly brings down the executive to the
right of " consequentially affecting the proper or improper exercise of the
power of the legislature to declare war.

And then, by a caprice as unexpected as it is sudden, it espouses the cause of
the legislature; rescues it from the executive right "to lay it under an
obligation of declaring war"; and asserts it to be "free to perform its own
duties, according to its own sense of them," without any other control than
what it is liable to, in every other legislative act.

The point at which it finally seems to rest, is, that "the executive in the
exercise of its constitutional powers, may establuh an antecedent state of
things, which ought to (...) in the legislative decisions;" a prerogative which
will import a great deal, or nothing, according to the handle by which you take
it; and which, at the same time, you can take by no handle that does not clash
with some inference preceding.

If "by weighing in the legislative decisions" be meant having an influence on
the expediency of this or that decision in the opinion of the legislature; this
is no more than what every antecedent state of things ought to have, from
whatever cause proceeding; whether from the use or abuse of constitutional
powers, or from the exercise of constitutional or assumed powers. In this sense
the power to establish an antecedent state of things is not constituted. But
then it is of no use to the writer, and is also in direct contradiction to the
inference, that the executive may "lay the legislature under an obligation to
decide in favor of war."

If the meaning be as is implied by the force of the terms "constitutional
powers," that the antecedent state of things produced by the executive, ought
to have a constitutional weight with the legislature: or, in plainer words,
imposes a constitutional obligation on the legislative decisions, the writer
will not only have to combat the arguments by which such a prerogative has been
disproved: but to reconcile it with his last concession, that "the legislature
is free to perform its duties according to its own sense of them." He must show
that the legislature is, at the same time, constitutionally free to pursue its
own judgment and constitutionally bound by the judgment of the executive.

No. IV.
THE last papers completed the view proposed to be taken of the arguments in
support of the new and aspiring doctrine, which ascribes to the executive the
prerogative of judging and decidiag whether there be causes of war or not, in
the obligations of treaties; notwithstanding the express provision in the
constitution by which the legislature is made the organ of the national will,
on questions whether there be or be not a cause for declaring war. If the
answer to these arguments has imparted the conviction which dictated it, the
reader will have pronounced, that they are generally superficial, abounding in
contradictions, never in the least degree conclusive to the main point, and not
unfrequently conclusive against the writer himself: whilst the doctrine -- that
the powers of treaty and war, are in their nature executive powers -- which
forms the basis of those arguments, is as indefensible and as dangerous, as the
particular doctrine to which they are applied.

But it is not to be forgotten that these doctrines, though ever so clearly
disproved, or ever so weakly defended, remain before the public a striking
monument of the principles and views which are entertained and propagated in
the community.

It is also to be remembered, that however the consequences flowing from such
premises, may be disavowed at this time or by this individual, we are to regard
it as morally certain, that in proportion as the doctrines make their way into
the creed of the government, and the acquiescence of the public, every power
that can be deduced from them, will be deduced, and exercised sooner or later
by those who may have an interest in so doing: The character of human nature
gives this salutary warning to every sober and reflecting mind. And the history
of government, in all its forms and in every period of time, ratifies the
danger. A people therefore, who are so happy as to possess the inestimable
blessing of a free and defined constitution, cannot be too watchful against the
introduction, nor too critical in tracing the consequences, of new principles
and new constructions, that may remove the land marks of power.

Should the prerogative which has been examined, be allowed in its most limited
sense, to usurp the public countenance, the interval would probably be very
short, before it would be heard from some quarter or other, that the
prerogative either amounts to nothing, or means a right to judge and conclude
that the obligations of treaty impose war, as well as that they permit peace.
That it is fair reasoning, to say, that if the prerogative exists at all, an
operative rather than an inert character ought to be given to it.

In support of this conclusion, there would be enough to echo, "that the
prerogative in this active sense, is connected with the executive in various
capacities -- as the organ of intercourse between the nation and foreign
nations -- as the interpreter of national treaties" (a violation of which may
be a cause of war) "as that power which is charged with the execution of the
laws of which treaties make a part -- as that power, which is charged with the
command and application of the public force."

With additional force, it might be said, that the executive is as much the
executor as the interpreter of treaties: that if by virtue of the first
character, it is to judge of the obligations of treaties, it is by virtue of
the second, equally authorized to carry those obligations into effect. Should
there occur for example, a casus federis, claiming a military cooperation of
the United States and a military force should happen to be under the command of
the executive, it must have the same right, as executor of public treaties to
employ the public force, as it has in quality of interproier of public treaties
to decide whether it ought to be employed.

The case of a treaty of peace would be an auxiliary to comments of this sort:
It is a condition annexed to every treaty that an infraction even of an
important article, on one side, extinguishes the obligations on the other: and
the immediate consequence of a dissolution of a treaty of peace is a
restoration of a state of war. If the executive is "to decide on the obligation
of the nation with regard to foreign nations" -- "to pronounce the existing
condition (in the sense annexed by the writer) of the nation with regard to
them; and to admonish the citizens of their obligations and duties as founded
upon that condition of things." -- "to judge what are the recibrocal rights and
obligations of the United States, and of all and each of the powers at war:" --
add, that if the executive moreover possesses all powers relating to war not
strictly within the power to declare war, which any pupil of political
casuistry, could distinguish from a mere relapse into a war, that had been
declared: With this store of materials and the example given of the use to be
made of them, would it be difficult to fabricate a power in the executive to
plunge the nation into war, whenever a treaty of peace might happen to be
infringed?

But if any difficulty should arise, there is another mode chalked out by which
the end might clearly be brought about, even without the violation of the
treaty of peace; especially if the other party should happen to change its
government at the crisis. The executive, in that case, could suspend the treaty
of peace by refusing to receive an ambassador from the new government, and the
state of war emerges of course.

This is a sample of the use to which the extraordinary publication we are
reviewing, might be turned. Some of the inferences could not be repelled at
all. And the least regular of them must go smoothly down with those, who had
swallowed the gross sophistry which wrapped up the original dose.

Every just view that can be taken of this subject, admonishes the public, of
the necessity of a rigid adherence to the simple, the received and the
fundamental doctrine of the constitution, that the power to declare war
including the power of judging of the causes of war is fully and exclusively
vested in the legislature; that the executive has no right, in any case to
decide the question, whether there is or is not cause for declaring war: that
the right of convening and informing Congress, whenever such a question seems
to call for a decision, is all the right which the constitution has deemed
requisite or proper; and that for such, more than for any other contingency,
this right was specially given to the executive.

In no part of the constitution is more wisdom to be sound than in the clause
which consides the question of war or peace to the legislature, and not to the
executive department. Beside the objection to such a mixture of heterogeneous
powers; the trust and the temptation would be too great for any one man: not
such as nature may offer as the prodigy of many centuries, but such as may be
expected in the ordinary successions of magistracy. War is in fact the true
nurse of executive aggrandizement. In war a physical force is to be created,
and it is the executive will which is to direct it. In war the public treasures
are to be unlocked, and it is the executive hand which is to dispense them. In
war the honors and emoluments of office are to be multiplied; and it is the
executive patronage under which they are to be enjoyed. It is in war, finally,
that laurels are to be gathered, and it is the executive brow they are to
encircle. The strongest passions, and most dangerous weaknesses of the human
breast; ambition, avarice, vanity, the honorable or venial love of fame, are
all in conspiracy against the desire and duty of peace.

Hence it has grown into an axiom that the executive is the department of power
most distinguished by its propensity to war: hence it is the practice of all
states, in proportion as they are free, to disarm this propensity of its
influence.

As the best praise then that can be pronounced on an executive magistrate, is,
that he is the friend of peace; a praise that rises in its value, as there may
be a known capacity to shine in war: so it must be one of the most sacred
duties of a free people, to mark the first omen in the society, of principles
that may stimulate the hopes of other magistrates of another propensity, to
intrude into questions on which its gratification depends. If a free people be
a wise people also, they will not forget that the danger of surprise can never
be so great, as when the advocates for the prerogative of war, can sheathe it
in a symbol of peace.

The constitution has manifested a similar prudence in refusing to the
executive the sole power of making peace. The trust in this instance also,
would be too great for the wisdom, and the temptations too strong for the
virtue, of a single citizen. The principal reasons on which the constitution
proceeded in its regulation of the power of treatics, including treaties of
peace, are so aptly furnished by the work already quoted more than once, that I
shall borrow another comment from that source.

"However proper or safe it may be in a government where the executive
magistrate is an hereditary monarch to commit to him the (...) power of making
treaties, it would be utterly unsafe and improper to entrust that power to an
elective magistrate of four years duration. It has been remarked upon another
occasion, and the remark is unquestionably just, that an hereditary monarch,
though often the oppressor of his people, has personally too much at stake in
the government to be in any material danger of being corrupted by foreign
powers. But that a man raised from the station of a private citizen to the rank
of chief magistrate, possessed of but a moderate or slender fortune, and
looking forward to a period not very remote, when he may probably be obliged to
return to the station from which he was taken, might sometimes be under
temptations to sacrifice his duty to his interest, which it would require
superlative virtue to withstand. An avaricious man might be tempted to betray
the interests of the state to the acquisition of wealth. An ambitious man might
make his own aggrandizement, by the aid of a foreign power, the price of his
treachery to his constituents -- The history of human conduct does not warrant
that exalted opinion of human virtue, which would make it wise in a nation, to
commit interests of so delicate and momentous a kind as those which concern its
intercourse with the rest of the world, to the sole disposal of a magistrate,
created and circumstanced, as would be a President of the United States."

I shall conclude this paper and this branch of the subject, with two
reflections, which naturally arise from this view of the constitution.

The first is, that as the personal interest of an hereditary monarch in the
government, is the only security against the temptation incident to a
commitment of the delicate and momentous interests of the nation which concern
its intercourse with the rest of the world, to the disposal of a single
magistrate, it is a plain consequence, that every addition that may be made to
the sole agency and influence of the executive, in the intercourse of the
nation with foreign nations, is an increase of the dangerous temptation to
which an elective and temporary magistrate is exposed; and an argument and
advance toward the security afforded by the personal interests of an
hereditary magistrate.

Secondly, As the constitution has not permitted the executive singly to
conclude or judge that peace ought to be made, it might be inferred from that
circumstance alone, that it never meant to give it authority, singly, to judge
and conclude that war ought not to be made. The trust would be precisely
similar and equivalent in the two cases. The right to say that war ought not to
go on, would be no greater than the right to say that war ought to begin. Every
danger of error or corruption, incident to such a prerogative in one case, is
incident to it in the other. If the Constitution therefore has deemed it unsafe
or improper in the one case, it must be deemed equally so in the other case

No. V.
HAVING seen that the executive has no constitutional right to interfere in any
question whether there be or be not a cause of war, and the extensive
consequences flowing from the doctrines on which a claim has been asserted, it
remains to be enquired whether the writer is better warranted in the fact which
he assumes, namely that the proclamation of the executive has undertaken to
decide the question, whether there be a cause of war or not, in the article of
guaranty between the United States and France, and, in so doing has exercised
the right which is claimed for that department.

Before I proceed to the examination of this point, it may not be amiss to
advert to the novelty of the phraseology, as well as of the doctrines,
expounded by this writer. The source from which the former is evidently
borrowed, may enlighten our conjectures with regard to the source of the
latter. It is a just observation also that words have often a gradual influence
on ideas, and when used in an improper sense, may cover fallacies which would
not otherwise escape detection.

I allude panicularly to his application of the term government to the
executive authority alone. The Proclamation is "a manifestation of the sense of
the government;" why did not the government wait, etc. -- "The policy on the
part of the government of removing all doubt as to its own disposition" The
writer ought not in the same paper. No. VII. to have said, "Had the President
announced his own disposition, he would have been chargeable with egotism, if
not presumption.
"It was of great importance that our citizens should understand as early as
possible the opinion entertained by the government, etc." If in addition to the
rest, the early manifestation of the views of the government, had any effect in
fixing the public opinion, etc. the reader will probably be struck with the
reflection, that if the Proclamation really possesed the character, and was to
have the effects, here (...) to it, something more than the authority of the
government, in the writer's sense of government, would have been a necessary
sanction to the act, and if the term "government" be removed, and that of
"President" substituted, in the sentences quoted, the justice of the reflection
will be felt with peculiar force. But I remark only, on the singularity of the
style adopted by the writer, as showing either that the phraseology of a
foreign government is more familiar to him than the phraseology proper to our
own, or that he wishes to propagate a familiarity of the former in preference
to the latter. I do not know what degree of disapprobation others may think due
to this innovation of language, but I consider it as far above a trivial
criticism, to observe that it is by no means unworthy of attention, whether
viewed with an eye to its probable cause, or its apparent tendency. "The
government," unquestionably means in the United States the whole government,
not the executive part, either exclusively, or pre-eminently; as it may do in a
monarchy, where the splendour of prerogative eclipses, and the machinary of
influence, directs, every other part of the government. -- In the former and
proper sense, the term has hitherto been used in official proceedings, in
public discussions, and in private discourse. It is as short and as easy, and
less liable to misapprehension, to say, the Executive or the President, as to
say the government. In a word the new dialect could not proceed either from
necessity, convenience, propriety, or perspicuity; and being in opposition to
common usage, so marked a fondness for it, justifies the notice here taken of
it. It shall no longer detain me, however, from the more important subject of
the present paper.

I proceed therefore to observe that as a "Proclamation," in its ordinary use,
is an ad ress to citizens or subjects only; as it is always understood to
relate to (...) law actually in operation, and to be an act purely and
exclusively executive; there can be no implication in the name or the form of
such an instrument, that it was meant principally, for the information of
foreign nations; far less that it related to an eventual stipulation on a
subject, acknowledged to be within the legislative province.

When the writer therefore undertook to engrast his new prerogative on the
Proclamation, by ascribing to it so unusual, and unimplied a meaning, it was
evidently incumbent on him to show, that the text of the instrument could not
be satisfied by any other construction than his own. Has he done this? No. What
has be done? He has called the Proclamation a Proclamation of neutrality; he
has put his own arbitrary meaning on that phrase, and has then proceeded in his
arguments and his inferences, with as much confidence, as if no question was
ever to be asked, whether the term "neurality" be in the Proclamation; or
whether, if there, it could justify the use he makes of it.

It has appeared from observations already made, that if the term "neutrality"
was in the Proclamation, it could not avail the writer, in the present
discussion; but the fact is no such term is to be found in it, nor any other
term, of a meaning equivalent to that, in which the term neutrality is used by
him.

There is the less pretext, in the present case, for hunting after any latent
or extraordinary object because an obvious and legal one, is at band, to
satisfy the occasion on which the Proclamation issued. The existence of war
among several nations with which the United States have an extensive
intercourse; the duty of the executive to preserve peace by enforcing its laws,
whilst those laws continued in force; the danger that indiscreet citizens might
be tempted or surprised by the crisis, into unlawful proceedings, tending to
involve the United States in a war, which the competent authority might decide
them to be at liberty to avoid, and which, if they should be judged not at
liberty to avoid, the other party to the eventual contract, might not be
willing to impose on them; there surely might have been sufficient grounds for
the measure pursued by the executive, and being legal and rational grounds, it
would be wrong, if there be no necessity, to look beyond them.

If there be any thing in the Proclamation of which the writer could have made
a handle, it is the part which declares, the disposition, the duty and the
interest of the United States, in relation to the war existing in Europe. As
the Legislature is the only competent and constitutional organ of the will of
the nation; that is, of its disposition, its duty and its interest, in relation
to a commencement of war, in like manner as the President and Senate jointly,
not the President alone, are in relation to peace, after war has been commenced
-- I will not dissemble my wish that a language less exposed to criticism had
been preferred; but taking the expressions, in the sent of the writer himself;
as analogous to the language which might be proper, on the reception of a
public Minister, or any similar occasion, it is evident, that his construction
can derive no succor, even from this resource.

If the Proclamation then does not require the construction which this writer
has taken the liberty of putting on it; I leave it to be decided whether the
following considerations do not forbid us to suppose, that the President could
have intended, by that act, to embrace and prejudge the Legislative question
whether there was, or was not, under the circumstances of the case, a cause of
war in the article of guaranty.

It has been shown that such an intention would have usurped a prerogative not
vested in the executive, and even confessedly vested in another department.

In exercising the Constitutional power of deciding a question of war, the
Legislature ought to be as free to decide, according to its own sense of the
public good, on one side as on the other side. Had the Proclamation prejudged
the question on either side, and proclaimed its decision to the world; the
Legislature instead of being as free as it ought, might be thrown under the
dilemma, of either sacrificing its judgment to that of the executive; or by
opposing the executive judgment, of producing a relation between the two
departments, extremely delicate among ourselves, and of the worst influence on
the national character and interests abroad; a variance of this nature, it will
readily be perceived, would be very different from a want of conformity to the
mere recommendations of the executive, in the measures adopted by the
Legislature.

It does not appear that such a Proclamation could have even pleaded any call,
from either of the parties at war with France, for an explanation of the light
in which the guaranty was viewed -- whilst, indeed, no positive indication
whatever was given of hostile purposes, it is not conceived, that any power
could have decently made such an application -- or if they had, that a
Proclamation, would have been either a satisfactory, or an honorable answer. It
could not have been satisfactory, if serious apprehensions were entertained,
because it would not have proceeded from that authority which alone could
definitely pronounce the will of the United States on the subject. It would not
have been honorable, because a private diplomatic answer only is due to a
private diplomatic application; and to have done so much more, would have
marked a pusilanimity and want of dignity in the Executive Magistrate.

But whether the executive was or was not applied to, or whatever weight be
allowed to that circumstance, it ought never to be presumed, that the executive
would so abruptly, so publicly, and so solemnly, proceed to disclaim a sense of
the contract, which the other party might consider and wish to support by
discussion as its true and reasonable import. It is asked, indeed, in a tone
that sufficiently displays the spirit in which the writer construes both the
Proclamation and the treaty, "Did the executive stand in need of the logic of a
foreign agent to enlighten it as to the duties or the interests of the nation;
or was it bound to ask his consent to a step which appeared to itself
consistent with the former, and conducive to the latter? The sense of treaties
was to be learnt from the treaties themselves." Had he consulted his Vattel,
instead of his animosity to France, he would have discovered that however
humiliating it might be to wait for a foreign logic, to assist the
interpretation of (...) act depending on the national authority alone, yet in
the case of a treaty, which is as much the treaty of a foreign nation, as it is
ours; and in which foreign duties and rights are as much involved as ours, the
sense of the treaty, though to be learnt from the treaty itself, is to be
equally learned by both parties to it. Neither of them can have a right more
than the other, to say what a particular article means; and where there is
equality without a judge, consultation is as consistent with dignity as it is
conducive to harmony and friendship; let Vattel however be heard on the
subject. The third general maxim, or principle, on the subject of
interpretation [of Treaties] is: " that neither the one nor the other of the
interested or contracting powers has a right to interpret the act or treaty at
us pleasure. For if you are at liberty to give my promise what sense you
please, you will have the power of obliging me to do whatever you have a mind,
contrary to my intention, and beyond my real engagement: and reciprocally, If I
am allowed to explain my promises as I please, I may render them vain and
illusive, by giving them a sense quite different from that in which they were
presented to you, and in which you must have taken them in accepting them. Vat.
B. II. c. vii. 265.

The writer ought to have been particularly sensible of the improbability that
a precipitate and exparte decision of the question arising under the guaranty,
could have been intended by the proclamation. He had but just gone through his
undertaking, to prove that the article of guaranty like the rest of the treaty
is defensive, not offensive. He had examined his books and retailed his
quotations, to show that the criterion between the two kinds of war is the
circumstance of priority in the attack. He could not therefore but know, that
according to his own principles, the question whether the United States, were
under an obligation or not to take part in the war, was a question of fact
whether the first attack was made by France or her enemies. And to decide a
question of fact, as well as of principle, without waiting for such
representations and proofs, as the absent and interested party might have to
prudence, would have been a proceeding contrary to the ordinary maxims of
justice, and requiring circumstances of a very peculiar nature, to warrant it,
toward any nation. Toward a nation which could verify her claim to more than
bare justice by our own reiterated and formal acknowledgments, and which must
in her present singular and interesting situation have a peculiar sensibility
to marks of our friendship or alienation, the impropriety of such a proceeding
would be infinitely increased, and in the fame proportion the improbability of
its having taken place.

There are reasons of another sort which would have been a bar to such a
proceeding. It would have been as impolitic as it would have been unfair and
unkind.

If France meant not to insist on the guaranty, the measure, without giving any
present advantage, would have deprived the United States of a future claim
which may be of importance to their safety. It would have inspired France with
jealousies of a secret bias in this country toward some of her enemies, which
might have left in her breast a spirit of contempt and revenge of which the
effects might be felt in various ways. It must in particular have tended to
inspire her with a disinclination to seed our commerce with those important
advantages which it already enjoys, and those more important ones, which it
anxiously contemplates. The nation that consumes more of the fruits of our soil
than any other nation in the world, and supplies the only foreign raw material
of extensive use in the United States would not be unnecessarily provoked by
those who understand the public interest, and make it their study, as it is
their interest to advance it.

I am aware that the commonplace remark will be interposed, that, "commercial
privileges are not worth having, when not secured by mutual interest; and never
worth purchasing because they will grow of themselves out of a mutual
interest." Prudent men, who do not suffer their reason to be misled by their
prejudices will view the subject in a juster light. They will reflect, that if
commercial privileges are not worth purchasing, they are worth having without
purchase; that in the commerce of a great nation, there are valuable privileges
which may be granted or not granted, or granted either to this or that country,
without any sensible influence on the interest of the nation itself; that the
friendly or unfriendly disposition of a country, is always an article of moment
in the calculations of a comprehensive interest: that some sacrifices of
interest will be made to other motives: by nations as well as by individuals,
though not with the same frequency, or in the same proportions, that more of a
disinterested conduct or of a conduct founded on liberal views of interest,
prevails in some nations than in others, that as far as can be seen of the
influence of the revolution on the genius and the policy of France,
particularly with regard to the United States, every thing is to be hoped by
the latter on this subject, which one country can reasonably hope from another.
In this point of view a greater (...) could not have been committed than in a
step, that might have turned the present disposition of France to open her
commerce to us as far as a liberal calculation of her interest would permit,
and her friendship toward us, and confidence in our friendship toward her.
could prompt, into a disposition to shut it as closely against us as the united
motives of interest, of distrust, and of ill will, could urge her.

On the supposition that France might intend to claim the guaranty, a hasty and
harsh refusal before we were asked. on a ground that accused her of being the
aggressor in the war against every power in the catalogue of her enemies, and
in a crisis when all her sensibility must be alive toward the United States,
would have given every possible irritation to a disappointment which every
motive that one nation could feel toward another and toward itself, required
to be alleviated by all the circumspection and delicacy that could be applied
to the occasion.

The silence of the Executive since the accession of Spain and Portugal to the
war against France throws great light on the present discussion. Had the
proclamation been issued in the sense, and for the purposes ascribed to it,
that is to say, as a declaration of neutrality, another would have follouted,
on that event. If it was the right and duty of the Government, that is, the
President, to manifest to Great Britain and Holland; and to the American
merchants and citizens his sense. his disposition, and his views on the
question, whether the United States were under the circumstances of the case,
bound or not, to execute the clause of guaranty, and not to leave it uncertain
whether the Executive did or did not believe a state of neutrality, to be
consistent with our treaties, the duty as well as the right prescribed a
similar manifestation to all the parties concerned after The writer is betrayed
into an acknowledgment of this in his 7th No. where he applies his reasoning to
Spain as well as to Great Britain and Holland. -- He had forgotten that Spain
was not included in the proclamation.
Spain and Portugal had joined the other maritime enemies of France. The
opinion of the Executive with respect to a consistency or inconsistency of
neutrality with treaties in the latter case could not be inserred from the
proclamation in the former, because the circumstances might be different.
Taking the proclamation in its proper sense, as reminding all concerned, that
as the United States were at peace (that state not being affected by foreign
wars, and only to be changed by the legislative authority of the country) the
laws of peace were still obligatory and would be enforced, and the inference is
so obvious and so applicable to all other cases whatever circumstances may
distinguish them, that another proclamation would be unnecessary. Here is a new
aspect of the whole subject, admonishing us in the most striking manner at once
of the danger of the prerogative contended for, and the absurdity of the
distinctions and arguments employed in its favor. It would be as impossible in
practice, as it is in theory, to separate the power of judging and concluding,
that the obligations of a treaty do not impose war from that of judging and
concluding that the obligations do impose war. In certain cases, silence would
proclaim the latter conclusion, as intelligibly as words could do the former.
The writer indeed has himself abandoned the distinction in his VIIth paper, by
declaring expressly that the object of the proclamation would have been
defeated "by leaving it uncertain whether the Executive did or did not believe
a state of neutrality to be consistent with our treaties".

HELVIDIUS.

THE END.

