A LETTER TO CERTAIN BANK DIRECTORS, FROM A MERCHANT.

PHILADELPHIA, PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, AND SOLD BY ALL THE BOOKSELLERS.

Dec. 1796.

A LETTER TO Certain Bank Directors.
"EXCESSIVE Usury," it has been said, is the most unequivocal proof of the the
imbecility of States, or symptom of some internal vice which corrodes them, and
is often the harbinger of the most terrible catastrophes.

I am ^ed to the adoption of this observation from a consideration of the
unparalleled extortions that are daily and openly practiced in this city -- in
the purchase and sale of Promissory Notes -- to the disgrace of civilization
and of the national character.

Where must this end?

My enquiries into the causes of the present distresses, are frequently
answered by a reference to the injuries and losses our merchants have sustained
by the unjust capture of our vessels at sea, and their illegal detention.

These evils, it cannot be disputed, are serious and deeply afflictive: but it
must not be disguised that calamity is not confined to that range -- it must be
ascribed to a cause, operating in various forms, no less fatal, though not so
striking to the public discernment -- the shameful monopolizing principle
adopted by the Banks, of discounting for those only who can make large
deposits, or, as it is termed, "KEEP GOOD ACCOUNTS."

When I consider that the aggregate capital of the several Banks in this city,
amounts to so many millions of dollars, and (making a due allowance for such
parts thereof as cannot but remain inactive at present,) hear complaints so
universal, and credit suffering so intensely every day, my astonishment at the
public blindness or indifference, is greater than I can express!

I naturally enquire, and wonder that other men do not enquire also, How is
this amazing sum disposed of EVERY SIXTY DAYS with so little general
satisfaction -- with such misfortunes hourly arising, and such funds at hand?

It is in vain that I labor to find a satisfactory resolution of this
important question: The man most biassed by interest cannot say it is
impartially -- no candid man that it is justly disposed of -- or that it is
laid out in the manner most useful to the commerce and agriculture of the
State, or to produce the most considerable advantages to trade and industry in
general, as was contemplated by the several Acts of Incorporation.

Whatever may be the extent of the injuries and losses the merchants have
sustained by the capture of their vessels and other property, they must be
considered as part of the consequences flowing from their own proceedings in
promoting the adoption of a Treaty, which, instead of healing the first
affliction, has confirmed it into a disease, and threatens to add disorders
still more grievous.

This measure of politics, however, but partially relates to the present
subject, inasmuch, as it is only an external aggravation of disorders, which
already exist internally, radically pernicious, and fraught with generative
destruction.

Must it not be a matter of astonishment to every well informed man -- must it
not be disgusting to very man not totally absorbed in avarice, to be told, that
an individual of the best credit shall not be entitled to accommodation at a
public institution, because he will not suffer his money to lie dead in Bank.
What is the true character of such a strange procedure, is it not demanding a
deposit of money, and at the same time exacting a discount for the use of a
part of it? Is it not paying interest to the borrower for the use of the
lender's money!

Yet such are the shameful extortions openly avowed, notwithstanding two of the
charters of these public institutions were granted under such limitations and
restrictions as not to become an object of jealousy or apprehension to the good
people of the States; -- and -- to the intent that the Citizens of the State
might not be oppressed!

A most eminent author Smith's Wealth of Nations, p. 319.
says, It is not by augmenting the capital of a country, but by rendering a
greater part of that capital active and productive than would otherwise be so,
that the most judicious operations of banking can increase the industry of the
country. That part of the capital which a dealer is obliged to keep by him
unemployed and in ready money for answering occasional demands, is so much DEAD
STOCK; which, so long as it remains in this situation produces nothing to him
or to his country. The judicious operations of banking enable him to convert
his dead stock into active and productive stock. How contrary is this doctrine
to the shamefully extortionate and usurious "New invention of cashiering" now
pursued, as it has been termed by Sir Joshua Child! How different from the
principles of the "Mons Pietatis" of the Bishop of Padua, who (in 1490)
established a Bank purposely to counteract similar extortion and usury in those
days!

One of the principal motives for the establishment of the Bank Royale of Paris
was, that it would make usury to cease Beawe's Lex Mer. p. 328.
; and the Bank of England, we are told Postleth. Dict. Art. Banking; and 3
Anderson Com. 141.
, is an invaluable accommodation to the community, because it has a tendency to
keep low the interest of money, and is an effectual and permanent check to
usury, which is the greatest bane to trade and navigations.

It has been said Coxe's U.S. 480.
that the organization of our banks is on a plan and principles nearly uniform
with, and like to those of the Bank of England. Why then are effects produced
so very opposite and extraordinary? How comes it that the system upon which our
banks are conducted at present can only create further distresses among all
those who have not been engaged in their extortions? How comes it that they
throw into the hands of usury the means whereby to play with redoubled cruelty
upon those distresses which they at first create?

I have been referred to individuals in Mulberry-street -- Chesnut-street --
Second-street -- Third-street -- Water-street, and other streets, as known
usurers, or AGENTS acting ^or COMPANIES OF USURERS! and I have been confidently
assured that those very individuals (with shame be it mentioned!) can, and do
obtain discounts regularly at two of the Banks!

Whether there is cause for suspicion that several Bank Directors are
intimately concerned in some of those establishments or not, may be inferred
from the following circumstances of a conversation which took place a few days
ago. A Director was met by a Broker, whom he addressed in languague and effect
nearly as memory can collect thus, For shame, J --, for shame! why will you not
pursue some regular business, in preference to being instrumental to the
distresses of your neighbors? -- To which the Jew replied -- Got damn! fwhat
haf you to do mid it! I sells more notesh to Bank Tirectors dan to efry pody
else! -- I should not omit adding, that this very Director has been since
charged, as I am well informed, openly to his face, with purchasing notes!

Some Directors, influenced more by private motives, than a regard for the
duties of their appointment and the credit and character of the institutions,
make it a practice to examine the Bank Books of individuals, and where
complaints are made of the reduction of discounts without cause assigned, to
offer as a reason, this sort of reply -- "You trade beyond your capital;" as if
a man's Bank Book stood in the place of his ledger! Presumptuous Dictators! who
invested you with the insolent authority of inquisitors? Have you forgot from
whence each of you sprang -- that to capital you owe nothing, to credit your
very existence!

It is allowed by all experienced men that commerce cannot exist without mutual
and extensive credit. -- Men of the moment, be cautious! -- you have sins to
answer for -- recollect that credit is gained by custom and seldom recovers a
strain -- read Anderson, and learn what Banks are.

"Although like private merchants," says he their circumstances may not be
alike prosperous at all times, we can see no benefit that can arise by such
minute enquiries, so long as they, to all appearance, are prosperous and
punctual in all their affairs; neither do we apprehend these proper to be
enquired into at all, unless there should arise any reasonable suspicion of
fraud: for as it has been a political observation of long standing, that even
the reputation of great and powerful Monarchies and States, often subsist more
by common fame or opinion than by real strength or ability, -- magis fama quam
vi -- so it may more strictly and properly be applicable to a Bank and Bankers,
of which we had a most pregnant instance a few years ago, at the breaking up
and dividing the profits of an eminent partnership of a private bank in London,
which, for many years, had cleared or divided several thousand pounds yearly
for the partnership; when upon valuing or appraising all the real stock of the
partnership before the highest judge of Great Britain, it appeared, even to
that great man's amazement, that the whole did not amount to above three or
four hundred pounds, consisting entirely of shop implements, and certain
household furniture, etc.

A certain Director some time since, upon an iron merchant's applying to him,
to know what were the objections to the paper which he had offered at Bank that
had not been discounted, was told, " You should sell your iron!" This sapient
Director had, a day or two before, been applying himself for the iron; but the
ironmonger expecting (as the Director also expected) that the price of iron
would rise, preferred borrowing cash, to selling goods to the Director at a
risk of great disadvantage in the course of trade.

Herein may be discerned the power acquired and the means used to profit by a
knowledge of the apparent state of individual credit as exhibited in their Bank
Books -- and in this way it is that we can account for numerous objections to
the discounting of good notes.

If the Directory of a Bank can occasionally have " twenty thousand dollars"
divided among themselves in one day, more than is usual and customary for them
to have discounted (which actually happened a few days since) they may with
great ease keep " good accounts," and out of the profits only by such purchases
-- hopeful Directors! -- graceless deposits!

When the Bank of England was instituted there were but four great or
considerable Banks in Europe, all of which, excepting that of Genoa alone, were
solely for the convenience of merchants 3 Anderson 141.
; but our banks, by their system of "good accounts," openly and avowedly give
usury the preference to the merchant.

Will this mode of proceeding make money plentiful, trade easy and secure,
raise the price of lands, draw the species of gold and silver into the hands of
the common people, as we see it in Holland, Genoa, and other places? And. 145
Perhaps it might tend to cure this evil, if the Directors were obliged to take
a qualification oath, as is the case in the Directory of the Bank of England;
Ibid. 146.
and as I find they have adopted in the Bank establishment at Baltimore.

The Bank of England to support the credit of mercantile houses, advanced in
one week in the year 1763, 1,600,000 pounds sterling, a great part of it in
bullion, and extended its assistance even to Hamburg and Holland. Smith's
Wealth of Nations, 318.
The advantages derived by the British Merchants in the present war are still
more conspicuous. How different, how salutary must the effects of such an
institution be, compared with those which give a special countenance to Usury!
-- How shocking is it to see such conduct under the "most perfect Government,"
in "the most free and enlightened nation in the world!" -- in times too when
principles are professedly so well understood, and when no one pretends to deny
that Commerce cannot subsist without mutual and extensive Credit, nor that
unless money can be borrowed, Trade cannot be successfully carried on. 2 Black.
Com. 455.


But the evils of such abuses are not confined to the present time, nor to the
present course of trade; it is in the first instance establishing a character
of infamy on the present race, and implanting the seeds of poison for the
rising generation; this countenancing of the most pernicious practice of
Stock-jobbing and Usury, is directly sapping the morals and perverting the
proper genius of the people from trade and industry, in the most abominable,
because the most fatal and effectual manner that is possible?

The ease of borrowing money at a short warning is the life of commerce, says
Blackstone Ibid.
, and the benefit that is to arise to the public through commerce, holds the
first place among his arguments for the admission of a premium for the use of
money at all. But our Banks lend to none but those who will consent to PAY
interest for LENDING their own money, and no matter by what infamous means
obtained, and how sustained. This is following the advice of the Governor in
his late speech to both chambers, of multiplying the means by which every
species of honest industry may be effectually encouraged and rewarded with a
vengeance! -- Will it have a tendency to cultivate the relations of Agriculture
and Commerce, the most important to be considered and cultivated. Is this
considering the direct aid which may be afforded to commercial industry and
enterprise, which ought ever to be distinguished in their treatment as they are
ever distinguishable in their nature, from the wild and fascinating movements
of the spirit of speculation -- a spirit that never fails to taint the morals,
and to blight the credit of the nation which is exposed to its malignant
influence!

"Good morning to the day, and next my gold!
"Open the shrine, that I may see my saint!"


AGRICULTURE is we are told the great leading interest of all states, and
employs nine parts in ten of the inhabitants of America; Coxe's U. S. 6.
It is the great leading interest of all societies; Smith's Wealth of Nations,
362.
and -- in all the countries of Europe, judicious writers have considered
Commerce as the handmaid of Agriculture; if true there, with us it must be
unquestionable. Coxe's U. S. 8.
In the name of common sense and justice then, let it be explained how
Agriculture, how nine parts in ten of the inhabitants are to be benefitted by
the Monopoly, Usury, and extortion of our Banks.

What is the nature and true features of an agreement or a resolution, for it
is immaterial which form it is executed under, of the Directors of a Bank to
countenance such proceedings. -- Is it not in fact tantamount to an agreement
to create a run upon all the regular followers of Trade and Commerce? -- Is it
not striking directly at the very root of Agriculture? -- Is it not conspiring
and creating means for exercising the most treacherous assaults on the property
of the simply industrious, and playing upon the distresses of individuals? How
many have already fallen victims to this avaricious conspiration -- How many
have been obliged to stop payment, or been absolutely ruined by this
overbearing and intolerably base and wicked machination?

The Banks make the left handed closet agreement to discount for those only who
make a large deposit. This is not known out of doors! ("for Bank Directors must
not tell the secrets of the "Bank") until it is about to wound the
unsuspecting, and by the time so shameful a monopoly of the circulating medium
begins to be believed, has already taken place (for honest men with difculty
believe such things.) The paths of regular industry though thus harrassed and cut
up, are not at once abandoned, sacrifices are submitted to, and honest men bow
lowly to the factors of destruction; they collect like the ant and be, the
little accumulations of labor and perseverance, but in vain, they cannot make
large deposits -- they are not worthy the grasp of the spoil^^! -- Their
efforts once cramped, sacrifices must follow extreme exertions; these alone can
prevent the notes of honest unsuspicious men from lying over! cruel
overbearing, horrible system! How can they expect men totally unsuspicious, and
unprepared for such attacks, to make large deposits? But with what conscience
can they expect men to pay itnerest for money, while their own lies dead in
Bank?

Exorbitant, anomalous discounts may well enable a Director to keep a good
account. Much less than the extra sum of " twenty thousand dollars," divided
occasionally among as many others would enable them all to keep "good accounts"
also.

A certain Bank Director applied to a stationer some short time ago, to have a
handsome Bank-Book made. After the stationer had completed his work agreeable
to order, he was so much pleased with its elegance, that he resolved to furnish
himself with one equally handsome, and exactly like it. A few days after, the
stationer sent his new and pretty Bank-Book to the Bank, to get a small note
wrote in; to his surprise his pretty book was returned with a credit for a note
which had been discounted (FOR THE DIRECTOR) for "eighteen thousand dollars."
-- The accidental resemblance of two elegant Bank-Books caused this mistake,
but it also discovered a fact that points with silent energy, at the Bank
proceedings; if each Director had the like indulgence on the same day, the
immense sum of 350,000 dollars must have been at once divided among them.

An extra sum of 20,000 dollars occasionally added to such a sum as this, must
make a Bank Director's place a very convenient and eligible one -- and it may
no longer be a matter of wonder that Directors can with ease keep " a good
account."

But "the specie has all left the country," says SPECIOUSUS; "we are obliged
daily to curtail our discounts," says HIPOCRITUS; -- give to each a little,
divide it among you, says AVIDIUS; -- But we can divide it only among those who
keep GOOD ACCOUNTS, exclaim one and all!

At midnight thus the miser steals untrack'd! amid his store
And grasps -- and grasps -- till he can hold no more;
And when his strength is wanting to his mind
Looks back and sighs -- on what he left behind.


It has been wisely said, that the circulating medium being the soul and food
of commerce, a corporation possessing a power of the soul can animate or
annihilate the body at pleasure; if this miserly monopolizing spirit is
pursued, the body must indeed die a painful and lingering death and carry
contagion and ruin into its course.

A monopoly of the circulating medium is an universal power of embargo over
trade, agriculture and manufactures, and it is immaterial whether it is
deposited or usurped in the hands of a few. "Banking in its best view" says an
eminent writer, is only a species of fraud whereby labor suffers the imposition
of paying an interest on the circulating medium. That banking fairly exercised
may be divested of its fraudful character is beyond dispute; but that the
circulating medium is the creature of labor is no less true; to render the
creator subject to the creature is an inversion of all principles rational and
moral, which was left for the banks to realize in this most enlightened and
free nation.

If there were not the examples of the bank of England, of Amsterdam, of
Venice, of Edinburg, and so many others i^ Europe, the experience which we have
had, which every day and every hour lives before us, displays and calls for the
necessity of a regular, periodical, and general change of the directors in each
of the banks, and that each director (as is the case at Baltimore and
elsewhere) should be appointed under a very special oath of qualification. The
directors of the bank of Amsterdam are sworn when they leave the institution as
well as when they first accept the charge. I do not wish to oblige the present
directors to swear for the time past -- that would be too hard upon them! -- I
only suggest its future propriety.

Perjury is a horrible crime, it is punished in England with the Pillory -- and
it is remarkable enough that Usury is treated in the same way; 3 Anderson 179.
should not brokers and their infamous bargains be put up for shame and scorn's
pointing finger. A similarly infamous stock jobbing system, which is said to
have caused the citizens of London to decline trade and turn usurers, arose to
so dangerous a height as to require the interference of the National
Legislature, and the passing of an act of Parliament, which restrained the
brokers to a certain number, from acting without a license from the Lord Mayor;
it obliged them to take an oath of fidelity, -- their names to be written on
the Royal Exchange; -- to incur a penalty if they dealt in such articles
themselves, and to enter into an obligation for their faithful actings, and in
failure to forfeit 500 pounds; 3 Ander. 179.
and it is elsewhere said, 4 Blacks. Com. 116.
, their being guilty of such usurious acts as are daily committed here with
impunity would subject them to the penalties of a Praemunire.

Legislative interference is unquestionably called for, to guard us against the
evils flowing from such scandalous abuses; and at the same time, since, where
paper money is pretty much confined to the circulation between dealer and
dealer, as at London, there is always plenty of gold and silver, Smith's W. of
N. 322.
it would be of great public benefit if the issuing of Bank Paper could be
restricted to notes of not less than twenty dollars.

The election for Directors of the several Banks will shortly come on -- these
remarks will require the consideration of the Stockholders, and it is hoped
that the indispensible necessity of a frequent and general change in the
several Directions, will be now considered as sufficiently demonstrated. A
personal exposition of names and persons has been avoided, because every one
concerned that chooses to enquire, can apply the facts with the proof of them;
the system admits of abuses, and it should obtain the correction of frequent
change of persons, and every preventive of regulation and law that the public
good and equal individual security demand.

That the State Legislature, will as much as is in their power attend to the
correction of evils so universally and severely felt, is most earnestly to be
hoped for. Qualification oaths, appear to be an easy and necessary preliminary
step, which can be adapted to both the State Banks. It is likewise to be
wished, and it appears to be signally incumbent on the LEGISLATURE of the
UNITED STATES, to take up a subject involving the best and dearest interests of
the nation.

Mischiefs are like the Cockatrice's eye,
If they see first, they kill -- if seen, they die.
December 15.

