A SERMON, PREACHED SEPTEMBER 14, 1796, AT THE DEDICATION OF THE MEETING HOUSE,
BELONGING TO THE CATHOLIC BAPTIST SOCIETY IN CUMBERLAND.

By JONATHAN MAXCY, A. M. PRESIDENT OF RHODE ISLAND COLLEGE.

PROVIDENCE: Printed by CARTER and WILKINSON, and sold at their Book-Store,
opposite the Market. (...)

At a meeting of the Catholic Baptist Society in Cumberland, holden on the 16th
day of September, A. D. 1796.
Resolved, That their committee wait on the Rev. JONATHAN MAXCY, with the
thanks of this Society, for the excellent and well-adapted Discourse he
delivered at the dedication of their Meeting House, on the 14th instant, and
request of him a copy for the press.

A true copy from the records:

Witness, SETH CAPRON, Clerk.

TO THE WORTHY AND RESPECTABLE SOCIETY, AT WHOSE REQUEST THE FOLLOWING SERMON
WAS PREACHED, AND IS NOW PRESENTED TO THE PUBLIC, IT IS MOST RESPECTFULLY
INSCRIBED, BY THEIR SINCERE FRIEND, AND VERY HUMBLE SERVANT, J. MAXCY.

A SERMON.
GENESIS xxviii. 17. This is none other but the house of GOD; and this is the
gate of Heaven.
A BELIEF in the existence of God, and in his intercourse with rational
creatures, has pervaded all ages and nations. Every temple that has been built,
every victim that has been slain, all the rites of paganism, and all the
institutions of Christianity, bear testimony in favor of this assertion. The
various and opposite methods in which men have attempted to approach God, to
render him their worship and to receive his favors, evince that they were
ignorant of their true state by nature, of the divine attributes, and of the
great Mediator, through whom all blessings descend. Inspiration assures us,
that there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus. 1 Timothy ii. 5. Through him every true Christian, worshipping in spirit
and in truth, looks up to God as his parent, and receives divine favors.
Intercourse in this way with God, is a peculiar privilege of every real
believer, and a distinguishing trait in his character. It marks his progress
through life. It bears him above immoderate attachment to earthly, perishable
objects, sublimes his soul, invigorates his affections, enlarges his capacity
of enjoyment, and qualifies him for the service of heaven. While he sits under
the shadow of the Almighty, his ravished soul, struggling with ecstasy, bursts
from her confines of clay, joining with angels, and the spirits of the just
made perfect. His religion is not founded on conjecture; it is no Idle
formality, no uninteresting speculation; but it is a truth, a substance, a
heartfelt reality, a heaven on earth. All the operations of the divine spirit,
in regeneration, repentance, faith, sanctification and communion with God, are
indications of his favor, and incontestible evidences of the reality of vital
piety. Though reason abundantly confirms the divine original of the Christian
religion, and points it out as the only road to glory; yet reason is by no
means the chief source from which believers in general derive their assurance
and consolation. They assent, because they realize. They believe, because they
feel. They rest assured, because they have the evidence of their internal
senses. He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself. 1
John, v. 10. He who has been brought by the power of God to a cordial reception
of the gospel, can no more doubt the reality of religion, than he can the
existence of the material world. In both cases he relies on the veracity of his
sensible experience. How absurd then and vain is it, for those who possess no
real knowledge of religion, to represent it as a phantom, a cheat, or delusion!
With the same propriety might a deaf man deny the existence of sound, or a
blind man the existence of light and colors. Christians, in all ages and
countries, have the happiness to "know in whom they have believed." God is
limited neither by time nor place. He often comes sensibly near to his people
by day and by night, on the ocean or on the land, in the populous city or in
the lonely desert. Behold Jacob, taking leave of his aged father, flying from
the rage of an incensed brother, having no one to accompany him through a
strange country. The sun falls beneath the horizon. Darkness spreads over the
earth, and muffles up the sky. Jacob in the open air lays his head upon a
stone. He sleeps. In this exposed and solitary state, his heavenly Father meets
him, and fills him with consolation. God says to him, behold, I am with thee,
and will keep thee in all places whither thou go. And Jacob awaked out of
his sleep, and said, surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not. --
How dreadful is this place! This is none other but the house of God, and this
is the gate of heaven. -- You will please to observe that Jacob utters these
words while his heart is filled with a lively sense of God's presence. It is on
this account that he calls the place in which he was the house of God, and the
gate of heaven. It is on the same account that the scriptures represent the
church as the house of God. I propose, therefore, on the present occasion, to
accommodate the words of the text to the meaning of those phrases in the
scriptures, which speak of the church as an habitation for God. In discussing
the subject presented in the text, I shall in the I. First place, show what
constitutes a church that may be styled the house of God.

II. In the second place, consider the church as a state preparatory for heaven.

A few observations shall then conclude the subject.

I. I shall in the first place show what constitutes a church that may be
styled the house of God.

Under this head, I do not propose to point out all the particular things
necessary to the organization, instruction, and government of a church; but the
nature of it, considered as an habitation for God. A church consists of a
number of real believers in Christ, united together under his laws, for the
worship and service of God. The following are some of the leading traits in
their characters:

1. They have experienced regeneration. This is expressed in the scriptures by
various phrases, tending to point out its greatness and importance. Christ
represented it under the notion of a birth, when he said to Nicodemus, except a
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Paul represented it as the
putting off and crucifixion of the old man, as the destruction of the body of
sin, as a restoration from death, as a renovation of the spirit of the mind, as
a new creation. The necessity of this change originates in the depravity and
sinfulness of the human heart. These are abundantly testified of in the
scriptures, and confirmed by the conduct of men in all ages and nations. The
testimony of eternal truth is, that men have all gone out of the way; that
there is none that does good; that there is no fear of God before their eyes;
that they desire not the knowledge of his ways; that they have come short of
his glory; that the carnal mind is enmity against God; that every thought of
the imagination of man's heart is evil, and that continually. These expressions
convey an idea of the greatest alienation of heart from God and holiness.
Though all men are sinners, yet all are not equally criminal, obstinate and
incorrigible. All, however, are by nature in such a state as to need a
renovation of heart to sit them for the house of God, and the enjoyment of
heaven. He whose soul is the haunt of wickedness, whose passions are the vile
minions of riot and debauchery, whose life is a catalogue of sins; he can be
rouzed from his lethargy by nothing but the loudest thunders of Sinai, and be
changed to holiness by nothing but the resistless arm of the Almighty. The
essence of this change consists neither in the illumination of the
understanding, nor in the reception of any new faculties; but in the infusion
of a holy disposition, prompting to holy exercises of heart and conduct in
life. The great work of regeneration is by the scriptures uniformly ascribed to
the Holy Spirit, as the immediate agent. Thus said Christ, except a man be born
of the Spirit, he cannot see the kingdom of God. That which is born of the
Spirit, is spirit. John iii. 5, 6. John, speaking of those who received Christ,
says they were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God. John i. 13. Paul to the Corinthians says, we all beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. 2 Cor. iii. 18. Paul to
Titus says of God, he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of
the Holy Ghost. Tit. iii. 5. The Spirit of God sheds abroad his love in the
heart, and conveys to it the same kind of disposition which resides in himself.
Hence he who is regenerated, is united to God in love. For God is love, and he
that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him. 1 John, iv. 16. Hence it
is, that all who are regenerated, are built up a spiritual house. None but such
can properly belong to it and constitute an habitation for the living God. Thus
regeneration appears to be an essential trait in the character of true members,
who form a church that may be styled the house of God.

2. The next trait in their character is, that they have true repentance for
sin. This is indispensibly necessary to pardon and salvation. This was the
uniform language of John the Baptist, of Jesus Christ, and his apostles. John
preached the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. Jesus taught that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all
nations. The apostles preached the same doctrine, when they said, repent and be
baptized, every one of you, in the name of Christ, for the remission of sins.
Evangelical repentance consists not in occasional pangs of remorse, horrors of
conscience, or resolutions to amend. If it does, then a Judas, a Felix, and a
Herod, must be numbered with the pious, and be enrolled on the list of
salvation. There are scarcely any, who, at some period of their lives, have not
been alarmed with fearful apprehensions for the consequences of sin, have
reformed their conduct, and implored forgiveness of God. These things they may
have done, and yet be entire strangers to true repentance. This penetrates the
inmost retirements of the heart. It consists in a holy disgust of sin,
considered as a most heinous crime against God, and prompts the true penitent
not merely to view sinful actions with abhorrence, but to trace them up to
their origin, and disclose all the secret recesses of wickedness. Even when his
conduct is fair and unblameable in the eyes of the world, he laments over the
depravity of his heart. He possesses a deep and affecting sense of the
intrinsic evil of sin; and opposes it, not merely because it exposes to
punishment, not merely because it would injure his character, and squander his
estate, but chiefly because he views it to be vile in its own nature, ruinous
to his peace in its tendency, dishonorable to God, rebellion against his
authority, opposition to his holiness and goodness. That repentance cannot be
considered as genuine, which does not produce a uniform disgust of all sin, in
every kind and degree; while it prompts to an invincible perseverance in every
known duty, and an humble dependence on the mercy of God, through Jesus Christ.
Repentance, as it implies an entire change of motives, feelings and actions,
respecting sin, is an indispensible prerequisite to the enjoyment of God and
heaven. Salvation without it, appears highly irrational and absurd. For God to
receive one without repentance, would be to receive one as a friend whom he
knew to be an enemy. Hence it appears necessary, that all who belong to God's
house, should have true repentance for sin.

3. Another trait in their character is, that they possess true evangelical
faith. By this we are to understand a firm persuasion of all revealed truth; a
persuasion effected in the understanding by divine testimony, and wrought into
the heart by the influences of the Divine Spirit. Hence it appears, that
genuine faith is no dormant uninteresting principle, leaving the possessor in a
state of languor and indifference; but active, producing good works, assuring
of justification and eternal life. Paul says, faith is the substance of things
hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. According to this definition,
it appears to be a kind of divine internal sense, diffusing itself into
futurity, conversing with distant invisible objects, bringing them home into
present enjoyment, substantiating them to the mind, and laying a firm and
immovable foundation for hope. Evangelical faith has more immediate reference
to Christ in his various offices; to all parts of his work as Mediator,
Redeemer and Savior; to his righteousness as the only ground of acceptance
with God; to divine mercy through Christ; for the pardon of sin; for the
sanctification of the heart; for growth in heavenly life; for complete
deliverance from evil, and in statement in eternal beatitude. Hence the
scriptures represent faith as "working by love." No wonder that it does; for it
brings into view God's most holy character in the great scheme of redemption by
Jesus Christ, and descries all the glorious realities of the heavenly state.
When the heart is reconciled by divine grace, the soul not only apprehends
God's character, but approves it, loves and admires it, as infinitely
excellent, and longs to be changed into the same image. Faith works by love
toward men. It displays itself in kind benevolent affection, especially to the
household of faith. It embraces, "with arms of love," all good men of every
denomination, and views them as children of God, and heirs of glory. The
scriptures represent faith as "purifying the heart." This effect appears
necessarily to result from its nature. We are so constituted, as readily to
assimilate ourselves to those objects about which we are conversant. As faith
brings into our view and enjoyment things heavenly and holy, it changes us
"into their image, from glory to glory." Victory over the world is another
effect ascribed to faith. This is the victory that overcomes the world, even
our faith. As faith brings into view things of eternal weight and importance,
the world, with all its pomp and pageantry, recedes and dwindles to a point.
The soul rises above it, and soaring toward the divine nature, is lost in its
immensity and glory. Thus it appears that faith is an exalted grace, and fits
its subjects for the house of God.

4. Another trait in their character is, devotedness of heart to God. This
implies a cordial approbation of his character, laws and government. As all
true religion is seated in the heart, the source of action and virtue,
devotedness of heart implies a constant obedience of all the affections to the
divine will, and an external practical observance of all the duties, religious
and moral. He who has been born from above, whose heart has been filled with
sincere godly sorrow for sin, who depends for salvation entirely on the mercy
of God in Jesus Christ, considers himself not as his own, but as "bought with a
price;" and endeavors to glorify God in body and spirit. He does not consider
religion as a task, but as a pleasure. He finds that the Savior's yoke is
easy, and his burden light. He rejoices to possess religion in his heart,
purifying his affections, and sitting him for the house of God.

5. Another trait in the character of those who compose the true church, styled
the house of God, is, that God's glory is the highest object in their view and
regard. His nature is the sum of all excellence and perfection. It contains
every thing that can attract the affections, excite the admiration, and call
forth the praises of all holy beings. God is love. With this all his actions,
and all his treatment of rational creatures, will perfectly correspond. For God
can do nothing contrary to himself. All his arrangements and operations, in the
great works of creation, in the great kingdoms of providence and grace, are
calculated to effect a perfect display of his true character, and to secure the
highest happiness of the rational universe. A display of God's true character
is his glory. Those then who are real friends to God, must feel a disposition
to coincide with all his designs and operations.

6. Another trait in their character is, that they strive for higher
seize in the divine life. The principle of this is implanted in the heart
in regeneration. Under the influences of the Holy Spirit, it is increased and
brought forth in all its operations. This life implies an inward propensity to
holiness, and a divine activity in all the powers of the soul. It is, in its
nature, tendency and effects, utterly opposed to sin. It implies an elevation
of the affections toward God, and a progressive advancement toward heaven. It
is a well of water, springing up into everlasting life. It is communicated from
Christ to all his sincere disciples. They look to him as the exhaustless
fountain, and eagerly anticipate the glorious period when they shall be changed
into his image, and satiated with his fullness.

Various other things enter into the character of those who are real members of
the house of God. Those I have enumerated appear the most essential. For all
who have experienced them, feel united together, and when worshipping their
common Parent and Savior, are sensible of his presence, and can exclaim, this
is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.

II. I now proceed, in the second place, to consider the church as a
preparatory state for heaven.

The design of religion is to meliorate the hearts, reform the manners, and
save the souls of men. For these important ends, Jesus descended from heaven,
and founded the church on that rock, against which the gates of hell shall not
prevail. His design was to purify the hearts of men, in a state of discipline
and enjoyment, and thus prepare them for the sublime delights of heaven. That
we may view the state of the church in the present world as preparatory for
happiness and glory in the next, we need but consider them in a comparative
point of light.

1. If we consider the church as a state of society, it will appear preparatory
for heaven. In this point of view, it appears peculiarly accommodated to man,
as a rational, communicative being. Not only his necessities and dependencies,
but his natural instincts, impel him into society. Neither the beauties of
nature, nor the inventions of art, can dissipate the gloom, nor alleviate the
irksomeness, of perpetual solitude. The pleasures of social intercourse hold an
elevated rank in the scale of man's enjoyments. They expand his affections,
enlarge his capacity, refine his nature, and learn him to guide his conduct by
the rules of decency and propriety. If such are the effects and enjoyments
resulting from the society of men possessing different inclinations, pursuing
different objects, and aiming at different ends -- what that is truly
excellent, amiable and delightful, may we not expect from the society of those,
who imbibe the same spirit, possess the same moral temper, join in the same
worship, and strive for the same heaven? Men in a church state are united by
the nearest ties; ties founded in love. Being knit together in love, they hold
the head from which all the body, by joints and bands, having nourishment
ministered, increases with the increase of God. Col. ii. 2, 19. Heaven appears
to be the continuance and perfection of that happiness which is begun in the
social state of the church on earth. Here we are surrounded with numerous
imperfections, liable to many difficulties and animosities; but in heaven,
these will cease; perfect union will take place; a more extensive society will
commence; the affections will be enlarged beyond all bounds; all hearts will
leap with ecstasy; each, happy in itself, and in that great multitude, which no
man can number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues. Thus the
church state, in the present world, considered as a society, appears to be the
gate of heaven.

2. The church, considered as a state of progression in knowledge and holiness,
is preparatory for heaven.

Those who have experienced the great change of regeneration, are brought to a
particular knowledge of God, and in a degree assimilated to his nature. In
these consists the highest excellency of the Christian religion. It imparts to
men the dispositions and moral qualities of God. These at first are drawn in
small characters, but under the light of truth, they enlarge and rise into
view, till Deity stands confessed in man. We all, with open face, beholding as
in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image. 2 Cor. iii.
18. That men in the present obscure and sinful state need some particular
knowledge of God, and some change of their moral temper into his likeness,
before they can be prepared to enjoy him, is a truth too reasonable and obvious
to require much illustration. The church state is a dispensation of light and
holiness, by which men are trained up as in a family, under one common parent,
and fitted for heaven. It is by the gospel only, that men can acquire true and
saving knowledge of God. By the works of creation they may learn his existence,
power, wisdom and goodness; by the law of Moses they may learn his holiness,
justice, and opposition to sin; but it is by the gospel only that they learn
his mercy, in the forgiveness of transgression, and in the salvation of the
soul. In Christ they behold him under the endearing character of Father. Under
him, they are here in a church state trained up as his children, growing in his
knowledge, forming into his likeness, and looking forward to the mansions of
glory. Knowledge of God appears to be an indispensible prerequisite to eternal
life. Christ says, this is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only
true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent. John xvii. 3. From the
scriptures it appears, that the knowledge and enjoyment of Christ will
constitute an essential part of the happiness of the saints in heaven. They
will see him as he is; they will dwell with him; he will lead them by the
waters of life; he will be their everlasting light and glory. In these respects
the house of God appears to be the gate of heaven; for all its inhabitants know
and enjoy Christ. They receive him as God and man, as a prophet to instruct
them, as a friend to increase their consolations, as a king to reign over them,
and protect them from all their enemies. They grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of their Lord and Savior. They have a special knowledge of the Holy
Spirit, illuminating their understandings, sanctifying their hearts, assuring
them of pardon, justification and eternal life. They will pass on from one
degree of improvement to another, till they shall be ushered into the full
enjoyment of eternal beatitude. Various other circumstances might be mentioned,
and considerations adduced, to present the church as preparatory for heaven;
but the narrow limits prescribed by the present occasion, urge me to finish
this subject with some observations.

1. From the first part of this discourse, we learn what are the most essential
traits in the character of those who are fit to become members of the house or
church of God; and consequently, that if we admit those of dissimilar
character, we deviate from Christianity and vital religion. For if we consider
those as belonging to the house of God who have not been born from above, we
consider those to be fit to worship him, who, according to the declaration of
Christ, cannot enter his kingdom. How then could a church, composed of such
characters, be considered as the temple of God, or the gate of heaven? How
could those be sit to enjoy God in that holy mansion, who on earth had no
delight in him? The requirements of the gospel are all reasonable and
consistent, suited to the nature of God, and the state of man. Men are required
to repent, because this reconciles them to God, and leads them to view sin as
God views it. Men are required to exercise faith in Christ, because this
implies an acknowledgment of him in all his characters, works and offices; and
consequently a cordial approbation of salvation through his mediation. Men are
required to devote their whole hearts to God, to do all things for his glory,
and strive for heaven. How reasonable are these things! If complied with, how
conducive to our happiness! How can we expect to enjoy God, unless we love him
supremely? Heaven, to an impenitent heart, would be like the richest banquet to
the sick. Is it not then of the greatest importance for us to enquire whether
we are born from above? Whether we sincerely repent of our sins? Whether we
strive to oppose the wickedness of our hearts? Whether we receive and approve
the Savior? Whether we depend on him for salvation and eternal life? Unless we
do these things, we delude ourselves, if we entertain hopes of heaven. For
common sense teaches us, that we cannot enjoy an object, unless our disposition
be assimilated to its nature. How then ought our attention to be excited, that
we be reconciled to God? Will neither the terrors of eternal darkness, nor the
charms of eternal light, rouse us from our lethargy? Shall Jesus divest himself
of his heavenly radiance? Shall he descend to earth in the form of a servant?
Shall he agonize and die upon the cross? Shall he descend into the dreary
mansions of the grave, and dethrone the king of terrors? Shall he ascend on
high, amidst the shouts of admiring angels, and fling wide open the gates of
Paradise for men? Shall he disclose to our view the ever-verdant tree of life,
bending with the food of archangels, and spreading its branches for the healing
of the nations? Shall the glorious Savior do all these things for us, and we
remain unmoved and impenitent? God forbid. Let us receive him as our Lord and
Master. We shall then look toward heaven as our proper residence. We shall
anticipate its joys, and triumph over the ruins of sin. We shall leap with
pleasure at the approach of our emancipation. Our hearts will expand with
rapture in the prospect of that period, when the Savior, standing amidst his
ransomed millions, shall lift the sword of victory, and the pale horse of death
shall shrink into darkness -- never, never to strike his houghs in the vale of
immortality! Then will an ocean of love, broad as the circuit of the spheres,
roll down from the throne of God, and bear off the redeemed multitude to that
delightful country, where sin, and pain, and death, and sorrow, never had a
name.

2. The second observation which I make from the preceding discourse is, that
if the church is a state designed by God, and calculated to prepare men for
heaven, the maintenance of public worship must be of the highest importance. In
the ordinary course of Divine Providence, we are not to expect that men will
become virtuous and good, without the means of instruction and information. God
appears, in all things respecting this world, to operate by secondary causes.
In all the means which he has established in the ministration of the gospel,
there appears to be a tendency to holiness and virtue. If this be not the case,
why are the means appointed? If there be not greater probability that those who
hear the gospel will become good, than there is that those who do not hear it
will, why is it to be preached? If men expect to be saved by the gospel, they
must attend its ministration. For faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. We must assemble for the worship of God and enquire in his temple.
If God point out the road to heaven, and we refuse to walk in it, can we
without the greatest absurdity expect to arrive in that happy mansion? As
reasonably might we expect, that by descending into the earth we should light
upon the sun, or become companions of the stars. -- Your exertions in this
place for the establishment and support of public worship, evince your sense of
its importance. Permit me to congratulate you on the success with which your
efforts have been crowned. The liberality of your institution does honor to
human nature. Like heaven, you receive men of all denominations, without regard
to any thing but their goodness. May no standard ever be lifted here to call
forth the spirit of party, but may you live together in peace, forbearing and
forgiving one another. Let all things be done with decency, prudence and
moderation. May you all enjoy the blessings of salvation, and while worshipping
your common Parent, enjoy his sensible presence, so that with unseigned fervor
of soul you may exclaim, this is none other but the house of God, and this is
the gate of heaven. I now commend you to him who is able to keep you, and lead
you into all truth. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in
peace, and the God of peace shall be with you.

AMEN.

