^

Ormrod's Edition



VISIT FOR A WEEK, OR, Hints on the Improvement of Time.

CONTAINING, ORIGINAL TALES, ENTERTAINING STORIES, INTERESTING ANECDOTES, AND
SKETCHES FROM Natural and Moral History.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A POETICAL APPENDIX, DESIGNED FOR THE AMUSEMENT OF YOUTH.

-- Our parent's hand
Writes on our hearts the first faint characters,
Which Time retracing, deepens into strength,
That nothing can efface but Death, or Heaven.
VOLTAIRE. EMBELLISHED WITH AN ELEGANT FRONTISPIECE.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ORMROD AND CONRAD, NO. 41, CHESNUT-STREET.

1796.

INTRODUCTION.
THE great object of education, in general, is to unfold, direct and engage,
the various faculties of the understanding; and when these views are obtained,
the Tutors of Youth, may, without blame, rest satisfied. Not so, however, their
parents, their present friends, or their future connections. Talents, science
and erudition, however brilliant, important or lucrative, must still, to those
with whom we live and associate, be but secondary considerations. The comforts
of life cannot spring from these sources, though they constitute its
refinements; they will not make the character endearing, though they may render
it illustrious. -- Domestic happiness has its basis in the temper, and every
social virtue its origin in the heart. To form or improve these, in the earlier
stages of reflection and observation, is the intention and design of every part
of this instructive and pleasing work.

The AUTHORS of the ANALYTICAL REVIEW, in speaking of the VISIT FOR A WEEK, say
-- "We have pleasure in introducing this publication to the attention of
parents and preceptors, as a valuable addition to ^UVENILE LIBRARIES. Its
objects are, to awaken in the minds of young people, a taste for study, and to
teach them, in an amusing and interesting way, LESSONS OF PRUDENCE AND VIRTUE;
and both these ends this miscellany is very happily calculated to promote."
Analytical Review, for 1795.

VISIT FOR A WEEK.
CLARA and William were the son and daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Clement: Clara,
who was her mother's darling, had scarcely attained her tenth year, when she
was introduced to the card table, and to every place of fashionable resort, at
which it was possible to intrude a child of her age: In consequence, she grew
confident and vain; pretended to give her opinion on every subject; and was
considered by all as a pert, conceited, disagreeable child: Some pitied --
others laughed at her folly -- but Mrs. Clement being generally known to
possess that mistaken sort of partiality, which rendered her blind to the
imperfections of her children, no one ventured to reprove, or point them out.
The time thus allotted to pleasure, little remained for study; that little was
divided between dancing and music, while the knowledge of her own language,
French, Geography, and other essential branches of education, where little
attended to, if not wholly neglected. A course of life so improper for her age,
naturally brought along with it other inconveniences; her constitution
suffered; the roses fled her cheeks, and Mrs. Clement too late discovered the
ill consequence of her imprudence; she wished to correct the errors she had
committed in her education; but found it difficult to abolish a system she had
so long countenanced. How far her endeavors had succeeded is uncertain, as she
was unexpectedly seized with a complaint of which she died in a few weeks.

Clara was at first inconsolable, but a short time dissipated her grief, and
her relish for pleasure returned: she was then continually teizing her father
to take her to the play -- to let her go to Miss such a one's ball -- and the
more her wishes were gratified the more unreasonable they grew. Mr. Clement in
vain expostulated, it was all to no purpose; Clara thought only of consulting
her own inclinations, and Mr. Clement had too long accustomed himself to yield
to them.

The Mid-summer holidays, at length, brought William, who had for three years
past, been fixed at a boarding-school some miles distant, home, for the
vacation. He was a sprightly good natured boy, two years younger than his
sister, who had just entered her fourteenth. Till his departure for school,
like her, he had been much indulged, and his education neglected, but since
that time he had been kept to his studies, and his improvements had equalled,
if not surpassed the expectations of his friends.

Absence and the loss they had mutually sustained in their mother, increased
the affection Clara and her brother, notwithstanding they sometimes differed
when together, entertained for each other; nothing therefore could be more
grateful to either than this meeting.

William had been at home three days, when Mr. Clement one morning told them
with a smile, they judged the prelude to something agreeable, that they had an
excursion in contemplation, which he doubted not would give them pleasure.

Clara eagerly enquired to what place? but her countenance, which had the
moment before been enlivened with smiles, was instantly clouded, when Mr.
Clement replied -- To her aunt Mills', in Gloucestershire. This lady was the
widow of an officer: Upon the death of her husband, with whom she seemed to
have buried all earthly happiness, but that which arose from retirement and the
practice of virtue, had withdrawn to the family mansion house, where, secluded
from the (...) of life, she passed her time in acts of charity and devotion,
and, excepting the visits she occasionally paid to a few neighboring families,
enjoyed a solitude almost perpetual. The different tastes and pursuits of this
lady and Mrs. Clement, together with some slight misunderstandings, had for
some years disunited the families; but a few months before the death of Mrs.
Clement the intimacy had been renewed. Clara and William had not, however, yet
been introduced to their aunt, of whose character, from her attachment to
retirement, they had formed no very favourble idea: the visit was in
consequence not agreeable to either.

Mr. Clement observed it, but without seeming to do so, continued: "I have for
some time past wished to introduce you to my sister; business opportunately now
calls me into Worcestershire; I shall therefore drop you in my way, and call
for you on my return."

Clara looked disconcerted, and enquired with earnestness, "how long they were
to stay?"

"My business will detain me," said Mr. Clement, "about a week."

"A week!" interrupted Clara, "are we to stay a week?"

"If I may judge by your countenance and manners, Clara," said Mr. Clement,
"the visit I purpose does not meet your approbation; is a week so long a time
to pass with an amiable woman and your father's sister?"

"But papa, it will be so dull; I have heard you say that my aunt keeps no
company; and you know my brother should have a little pleasure in the holidays."

William echoed the sentiments of his sister, and joined in entreating his
father to defer the visit, and let them continue in town during his absence.
All, however would not do; Mr. Clement, contrary to his usual custom, withstood
the solicitations of his children, and notwithstanding all they could say,
remained inflexible.

"And when are we to go," asked Clara, peevishly?

"I design to set out tomorrow morning," said Mr. Clement; "and expect that
you will both attend me with cheerful countenances."

Clara finding it in vain to argue the point, was silent; but it was evident
from her countenance, that this acquiescence with her father's commands was
less agreeable to her, than as a dutiful child, it ought to have been.

As for William, who had made his objections rather out of compliment to his
sister, than from any dislike to the journey, he presently resumed his
cheerfulness, but Clara retired in a very ill humor to give orders for the
packing her clothes.

"Pray Miss," said Betty, understanding she was going to visit her aunt Mills,
"how long may you be going to stay."

"Longer than I like, I assure you, Betty," said the young lady; "my papa is
determined we shall stay a week."

"A week Miss" exclaimed Betty, who saw by this, her young mistress was not
pleased with the journey, "why you will be moped to death; I wonder my master
can think of taking you to such an out of the way place!"

"We shall have a melancholy time indeed," said Clara, "but there is no saying
any thing to papa; I never knew him so obstinate in my life."

"To be sure," said Betty, "madam Mills is a very charitable good lady; but la
miss, you will be tired to death; they say she does nothing from morning till
night but read the bible and say her prayers."

"And do you think that is true?" said Clara, in a tone of voice that rather
encouraged than checked the impertinence of her servant.

"To be sure I do," said Betty; "why madam Mills, they say, miss, has never
been in London, since the death of the colonel, but once, and that was, at your
christening; so you may be sure she is an oddity."

"To be sure," said Clara, "she has no card parties." --

"Card parties," said Betty, "la bless you, Miss, I dare say there is not a
house within six or seven miles of her."

"Well," said Clara; "I shall have a charming time of it! but there is no
persuading papa; I don't know what is come to him; so you must pack up my
things; let us see; I shall take my pink lustering and my blue satin slip; then
there is my spotted book muslin and my fine jaconet with sprigs; as for the
striped muslin, you will not forget that."

"La, miss," said Betty; "sure you will not want so many clothes!"

"I desire you will put up all that I tell you," said Clara, sharply; "and
don't forget my cap with the blue and white feathers. The only entertainment I
shall have, will be the pleasure of dressing and undressing myself."

"Very true, miss," said Betty, who always flattered the follies of her
mistress, and immediately set about performing the orders she had given.

Earley the next morning the coach was at the door, and Clara, in spite of her
reluctance, set out with her father and brother for the

HOSPITABLE MANSION
Of Mrs. Mills, at which they arrived toward evening the next day. It was
situtuate in the most fruitful part of the county; on a rising ground, one side
of which commanded a view of distant hills and beautiful enclosures, and the
other of a cheerful village, the inhabitants of which looked gay with health
and industry. The reception of our travelers was the most tenter and
affectionate; Mrs. Mills embraced her nephew and niece with tears of joy, and
gently chid her brother for having so long estranged her from those in whom her
heart was so deeply interested.

Clara and William, whose faults proceeded, not from a bad or insensible heart,
but from an erroneous education, were touched with her caresses, and the more
so as they could not perceive in her countenance or manners the least trace of
that austerity they had ridiculously attached to her character.

Mr. Clement, whose business required dispatch, staid only to take a slight
refreshment, and again set forward on his journey, promising to render his
absence as short as possible: for Clara, who, however reconciled to her aunt,
could not over come the disgust she felt at the idea of passing a week without
amusement, stepped aside and privately entreated her father to short^^ the ^^ne
of their penance.

Rest being the most desirable after a fatiguing journey, the young people were
early conducted to bed, where they slept soundly till called upon to rise the
next morning.

William had for some time entertained himself in the garden when his aunt
entered the breakfast-parlour; but it was not till repeatedly told, Mrs. Mills
waited breakfast, that Clara was prevailed upon to get up and dress; the lady,
however, received her with her usual kindness, and readily accepting her
apologies, they were soon seated at the breakfast table.

"Do you rise every morning so early, madam?" said Clara, upon her aunt
observing that she did not appear to have (...) come the fatigue of her journey.

"Certainly, my dear," replied Mrs. Mills; "one must be wholly insensible to
the beauties of nature, to prefer a state of inactivity to the glorious
contemplation of it on a fine summer's morning.

"I will answer for it," said William, archly, "that my sister, by her own
consent, would not rise till ten or eleven o'clock for the finest sight in the
world."

Clara colored with vexation, and darting a glance of displeasure at her
brother, said, "he need not be so sharp upon her, for it was only since he had
been at school that he was become such a mighty early riser.

William seeing his sister's displeasure, said, "he did not mean to offend
her," and owned "he had once been as fond of his bed as she," but said "it was
now as great a pain to him to lie late, as it had formerly been to rise early."

Mrs. Mills observed, "that the habit of rising early was easily acquired," and
said "she could not think we were authorized by our maker to waste those
precious hours in sloth, which might be rendered beneficial to ourselves, and
useful to our fellow creatures."

"But do you not find the day very long, madam? said Clara.

"Not in the least," returned Mrs. Mills, "on the contrary I often find it too
short to fulfill all the duties it necessarily brings along with it."

"Astonishing!" said Clara; how is it possible, madam, that you can employ your
time? In London, where there are many things to amuse one, I am generally tired
before night."

"From this," said Mrs. Mills, "I must judge that our amusements and pursuits
differ widely; I should ask my dear girl, in what yours consist? had we time to
enter upon the subject; but a walk before the day be too far advanced to render
it sultry, will, I think be agreeable."

The young people replied, "they should like it extremely, and in a few
minutes, were ready to attend their good friend."

The fragance of the breeze, the harmony of the birds, and above all the kind
condescension of Mrs. Mills, conspired to render the walk agreeable, and they
continued it on the banks of a winding river, conversing on different subjects
till the attention of Clara, whose observations did not in general extend
beyond the fashion of a cap, or the color of a ribbon, was attracted by the
swarms of young fish that appeared in the shallow water. "I never, in my life,"
said she, "saw such numbers! look William, they are absolutely innumerable; I
suppose this river is remarkable for fish?"

"Remarkable!" said William, laughing, "why you may see as many in every river,
if you have a mind to look."

"I do not believe that," said Clara; "I am sure I never walked by one where
there were such quantities."

'Your attention, my dear,' said Mrs. Mills, "must have been directed another
way; William is very right, there is nothing singular in what you see;
innumerable as the young fry appear, many rivers produce more abundantly than
this."

"Is it possible!" said she, and added, still fixing her eyes upon the water,
"what prodigious quantities!"

"The increase is indeed wonderful," said Mrs. Mills, "but what may not be
expected when a single fish is capable of producing millions of its species."

"Millions!" exclaimed William and his sister at the same instant, "did you say
millions?"

"I did," replied Mrs. Mills; "the cod produces at a birth, eight or nine
millions; the flounder above a million; the mackerel five hundred thousand; and
as for the herring, Mr. Buffon, a great naturalist, supposes that if a single
one was left to multiply undisturbed for twenty years, it would produce a
progeny more numerous than the inhabitants of ten such globes, as this we live
upon."

"Amazing" said Clara, "and how many different sorts of fish do you think there
are, aunt?"

"To the best of my recollection," replied Mrs. Mills, "naturalists describe
upwards of four hundred, but it is supposed that many more have escaped
observation."

"I wonder for my part," said William, "they do not stop the course of the
rivers."

"The greater part," resumed Mrs. Mills, "are confined to the sea, and would
expire in fresh water; but such is their astonishing increase, that the ocean
itself would be too limited to contain them, did not the existence of one
species depend on the destruction of another."

"What, do they eat one another?"

"Yes;" replied Mrs. Mills, "it is computed that scarcely one in five thousand
escapes the perils of its youth: the young fish become the prey of the older,
and those that escape, in their turn, devour such as are smaller than
themselves."

William was going to reply, but was prevented by his sister, who exclaimed,
"what a leap that fish gave! I declare, it made me start; did you observe,
madam, it jumped quite out of the water?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Mills, "but i^ you admire agility, what will you say to the
salmon, which is frequently seen to throw itself up cataracts and precipices
many yards high."

"Is that possible?"

"It is a fact well known," said Mrs. Mills; "the generality of fish, as I
before observed to you, are confined to the sea; but a few quit the sea at
certain seasons, to deposit their spawn in the gravelly beds of rivers: of this
kind is the salmon, which upon these occasions will swim up rivers five hundred
miles from the sea, and not only brave various enemies, but spring up cataracts
and precipices of an amazing height, that interrupt its progress."

"How surprising!"

"And are they as anxious to return to the sea?" asked William.

"Yes," replied Mrs. Mills, "equally so were they confined to the fresh water
longer than the time nature has appointed for the preservation of their
species, it is proved, by experience, that they become sickly, pine away, and
expire the second year: the salmon, therefore, has no sooner deposited her
eggs, which she does with great care in the gravelly bottom of the river, than
she returns to the sea, if she escapes the various snares laid for her by the
fishermen."

"Pray, aunt," said William, where is the salmon mostly caught?"

"We are chiefly," said Mrs. Mills, "supplied with this delicious fish from the
rivers Tweed and Tyne; from whence it is no uncommon thing for a boat load to
be taken at one draught. The trade of Berwick, a town on the borders of
Scotland, and of Colraine, in Ireland, consists wholly in this article. A great
quantity of the salmon annually caught is consumed fresh, and the rest is
salted or pickled, and sent beyond sea."

"It is a little hard, poor fellows," said Clara, "to be caught after making so
long a voyage, and encountering so many difficulties. How many miles, Madam,
did you say they will swim from the sea?"

It is said," replied Mrs. Mills, "they will swim up rivers five hundred miles
from it; but these voyages are nothing, when compared with those made by fish
of another description: What do you think of the herring, which visit us every
year from the furthest extremity of the North?"

"Why, do they, aunt?"

"Innumerable shoals of herring," said Mrs. Mills, "live in the seas near the
North pole, which at certain seasons they quit, and descend in multitudes upon
our coasts."

"They are great travelers indeed," said William. "I am studying geography."

"The cause of their leaving that retreat, where the severity of the climate
secures them from the attacks of various enemies, is not ascertained: Some
authors think their numbers oblige them to emigrate; others, that they take
these long voyages to avoid the large fish that inhabit the frozen ocean; but
the opinion more generally entertained is, that having exhausted the stock of
in^ect-food, with which those seas abound, they travel southward in pursuit of
a fresh supply, which awaits them at the time of their arrival in the British
channel. Whatever be the cause, this perilous expedition seems to be undertaken
with general consent, and performed with the utmost regularity. They assemble
before they set out; separate into distinct shoals, and during the voyage not a
straggler is seen from the general body. In June the main body arrives on our
coasts; and though it has suffered much from the greedy inhabitants of the
deep, many of which are said to devour barrels at a yawn, is so numerous as to
alter the very appearance of the ocean, being divided into distinct columns,
five or six miles in length, and three or four broad."

"They must make fine work for fishermen," said William.

"The Dutch," replied Mrs. Mills, chiefly monoplize the herring fishery: The
English, however, yearly export great quantities, which are pickled, smoaked
and sent to different parts of Europe."

"As Mrs. Mills and her young friends conversed thus, the sky became suddenly
overcast, and they were glad to take shelter from a shower, beneath the
branches of a spreading elm. Clara was extremely discomposed at the thoughts of
being wet, and said she was sure she should get her death of cold, beside
spoiling her new bonnet the first time of putting it on.

"I hope neither of these misfortunes will happen," said Mrs. Mills, with her
usual cheerfulness: "This tree will afford us shelter for some time; and the
shower is too violent to continue."

"Ah," said Clara, "it does not look as if it would cease: See it already
begins to drip through the tree. Dear, what shall we do? I Am sure I shall get
my death of cold."

"Do not alarm yourself, my dear," said Mrs. Mills. "When a misfortune cannot
be avoided, the wisest way is to submit to it with patience, and not to make it
greater, by the supposition of evils that may never arrive, or if they do, that
you cannot prevent."

As Mrs. Mills said this, they saw a little girl hastening to them, with a
bundle almost as big as herself. "How do you do, Peggy?" said Mrs. Mills, when
she came up to them.

The little girl made her best courtesy, and untying the bundle, "Please you,
my lady," said she, "I saw you under the tree, as I came from school; so I made
haste home, and have brought you my mother's riding hood." Saying this, Peggy
produced a long camblet cloak, with a hood large enough for an umbrella. --
"Here is one too," said she, "for young madam; and if master would please to
put on this coat.

"Thank you, my good girl," said Mrs. Mills, "these accommodations are very
seasonable indeed.

Peggy then added; "My mother sends her duty to your ladyship, and says, if you
would please to step to our cottage, I could go and tell Mr. John to come with
the coach: she would have brought the things herself, but she has scalded her
foot."

"Your mother is very considerate," said the lady. "I am sorry for her
accident, and think we cannot do better than accept her invitation, as we are
so far from home. What say you, my dears? Dame Bartlet's cottage is at hand; we
can wait there till the shower is over, and the wet a little dried off the
ground."

The young people consented, and being equipt in the things Peggy had brought,
made the best of their way to

THE COTTAGE,
where every thing wore the appearance of neatness and industry. Dame Bartlet,
who, upon their entrance, was spinning, said, she hoped Mrs. Mills would not
take it amiss that she did not get up to receive her; but that she supposed
Peggy had mentioned her accident, or it must seem very strange that she did not
come in person to offer her services.

Mrs. Mills replied, that the attention she had shown was quite sufficient, and
obliged her extremely.

"Ah! Madam," returned Dame Bartlet, "it would be very strange indeed, if me or
my girl were wanting in any duty to a lady who has been so good to us."

Mrs. Mills now enquired into the state of Dame Bartlet's foot and recommended
the treatment she thought salutary, desiring she would, in the afternoon, send
Peggy to her for some balsam to apply to it. She then made enquiries after
several sick villagers, which, she said, it was her design that day to visit,
had not the rain prevented her walk being extended so far. Clara, in the mean
while, who had never before seen a spinning wheel, was attentively surveying
Dame Bartlet's. She admired with what dexterity the good woman drew the thread
from the distaff, and declared she thought it must be a very pretty amusement.

"It was once," replied Mrs. Mills, "an employment of repute among persons of
the first rank; at present it is, in general, confined to the lower and
middling class of people, for many of whom the distaff provides a comfortable
subsistence."

An hourglass, which stood in the window, was not less the object of William's
attention; it was the first he had ever seen, and, before he enquired, he
ventured many conjectures upon what might be its use. When Mrs. Mills explained
to him in what manner it was calculated to measure time, he observed, that the
people who invented it must have very little brains, for that it was not half
so convenient as a watch.

"I agree with you," said Mrs. Mills, "that it is not so convenient as a watch;
but cannot agree that the first inventor of the hourglass discovered the least
want of ingenuity. -- Tell me, William, were you in an island where no watch or
clock could be procured, what should you think of the hourglass?"

"I believe, aunt," said William, a little ashamed of what he had said, "I
should think it a great treasure; for I fancy it would be long enough before I
should be able to make a watch or a clock."

"You see then," returned Mrs. Mills, "that we must not always despise an
invention for its simplicity, and that the value of things depend much upon
time, place, and circumstance. It was long before the hour glass fell into
disuse, from the discovery of a more convenient mode of measuring time. In the
first ages of Greece, it was customary for a person appointed to the office, to
ascend an eminence every day, in the midst of the city, and proclaim that the
sun had reached the highest point of the heavens; in other words, that it was
noon. Sun-dials were afterward invented, and in time gave place to still
greater improvements. Clocks, though much inferior to those now in use, were
produced, and in time carried to the perfection you so much admire. With
respect to our own country; the ingenious art of clock-making was introduced
into it, in 1622, by Hugens, a native of Holland."

At this moment Peggy, who had for some time disappeared, re-entered with a
basket of mulberries she had been gathering.

"I see, Peggy," said Mrs. Mills, as the good girl set them before the young
people, "that you still love to oblige."

Peggy's eyes sparkled with pleasure -- she blushed -- courtesied -- smiled,
and said she wished they had something better to offer.

Clara and her brother, who were extremely fond of mulberries, immediately fell
to; while Mrs. Mills, observing that the rain had ceased, said she would step
to poor Susan Millstone's: "For," said she, "I hear the loss of her husband
sets heavy on her."

"Ay, truly does it," said Dame Bartlet; "she has never held up her head since
poor Ralph died. It is a pity she takes on so -- she does nothing but cry --
neglects her work; and as to her poor children, they would make your heart
ache; she takes no thought of them.

"This is a sad account indeed," replied the lady, "I will go and see what can
be done."

"Ah! Madam," said Dame Bartlet, "you carry comfort wherever you go."

During the absence of Mrs. Mills, Clara and her brother finished the
mulberries, and gathered from Dame Bartlet, whose grateful heart longed to
utter the praises of her benefactress, that she was indebted to Mrs. Mills for
the cottage, with all that it contained, and indeed, she added, for every
blessing she enjoyed: She was going, in the warmth of her heart, to enter into
(...) particulars, had she not been prevented by the return of the lady.

"May I be so bold, Madam," said the good woman, "as to ask how you found poor
Susan?"

"I found her, replied Mrs. Mills, "as you described, buried in grief; but
have, I trust, left her more reconciled to her misfortunes."

At this instant a little girl broke abruptly into the cottage. "O joy, joy,
neighbor Bartlet," said she "mammy says she will go to work tomorrow, and
Madam Mills says Jane and I shall go to school -- and" -- The child stopped,
seeing her benefactress, and drew back confused.

The reader need not be told this was one of the poor woman's children whom the
benevolent lady had just visited.

Mrs. Mills, whose benevolence was always performed in secret, unwilling the
subject should be further investigated, smiled affably on the child, and
observing that the day was far advanced, bade farewell to Peggy and her mother,
and hastily left the cottage, followed by her nephew and niece.

In the course of their walk home, an expression unguardedly escaped Clara,
which strongly conveyed, that she thought her aunt condescended very much in
visiting and speaking, in such familiar terms, to persons whose station in life
was so much beneath her own.

Mrs. Mills immediately entered upon this subject, and observed in reply: That,
in the eye of God, we were all equal: "He commands us," said she, to love our
neighbor as ourselves without any previous distinction, whether he be poor or
rich, a mechanic or a gentleman."

"To love our neighbor as ourselves," returned Clara pertly: "Do you think
there ever was an instance of any one loving another as well as himself?"

"Many," said Mrs. Mills: "History abounds with examples that demonstrate the
existence of such virtue. If you are at all acquainted with history, you cannot
forget the friendship of Damon and Pythias, nor the noble conduct of Leonidas,
and many heroes of antiquity, who devoted themselves to death for the service
of their country."

Clara, ashamed to confess that she was totally unacquainted with history, was
silent; but William, who was better informed, acknowledged that those heroes
might truly be said to love others as well, nay better, than themselves: but
added, it was a long time since they lived.

"It is not on that account," said Mrs. Mills, "the less true that they did
exist, and that the events recorded happened; but I could bring many examples
from modern history to prove that it is possible to love our neighbor as
ourselves, nay, I can cite one, from a people we hold uncivilized, which
happened within these last fifty years. Did you ever hear of the

CATARACT OF NIAGARA?"
"Never," replied Clara.

"Nor you, William?"

"Never."

"Well then," said Mrs. Mills; "imagine to yourself an immense river, increased
by a number of lakes or rather seas falling perpendicular from a rock one
hundred and thirty-seven feet high, and you will form an idea of the cataract
of Niagara"

"I do think," said William, "I recollect Mr. Smyth, our geographical master's
describing it: is it not in Canada, a province of North America?"

"It is," said Mrs. Mills; "and is esteemed one of the greatest curiosities in
the world; for two leagues above the great fall, the river is interrupted by a
variety of lesser falls, and runs with such rapidity, that the largest canoe
would be overturned in an instant. Higher up the river is navigable, as you
will find by the story I am going to relate.

"Two Indians went out one day in their canoe, at a sufficient distance from
the cataract, to be, as they imagined, out of danger; but having drank too
frequently of some brandy they unfortunately had with them, the fumes of it
created a drowsiness, and they were so imprudent as to stretch themselves at
the bottom of the canoe, where they fell asleep.

"The canoe in the mean time, which they had been towing against the stream,
drove back further and further, and would in a very short time have
precipitated them down the fall, had not the noise of it, which is heard at the
distance of six, and at certain times, fifteen leagues, awakened them. Figure
to yourselves, my dear children, what must have been the feelings of the poor
creatures at this moment; and how dearly they repented the intemperance which
had hurried them into such danger, They exclaimed in an agony not to be
expressed, that they were lost; but exerted their strength to work the canoe
toward an island which lies at the brink of the fall. Upon this, exhausted
with labor and fatigue they at length landed; but upon reflection were
sensible that unless they could find means to escape from this island, they had
only exchanged one kind of death for another, since they must unavoidably
perish with hunger; the situation of the island, however, gave them some hopes;
the lower end of it touches the precipice from whence the water falls, and
divides the cataract in two parts; a space is consequently left between, where
no water falls, and the rock is seen naked. Necessity supplied them with
invention; they formed a ladder of the bark of the linden tree, and fastening
one end of it to a tree that grew at the edge of the precipice, descended by it
to the water below, into which they threw themselves, thinking, as it was not
rapid in this part, to swim to shore."

"Had it been my case," said Clara, "I should rather have died of hunger in the
island, than have attempted my escape that way."

"The Indians," said Mrs. Mills, "acted more wisely: while hope remains, it is
our duty to exert our efforts to avert the misfortune that threatens us, when
unavoidable, it is the highest wisdom to bear it with fortitude and
resignation."

"And did they reach the shore, aunt?" said William.

"No," replied Mrs. Mills; "the waters of the two cataracts, (for you know I
told you one part of the fall was on one side of the island, and the other on
the other) meeting, formed an eddy which, when they began to swim, threw them
back with violence against the rock. They made repeated trials, but with the
same ill success, till at length worn out with fatigue, their bodies much
bruised, and the skin in many parts torn off, from the violence with which they
were constantly thrown against the rock, they were forced to climb up the
ladder again, into the island, from which they now thought nothing but death
could deliver them.

"Their hopes once more revived, when they perceived some Indians on the
opposite shore. By signs and cries, they at last drew their attention; but such
was the perilous situation of the island, that though they saw and pitied them,
they gave them small hopes of assistance. The governor of the fort, however,
being acquainted with their situation, humanely conceived a project for their
deliverance. He reflected that the water on the eastern side of the island,
notwithstanding it is rapidity, is shallow, and thought by the help of long
poles pointed with iron, it might be possible to walk to the island. The
difficulty was to find a person with sufficient courage and generosity to
attempt their rescue at the hazard of his own life."

"Indeed," said Clara; "if their deliverance depended upon that, I should have
thought small hope remained of it."

"It was nevertheless effected," said Mrs. Mills; "two generous Indians
undertook to execute the governor's project, resolving to deliver their poor
brethren, or to perish in the attempt."

"Is it possible?" said William; "what noble souls!"

"Yes," said Mrs. Mills; "they prepared for their perilous expedition, and took
leave of all their friends, as if they had been going to death: each was
furnished with two poles pointed with iron, which they set to the bottom of the
stream, to keep them steady and support them against the current, which must
otherwise have carried them along with it. In this manner they proceeded, and
actually arrived at the island, where, delivering two of the poles to the poor
Indians, who had now been nine days upon the island, and were almost starved to
death, they all four returned safe to the shore they had left."

"What a providential escape!" said William; "how rejoiced the poor fellows
must have been to receive the poles that were to assist them in getting away!"

"Their joy," said Mrs. Mills, "on the prospect of their deliverance, must
certainly have been great, but I will venture to affirm, it did not exceed
that, of the generous Indians, who hazarded their lives to effect it."

"It must certainly," said William, "have given them great pleasure, but what a
risk they ran!"

"True" said Mrs. Mills, "but on the other hand, what a gratification! do you
think there could be a pleasure equal to that felt by the generous Indians,
when they effected the deliverance of their poor countrymen."

"They were certainly noble creatures," said Clara, "one does not often hear,
even in civilized countries, of persons who act so disinterestedly."

"Though instances of such generosity," said Mrs. Mills, "do not occur daily,
they are, nevertheless, more frequent than we are aware of.

"Do you think so?" said William.

"Yes;" replied Mrs. Mills, "the most generous actions, are performed in
secret, and shun the noise of public fame; on this account, it is, that they do
not so often come under our observation. I know, nevertheless, of several that
might be put into competition with this, I have just recited: one in
particular, at this moment, occurs to my remembrance."

"Dear aunt," said William, and his sister, at the same instant, "do relate it?"

"The fact I allude to," said Mrs. Mills, "happened within these seven or eight
years in France, at a place called Noyon. Four men, who were employed in
cleansing a common sewer, upon opening a drain, were so affected by the foetid
vapors, that they were unable to return. The lateness of the hour (for it was
eleven at night) rendered it difficult to procure assistance, and the delay
must have been fatal, had not a young girl, a servant in the family, with
courage and humanity, that would have done honor to the most elevated station,
at the hazard of her own life, attempted their deliverance. This

GENEROUS GIRL,
who was only 17 years of age, was, at her request, let down seven different
times, to the poor men, by a rope, and was so fortunate as to save two or them
pretty easily; but, in tying the third to a rope, which was let down to her for
that purpose, she found her breath failing, and was so much affected by the
vapor, as to be in danger of suffocation. In this dreadful situation, she had
the presence of mind to tie herself by her hair to the rope, and was drawn up
almost expiring with the poor man, in whose behalf she had so humanely exerted
herself.

"I will answer for it," said Clara, "she had not courage to venture down for
the other."

"You are mistaken," said Mrs. Mills, "far from being intimidated, the moment
she recovered her spirits, she insisted upon being let down for the poor
creature that remained, which she actually was; but her exertions at this time
failed of success; the poor man being drawn up dead."

"Is this really a true story?" said Clara. "It is an undoubted fact," said
Mrs. Mills; "the corporation of the town of Noyon, as a small token of their
approbation, presented the generous girl with six hundred livres, and conferred
on her, the civic crown, with a medal, engraven with the arms of the town, her
name, and a narrative of the actions. It is also said, that the Duke of Orleans
sent her five hundred livres, and settled two hundred yearly on her for life."

"But to return," said Mrs. Mills, to our first point: these, and many more
examples of the same kind, that I could prove, that when our blessed Lord
commands us to love our neighbor as ourselves, he does not exact that which is
beyond the ability of his creatures to perform.

"Why, to be sure," said Clara, "both the Indians and the generous girl, you
have just mentioned, may truly be said to love their neighbor as themselves;
but it is much more easy to admire than to imitate."

"Very true Clara," replied William, "I am sure, though I should have pitied
the poor m^n in danger of suffocation, and the Indians who were left on the
island, I never should have had courage to deliver them at the risk of my own
life."

"Had you thought it your duty, my dear William," said Mrs. Mills, "to hazard
your life, in such a cause, I hope God, (without whose assistance, we can do
nothing,) would have given you strength and courage to perform it. We are not
all called to a station of such danger, though all to display our love to our
neighbor, according to our situation and ability; we who are blessed with
affluence, more immediately in acts of charity and beneficence. Nor is this
alone sufficient; we must bear with the infirmities of our neighbor, reprove
his faults with mildness; comfort him in his affliction; and be at all times
ready to rejoice in and promote his felicity. Nor are opportunities, wanting in
which the poor, as well as the rich, may show their obedience to the divine
command: Peggy Bartlet, whom we had just left, is an example of this; you would
scarcely credit, of what consequence that poor child is to the whole
neighborhood: If a neighbor fall sick, Peggy is immediately at hand, to run
for the Doctor to quiet the children, or to perform any little office of
kindness within her power. If she is from school, and unemployed by her mother,
the wheel of Dame Grimestone, their next neighbor, who has a large family,
never stood still. If any difference happen among her companions, Peggy is the
first to set on foot a reconciliation; and as for the children of Robert Gould,
a poor labourer, who lives within a few doors of them, Peggy has already taught
two of them to read, and a third nearly to say the alphabet. In short, she
never lets slip an opportunity, in which she can render herself useful, and by
this means, does more good within her little circle, than those, whose
abilities are more extensive.

"I liked her," said William, "from the very first, she looked so good*
natured, and was so civil."

"Yes," returned Mrs. Mills, "and her civility springs wholly from the goodness
of her heart."

"Is her father yet alive?" asked Clara.

"No," said Mrs. Mills; "he died when she was scarcely a twelthmonth old,
leaving his widow in great distress."

"Ah!" said William' "now I understand; you have taken care of them ever since.
Dame Bartlet told us, that, next to God, she owed every thing to you aunt."

"You are mistaken, my dear William," said Mrs. Mills, "my knowledge of Peggy
and her mother has been recent. It is not more than two years since an event in
which the goodness of their hearts was signally displayed, recommended them to
my notice, and gave rise to those little services which their gratitude so far
over-rates."

"Pray, aunt," said Clara, "what was the circumstance."

"To answer your question," said Mrs. Mills, "I must enter into a detail longer
than the present time will permit."

"O now," said William "you have raised our curiosity. Do tell us -- I know it
is something interesting."

"My dear boy," said Mrs. Mills, "we are already at home -- another time -- "

Before she could finish the sentence, the gate opened, and Clara, upon
entering the hall, perceived the hand of the clock upon the stroke of three;
little time remained for the toilet: she hastened into her dressing room, and
found it was possible to complete that which commonly took up two hours,
equally as well in twenty minutes.

Dinner being over, and the desert removed, the young people, who had not
forgotten the subject of their last conversation again renewed it, and
requested Mrs. Mills, to recount the circumstance that first recommended Peggy
Bartlet to her notice.

"My dear children," said Mrs. Mills, "since you desire it, I shall willingly
satisfy your curiosity, though my narrative may afford you small entertainment.
Saying this, she began

THE LITTLE VILLAGER.
As near as I can recollect, it is about two years since I every day observrd a
little girl, clean, but very meanly dressed, regularly cross the field, which
lies contiguous to my orchard. She had commonly a basket upon her arm, and made
her way with such haste, that my curiosity was excited, and I asked Banks, my
woman, to which of the villagers the child belonged

Banks replied, that she had herself observed her and more than once made the
same enquiry, but had not gained any satisfactory account of her.

This interested me still further; and I desired Banks, the next time she
passed, to accost her. -- Whether this was through negligence omitted, or that
the girl took another road, I know not, but I heard no tidings of her for three
days; when having extended my morning walk beyond its usual limits, I saw her,
with her little basket, some yards before me, cross a retired path, into which
I had just turned, and make toward a hut, that was nearly concealed by two
large elms. I quickened my pace, and overtook her the moment she opened the
door -- But what a scene of misery struck my sight! A man apparently on the
point of expiring, destitute of every necessary comfort, lay on the ground and
by him sat a woman, in the prime of life, whom grief and disease seemed to have
reduced nearly to the same condition. A languid smile animated the features of
each, upon the entrance of the girl, who affectionately enquired how they had
passed the night?

The poor man shook his head, and a deep sigh from the woman explained too
clearly that they could not answer the question to the wishes of their little
friend; who, having sympathized with them a moment in silence, uncovered her
basket, and said, she hoped they could eat an egg, as she had brought a couple
newly laid.

An expressive glance from the poor man told his gratitude, and the woman
pressing the hand of the girl, exclaimed, 'Ah! Peggy, you and your good mother,
I am sure, half starve yourselves on our account; it (...) a cruel thing that
we must make you partake our misery!'

"Do not say so," said the little girl, 'I bring you nothing but what we can
very well spare -- and -- '

"O yes," said the poor woman, 'so you would make us believe. This mattress and
these blankets you can very well spare, though we know you have nothing but a
rug and the ground for yourselves!'

"Do not be uneasy about that," said the child, 'we sleep much easier upon the
rug than we should on the mattress, if we knew you wanted one.' Saying this,
she threw off her cloak, and taking some dry sticks out of her basket, set them
alight in the chimney, and prepared to boil the eggs. The door being half shut,
I had continued an unseen spectator of all that passed; I now thought it time
to enter, and gave a soft rap.

"I understood, in general terms, upon my entrance, that a series of
misfortunes had reduced this unhappy pair to their present miserable condition;
but it was not a time to require particulars; their situation called for
immediate redress."

"And I am sure aunt," said William, "you did not refuse it."

"If I had, William, I must have been unworthy the affluence with which
Providence has blessed me," said Mrs. Mills; "but with respect to the poor man,
assistance came too late; notwithstanding the humane exertions of Mr. Benson,
our apothecary, who, at my request, went immediately, he did not survive till
the next morning; and grief increased the fever of the woman so much, that it
was not till some days after, Mr. Benson could give hopes of her recovery. Time
and reflection, however, composed her mind; the fever abated, and she gathered
strength daily. As she had been removed to my house, I had frequent
opportunities of seeing her, and thought I observed in her something above the
vulgar; not that there was any thing in her deportment unbecoming or
inconsistent with an humble station; but her sentiments, though plain and
unadorned, were expressed with a propriety seldom met with in low life: She
appeared to be well acquainted with the Scriptures and with several books of
divinity, and an unaffected strain of piety prevailed in her discourse, that
interested me very much.

On expressing, one day, my surprise to find her so well informed, she replied;
'Ah, Madam! the little I know I owe all to a dear young lady, with whom I was
so happy as to pass my youth.

I desired she would be more explicit, and she continued: 'My father was a poor
labourer on the estate of Sir James Ramsden, whose lady, when I was twelve
years old, took me into the family to wait upon Miss Frances, her youngest
daughter, at that time just seven years of age. Never sure was seen so sweet a
child! At those early years she discovered a sense of religion, seldom met with
at a riper age: She would frequently repeat little extempore prayers, and
divine stanzas, which showed the heavenly turn of her mind. As she grew up, her
sole delight was in reading the Scriptures and other books of divinity, or in
performing acts of charity and devotion, How often, while other young ladies
have been engaged at the card table, or places of public diversion, has she
passed her time, in instructing me in the word of God, and the duties of my
station! Ye, Madam, it is to her kindness alone that I owe the happiness of
being able to read the word of God in his Holy Scriptures, from whence I have
drawn all the consolation that has supported me in my afflictions. A malignant
fever carried her off in the bloom of health and beauty; at eighteen she died
universally lamented The author has the pleasure to inform her readers, that
the above is not an imaginary, but a real character.
. -- But I beg your pardon, Madam, said the poor woman, I am tedious.

I assured her that I thought otherwise: The most trifling incidents, I
observed, when they related to a character so exemplary, could not fail of
interesting the hearer. She then, at my request, acquainted me with what
afterward befell her, and, to the best of my remembrance, went on thus:

Time, Madam, reconciled me to the loss of my dear young lady; but the precepts
I had so often received from her mouth, and seen enforced by her example, as
the Psalmist says, "were written on the tablets of my heart," and I can with
truth say, "that I have found them more precious than gold or fine raiment." I
continued in the family of Lady Ramsden till I married my late husband, an
honest industrious man, who rented a small farm thirty miles distant. For the
first six years after our marriage, every thing went on well, and we were
getting forward in the world apace; but, unfortunately for us, our landlord
died suddenly, and the person into whose hands the farm fell, not only refused
to renew our lease, which was nearly expired, but insisted upon such an
enormous advance of rent, that my husband thought it prudent to quit the farm.

We took Harley farm, which you know, Madam, is within a mile of the next
village. The rent was higher than that we formerly paid, but my husband
thought, by attention and industry, to make it answer; and I am sure, poor
soul! he did not spare that: but indeed, said Mrs. Brown, with tears in her
eyes, we seemed to have left all our good fortune at the old farm; the soil of
the new one proved unfruitful, and, in spite of all my husband's labor,
produced such poor crops, that we lost considerably the two first years. We
consoled ourselves with the hopes that the next would be better (for we had
taken a long lease of the farm) but we were disappointed, and some stables
belonging to our next neighbor, unfortunately taking fire, communicated to our
granary, where it did us considerable damage before it could be extinguished.
These, and other losses, prevented my husband's making his regular payments,
and preyed so much upon his mind, that it greatly affected his health, and a
cold, which he caught about this time, falling upon his lungs, laid the
foundation for the disease that put an end to his life.

In short, things grew worse and worse; we found ourselves every year more
involved; and our arrears with our landlord being considerable, he took
possession of our effects, and we were turned into the world destitute. As we
had neither money nor friends, we could expect support only from our own
labor, and, weak as he was, my husband determined to set out immediately for a
farm about four miles off, where he had been told hands were much wanted. In
short, Madam, we set out, but in the way my poor husband grew so bad, that he
could not proceed: he fainted, and when he recovered, I thought it a great
blessing that the shed in which you, Madam, discovered us was at hand to
receive him. He crawled to it, thinking to stay there till his strength
returned; but, poor soul, he grew worse and worse. The little money we had,
which amounted only to a few shillings, was soon expended: want stared us in
the face, and I set out for the village I had left to seek employment. You will
wonder, Madam, that I did not seek it upon the spot; and, I am ashamed to say,
that I was withheld by pride. I knew it must lead to a discovery of our
miserable retreat, which I had hitherto carefully concealed, by going for the
few necessaries we wanted at night.

I had scarcely entered the village when I was met by Peggy Bartlet, the little
girl whom you condescended the other day to notice: she is the daughter of a
poor widow, to whom in better days I had rendered some little services. The
poor child threw her arms round my neck overjoyed, and run to tell her mother,
who weeds, spins, chares, or any way earns a penny to support herself and
child, that I was there. The poor woman upbraided me kindly for having left the
village, without saying where I was going, and said, she had determined to
leave work that evening earlier than usual, to find me out, and see if she
could not do any thing for us.

I am ashamed to say, Madam, that my pride was so great, that I preferred
telling a falsehood to acknowledging the truth of our situation to this honest
creature: I pretended that my husband had got into work at Burlington farm, for
which we had set out, and that being disengaged, I also wished for employment;
enquiring if she knew of any?

She replied, that hands were wanted in the garden, where she worked; but
added, that it was not employment for me.

My necessities were too pressing to hesitate; I replied that I should gladly
accept the employment, and begged she would apply for me directly.

Ah! said the good creature, shaking her head, little did I think -- and her
heart was so full, she could say no more.

I said I had never been accustomed to idleness, and cheerfully submitted to
the will of God.

I was immediately set to work, and in the evening, with a heart somewhat
lightened, I returned to my husband with the pittance I had earned. I continued
for several days to attend regularly at the garden, but the anxiety I felt in
leaving my husband, who every day grew worse, was such, that it produced a slow
few, which reduced me so much, that it was with difficulty I pursued my
labors. Still, however, I pleased myself with the thought, that the extent of
our misery was unknown; till returning one evening something earlier than
usual, I met little Peggy at the entrance of our retreat. The poor girl fell
upon her knees, and with tears in her eyes, begged I would not be angry with
her. She said, she had remarked how ill, and sad, I looked, and was afraid
things were worse than I said, which had made her determine to watch me home.
But little did I think, said she, sobbing, they were so bad.

"The grief of the poor child," said Mrs. Brown, "affected me so much, that I
could not forbear mingling my tears with hers, and for some minutes, our hearts
were so full, that neither of us could speak: at last, she broke abruptly from
me, and taking the path toward home, I thought of seeing her no more that
night; but I was mistaken, about an hour and a half after, a soft rap came to
the door; I opened it, and was not a little surprised to find there Peggy and
her mother, each charged with a load they could scarcely stand under; would you
believe it, Madam, they had brought us their mattress and blankets! and
actually, till your bounty, made it unnecessary, lay on the ground themselves.
I begged, and so did my poor husband, that they would take them back, but it
was all to no purpose: heaven be praised, they said, they had found us out, and
had a mattress and blankets for us. Nor was this all, I soon grew so ill, that
I could not, as usual, go to work, and then Madam, we must have starved, had it
not been for these good creatures, who, I am certain, often went without
necessaries themselves, that they might supply us with what they fancied we
could eat.

The good woman herself was obliged to keep close to work, but Peggy constantly
slaved to us twice, and sometimes three times a day. She never came
empty-handed; if it were but a few sticks she had picked up by the way, to make
us a little fire, she had always something: and endeavored to alleviate our
distress by a thousand kind attentions.

"Indeed, madam," said Mrs. Brown, "had it not been for those good people, we
must have been lost for want. I can never forget their kindness."

"This account," continued Mrs. Mills, "raised Dame Bartlet and Peggy high in
my esteem: I wished to see them, and one day took a ride to the village where
they lived. Upon enquiry, I found, as Mrs. Brown had before told me, that dame
Bartlet was the widow of a poor weaver; that by dint of hard labor, she
supported herself and child, and paid for a room, or rather garret. I learnt
further, that she had not always been accustomed to labor without doors; but
that two years before, she had the misfortune to be robbed of her
spinning-wheel, which before supported her, and since that time, she was glad
to weed, chare, or do any thing to earn an honest penny. The cottage, which we
this morning visited, happened at that time to be vacant, and I thought it
could not be occupied by more worthy inhabitants. I, therefore, asked dame
Bartlet, if she would like to remove to it? she was rejoiced at the proposal,
and when, I added, I would furnish it, and purchase a spinning-wheel, Peggy and
she were nearly out of their wits with joy. I need not tell you, I was as good
as my word; a fortnight after, they removed to the cottage, and have since
occupied it. An opportunity, also, soon offered of placing Mrs. Brown in a
station to which she does great credit; we have a school of industry in the
village, the mistress of which dying, Mrs. Brown supplies her place. Peggy
attends the school, and though Mrs. Brown is too just to let her partiality
appear at improper times, I am certain, she entertains the same affection for
her, as if she were her own child."

Mrs. Mills concluded her narrative, as the servant brought in tea. A walk upon
the lawn occupied the time, till the bell rung for supper, after which, the
whole family being assembled, the day was as usual, concluded in prayer and
thanksgiving.

The next morning, Clara rose at a more early hour, and took care to be ready
to receive her aunt in the breakfast parlour. Having taken their tea and
chocolate, Mrs. Mills acquainted her young friends, that she was going to visit
her bees, and invited them to accompany her. They all three, then took their
way to

THE APIARY.
at which, they presently arrived. Among the hives, was one different to the
rest; Clara observed it, and enquired the reason?

"That hive, my dear," said Mrs. Mills, was constructed by my own directions;
you see it is chiefly of glass: I spend many hours in observing the little busy
people that inhabit it."

"I have been told aunt," said William, "that bees have a queen; is it true?"

"It is;" said Mrs. Mills, "and what is more, this queen has a palace, guards
to attend her, and subjects over whom she reigns as absolute."

You are jesting with us, aunt?

"I am perfectly serious," replied Mrs. Mills: "In every swarm, there are three
sorts of bees; the working be, the drone which is supposed to be the male, and
the queen, which is longer and more beautiful than the rest, and is the mother
of the whole swarm."

But you said the queen had a palace.

She has a cell proportionable to her size, raised from a large foundation,
either on the flat or edge of the comb, and differently formed from the rest.
This I think, may, with no great impropriety be called her palace. She
generally keeps herself retired in the upper apartments of the comb, and
whenever she appears in public, which is generally to deposit her eggs, is
attended by several large bees, if not by the whole swarm, who flutter their
wings, and appear all in transport.

"You were very right indeed aunt, said William, "to say that the queen had her
palace and her guards; how wonderful!"

"The attachment of the whole swarm to the queen be," said Mrs. Mills, "is
indeed, wonderful: an author, who has given us many curious particulars
concerning these insects, relates, that having once an inclination to prove,
how far this surprising instinct, would influence them, he took a swarm of bees
that had been hived the day before, and having shook them in a lump, on a grass
plot, separated the queen be from the rest, cilpt one of her wings, and kept
her in a box apart. A general confusion immediately took place, contrary to
their usual custom, which is to cluster together, the bees immediately
scattered themselves over the grass, and flew here and there in pursuit of
their queen with a piteous discontented noise. When the box, in which she was
confined, was opened, a different scene took place; they immediately gathered
together from all parts, and in less than a quarter of an hour, the whole swarm
clustered around it, waiting till the queen, as usual, should lead them to some
place for their common preservation.

But the poor queen, was unable to rise; and her faithful subjects, chose
rather to die with her, than to desert her, for though pinched with hunger, they
would not fly to get any food. Nor was the affection of the queen less to her
subjects: when separated from them, she refused the honey that was repeatedly
offered her. I am sure, you will be sorry to hear, that having continued four
days, without tasting any food, they all literally died by famine, except the
queen, who lived only a few hours after Wardour on Bees.
"

"Ah!" said William, "how I should have grieved; it was a cruel experiment, but
a convincing proof, that animals have reason.

"Hold, my dear William," said Mrs. Mills, "be cautious of falling into so
gross an error. Though the order and seeming rationally, which is discerned in
the animal creation, cannot fail of raising our ideas of that Being, whose
wisdom is displayed in the minutest of his works, let us not imagine he has
bestowed on them that superior faculty man alone enjoys. The little busy
creatures of whom we speak, however wonderful their labors and economy, act by
stated laws which providence has implanted in their nature: insensible of good
and evil, they are impelled only to the performance of that which is necessary
to their preservation, or the wise purposes for which they are created."

At this instant the attention of William was attracted by a be returning to
the hive, and he exclaimed, "look, aunt at that be, it is so loaded, it can
scarcely fly."

"It is indeed well laden," said Mrs. Mills, "but will soon be eased of its
burden; observe, William, it is now at the entrance of the hive, and is met by
several bees, who are busily employed in assisting it to unload."

"Is that what they are about?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Mills; "they will swallow the little pellets the other has
collected, and in their stomachs they will acquire the consistence of wax,
which will afterward be cast up and turned over to other bees, whose business
it is to knead it, and spread it into different sheets, laid one upon another."

"Well," said Clara, "it is astonishing! but how do they collect the little
pellets?"

"They collect the yellow dust of flowers in the hairs of their body? then
brush themselves and form the grains into pellets. The honey is collected by a
sort of trunk; a small part of it goes to support the be, and the rest is
preserved in a little bag, with which nature has furnished her stomach, to be
cast up and deposited, afterward, in magazines for the support of the
community?"

"But I cannot conceive, aunt," said Clara, "of what service the wax can be; do
they eat it?"

"With the wax," said Mrs. Mills, "they build their habitations, and seal up
the honey in their cells; they also mix it with honey, to make bee-bread for
the support of their young."

"Well," said Clara, "I was never more interested in my life in any story than
in the account you have given us of these dear little creatures: If they have
not reason, I am sure they have a much larger share of instinct than any other
creature."

"They certainly have," said William.

"A sufficient portion of this principle," said Mrs. Mills, "is visible in the
meanest insect to raise our admiration of the supreme Being. It is certain none
can exceed the be, whose economy presents us with a useful lesson, and whose
labors with a food wholesome and delicious; but were you to look into the
history of the minutest insects, you would be sensible that this wonderful
property is not bestowed partially; each is furnished with it in proportion to
its wants. I could mention many -- O, here is one at hand to my purpose. Let us
stop a moment at this rose bush, and observe with what admirable dexterity

THE SPIDER:
"A spider," exclaimed Clara, starting on one side -- "I am so frightened!"

"Do not alarm yourselves, my dear," said Mrs. Mills, "I am not going to put
the poor thing upon you, and I am sure it will sooner run from you, than to
you."

"O," said Clara, "I am so terrified! I have such an aversion to spiders!"

"On what account, my dear," said Mrs. Mills? "Let us take the other path, and
talk this matter coolly over. Tell me from what does your aversion to these
inoffensive insects arise?"

"O la! aunt, I cannot tell; they are such ugly creatures, the very thought of
them makes me shudder."

"But, my dear child, if you have no better reason for disliking them, you must
allow me to say, it is a prejudice which a little resolution would enable you
to surmount."

"O aunt," replied Clara, "it is impossible I should ever endure the sight of a
spider: I took a dislike to them when I was a very little girl; and I am
certain, if one was to be put upon me, I should fall into fits."

"If you think so," said Mrs. Mills, "it is your duty to surmount a prejudice,
accident might render so fatal to you."

"O dear," said Clara, "it would be in vain for me to try; when people have
such an antipathy to a thing, it is impossible to overcome it."

"If I convince you," said Mrs. Mills, "that it is possible to overcome such an
antipathy, will you promise me to use your endeavors to get the better of your
dislike to spiders?"

"I have the greatest opinion of what you say, Madam," said Clara, "but I own,
I do not think you will ever convince me it is possible to overcome a dislike
where it is so strong as mine to spiders."

"But, if you should be convinced, will you promise me to use your endeavors?"

"If you desire it, Madam."

"Well then," said Mrs. Mills, "I will recount an anecdote that must convince
you an antipathy is really to be overcome."

"O," said William, drawing close to his aunt, "I am glad we are going to have
a story: I do so love stories!"

"This I am going to relate," said Mrs. Mills, "has the merit of truth: you
have, without doubt, heard of Peter the Great, Czar of Muscovy."

"Yes," replied William; "he founded the city of Petersburg."

"He did so," replied Mrs. Mills, "and enacted many useful laws, which justly
acquired him the surname of Great. But to my story: This great man, in his
childhood, had so great an antipathy to water, that he could not endure to
approach even within sight of it."

"Well," said Clara, "that was the most strange antipathy I ever heard of: how
ridiculous! to be afraid of water!"

"Pardon me, my dear girl," said Mrs. Mills, "if I cannot see any thing more
absurd, in the Czar's antipathy to water, than in yours to a spider -- but,
however, you shall hear my story. This antipathy, which must have been an
insuperable bar to all his warlike achievements." --

"How so, aunt," interrupted William; "I do not comprehend what his dislike to
water had to do with his battles."

"I see, William," said Mrs. Mills, "smiling, that you are no soldier; do you
imagine he could make one campaign, without having occasion to pass a river, or
at least, to encamp on the banks of it, which, was almost as dreadful to him?"

"To be sure he could not," said William, "striking his forehead, what a fool I
was!

"Well," rejoined Mrs. Mills, "this infirmity, which would have given his
enemies so evident an advantage over him was happily overcome by the address of
one of his courtiers."

"One fine day, Prince Galliezin, his governor, and chief favorite, persuaded
him to ride into the country, upon a hunting party, without informing him,
there was a brook near the place. After a little diversion, the favorite
cried, what, hot weather! O that there was a river at hand, that I might jump
in and bathe! How said the young Czar, would you kill yourself? Galliezin
answered, I have frequently bathed with your father, and yet your majesty sees
me alive. Nothing can be more wholesome in sultry weather. The Czar was
surprised, and coldly replied, I have heard, that people are frequently
drowned. Ay, said the favorite, but not in water scarcely so high as one's
knees. If you please, sir, I will send some body to look for a stream, that you
may see it possible to bathe without drowning. The brook was easily found; the
Czar rode toward it trembling, and stopped his horse at a distance. Galliezen
ordered some men to cross it backward and forward, on horseback; upon which,
the Czar ventured to ride nearer. Galliezen seeing this, rode through himself,
and ordered some of his people to cross it. They did; the Czar admired at what
he saw: but, at last, had the courage to ride his own horse over: Pleased at
what he had performed, he from that time, used himself to the water, till by
degrees, he got rid of this troublesome antipathy, which was occasioned by a
fright, in his infancy." "Well, my dear," said Mrs. Mills, "is it, or is it not
possible to overcome an aversion?"

"There is no arguing against facts so convincing," said Clara, "if this story
is true --

It is recorded in the life of Peter the Great, interrupted Mrs. Mills, if it
will afford you the least satisfaction, I will show it you when we return to
the house, nearly in the words I have related it. Dear Madam, said Clara, you
cannot think I doubt what you say.

"Well then, said Mrs. Mills, I may claim your promise."

"Yes," said Clara, but I have such a dislike to a spider! I have always
avoided them, and Jane, my mamma's maid, knowing how terrified I was, was
always upon the look out, that I might not be alarmed.

"These very precautions, my dear," said Mrs. Mills, "have increased your
dislike; by constantly avoiding the sight of the object, which disgusts you,
your imagination has painted its deformity greater than the reality.

"La! sister," said William, "there is no harm in a spider: you may easily get
the better of such foolish dislike if you try; let me go and fetch one; you
shall see me handle it; I am not afraid.

"Oh for heaven sake," said Clara, catching hold of him, and turning pale with
terror, "stop."

"Hold William," said Mrs. Mills, "be not in such haste."

"Well," said William, "I have done, I only wanted to use my sister to a
spider; if once she could be persuaded to touch one, the business would be done.

"You must remember, William," replied Mrs. Mills, "that the courtier, who so
happily cured the infirmity of Peter the Great, acted with some address; had
he, instead of inviting him to enjoy the coolness of the river, ^uddenly
plunged him into it, it is probable he would have strengthened, instead of
surmounting his prejudice.

I remember a person who had ^its to the day of her death, from a frog, to
which she had a particular dislike, being in jest, put upon her neck. People
who commit this sort of violence, on the feelings of others, I am sorry to say,
(I do not mean that it is your case William), are rather desirous of diverting
themselves, than of benefiting their friends.

There is something very inhuman in thus sporting with the infirmities of
others; but let us take the next path.

"But the spider, aunt," said Clara, alarmed, -- "we must pass so close --
indeed, I cannot venture."

"Nay, now, my dear," said Mrs. Mills, "do not yield to an idle conceit, which
your better judgment must condemn; recollect, that you are not going to
encounter a Hyaena, or a Rhinoceros, but to look upon an inoffensive insect, to
whose existence, it is in your power, in an instant to put an end, and whose
ingenuity is deserving your highest admiration."

"But may I be sure, madam, that you will not suffer it to crawl upon me," said
Clara; "and that you, William, will not play me any trick?" "I will engage for
William," replied Mrs. Mills, "and surely, you may rely upon me, after what I
have said."

"Well then;" said Clara, "but let me go on this side -- now be sure, William,
you do not play me any trick."

"Not I," said William; "but you must not be angry, if I cannot help laughing
to see you so foolish." They now came in sight of the bush, where the poor
spider, little conscious of the terror it inspired, had half formed its curious
web. When Clara beheld it, with such agility, run from side to side of the
branch, upon which it was weaving its subtle snare, she started back, and it
was some time before she could be prevailed upon to advance: however,
encouraged by Mrs. Mills, and a little ashamed by the raillery of her brother,
she approached so near, as to see distinctly the whole progress of its
ingenious labors. At first, her heart beat -- she declared it made her
shudder, -- she had never, in her life, looked so long upon a spider -- by
degrees, she became more calm, and at length, protested, it was not so ugly as
she imagined -- really, the body was very handsomely speckled, and as for the
web, it was astonishing from whence the thread, with which it was woven, could
come." "The spider," said Mrs. Mills, "has, at the extremity of her body, five
openings, through which she distills at pleasure, a clammy glue: this forms the
thread, which lengthens in proportion to her distance, from the place where she
first fastens it. When she closes these openings, the thread, no longer
extends, and she remains suspended in the air. Observe, Clara, she makes use of
the thread, for her ascent, grasping it in her paws, as we should a rope with
our hands and feet."

"Well, really," said Clara, "it is very curious, I should like to see in what
manner the web is first begun; this is half finished."

"It will be well worth your attention, at another opportunity," said Mrs.
Mills.

"Is the web begun in the middle?" asked Clara.

"That cannot be practicable," said Mrs. Mills, "you see it is suspended
between two branches, the spider, therefore, would have no resting place."

"Very true, aunt," said William, "I never thought about it before, but really,
I cannot conceive, in what part of the web, the spider can possibly begin."

"It is a question," replied Mrs. Mills, "that might have puzzled wiser heads
than yours William, had not experience and observations fully discovered it.
When the garden spider, for there are many kinds of spiders, begins its web, it
places itself upon the end of a branch, and there fastens several threads,
which it lengthens to two or more else, leaving them to float in the air: these
threads are wafted by the wind, from one side to another, and lodged either on
a house, pole, or the opposite branch, where they are fastened by their natural
glue. The spider then draws them to her, to try that they be well fixed, and
they become a bridge for her to pass and repass at pleasure; she then marches
to the middle of this thread, and adds to it another, by the help of which she
descends, till she meets with a solid body to rest upon, or leaves it as the
first floating in the air, to the direction of chance; in the same manner other
threads are drawn from the center, and there again, as you see, crossed. But I
will leave the rest to your own observation, which will imform you more
agreeably."

"Well," said William, "it must be owned the spider is a very ingenious
creature; I should have puzzled my head for a month, and not guessed how she
began her web."

"Nor I," said Clara, "but pray Madam, what is the use of the web, when it is
made?"

"Why," said William, bursting into a fit of laughter, "don't you know, that
spiders spread their webs to catch flies?"

"If I had known," replied Clara somewhat piqued, "I should not have asked the
question."

"There is no disgrace," said Mrs. Mills, "in not knowing a thing, the disgrace
is in not wishing to be informed."

"I did not mean to offend my sister," said William, "only it was so droll, to
hear her ask, what spiders spread their webs for."

"You know William," said Clara, "that my mamma always ordered the servants to
take particular care, that I should not be alarmed, with the sight of a spider,
so you need not be so very sharp upon me."

"Well," said William, "I beg your pardon, sister, I will be more careful in
future."

And do spiders really feed on flies, Madam? "Undoubtedly," said Mrs. Mills.

"Well then," said Clara, "if the spider is an ingenious creature, you must
allow that she is very cruel."

"Pray, my dear, what do you understand by the word cruelty?"

"Why," said Clara, "I think it is cruel to put an innocent thing to death."

"By cruelty," said Mrs. Mills, "I understand, that depraved inclination which
causes us to inflict a pang wantonly; or unnecessarily to deprive any creature
of life: now the spider seizes the prey which nature has made necessary to her
existence; she cannot, than, any more be chargeable with cruelty, than other
animals, man himself, not excepted, for whose use innumerable creatures are
daily doomed to suffer. We may grieve for the sufferings of the poor fly within
the grasp of its enemy, but it is unjust for our resentment, to rise against the
spider, who acts only in conformity to the stated laws, providence has
implanted in its nature.

However, if you accuse the spider of cruelty, she has one quality, which
cannot fail of meeting your approbation; I mean her attention to her young,
which is so great, that she will incur every danger sooner than forsake them.
She carefully wraps her eggs in a web of astonishing strength, which she
fastens to a wall, or a leaf, and watches with unremitted solicitude: if danger
is at hand, her first care is to pull down the sacred deposite and escape with
it. There is one kind of spider, which has recourse to a very ingenious
expedient for the preservation of her eggs, she suspends her bag eggs in some
little aperture, perhaps of a wall, by a thread, and before them in the same
manner, a little packet of dried leaves, which, by constantly swinging about at
the entrance, prevent the birds and wasps, who are upon the watch for the eggs,
from discovering them."

Well, that is indeed an ingenious contrivance

When the little spiders are hatched, the mother carries them upon her back,
and discovers her tenderness by a thousand solicitudes: but, come my dear, let
us walk on, our spider has completed her web, and I think you are convinced it
is possible to look upon one, without fainting or falling into fits.

"Indeed, Madam," said Clara, "I am; and feel so far reconciled to the sight of
what I once so much dreaded, that I think, in time, it might be possible for me
to see a spider crawling on my hand, with as little concern as I have felt in
hearing it named."

"You see, my dear," said Mrs. Mills, "what a little resolution and proper
reflection will accomplish; but to this habit, which, in these cases, is often
more powerful than reason itself, must be joined by frequently accustoming
yourself to look at, and examine a spider, when you consider that its
deformities will grow familiar, and your disgust wear away."

"Well, aunt," said Clara, "I am resolved, as this is the case, to pay my
respects every day, while I am here, to the spiders that inhabit your garden."

"It is the resolution of a sensible girl," said Mrs. Mills, "but what is
William examining with such attention?"

"Bless me," said Clara, "what a

BEAUTIFUL CATERPILLAR!
where did you find it William?

"I found it," replied William, "at the foot of this tree. Pray Madam,
continued he, turning to his aunt, is not this the caterpillar, that changes to
the peacock butterfly?"

"It is," said Mrs. Mills, "and is probably preparing for its change."

"It must be a very curious change," said Clara: "it puts one in mind of the
transformations, one reads of, in the tales of the fairies."

"I know of nothing recorded in tales of the fairies," said Mrs. Mills, "more
wonderful than the operations of nature, but familiarity causes us too often to
view the most interesting objects with indifference."

"But pray, Madam." said Clara, "is it not strange, that one never sees a
caterpillar actually changing into a butterfly?"

"When we return to the garden," said Mrs. Mills, "I dare say, William will
gratify you with the sight of a Chrysalis."

Pray what is that?

"Why, surely," said Mrs. Mills, "my dear girl, you did not expect to see this
change, wrought in an instant; the operations of nature, are all effected by
regular and imperceptible gradations; the oak did not on a sudden acquire its
strength and stateliness, yet it was once an acorn in the bowels of the earth.
Toward the close of summer, these little creatures being satiated with the
verdure nature has provided for their subsistence, cease to eat, and employ
themselves in building a retreat, in which they quit the form of caterpillars,
and give birth to the butterfly that is within them. Some bury themselves in
the earth, and there rend their skin, which, with the head, paws and entrails,
shrink back, and leave only a substan^e of an oval form called the chrysalis.
This contains the butterfly, which having completed its growth, bursts its
enclosure, and comes forth. Other caterpillars involve their bodies in a
texture of thread and glue, and thus rolling themselves over in a bed of sand,
collect an incrustation of the small grains, in this manner, as an ingenious
author The Abb^ La Plu^he, to whose works the author is frequently indebted i^
the (...)
observes, building themselves monuments of stone. -- Another kind, pulverise
the bark of the willow, or some other plant, and with a mixture of their
natural glue, form it into paste, in which they wrap themselves: others again,
spin themselves like the silk worm, a warm covering that secures them from the
rain: In short, nature has given to each, abilities in different ways, to
secure itself a safe retreat, during the time of its inactivity.

"How wonderful," said Clara! "but pray, Madam, do silk worms undergo any
change?"

"The silk worm," said Mrs. Mills, "changes to a moth, in the same manner as
the caterpillar does into a butterfly: there is a great resemblance between the
silk worm and those caterpillars which spin themselves a covering."

"Ah," said William, "but silk worms are of some use; we are obliged to them
for all the fine silks we admire; as for caterpillars, they are good for
nothing."

"I am very ready," said Mrs. Mills, "to acknowledge all our obligations to the
silk worm; but should be sorry to suppose for a moment, that infinate Wisdom
has formed the most insignificant creatures in vain."

"Why, madam," said William, "of what use can caterpillars be? I am sure I have
heard our gardener say that they injure the trees and plants very much."

"It must be owned," said Mrs. Mills, "that our trees and plants sometimes
suffer from the visits of these insects; but then again it must be remembered,
that the poor birds, as well those which supply our table as those which
delight us with their song, would suffer still more severely from their
absence."

"How so, aunt?"

"Caterpillars and worms," said Mrs. Mills, "are the food of young birds: the
parents do not forsake their egg till the fields are replenished with these
insects, which disappear when the earth is covered with grain and other
provision, and the young brood has acquired strength to digest it. You must
allow, that the caterpillar, who furnishes support for the young birds, has, in
its turn, a title also to support; and this it finds in the plants and verdure
of the earth: its depredations, to our imperfect view, may sometimes alarm, but
that wise Being who formed, and knows to what use he has assigned the creature,
knows when to permit and when to set bounds to its ravages."

Our party, mutually pleased with each other, had strolled considerably further
than they at first designed: They had for some time left Mrs. Mills's
enclosures, and were proceeding down a shady lane that led to the village, when
their ears were assailed by the noise of several hammers which proceeded from a
blacksmith's shop. Mrs. Mills in vain endeavored to raise her voice, and the
young people to attend, the nearer they approached, the louder were the sounds,
which increased, till silence was at last all that could be opposed to them.

Clara, who was extremely interested in her aunt's discourse, was much
disconcerted at the interuption: and, as soon as she could make herself
understood, declared, with some impatience, that such trades were quite a
nuisance, and ought not to be suffered.

"Come, come," said William, "do not be too severe, sister; the noise of a
blacksmith's hammer is not so bad as the smell of a tanner's pits."

"I am sure," said Clara, "no smell can be so insupportable as the horrid din
of those abominable hammers; I declare, we are not yet beyond the sound of
them, they have put every thing my aunt was telling us about the caterpillars
out of my head."

"Well," said William, "both the tanner and blacksmith are bad enough, to be
sure; you would say so, Clara, if you were as constantly regaled with the smell
of the stinking hides as we are at school: There are ta^pits adjoining to our
play-ground, at Mr. Markum's. It is a shame, people of consequence should
encourage such trades, and suffer them upon their estates."

"I am quite of your opinion, brother," replied Clara, "they are quite a
nuisance."

Mrs. Mills, perceiving they had nearly exhausted their rage against the poor
tanner and blacksmith, now broke the silence she had for some time kept. "You
think then," said she, "that every person of consequence should dismiss the
honest blacksmith and tanner from their estate?"

"Indeed, aunt, we do," replied Clara; trades that are such a nuisance should
not be encouraged."

"I am afraid then," said Mrs. Mills, "the saw and mallet of the carpenter, the
chissel of the mason, the grindstone of the cutler, and the appendages of many
useful trades, will give the professors little chance of your favor, in short,
were I to judge by your impatience, at the small inconvenience you have
sustained from the tanner and blacksmith, I should predict that the mechanic
arts, in general, would not find a warm friend in either."

"No, aunt," said William, "we do not say that we should discard all; but some,
you must allow, are less useful and more disagreeable than others."

"All, my dear William, are useful in their turn; none more so than those which
you despise: were examples wanting to prove what daily experience so clearly
demonstrates, I could relate a circumstance, in which their utility was proved
in a very critical situation."

"Dear aunt, do relate it," exclaimed the young people.

"My dears, it is a narrative of some length and we are already at home."

"Nay, now you have raised our curiosity."

"Well," said Mrs. Mills, ever ready to oblige, "when we get home, I will look
among my papers for an extract I made of the circumstance; and, after dinner,
read it."

At this moment the door opened, and they separated to dress for dinner.

"Well," said Clara to her brother, whom on her return, she found alone in the
dining parlour, "Who could have thought that almost two whole days could have
been spent so agreeably in this solitary place, without any other company than
one's aunt!"

"Ah," said William, "who could have thought it!"

"I declare I have not yet," said Clara, "found one hour tedious: My aunt is a
charming woman; my papa said so, but I did not believe him. I already begin to
love her dearly, she is so kind and agreeable."

"Yes," replied William, "she has always something new to tell us; but hush --.

The entrance of Mrs. Mills broke off the discourse, and dinner soon after
followed.

The young people were not a little pleased to see that their aunt had been
mindful of her promise; the dessert being removed, she drew from her pocket, a
written paper, and read to them, the following

Account of the sufferings of the unfortunate persons, who survived the

SHIPWRECK OF THE DODINGTON INDIAMAN Ab^^dged from Dodsley's Annual Register.
.
On the 23d of April, 1755, the Dodington, a ship belonging to the East India
Company, sailed from the Downs, and on the 17th of July following, about one in
the morning, struck on a rock distant, east from the Cape of Good Hope, about
250 leagues. Of 270 souls that were on board when the ship struck, 23 only
escaped to the shore, which was a barren uninhabited rock, apparently capable
of affording them but a temporary succor. Their first care, was to search
among the things, which the violence of the sea had thrown upon the rocks, for
something to cover them, and in this, they succeeded beyond their hopes. They
next felt the want of fire, which was not so easily supplied: Some attempted to
kindle two pieces of wood, by rubbing them together, while others were
searching among the rocks, in hopes of picking up something to serve for a
flint and steel. After a long search, a box containing two gun flints, and a
broken file, was found; this was a joyful acquisition, but still, till
something like tinder could be procured, the flints and steel were useless; a
further, search was therefore undertaken, with inexpressible anxiety; and at
last, a cask of gunpowder was discovered; but this, to their great
disappointment, proved to be wet: a small quantity, however, that had suffered
no damage, upon a close examination, was found at the bottom of the cask. Some
of this, they bruised on a linen rag^ which served very well for tinder, and a
fire was soon made. The wounded gathered around it, and the rest went in search
of other necessaries, without which, the rock could afford them but a short
respite from destruction. In the afternoon, (for the ship struck about 3 in the
morning) a box of wax candles, and a cask of brandy, were brought in, and soon
after, some others of the party returned with an account, that they had
discovered a cask almost full of fresh water, which was even more welcome than
the brandy. The chief mate brought in some pieces of salt pork, and soon after
others arrived, dri^ing before them seven hogs, which had come on shore alive.
The approach of night, made it necessary to provide some shelter; all hands
were employed, and a tent was at last made of some canvass that had been thrown
ashore, though it was so small, for want of more sail cloth, that it would not
hold them all. They were obliged to erect their tent upon the highest part of
the island, from fear of being overflowed; and this was covered with the dung
of a large kind of water fowl, called a gannet, by which the island was much
frequented. As they had passed the day, without food, they had passed the night
without rest, being sunk a foot in the fowls dung, and the fire constantly
being extinguished, by the temtempestuousness of the night.

The next day the company were called together, to eat their first meal, and
some rashers of pork were broiled upon the coals for dinner. The sitting thus
disconsolate and forlorn down to a repast they had been used to share in
convivial cheerfulness, struck them with such a sense of their condition, that
they burst into passionate lamentations, wringing their hands, and looking
round them with all the wildness of despair; in such a tumult of mind, the
thoughts naturally hurry from one subject to another, to fix, if possible, upon
something that may afford comfort: one of the company recollected that the
carpenter was among them, and suggested to the rest, as a subject of hope,
that, with his assistance, it might be possible to build a strong sloop, if
tools and materials could be procured.

Every one's attention was immediately turned upon the carpenter, who declared
he had no doubt he should be able to build a sloop that would carry them to
some port of safety, if tools and materials could be found.

At that time they had no rational prospect of procuring either; yet they had
no sooner placed their deliverance, one remove beyond total impossibility, than
they seemed to think it neither improbable nor difficult; they began to eat
without repining, and from that moment the boat engrossed their whole
conversation. As soon as they had finished their repast, some went in search of
tools, which were, however not that day to be found, and others to mend the
tent. The next day they secured four butts of water, a cask of flour, a
hogshead of brandy, and one of their little boats, which had been thrown up by
the ^ide, in a shattered condition. Hitherto they had found no tools, excepting
a scraper; but the day after, they had the good fortune to find a hamper, in
which were files, sail needles, gimlets, and an azimuth compass-card. They also
found two quadrants, a carpenter's adze, a chisel, three sword blades, some
timber, plank, canvass and cordage. These they secured with great joy, though
they were in want of many implements, without which, it was impossible for the
carpenter to work: he had just finished a saw, but had neither hammer nor
nails. In this dilemma, it happened that one of the seamen, a Swede by birth,
picked up an old pair of bellows, and bringing them to his companions, told
them he had been by profession a smith, and that, with these bellows, and a
forge, which he hoped, by his direction, they would be able to build, he could
furnish the carpenter with all the tools he could want, nails included, as
plenty of iron might be obtained, by burning the timber, which had come on
shore from the wreck. This account was received with transport of joy: the
smith immediately applied himself to mending the bellows, and the three
following days were spent in building a tent, and a forge; in bringing together
the timber and plank for the use of the carpenter, who was in the mean time
busy in getting ready the few tools he had, that he might begin the boat as
soon as possible: this, assisted by the quartermaster, he did the next day;
the smith also finished his forge, laid in a quantity of fir for fuel, and from
this day they both continued to work with indefatigable diligence, except when
prevented by the weather. The smith having fortunately found the ring and nut
of a bower anchor which served him for an anvil, supplied chisels, axes,
hammers, and nails as they were wanted; and the carpenter used them with great
dexterity and dispatch, till the 31st, when he fell sick. As the lives of the
whole company depended upon his recovery, we may judge with what anxiety they
awaited it; and with what unspeakable joy they beheld him, in a few days, so
far restored, as to return to work.

In the mean time the stores they had saved from the wreck were so nearly
exhausted, that they came to an allowance of two ounces of bread a man per day;
and had no salt pork but what they determined to keep to victual the boat; for
their escape scarcely depended less upon sea stores than on the sails
themselves: their water also fell short. In this distress, they had recourse to
several expedients: they dug a well in hopes to find a spring, but were
disappointed: they atempted to knock down some of the gannets that settled upon
the top of the rock, and in this they succeeded better; but found the flesh
very rank, and perfectly black. They also made a raft, or float, called a
catamaran, on which they purposed to go out a fishing, with such hooks and
lines as had come on shore; and on these they had some success, till they were
intimidated by an accident from the further use of them.

Mr. Colet, the second mate, and Mr. Yets, the midshipman, had been out one
afternoon, till four o'clock, when they endeavored to make to land: but the
wind suddenly blowing to the west, they found that instead of approaching the
shore, they were driven very fast out to sea. The people on shore perceived
their distress, and sent out another float to their assistance; but the surf
was so great that it overset three times; and the men were obliged to swim. In
the mean time they saw their friends driving out to sea at a great rate; and
were just giving them up to destruction, when the carpenter revived their
hopes, by sending them word that he would make the little boat (which the
reader may recollect had been thrown on shore in a shattered condition) so
tight that it should not take in water faster than one man could heave it out:
this he dispatched in a quarter of an hour; and every one being willing to
venture out for the deliverance of their friends, it soon overtook the float,
received the mate and his companion on board, and returned safe to shore.

It was now thought dangerous to venture out any more on the float: the
carpenter, therefore, again went to work on the little boat, and put it into
complete repair. In this they frequently took great quantities of fish. Three
of the company also having discovered a great smoke on the main land, embarked
in it, in hopes of making some discovery favorable to their situation: but
having been out forty eight hours, lost one of their companions by oversetting
of the boat, and incurred many dangers from the Indians, who came down upon
them; they returned, giving thanks to God for having permitted them to return
safe to a place which, however barren and desolate, they now considered as an
asylum from a situation of greater distress.

"In the mean while the whole company was thrown into the utmost consternation
and alarm, by an accident that happened to the carpenter, who cut his leg in
such a manner, that he was in great danger of bleeding to death. What anxiety,
what alarm did not this occasion! They had no surgeon among them, nor any thing
proper to apply to the wound; yet under God, their existence depended upon the
life of the carpenter. However, with much difficulty, the blood was at length
staunched, and the wound healed without any bad symptom. Soon after this they
found a fowling-piece, which was a great treasure; for though the barrel was
much bent, by the assistance of their s^e^t-anchor, the carpenter soon made it
servi^able, and used it with great success in shooting the birds, which they
had before no way of taking but by knocking them down with a stick. About this
time also they perceived the gannets, which had of late forsaken them, hover
about the rock, on which they settled to lay their eggs, to the great joy of
the company, who were for some time constantly supplied with them in great
plenty. The carpenter and smith, in the mean while continued to work upon the
boat, and the people were busied in collecting what was, from time to time,
thrown up from the wreck; especially cordage and canvass, which was necessary
to rig the boat and some casks of fresh water. They had also fortunately some
rainy weather, which proved very acceptable, as they contrived to save some of
the water for sea stores; their escape scarcely depending less upon fresh water
than upon the sails. But they were still in want of bread, having lived many
days on short allowance. As a last recourse, they thought of building an oven,
as they had some barrels of flour, though they had no bread, and succeeding
beyond their expectations, they converted the flour into a tolerable biscuit.
This was, however, at length so nearly exhausted, that they were forced to live
upon a few ounces a day, without brandy, of which there remained only a small
quantity; and this they preserved inviolate for the use of the carpenter. Water
was also so short, that they were allowed only half a pint a day. In this
condition, however, they providentially, in a great degree, preserved their
health and strength; and, on the 16th of February, launched their little bark,
calling her The Happy Deliverance: On the 17th, they got their little pittance
of stores on board, and on the 18th, set sail from the rock, on which they had
lived just seven months, giving it at parting the name of the Bird Island.

"And was their voyage favorable?" asked William.

"They all," replied Mrs. Mills, "happily arrived, without accident, at the
place of their destination."

"What a providential escape!" said Clara; "they owed it entirely to the
carpenter and smith."

"Providence," said Mrs. Mills, "undoubtedly made them the instruments of it;
according to natural causes, they must have perished, had it not been for their
assistance: I hope, therefore, since you see the utility of the mechanic arts,
before you dismiss any one from your estate, you will first consider whether
the advantage yourself or society derive from it be not equivalent to the
inconvenience you suffer."

"I assure you, aunt," said William, "I shall; and I shall be less severe on
poo^ Charles Franklin than I used to be."

"I am sorry," said Mrs. Mills, "to understand that you have been severe
against any one; but, pray, who is this Charles Franklin?"

"Why," replied William, "he is one of the boys at our school; his father is
worth a deal of money, but he is an ironmonger; so, as Charles is the only
tradesman's son among us, all the boys make game of him, and many will not keep
him company; though, to say the truth, he is as genteel as any of us, and takes
his learning as well."

"I am sorry," said Mrs. Mills, "to hear that you were capable of joining in
such illiberal conduct: I know of no other distinction between the gentleman
and the common man than that of the heart, manners, and understanding."

"Why, aunt," said William, "I own I have been sometimes ashamed, but at school
one must do as the others do; the great boys lead, and the little ones follow."

"I am sorry to observe," said Mrs. Mills, "that you have betrayed a very
cowardly spirit, in being afraid of resisting what you know to be wrong, merely
because others were ba^e, or weak enough to set you the example."

"But, aunt, if I had not joined in the laugh against Charles Franklin, I
should have been laughed at myself."

"My dear William, never suffer a false sense of shame to deter you from doing
what you think to be right: This sort of compliance may lead you into dangerous
errors. Tomorrow, after dinner, I will illustrate my observation, by a story,
which I think will afford you some entertainment."

"O said Clara," I am glad we shall have a story; your stories, madam, are so
interesting!"

"I am happy, my dear, they give you pleasure."

"But cannot we have it now, dear madam?"

"It is nearly tea time," replied Mrs. Mills.

"Very true," said William, "and we must not forget the microscope."

"Nor must I forget," returned Mrs. Mills, smiling, "that I have not yet heard
Clara touch the piano forte."

"But the miscroscope, dear madam," said Clara, "I do so long to see it!"

"Nor am I less impatient," said William, "to hear the story."

"Tomorrow," said Mrs. Mills, "will be long enough for both; we must not be
prodigal of our pleasures."

William and his sister were too sensible of their aunt's kindness to press her
further; and the tea things being removed, Clara, unasked, sat down to the
piano. Though not a proficient, she played and sung prettily; and, in the
present instance her readiness to oblige entirely covered the defect of her
performance. Her aunt was extremely pleased, and with regret observed, at nine
o'clock, that it was time to separate.

The next morning after breakfast, the young people did not forget to remind
their aunt of the microscope.

Mrs. Mills expressed her readiness to indulge their curiosity; but added, that
if she might advise, a turn in the garden would be better, as the microscope
would furnish entertainment when it was too sultry to walk.

The young people immediately assented, and they all three took their way to

THE GARDEN.
"What a beautiful show of tulips!" said Clara;" I think I never saw greater
variety nor more brilliant colors!"

"But what do you think of my auriculas!" said Mrs. Mills, pointing to a
beautiful assemblage on her left hand.

"O, they are charming!" exclaimed Clara.

"Do you think, aunt," rejoined William, "that any other country besides
England can show such a number of beautiful flowers; there is no end of their
variety?"

"It is certainly very great," said Mrs. Mills; "but we must not forget that we
are indebted to other climates for that beauty and variety."

"How, aunt," "said William; "are not these flowers the growth of our own
country?"

"They undoubtedly grow here," said Mrs. Mills, "and, as you see, thrive; but
no plant can properly be called the natural produce of a country that will not
grow without pains of culture, which you know few of vegetables or garden
flowers will. For the auricula we are indebted to Caira; for the tulip to
Cappadocia, a province of Persia the pink and carnation come from Italy; the
lily from Syria; the tuberose from Java and Ceyland, islands in the Indian
Ocean; and the delicate fragrant jessamine, which I am sure we all admire, is a
native of the East Indies. The sun does not shine with sufficient power and
constancy in our climate to produce such brilliant colors and powerful odours."

"Well, aunt," said William, "there is one thing, however, in which Old England
I think may glory; and that is in her fields of corn: they are certainly her
own."

"I see," said Mrs. Mills, smiling, "that William is willing to stand up for
the consequence of his country; but, my dear fellow, rye and wheat grow wild in
Tartary and Siberia, but require a deal of culture ^^re ^orn, therefore, cannot
be the produce of England."

"Well, aunt," said William, "I am sure neither Tartary nor Siberia can show
finer fields of corn than we passed through yesterday."

"There I agree with you," said Mrs. Mills; "the soil of England is extremely
well adapted to the culture of corn, which it produces in such abundance, as
not only to supply its own inhabitants but other countries, to which great
quantities are yearly exported, as an article of commerce. Corn is nevertheless
of foreign origin, as indeed are more of our vegetables and herbage. The
colliflower comes from Cyprus, an island in the Levant; asparagus from Asia;
sharlots from Siberia; and horseradish from China. Lentils we owe to France,
and kidney-beans to the East Indies; garlic also is produced naturally in that
part of the world. When America was first discovered, which you know was in the
year 1492, by Christopher Columbus, a number of plants and flowers were found
there, till then unknown to the rest of Europe, to different parts of which
they have been transplanted. We are obliged to Brazil, a province of South
America, for that excellent and useful vegetable, the potatoe."

"Well," said Clara, "I had no idea that all our vegetables and flowers came
from foreign countries."

"The soil of each different country," resumed Mrs. Mills, "contains juices
proper for the nourishment of the vegetables peculiar to it, and these, if
deprived of such juices, will naturally wither and die."

"How is it then," interrupted William, "that we have pinks, roses, and all
these beautiful flowers and good vegetables, if they will not grow any where
but in their own soil?"

"I did not tell you," said Mrs. Mills, "that they would not grow any where but
in their native soil, but that such juices were requisite to nourish them."

"Well," said William, "that is pretty nearly the same."

"No;" replied Mrs. Mills, "it alters the case very much."

"You must remember, my dear boy, that it is possible for art to imitate
nature; this is the province of the gardner, who by a mixture of different
sorts of earth, clay, gravel, marl, chalk, etc. prepares a soil proper for the
nourishment of the plant or vegetables, he means to foster, and regulates the
heat according to that which nature has made necessary to it; and thus, as an
ingenious author, who has, in part furnished the information I have just given
you, observes, by the industry of man, one country is made to contribute to the
advantage of another."

"But how is it aunt," said Clara, "that we see so many different sorts of
flowers grow out of the same bed? from what you have said, I should suppose,
the juices that were fit for one kind, would not be so for another."

"Every plant," my dear Clara, "replied Mrs. Mills, "is capable of choosing for
itself; the wise author of nature has provided each with a set of vessels or
fibers, that eagerly attract and admit those juices that are proper for its
nature and reject all other.

"These juices are set in motion by the air and heat, and circulate through the
whole plant in the same manner as the blood does through our veins."

"Dear Madam," said Clara, "where can you possibly have learnt so many curious
particulars?"

"From reading and observation, my dear, returned the lady, for which the
country affords ample opportunity."

"I see, Madam," said Clara, "that it is possible to pass one's time very
agreably in retirement; when I came, I entertained different sentiments; I
thought it impossible to be amused without cards, and public diversions, but
though I have been here only two days, I already feel things in a very
different light."

"My dear child," said Mrs. Mills, "you make me very happy; be assured, nothing
but habit, which will sometimes overcome nature, and eradicate the best
principles, can induce us to fly for amusement, to such low irrational
pleasures, while the glorious volume of nature is open to our perusal: but the
sun grows powerful; and you are, I doubt not, impatient to see the wonderful
effects of my

MICROSCOPE.
Saying this, she took the path toward the house, and having conducted the
young people into a room, which she had previously prepared for their
reception, produced the wing of a butterfly, and having rubbed off some of the
dust, desired the young people would view it through the magnifying glass. They
eagerly obeyed; and with astonishment beheld that every grain of dust was a
distinct feather!

They then examined the wing itself, and perceived, that when the dust was
rubbed off, a thin skin only remained perforated, with little holes, the actual
sockets, which contained the quills. "Well," said Clara, "this is indeed
wonderful, I see the wing of a butterfly is as truly composed of feathers as
the wing of a bird."

"Equally so," said Mrs. Mills, "but I have more wonders to show you. William,
go to the window, and bring hither a dead fly."

"Ay," said Clara, "let us see what kind of figure it will make."

The fly was immediately put into the microscope.

"Dear," said Clara, looking attentively at it through the glass, "its wings
are a fine net work, beautifully glazed!"

"But do you observe," said Mrs. Mills, "upon its head, two little immovable
crescents, shaped like a split pea, and upon these a number of minute eyes?
each is furnished with a set of fibers or optic nerves."

"But I do not see," said William, who now put his eye to the glass, "the use
of so many eyes."

"Other creatures," said Mrs. Mills, "can at pleasure, turn their eyes, to see
when danger is at hand; but the fly's being fixed and immovable, they are
placed on a round surface, some low, others high, that she may discover when
danger threatens her from above, below, or on either side. Take notice, also,
of her bending claws, which are defended by sponges, (...) to preserve their
points, which would otherwise soon be impaired."

"I see them clearly, aunt," said William, "and is there not, beside, something
like hair, at the end of her feet?"

"Yes," replied Mrs. Mills, "she makes use of it as a brush, to clean her
wings, and eyes. I dare say, you have often seen her rub one paw against the
others, draw them over her wings, and conclude by brushing her head."

"Yes," said William, "but who could have thought she was provided with a
little brush, for the purpose."

"Providence," said Mrs. Mills, "has provided the meanest creature with the
means to render its existence comfortable. The trunk of the fly, is a very
curio^s instrument, composed of two parts, which fold one over the other, and
are both sheathed in her mouth, the end is sharp like a knife, and enables her
to cut, when she eats; she likewise uses it as a pump for the drawing up of
liquors."

Clara and her brother were extremely delighted with the wonders of the
microscope, and Mrs. Mills assured them, they would find them inexhaustible. "A
grain of sand, a drop of water, the minutest leaf," said she, "will furnish you
with an ample field for speculation, and lead you to adore that Being, whose
wisdom shines in the minutest of his works; the sting of a gnat, the point of
which is scarcely discernable, in the finest microscope, is a case composed of
long scales, one of which serves as a new case to the other three, which are
sheltered in a long grove, have the sides sharpened like fine swords, and are
beside barbed at the point."

"It is not surprising then," said Clara, "that it should give one so much
pain; upon my word, by the description, it appears a formidable weapon."

"I will go and seek a gnat," interrupted William, "I should like to examine
the sting."

Mrs. Mills prevented the execution of this design, by observing, that it was
almost time to put an end to their speculations; beside, she added, this
microscope would not, I fear, magnify sufficiently, to satisfy you of all the
particulars I have described, which are, nevertheless, to be clearly discerned
through a glass ^itted to the purpose."

"Pray," said Clara, "what is this so curiously pinned to a piece of paper?"

"It is the wing of an earwig."

"Of an earwig!" said William, "why, earwigs have not wings."

"Indeed, they have," said Mrs. Mills, "and, as you see, very fine ones too,"

"But, aunt," said William, "I have seen many earwigs, but I never observed
that they had wings."

"Neither may you have observed that beetles have wings, yet it is no less
certain that they have."

"How is it then," returned William, "that we do not see them?"

"Those insects," said Mrs. Mills, "whose wings are of such a delicate texture,
that the least friction would tear them, have, as in the above instances, two
strong scales, which they rise and fall like a pair of wings, but which are no
more than a case to the real ones. The wing of the earwig is curiously folded
beneath a little scale, and with the assistance of a fine pin, may readily be
discovered."

Clara and her brother, reluctantly withdrew from a speculation that afforded
them so much pleasure; but a recollection of the story, their aunt had promised
to relate, prevented their soliciting, a renewal of it that day; in the
afternoon, therefore, Mrs. Mills read aloud

THE EXCURSION, A MORAL TALE.
"At the close of a delightful summer, Mr. Weldon, a worthy clergyman, went
into Lincolnshire to take possession of a small living, in the gift of Sir John
Bentley; to whose notice his excellent character soon recommended him. Mr.
Weldon had a wife, four daughters, and a son with the latter of whom Sir John
was so pleased, that he proposed, if it met his father's approbation, to
educate him with his own son. The offer was too advantageous to be rejected, it
was embraced with the warmest gratitude, and Charles, a few weeks after, having
taken a tender farewell of his parents and sisters, set off with the son of his
patron for a seminary some miles distant. Young Bentley was at this time nearly
two years older than Charles, who had just entered his twelfth year; he was the
sole surviving hope of his family, and from his cradle had been spoiled by
flattery and indulgence; unaccustomed to restraint, his passions had gathered
strength, and though he had naturally good sense, and a heart humane and
affectionate, he seldom listened to the suggestion of these, but sacrificed
every worthy principle to the whim that actuated him for the moment. He was,
beside, turbulent and haughty, and a great share of obstinacy was visible in
his disposition.

"Charles, on the other hand, had an excellent heart, and an understanding
capable of the highest improvement; but he had one failing, that constantly
counteracted the good effect these would naturally have produced on his
conduct; this was an easiness of temper, carried to such excess, that his
conduct seemed rather to depend on those with whom he associated, than on the
approbation of his own heart or the principles instilled into him by his father.

He loved virtue, he detested vice, but he wanted resolution to maintain the
one and to resist the other: He was continually entering into things that his
heart, disapproved, merely because he was unable to withstand the laugh, or
resist the persuasion of his companions. This unfortunate pliability of temper,
added to his sprightly good humor, rendered Charles a favorite of young
Bentley, and they soon became inseparable companions.

At the request of young Bentley, it was agreed that Charles should spend the
vacation with him: at the close of the year, therefore, the young people set
out together for Sir John's house in London.

Edward, for that was young Bentley's name, was received with the greatest joy
and affection by his parents, who flattered themselves, he was greatly
improved; nor did they forget Charles, whose heart beat with gratitude and
pleasure at the kind reception he experienced from his patron and Lady Bentley.
The holidays seemed to communicate equal joy both to him and his friend, and
for a week nothing but pleasure was thought on. Young Bentley had his little
parties at home and abroad; and Charles, unaccustomed to the gaity that
surrounded him, thought all happiness and enchantment. Ten days elapsed in this
manner, when one morning, as he was entering a toy-shop to execute his
commission his friend Edward had given him, his eyes glanced upon features
which seemed familiar to him. Curiosity induced him to turn off the step, and
follow the person who had thus transiently attracted his observation. It was a
young woman, clean but meanly clothed, supported upon crutches; in her
countenance disease and want were strongly pictured. Charles overtook her in an
instant, and, as with difficulty she dragged her weight along, wholly absorbed
in her own misery, looked steadfastly upon her face. One while he thought
himself mistaken; another that it was impossible for two faces so strongly to
resemble each other; at length resolved to satisfy his doubts: "Catharine!"
said he, in a tone of enquiry. The young woman looked up, and turning her
hollow eyes upon Charles, in her turn, looked steadfastly on him, and exclaimed
at last: Gracious me! do I see Master Charles Weldon!

"Ah, Catharine!" said Charles, kindly ^^^ing her by the hand, "I little
thought to have seen you reduced to this miserable state!"

"You see, my good young master," said the poor woman, "what sickness and
poverty can bring one to. Thank heaven I have little to reproach myself with. I
am still honest, and as long as I was able, was glad to work: but it has
pleased God, for some wise end, to afflict me, and I submit with patience."

"But where do you live Catharine?" said Charles. "Are you in place? Have you
been long a cripple?"

"You know, master Charles," said Catharine, "that I left my master's and came
up to town, thinking to better myself; but I repented it since. I soon got into
place, indeed, and was liked very well by my master and mistress; but when I
was seized with this rheumatism, and could no longer do their business, it was
not to be expected they would keep me: So I took my lodging down the street,
you see yonder, where, by degrees, I parted with all my clothes to support
myself. My mistress was, indeed, very kind, and gave me money at different
times; but, as I was not able to work, it was soon gone. I have not a great
stomach, master Charles, but indeed I have many times known a want of the
little I could have eaten."

"Poor soul!" said Charles, his eyes filling with tears, "Why did you not let
my father know of your distress? But is there no hope of your ever being
restored to the use of your limbs?"

"None, sir," returned Catharine, "unless I could go to Bath: the charitable
doctors who give me advice, say, that is the only thing that can restore me:
but it is not for such a poor miserable creature, as I am, to think of so long
a journey. Where should I find money to bear the expense!"

"How I wish," said Charles, "that it were in my power to assist you! How much
money, do you think, would take you to Bath?"

"Ah! sir," said Catharine, "I am so helpless I could not attempt so long a
journey with less than a guinea and a half: for nobody you know, master
Charles, in a strange place, would take me in, without I could first pay down
the money for a lodging."

"And do you think," said Charles, "that a guinea and a half would do,
Catharine?"

"Yes, sir," replied Catharine, "I could make that do very well. You must know,
master Charles, there is a poor widow who lodges upon the same floor that I do:
she has been very kind to me in my distress. God knows I must have starved if
it had not been for her. She is now going to live with her daughter, who keeps
a shop at Bath. To be sure I was very selfish; but indeed, master Charles, it
almost broke my heart when I heard I was to lose her. It then came into my
head, that if I could but raise a little money to bear the expense of the
journey, I might go with her, and stand a chance of recovering the use of my
poor limbs: and in case I was not so happy, I considered that, let the worst
come to the worst, I was a: likely to get a little needle work there as here.
This made me very anxious to go; and, at last I took heart, and determined to
ask my good mistress once more to stand my friend: But what do you think, sir,
when I went to the house, I found the whole family in grief and confusion: My
poor mistress, two days ago, suddenly dropped down dead. My last resource,
therefore, has failed, and I am sensible that it is my duty to submit patiently
to the will of my Creator."

"But your friend is not gone!" said Charles, eagerly.

"She sets out in the wagon tomorrow night," returned the poor woman with a
sigh.

The expressive eyes of Charles sparkled on this intelligence: "How happy am
I," said he, "that I met you, and that it is in my power to assist you! Set
your heart at rest, my good Catharine, you shall go with your friend -- I have
a guinea and a half -- How rejoiced I am that I saved it!" Saying this, he put
his hand to his pocket; but recollecting himself, "I have unluckily," he added,
"changed my waistcoat this morning and have not the money about me. I will step
home for it now; or, if it will make no difference, bring it to you in the
course of a few hours."

"Oh! my dear young master," said Catherine, "you are too good. -- But your
papa and mamma, will they give their consent?" --

"My father and mother," interrupted Charles, "are not in town; if they were, I
know they would assist you more than I can. -- As to the money I speak of it is
my own, and I may do as I like with it. I saved it to spend in presents for my
sisters, when I returned into the country; but I know they will be better
pleased to hear you have it, than with any presents I could take them."

"And will you, indeed, be so generous?" said the poor woman, whose cheek was
flushed with hope, "will you be so generous to a poor creature, who can make no
return?"

"Say no more, my good Catharine," said Charles, "I am sure the pleasure I
shall have in assisting you, will be greater than that you can conceive from
the trifle it is in my power to appropriate to your use. Tell me your
direction, and depend upon seeing me in a few hours."

"Ah! sir," said Catharine, "God who has sent you to my relief, will not suffer
your goodness to go unrewarded." Then having pointed out to him the house where
she lived, she added, a thousand blessings go with you; and Charles having bid
her farewell, was returning to the toy-shop, when stepping back a few paces,
"you appear to walk in great pain, Catharine," said he, "let me guide you over
this crossway; rest upon my arm -- there, do not hurry yourself."

"Oh! how good you are, master Charles," said Catharine, -- "there are few
young gentlemen like you."

"Nay," said Charles, "there is surely nothing singular in being commonly
humane, and wishing to take care of one who has often guided and taken care of
me." -- Then having conducted her to the end of the street where she lived, he
added, "good bye, Catharine, depend upon seeing me before night."

Charles now, in reality, repaired to the toy-shop, where having executed his
friend's commission, he returned home.

"Charles, my boy," said Edward, upon his entrance, "I have just hit on an
excellent scheme!"

"Have you," replied Charles, who was always happy when his friend was pleased:
"what is it?"

"Why," said Edward, "you know my father and mother went out early this
morning: they are sent for to a friend who is sick, ten or fifteen miles off;
so we may be sure they will not return till late in the evening."

"And what then?"

"It has just come into my head, Charles, that we may have a nice canter."

"A canter;"

"Yes," returned the young gentleman, Lightfoot, my papa's hunter, is in the
stable: I can ride him, and you can have the little black poney. Nothing could
have happened more lucky; there is a review at Blackheath; it will be a nice
ride: and" --

"But have you asked leave, Edward?" interrupted Charles.

"That would have been to no purpose," returned the young gentleman; "you know
my mother would have been frightened out of her wits at the thought of my
mounting Lightfoot."

"Then how can you think of such a thing," said Charles; "besides, I now
recollect hearing Sir John and my lady both desire you would stay at home to be
ready for Mr. Mason, the miniature painter, who, you know, is this afternoon to
take your picture. I am sure they would be extremely displeased were you to be
out of the way."

"There now," said Edward, "I knew you would raise some objection: I never set
on foot any thing that you do not oppose."

"You do me great injustice, Edward," returned Charles; "you know I am never so
happy as when I can oblige you; but I love you too well, not to tell you when I
see you do wrong; and, indeed Edward, you are much to blame to think of going
out after the strict charge Sir John and my lady gave you to the contrary; and
to take Lightfoot will make it ten times worse. You say your mother would be
frightened out of her wits were she to know you mounted him -- What do you
think she will say, when she hears of your disobedience?"

"She will know nothing of the matter," said Edward, "we shall be home long
enough before she, or my father, or even the painter comes, and I warrant I
will stop George's mouth: he will go with us, and will not blab for his own
sake."

"You have very indulgent parents, Edward," said Charles, "and there is
something very mean in betraying their confidence; and then to draw the servant
in" --

"I think," returned Edward, somewhat piqued at his friend's freedom, "that I
know my duty as well as yourself. Was it any thing of consequence, I should be
as scrupulous, for I think I love my father as well as you do yours."

"I do not dispute that," said Charles; "nor mean, my dear Edward, to offend
you; but merely to prevail upon you to give up this foolish scheme. There will
probably be another review before the holidays are over, and then, I dare say,
your father will not have any objection to take you to it; but were you now to
go, your pleasure would be interrupted by the recollection that you are doing
wrong, and the fear of being found out. You may meet somebody you know; or
twenty things that you do not think of may happen to discover it to Sir John."

"What a coward you are, Charles," returned Edward; "you have no spirit, you
are such a chicken-hearted fellow" --

"I have spirit enough, Edward, when I know my cause is good" --

"Well," interrupted the young gentleman, "I am sure this is not a bad cause:
as I told you before, if it was matter of consequence, I should be more
scrupulous; but what harm can there be in taking Lightfoot for a few hours? You
know I have rode Mr. Shepherd's black Caesar before now, and I am sure he had
spirit enough."

"You are deceiving your parents, Edward," returned Charles, "and you must
allow there is harm in that; but it does not signify arguing, if you are bent
upon going, I cannot prevent you; but I assure you I shall, on no account
whatever, think of going with you."

"Nay, now, my dear Charles," said Edward, "I do not often ask a favor of you
-- Do oblige me this once, I will never again, I promise, desire you to do a
thing without my father's knowledge."

"This is always the way," returned Charles; "you know it hurts me to refuse
any request you make, and you take advantage of my weakness. You have drawn me
into many things against my inclination, but I am determined not to be
prevailed upon in this: it is such a wicked thing to deceive your parents, and
to draw the servants in to tell lies -- I am surprised you can think of it."

"There will be no occasion," returned Edward," to tell any lies; we shall be
back long enough before either father or mother returns. Now, Charles, I have
done many things to oblige you; do not deny me such a trifle: There will be no
other review before we go to school, and I have set my heart upon seeing one."

"Say no more, my dear Edward, you know it distresses me to disoblige you; but
indeed I cannot countenance you in such a bad action: Do, let me entreat you,
think no more of this wicked scheme."

"Look you, Charles," said Edward, "all you can say will be to no purpose: I am
determined to see the review, whether you go or not; so it will make no
difference in that respect, only I shall in future know how far I ought to rely
on your friendship: As long as you can keep your neck out of the noose, you do
not care what becomes of me."

This last observation piqued the pride, and wounded the friendship of our
hero, who began to utter his refusals with less confidence. Edward perceived
it, and continued to solicit, till Charles, notwithstanding all he had said,
was weak enough to be overcome, and actually consented to accompany him.

George, the stable-boy, was prevailed upon, with a bribe of half a crown, to
attend them, and to keep the secret, and our two young gentlemen, the one on
Lightfoot, and the other on the black poney, set forward on their

IMPRUDENT EXPEDITION.
Edward, who, no more than his friend, had, been much accustomed to ride on
horseback, though extremely elated with his station, found some difficulty in
keeping it; Lightfoot being a very spirited horse, and not much accustomed to
the tight rein; however, by the directions of George, he managed to keep his
seat, and arrived in high spirits at Blackheath. But here a disappointment a
waited them; the review they understood was deferred, owing to the
indisposition of some of the Royal Family, who were to be present. Edward was
much disconcerted; as also was his companion, who, notwithstanding the uneasy
sensations he felt from acting so contrary to his principles, would not have
been displeased, as he had gone thus far, to behold an exhibition entirely new
to him; but they were fain to submit.

"Well," said Edward, having commented on their ill luck, "we will not come
thus far for nothing: George, do you think you can find a house were we may
have some refreshment?"

"Yes, Sir," replied George; "there is one just across the heath, beyond that
cluster of trees, where any thing may be had, if you have money."

"Yes, yes," said Edward, "I will find money." Saying this, he gave Lightfoot a
touch with the whip, and away they all went. "Well," said Edward, recovering
his spirits, which the disappointment had somewhat damped, "this is delightful!
I am glad we came; it is worth something to ride Lightfoot! Charles could not
forbear thinking the pleasure was purchased very dearly, and was just going to
reply, when Edward exclaimed, upon seeing two youths advance, "I do think here
is Master Jones, the son of my fathers tenants! How do you do, my dear
William," said he, finding he was not mistaken, "what can have brought you
here?"

Master Jones enquired respectfully after Sir John and Lady Bentley, and
replied, that he was at school at Lewisham.

"But it is holiday time," said Edward.

"My father," returned Master Jones, "lives so far off, that I have holidays
only once a year."

"Well," said Edward, "I am delighted to have met you. We came to see the
review, but finding it is put off, are going to take some refreshment. You and
this young gentleman shall go with us -- I insist upon ^t."

"We are much obliged to you, Master Bentley," returned the young gentleman,
"but we cannot stay without our Master's knowledge; we came out merely for a
walk."

"My servant," said Edward, "shall go, and tell where you are; and then, I dare
say, he will not be angry."

The young gentlman readily, upon these conditions, consented, and George was
dispatched to Lewisham, while our party, highly pleased with their rencounter,
proceeded across the heath. Edward, who now felt himself of great consequence,
alighted at the inn, and giving his horse to the care of the hostler, entered
with an air of importance, ordered a fire to be lighted in the best room, and
something to be dressed as expeditiously as possible for dinner. These orders
were presently executed, and the young gentlemen, mutually pleased with each
other, set down to a couple of fine fowls and custards. The cloth being
removed, Charles took an opportunity of reminding his friend, that it would be
prudent to think of returning; but Edward declared, he was determined to make
out the day, for he knew his father and mother would not return till late in
the evening, and as to the painter he might go to Guinea.

Charles was going to expostulate, but Edward, turning to his new companions,
"What say you, my boys," said he, "to a game at cards?"

All, but Charles, seemed highly to approve the motion; but he, sensible of the
imprudence, once more drew his friend aside to expostulate; Indeed, Edward,
said he, you had better not set down to cards, you know, how time passes, we
had better go home: For my part, I have had no peace since I have been out, and
I am sure, I shall have none till I get home.

"You are a cowardly fellow," said Edward, "I tell you, there is plenty of
time, we shall be home long enough before my father and mother."

Saying this he broke from Charles, and calling for cards, began to settle the
preliminaries of the game.

"For my part," said Charles, "I would prefer to set by, and look on; you know,
Edward, I am not very partial to cards, and you are going to play higher than I
can afford."

"What a stingy fellow you are, Charles," said Edward, "to be afraid of loosing
your money."

"I am not stingy," returned Charles, "but I should be sorry to loose more
money than I could pay."

"O, never fear," replied Edward, "I will help you out; but I know you will
win."

"I neither wish to win nor lose," said Charles; "but, unable to withstand the
half smile of ridicule, which he observed on the faces of his companions, he
sat down with the rest, though it was to stake part of the money he had
appropriated to the necessities of poor Catherine. At first he won, but, as is
generally the case, his fortune, at length, took a turn, and he not only lost
all he had gained, but a considerable part of the money he had promised to poor
Catherine: this thought made him desperate; ^in proportion as he lost, his
eagerness to continue the game increased: his life or death seemed attached to
every card: he no longer watched the sun, nor perceived that it declined fast
toward the west: regardless of the consequences, he thought only of recovering
the money he had lost, and which he considered the property of another."

Master Jones and his friend, however, seeing the evening come on apace, at
length, took their leave; declaring they dared not stay any longer, and Edward
himself thought it necessary to call for the bill: contrary (...) to his
expectation, it amounted to more than his pocket could discharge. In this
dilemma, he applied to his friend Charles, who, with a pang not to be
expressed, but certainly not more severe than his imprudence deserved,
disbursed the last remaining seven shillings of the guinea and a half he had so
faithfully promised, before night, to carry to poor Catherine! As for Edward,
as long as he had it, it signified nothing to him where it came from, he paid
the reckoning, and mounting his horse thought only of getting home as fast as
possible. Charles, also, once more ascended the black poney, and with a heavy
heart followed his friend. Though inexcusably imprudent, he had not an
unfeeling heart; the thought, therefore, of disappointing the poor creature, to
whom he had given hopes, and who looked up to him as her only resource, filled
his mind with unspeakable anguish, and he continued his way, absorbed in the
most gloomy reflections, till roused by his companion, who suddenly checked his
horse, and exclaimed, "O heaven, Charles! what will become of me? I have lost
my father's diamond ring!"

This was like a thunder bolt to Charles; he was willing to hope, he had not
heard right; till his friend added, "fly George, fly, see if it be not left at
the inn."

George needed not this command to be repeated, he spurred his horse, and was
out of sight in an instant.

"Feel in your waistcoat pocket," said Charles, "perhaps it may luckily have
fallen from your finger there."

"No," returned Edward, "it is certainly lost, unless you have picked it up."

"I!" said Charles, "I never saw it but upon your hand at dinner, and I thought
more than once to ask, whether Sir John or my lady, had given it you."

"No," said Edward, "I saw it just before we set out lie upon my mother's
dressing table, and it unluckily came into my head that I would put it on."

"How could you be so imprudent!" said Charles.

"Indeed," returned Edward, "I cannot tell what possessed me, nothing could
ever be so unlucky, I never in my life before thought of such a thing -- Dear,
what a time George stays! one might have been twice there and back before now
-- let us go and meet him -- O here he is."

By this time George was come up, and his sorrowful countenance bore sufficient
testimony to the ill success of his embassy: the ring was not to be found.

The reader may easily form an idea of the distress of the whole party upon
this confirmation of their misfortune: Edward, who, on every occasion, was
accustomed to follow the bent of his passions, was quite frantic, and declared
that he dared not see his father without the ring, which he knew he
particularly valued, on account of its once belonging to his grandmother.
Charles' feelings were not less acute, though unwilling to add to the distress
of his friend, he confined them within his own breast: George, too, was not the
least affected upon this occasion; sensible that the blame would fall heavy
upon him for taking the horses out without Sir John's orders, he was equally
alarmed at an event that threatened a discovery, and ventured to reprove his
young master: "La! sir," said he, "how could you think of taking my master's
ring! what shall we do -- I am sure I shall lose my place; and that will be
very hard for my good nature -- if it had not been for the ring," --

"Well," interrupted the young gentleman impatiently, "talking is of no use
now; the ring is lost, and there is an end of it."

A silence of some minutes now ensued, and our travelers, with a slow pace
proceeded homeward; each reflecting with bitterness on the share he had in the
adventure. As for Charles, this unexpected misfortune had entirely banished all
thoughts of poor Catherine, and the resentment of his patron was the only
object that now presented itself to his mind. Edward, in the mean while, who
had been revolving all the circumstances in his mind, at length broke silence:
"I tell you what, Charles," said he, "the best way to get out of the scrape,
will be to deny that we know any thing of the ring."

"To deny it!" said Charles, with astonishment; "to deny it! can you think of
such a thing?"

"Why," returned Edward, "I am sure, if my father knows the ring is lost, I
shall never hear the last of it."

"But what can be so bad," said Charles, "as the standing in such a falsehood?
you said, when you prevailed on me to come with you on this imprudent
excursion, that, were it a matter of consequence, you would be more scrupulous
in deceiving your father."

"Well, well," interrupted Edward, impatiently, "to be sure I did so; but I did
not then think I should ever have been in such a scrape; desperate diseases
require desperate remedies -- and, my father's knowing who lost the ring, will
not bring it back."

"Very true, master Edward," said George, "and if he knows about the ring, all
must come out, and I shall lose my place, which will be very hard for my
goodnature; for you know, Master Edward, I did it all purely to oblige you."

"You are very wrong George," said Charles, "to encourage Master Edward, in any
thing so wicked; we have certainly all done wrong, but let us not attempt to
excuse one fault by committing a greater: The only thing we can do now, is to
confess all, and, submit to what punishment Sir John thinks fit to inflict. I
assure you, Edward, I will not assent to such a falsehood."

"Well," returned Edward, if it will give you pleasure to make a breach between
my father and I -- if -- "

"I am certain," interrupted Charles, "that you have a father too indulgent to
be in any fear of that sort; though he will, no doubt, be displeased, he will
not be irreconcilable."

"I know my father," returned the young gentleman, "better than you do; he is
very indulgent, when I do nothing to displease him, but if I do, he is very
passionate, and I know will punish me with the greatest severity; but I see it
will give you pleasure to make me miserable."

"Nay," said Charles, "you know I incur the same danger as you: the resentment
of Sir John will fall equally upon me; but I assure you, I would rather suffer
every thing than tell such an unpardonable falsehood.

"As you are so very conscientious, Charles," said Edward, "there is one way
that you may oblige me, and yet avoid telling a lie: you know the ring was
never off my finger, so you may safely say, when my father asks you, that you
never touched it, that will not be a lie."

"My dear Edward," said Charles "an equivocation is the very first species of
lying; because, as my father has often told me, it is covering falsehood with
the most plausible resemblance of truth: however, we may flatter ourselves, he
used to say, that we do not incur the displeasure of God by this sort of play
upon words; the lie is already formed in our heart, upon which he looks, and
equivocation is only a more specious method of imposing it upon others. It is
true, according to the literal sense of the word, I might safely tell Sir John,
I did not touch the ring; but if by this, I mean to convey that I know nothing
of it, I am equally a liar, as if the same idea were conveyed in different
words."

"Well," said Edward, impatiently, "it is not a time to preach now: I see you
are determined not to oblige me -- but I know the reason: you said no longer
ago than yesterday, that you had forgot all past differences, but I see now
that you are glad to retaliate, and would rather get into a scrape yourself,
than not be revenged."

This was a turn Charles little expected; he indeed repeatedly suffered from
the turbulent and arbitrary temper of Edward; but such was the affection he
entertained for him, that a kind look, a word of concession, was ever
sufficient to efface from his mind every trace of resentment or displeasure; he
was therefore, inexpressibly hurt that his friend should suspect that he was
actuated by so mean a motive, and endeavored to convince him that he acted
from a disinterested regard to truth, which he had been taught to venerate as
the basis of every virtue. Edward, who was not without art, perceiving his
suspicions touched him to the quick, pretended to be but the more confirmed in
them, thinking it would be the most effectual means to attain his ends.

"Yes, yes," said he, "I see you are glad to retaliate; I relied too much on
your professions: It is true, I may not be able to boast of a temper, at all
times, so equal as yours; but Charles could not seriously have asked a favor,
that I could have refused: my temper may be warm, perhaps violent, but I am
equally warm in my attachments, I cannot be a cool friend."

"I am not a cool friend," replied Charles, with tears in his eyes, "I am sure,
Edward, you never found me so: ^y my friendship in any thing that will render
you a real service, and you shall see with what readiness I will prove it, at
all hazards."

"O!" said Edward, with a sneer, "it is easy to be bold when danger is afar
off: I ask the proof now, and from henceforth shall know the value I ought to
set on your friendship."

"What would you have me do?" said Charles, who was weak enough to be moved by
his friend's pretended suspicions; "'it is true, it is not the first time, I have
been so weak as to be prevailed upon by your entreaties, to enter into things
that I knew were wrong; but this is of such serious consequence, indeed, I
cannot; beside, when we have told this falsehood, do you suppose your father
will believe we know nothing of the ring?"

"O!" said Edward, "'it is a hundred to one if he misses it; he does not wear it
once in seven years: he will think it has been swept away, or that he has lost
it off his finger; for I heard him say, the last time he wore it, it was so
large he could scarcely keep it on; but, however, if your friendship will not
suffer you to make so small a sacrifice -- I can only say, it cannot be very
strong, and that I shall, in future, know how to value it."

Charles really entertained the sincerest friendship for the son of his patron;
this was piqued by the pretended suspicions of the artful boy; who, observing
that he began to utter his refusals with a less resolute tone of voice, took
advantage of his weakness, and by dints of entreaties and tears, though he did
not convince his reason, worked so far upon his affection, that, in the end,
his integrity gave way, and I am ashamed to say, he consented to connive at the
falsehood his friend had projected.

The reader will judge, that the uneasiness of the whole party increased the
nearer they drew toward home; the day had for some time closed, and they were
alarmed, lest Sir John and his lady were returned: However, their fears on this
head, were soon dissipated, neither of them were at home, and Edward learnt,
with great satisfaction, that the portrait painter had sent to put off his
attendance till the next day: he exulted extremely upon the occasion, and so
far recovered his spirits, as to banter Charles a great deal upon his
cowardice. "I told you," said he, "we should come off safe; I dare say, my
father will not be at home this hour." He was however deceived in his
calculation; for Sir John and Lady Bentley arrived within a quarter of an hour:
Charles, who was but young in the art of deceiving, sickened at the thought of
meeting Sir John; he, therefore, took the first opportunity of sneaking to his
chamber, where, with grief and vexation, he called to mind all the

EVENTS OF THE DAY.
From the excursion to Blackheath, he reflected on the loss of the ring, and
not with less bitterness on the loss of his money: The situation of poor
Catherine returned fresh to his remembrance: "I am the only friend," said he,
"to whom she can look in her distress: I have pledged myself to assist her, she
is, without doubt, now listening anxiously to every foot, in hopes it is mine.
What a disappointment, when she finds I do not come! What a wretch I must
appear! Who knows, perhaps she may think I meant to make a jest of her
misfortunes. I have heard of such things; and all this is through my own folly;
what occasion had I to play at cards with money that was not my own? for it
certainly was not, when I had promised it to another person. What can I do? if
I could but borrow the money! but it is vain to think of that, for I know
Edward has not a sixpence left. What can I do? -- If I could but think of a way
to raise it! if I had but any thing I could sell for the money -- my watch --
but that will be missed directly; and besides, where can I sell it -- I suppose
it is not customary for shopkeepers to purchase such things -- and yet poor
Catherine, one would almost hazard every thing to keep one's word. -- It is so
shameful, so inhuman, to give her hopes, and then disappoint them. But what
will Sir John say, when he sees me without the watch he so generously gave me?
What can I say? he will certainly miss it -- suppose I have sent it to be
mended -- but that will be a falsehood -- I am already involved in one -- I am
grown very wicked! what would my father say! And yet poor Catherine! The watch,
I am sure, cost four guineas -- if I could sell it for two, I could keep my
word, and at least ease my mind of one burden -- I am almost tempted; the
holidays are now nearly half elapsed: Sir John may not miss the watch -- and
then, I will save every farthing I get for pocket money, to replace it before
the next -- I will get up early tomorrow morning, and go into the first
watch-makers I come to; if I can sell it, I will -- I must not think of the
consequences -- I am very miserable, one would hardly think how many faults one
false step leads one to commit! There is Sir John's ring -- but I will think no
more, I have promised Edward, and I must keep my word." Saying this, Charles
undressed himself, and went to bed, but the anxiety of his mind kept him long
awake, the night was far spent before he fell asleep. Morning renewed his
cares, and he began afresh to revolve the project of the watch -- sometimes he
thought of going to Catherine and acknowledging the truth, but this measure his
pride forbad -- then he thought of writing, but that was as irksome -- in
short, reflection only involved him in fresh perplexity; the watch was at last
doomed, and Charles repaired with it to a shop; where, with a confusion that
did not escape observation, he offered to sell it. The watchmaker, having
looked attentively on Charles, and then on the watch, asked what he demanded."
Charles replied, "that he thought it worth three guineas; but was very glad to
take two and half, which the shopkeeper offered. With this, he hastened to
Catherine; and putting a guinea and a half into her hand, "There, Catherine,"
said he, "is the money; I am sorry I disappointed you last night, but I could
not help it."

Poor Catherine's eyes sparkled with joy; she called him her preserver -- her
good angel, and could not find words to express her gratitude.

"I hope," said Charles, "that it will answer the purpose you wish, and that it
may please God to restore you." Then, disengaging himself as soon as possible,
he proceeded homeward. The happiness he had communicated to poor Catherine
conveyed such joy to his heart, that for a time he seemed to forget the means
he had taken to procure it, as also the disagreeable business in which he was
involved with Edward. He sauntered on, enjoying the coolness of the morning,
till, in passing a shop-window, his eye was insensibly, attracted by the
prettiest etui he had ever seen.

"What a Charming present," said Charles, "that would be for my mother! if I
had but money to purchase it: but there is the vexation," continued he, with a
sigh, "without money, one cannot come at any thing." Then Charles began to
think of the guinea that remained of the sum he had gained for the watch: This
he had firmly resolved to hoard carefully, and to add to it every penny he
could get, till he had accumulated sufficient to replace Sir John's present;
nevertheless he was tempted to go in and ask the price of the etui. It was
eight shillings: Charles thought it too much; but when the shopkeeper assured
him it was a very great bargain, and showed him others of higher price, which
in his opinion, were not half so pretty, his resolution was shaken; he began to
reflect that it would not be so very difficult to raise the value of the watch
he wished to replace, even though he should purchase the etui: "In a few days,"
said he, "I shall visit my god-mother, who never fails to make me a present;
and Sir John, I am certain, will not suffer me to leave town without marks of
his generosity; then there will be my weekly allowance, I can save that." In
short, he purchased the etui: and, while the shopkeeper was counting out the
change, his eye was unfortunately caught by a pretty little netting-case. His
sister Mary, who was a great netter, immediately was present to his mind; it
was impossible to resist -- the netting-case was purchased; but Charles would
not have left the shop quite pennyless, had not a small pocket-case of
instruments for drawing attracted his notice. This could not be resisted; it
was so small -- so neat -- so compact -- the very thing he wanted. The watch
was for the moment forgotten, and the case of Instruments added to the etui and
netting-case.

"Though Sir John Bentley possessed one of the most humane and benevolent
hearts in the world, his manners were austere and reserved. It so happened,
that on this morning, upon the appearance of Charles at the breakfest-table, he
addressed him with a greater share of complacency than usual: such is the
effect of guilt, that Charles could not summon resolution to look his
benefactor in the face: Every kind word Sir John addressed to him, seemed a
reproach to his dissimulation; every time he met his eye, it seemed to
penetrate into his inmost thoughts. As for Edward, who was more hardened in
vice, his feelings were less susceptible: he exulted mightily in the thought of
having so cleverly tricked his father: the ring indeed sometimes gave him
uneasiness, but then it was for fear the truth, by some unlucky accident,
should be discovered; as long as it remained concealed, he was happy; if it
were possible for guilt to be so.

"Things remained in this state three days, during which time Charles heartily
repented his imprudence, but foolishly thought that he had gone too far to
retract: his conscience continually upbraided him with his conduct, and he was
in hourly fear of being interrogated concerning the ring or the watch, which
last he resolved to say he had sent to the watchmakers to be set to rights. The
dreadful moment, however, at length arrived; Charles was sent for into the
study of Sir John, which he entered with a beating heart, though with more
confidence than usual. Let the reader judge how every fear was awakened, when
he perceived there the very man to whom he had sold the watch, and the
identical watch in the hand of Sir John! The person to whom Charles had sold
the watch was the very same of whom Sir John had purchased it. The watchmaker
knew the watch, and observing the confusion of Charles, whom he had frequently
observed pass his shop, in company with Master Bentley, when he offered it to
sale, suspected something more was in the matter than Sir John knew: unwilling
however, to proceed on uncertain grounds, he resolved to pay the price, and
keep the watch till he had an audience with Sir John, who, the reader will
conclude, was much surprised at the unfolding

THE AFFAIR.
The first question that naturally arose from the subject, when the culprit
appeared before him, was the cause of a proceeding so extraordinary? Charles
could make no reply, but shame and confusion were strongly pictured in his
countenance. Sir John repeated the question, but Charles was still silent; the
fear of bringing Catherine into trouble for having received such a sum, without
the knowledge of his parents or patron, made him prefer any subterfuge to that
noble candor, which alone could have excused his errors. Being no longer able
to oppose silence to the repeated interrogations of Sir John, he replied, "That
he met a poor woman in the street, and that he assisted her with part of the
money." "But," replied Sir John, "three days ago you had, to my knowledge, a
guinea and a half in your purse; you could therefore have followed the dictates
of humanity without making such a sacrifice: What did you do with that money?"
This was a question Charles did not expect, and was unprepared to answer,
without divulging the expedition to Blackheath. He hesitated -- he did not know
what to say -- and at last produced the etui, the case of instruments, and the
netting-box.

"Sir John was extremely displeased: "I fear, Charles," said he, "I have been
deceived in the opinion I first formed of you; for a boy who can, unpressed by
necessity, proceed to such lengths, must necessarily be unbounded in his
desires, and consequently unworthy my countenance and protection."

"Charles threw himself at the feet of his benefactor, and entreated to be
forgiven; but Sir John, highly incensed at his conduct left the room with
indignation, and from that time behaved toward Charles with a coolness and
reserve that wounded him in the tenderest part; as it convinced him he ^ad
entirely lost the confidence and good opinion of his patron. Nor was this all;
the story of the watch was circulated throughout the whole house and indeed the
whole neighborhood: every one censured him; every one exclaimed against his
ingratitude, in setting so little value upon a watch the gift of his
benefactor; and suspected, as he had discovered such a want of principle in one
instance, that other faults of the same nature remained behind, yet
undiscovered. Charles now sincerely repented his folly, but was still weak
enough to believe he had gone too far to retract. All he had courage to do was,
repeatedly, to solicit Edward to acknowledge the expedition to Blackheath, and
its consequences respecting the ring; but Edward, encouraged by its remaining
so long concealed, was deaf to his entreaties; and to confess the truth,
Charles himself was so much intimidated by the disgrace he had already
suffered, that he had not courage to press his friend home to a confession,
which he was sensible must involve him in further. A fortnight elapsed before
the dreadful time of enquiry arrived; but the ring was then missed, the
servants interrogated, and every corner of the house searched.

"The question of enquiry was then put to our two young gentlemen: Edward, I am
shocked to relate, declared with a firm voice and unblushing cheek, that he had
not seen the ring, nor knew even the place where it was kept. Charles did the
same; but that agitation, which will ever be the attendant on guilt, where the
heart is not wholly corrupt, joined to the ill opinion entertained of him on
account of his late disgrace, conspired to fix the suspicions on him. Sir John,
judging from the affair of the watch, was persuaded he had either lost or sold
the ring; and having in vain endeavored to draw from him the truth, confined
him to his chamber, with orders that he should have no other food than bread
and water, till he confessed. Edward's fears were, upon this occasion,
seriously awakened: he doubted not but Charles would now be brought to discover
the whole, and repented having so strenuously denied the truth, which he was
sensible would incense his father more than the fault itself: he resolved,
therefore, to exert the influence he well knew he possessed over his friend, to
prevent the consequences he so much dreaded. With this view, he went with him;
and having condoled with him on his disgrace, assured him, if he could have
thought his father would have laid the blame on him, he would have confessed
the truth at first; but he added, that now he had so strenuously denied it, he
could not recant without incensing his father to the last degree. By these
artful apologies, he so far won upon Charles, that he was weak enough to
persist in the falsehood, the discovery of which, Edward artfully hinted, would
not only ruin him, and more deeply involved himself, but also ruin poor George,
who had acted entirely from his persuasions.

"In the mean while, Sir John having advertised the ring in the public papers,
without success, fully convinced that Charles was no stranger to its fate,
resolved, since neither the punishment he had inflicted, nor the entreaties he
used, would induce him to discover the truth, to try what effect the disgrace
of being dismissed his family would produce; a measure which he adopted the
more readily, as the conduct of Charles, in this instance and in that of the
watch, made him appear by no means a proper companion for his son.

"Words cannot describe the feelings of Charles upon this occasion: the thought
of being thus shamefully dismissed the family of his patron, operated so
forcibly on his mind, that he resolved, let the consequence be what it would,
to confess every thing. -- He was making his way with this design to Sir John's
study, when, in crossing the hall, he unfortunately encountered Edward, who
stopped to enquire whither he was going in such haste? Charles, with a
sorrowful countenance, owned, that, unable longer to support the displeasure of
Sir John, he was actually going to confess the truth.

Edward, much alarmed at this intelligence, by his tears and entreaties, once
more shook the resolution of his friend. He entreated him, for his sake, to be
silent, at least for the present; assuring him that he would endeavor to
soften the resentment of his father, and at proper opportunity acknowledge the
truth. Charles was, as usual, softened -- he wept -- he expostulated -- but in
the end yielded; and, with an aching heart, set out a few hours after in the
stage coach for the peaceful mansion of his father, at which he arrived toward
evening the ensuing day.

How delicious would have been the embraces of his honored parents -- his
beloved sisters -- had Charles been conscious of deserving them! but guilt can
poison the purest pleasures.

Mr. and Mrs. Weldon, alarmed at the settled gloom that appeared on the
countenance of their son, enquired earnestly after the health and welfare of
the family he had left, and were much relieved when assured they were well: but
when Charles, bursting into tears, delivered a letter, with which he was
charged by Sir John, a thousand alarming conjectures were in an instant formed.
Among them, the misconduct of their beloved Charles never once occurred. Let
the reader then judge what they felt, when informed it had been such, that, for
the sake of his son's morals, Sir John could no longer think of continuing
Charles at the same school; though, to soften the stroke, he added, he would
defray the expense of his education, at any other his father should choose.

Mr. Weldon read this letter, with an emotion better felt than described. Had
Charles lost the countenance of his patron upon any other occasion, he could
have borne it with fortitude; but this baffled all his philosophy: he threw
himself into a chair, pale and trembling, and bending an eye of enquiry on his
son, seemed to demand the explanation he wished, yet dreaded to hear.

Charles, when he left London, had by the advice of Edward, formed the
resolution of keeping the truth concealed from his family; but though he had
withstood the reproaches of his conscience, and the disgrace of being dismissed
the family of his patron, he could not the distress of his father: he threw
himself in an agony at his feet, embraced his knees, and as distinctly as the
agitation of his mind would permit, gave a detail of the unfortunate expedition
to Blackheath, with all its attendant consequences.

"Unhappy boy," said Mr. Weldon, having listened attentively to the detail,
"the flexibility of your temper has undone you. Into what a labyrinth of
disgrace has it not plunged you!"

"O father," said Charles, in a voice interrupted by tears, "I see my errors;
but it is now too late: I have lost the favor of Sir John -- disgraced myself
in the opinion of every one -- made you miserable --." He could say no more.

"Mr. Weldon perceived, and even pitied his anguish;" you have indeed, my
child, said he, "done all this: it remains only now, to make all the reparation
in your power: Sir John must immediately be acquainted with the truth; the

POST SETS OUT!"
"O father," interrupted Charles, "indeed I cannot acquaint Sir John -- I have
promised Edward -- I have suffered a great deal for his sake -- and after all,
to betray him! indeed, father, I cannot."

"Truth," said Mr. Weldon, "is the only reparation you can now make, and you
owe it equally to Sir John -- your friend Edward -- and yourself." --

"Edward," said Charles, "would, I am sure, never forgive me! he had denied it
so often to Sir John -- it would so expose him."

"If Edward," said Mr. Weldon, "succeeds in concealing this fault, it will
encourage him to commit greater; from one step he will proceed to another till,
in the end, he will not stop at the worst of crimes. Would you, Charles, to
save your friend a momentary chagrine, expose him to a serious evil?"

"I am sure, father," replied Charles, "if Edward has suffered the tenth part
of what I have, he will never more be guilty of a falsehood -- if I had but
confessed the truth before I left London, I should have been happy -- but now,
indeed, father, I cannot; it will appear just as if I had left Edward to bear
the whole weight of Sir John's displeasure, and had neither courage nor
friendship to share it with him."

"I will not say," replied Mr. Weldon, "that it may not have that appearance,
but the mortification you may suffer, on this, and every other point, is a just
punishment for the obstinacy with which you persisted in the falsehood you had
once told."

"But Father," --

"Say no more," said Mr. Weldon, "in a tone of authority, that had never yet
failed to excite the obedience of his son, no time is now to be lost; the post
sets out at nine, and truth, as I observed before, is the only atonement you
can now make for your past errors."

"Charles ventured not to reply; he followed his father in silence to the
study, where, being furnished with pen and ink, he sat down, and with a
trembling hand, wrote a circumstantial account of the train of events, that had
brought on his present disgrace; generously taking every opportunity in the
course of the narrative to palliate (though frequently at his own expense,) the
faults of his friend. This letter was immediately dispatched to Sir John, and
Charles, though in other respects, eased of a burden that had long oppressed
his heart, was for a week, on Edward's account, a prey to very painful
sensations; at length, one day, as he stood at a window that looked into the
road, he saw a coach, which he knew to be that of his benefactor, draw up to
the gate. Sir John alighted, followed by his son, and was received by Mr.
Weldon and his Lady, with every mark of respect and friendship, though the
recollection of their son's disgrace, gave a check to that cheerfulness, which
his presence usually inspired."

Charles, alone, wanted courage to advance, till Sir John, compassionating his
embarrassment and confusion, encouraged him by a smile of invitation.

"Ah, Sir," said he, "with diffidence, approaching, my faults are too great to
be forgiven: I am unworthy -- " and here he stopped.

"As I am willing," said Sir John, "to believe your repentance sincere, and
although late, you have made for your errors, all the atonement in your power,
by an avowal of the truth, I will not add to those stings, guilt will ever
bring along with it, by reproaches: I will do more, I will endeavor to forget
the past, so saying, he held out his hand to him, in token of reconciliation."

"Ah, Sir," said Charles, "I am unworthy this goodness: I am entirely unworthy
of it: it wounds me more than the severest reproaches. Then turning to his
friend, Edward, said he, we have both done wrong -- can you forgive me?"

"Dear Charles," said Edward, "embracing him, I ought to ask forgiveness of you,
I have led you into many errors: had it not been for me." --

"Do not excuse yourself," interrupted Charles, "I only am to blame; had I,
with a proper firmness, resisted your solicitations, reflection would have
recalled you to your duty."

"You have been both to blame," said Sir John, "but I hope your past errors
will teach you the advantage, that truth will ever have over falsehood: had you
stopped at the first fault, how much disgrace would you not have spared to
yourselves, and anguish of mind to your friends!"

Sir John, then to the joy of all present, acquainted them, that he had
recovered the diamond ring, which Edward had lost, you have, without doubt,
said he, addressing Mr. and Mrs. Weldon, heard that I advertised it in the
public papers: I gained no information concerni^g it, till about half an hour
after the departure of Charles, when it was brought to me by a woman, who said,
she had found it about a fortnight before, upon Blackheath. As one of my
principal motives for wishing to recover the ring, was, that I might be enabled
to discover, by whom it had been detained, I made some enquiries, which led the
woman to inform me, that having shown the ring to a man who kept a public house
upon Blackheath, he said, he doubted not, but it was the same, two young
gentlemen who spent the day at his house, a few days before, had lost; and that
he was persuaded it would be advertised."

"Resolved," continued Sir John, "to pursue my enquiry further, I set out for
Blackheath, and by the description, the publican, at my request, gave of the
lads, to whom he alluded, I was persuaded, I had been imposed on by my son. I
reproached him on my return, with his duplicity, and drew from him a full
confession of his guilt."

"You, my dear Weldon, who are yourself a father, can alone judge, what I felt,
when my suspicions were changed into certainty."

"Edward beheld the anguish of my mind; my sufferings, I believe touched him;
his tears flowed abundantly -- I hope they were sincere -- but can we trust
him, who has once deceived us?"

"O Father," said Edward, bursting into tears, "my punishment is great; but is
just; while I possessed your confidence, I abused it -- I esteemed it lightly;
now, only that I have forever lost, am I sensible of its true value."

"Your conduct, Edward," said Sir John, "has given to mine, and to your
mother's heart, a wound, which time only, and your reformation can heal; in the
hope of that, as much as possible, will we obliterate the remembrance of the
past; but neither must yourself or Charles, expect to possess the confidence we
formerly reposed in you, till a long course of rectitude has proved the
sincerity of your repentance."

"Charles and his friend, sighed deeply; never were they before so completely
humbled; Charles especially, whose feelings were more acute than those of
Edward, when he reflected, how low his conduct had sunk him in his own and in
the opinion of all around him, was inexpressibly hurt, and in bitterness
lamented his folly: "O my dear Edward," said he, grasping the hand of his
friend, "let us, from henceforth, invariably adhere to truth; let us be
cautious of deviating in the smallest degree from the path of duty, out of
which, I am convinced, there is no happiness."

"Ah! Charles," replied Edward, "had I listened to your advice, we had both
been happy."

Sir John concluded, from the contrition that appeared in the countenance and
expressions of his son and Charles, that his discourse had made the impression
he wished, entered upon other topics, and having chatted half an hour with Mr.
and Mrs. Weldon, took his leave, telling Charles, at parting, to hold himself
in readiness, as Edward would set off for school, in a few days. This hint,
which signified to Charles, that he was to accompany his friend, joined to the
thought, that a possibility still remained, of regaining one day, however
distant, the confidence he had lost, inspired him with a joy, to which, since
the moment of his transgression, he had been a stranger. Two days after, his
heart dilated with another pleasure: Catherine, in a letter, she addressed to
Mrs. Weldon, setting forth her obligations to Charles, acquainted her, that she
doubted not being able in a few weeks, to engage in a service.

This letter, communicated joy to every part of this worthy family, and to none
more than to Charles, who, with pleasure, saw a parcel made up from the
wardrobe of his mother and sisters, dispatched to her, with a little purse, to
which, each of the young ladies contributed to their utmost. --

The day in which the young gentlemen were to depart for school, at length,
arrived; when Mr. Weldon addressed his son to this effect: -- "My dear Charles,
do not forget that your errors have originated from the instabiliy of your
mind: had you possesed that noble firmness, which, if not the basis, is the
safe guard of every virtue, you would not, against your reason, and better
judgment, have consented to accompany your friend, upon an expedition, which
your heart disapproved: this exposed you to a temptation, which was the
consequence of another error; I mean, that of risquing, against your principle
and inclination, money, which being promised to another, was no longer your
own; to repair this error, another was committed; your watch, the gift of your
benefactor, was sold, and to conceal this a lie followed."

"But what shall I say to that weakness which led you, in complaisance to
another, to impose on your benefactor, by a lie, which though ever of a heinous
nature, was, on this occasion, aggravated: could you assure yourself, that the
suspicion of theft, might not fall upon an innocent person? Fortunately you was
yourself, the victim of your weakness and duplicity: the mind of Sir John,
already prepared by the mystery that hung over the watch, readily entertained
suspicions to your disadvantage: he believed you no stranger to the fate of his
ring, and was persuaded, if you had not taken it with an intent to wrong him,
you had inadvertently lost it, and were too obstinate to own your fault. Your
faultering voice, and guilty countenance, confirmed these suspicions, and you
were justly punished, by a disgraceful dismission from the family.

"A gentle and complying temper, my dear Charles, is amiable, but unless
accompanied by discretion, will lead you, as you have proved by experience,
into the most dangerous errors: to yield, where we know it is our duty to
resist, is a weakness for which it is difficult to form an excuse: first, be
assured that your principles are just, and then let it be your glory, to act in
conformity to them -- but, I see the coach at the door; adieu my dear boy; let
my words sink deep into your heart, and remember, that the affection you
entertain for a father, whose happiness or misery, it is in your power, in a
great measure, to constitute, can only be proved by the rectitude of your
future conduct."

Charles had scarcely time to assure his father, he would treasure his
admonitions, before he was summoned to attend his friend Edward; he, therefore,
in haste, affectionately embraced his father -- his mother -- his sisters --
and departed for school. There, by the rectitude of his conduct, he, in process
of time, (for bad impressions are not easily effaced) obliterated, the
remembrance of his former errors, regained the confidence of his patron, and
became the pride of his parents, and the delight of all around him.

Edward, too, pursuing the example of his friend, became eminent for his
virtues, and found by experience that the highest happiness is that of
performing our duty.

"I shall make no comment," said Mrs. Mills, "on my story, as I am persuaded if
it has failed to amuse, you have too much good sense not to profit by the moral
it contains."

The young people assured her they were (...) edified and a^^^sed; and William
(...) lesson to him, when he returned to school, not to suffer himself, as he
had often, to be laughed or persuaded out of what he knew to be right. Tea was
then brought in, and the young people, after their evening walk, retired to
rest, perfectly satisfied with the amusements of the day.

The next morning Mrs. Mills, having some business at a neighboring farm,
proposed a ride thither to her young friends, who every hour more charmed with
the society of their aunt, expressed the pleasure they felt in the thought of
attending her. The carriage was therefore ordered, and soon after breakfast
they set out for the farm; the mistress of it, who was the picture of neatness
and good humor, with a train of little ones, came out to meet them. Mrs.
Mills, with her usual affability, enquired after the rest of her family, and
said, she had brought her nephew and niece to see the farm.

Mrs. Goodman replied, she should be happy to show the young lady and gentleman
the little that was worth their notice; but added, that she hoped Mrs. Mills
would permit them first to take such refreshments as the house afforded. Saying
this, she conducted her guests into a neat parlour, and set before them some
home-baked bread, curds and cream, and cowslip wine, a repast which was
extremely agreeable to the young people whose appetites were sharpende by the
ride.

Afterward the good woman, at the request of Mrs. Mills, conducted them into
an adjacent meadow, to view a brood of beautiful ducklings. Clara admired the
delicacy of their plumage, and as she saw the little creatures enjoying the
coolness of the running stream that watered the meadow, expressed her surprise
that their feathers did not appear wet.

"Providence," said Mrs. Mills, who embraced every opportunity of informing the
minds of her young friends, "has furnished birds, and especially waterfowl, at
the extremity of the body, with a little bag, containing a kind of oil with
which they anoint and dress their feathers, to render them impenetrable to the
wet. You must certainly have observed how frequently all kinds of birds draw
the bill over their feathers: it is a very necessary employment; for, without
it, their flight would be obstructed by every shower of rain, as the feathers,
by imbibing the water, would become heavy and un^it for use. It is observed,
that poultry which live under a covert are provided with a less quantity of
this oil than those birds which inhabit the open air."

From hence Mrs. Goodman took them to her granary -- her dairy, which was
neatness itself -- her hay ricks -- nor did she forget her pig-sties, which
were perfectly clean, and littered with straw, wishing her guests to observe a
fine (...) sow, which lay basking in one of them, with a litter of pigs,
scarcely a fortnight old. -- She next conducted them to the poultry-yard,
where, taking a basket, she scattered some corn, and called the feathered tribe
about her. At the well known sound, they came trooping from all parts; but
scarcely were arrived, when a candidate of a different kind put them to flight.
This was no other than a tortoise-shell cat, which made way for a fine white
hen that followed her. The hen without ceremony, fell upon the grain, and puss,
like a faithful guard, stood by to keep off intruders, till she had eaten her
fill: after which, she walked off in triumph with her charge, leaving the coast
clear to the rest of the poultry, which immediately succeeded. This scene was
not more new to the young people than to Mrs. Mills: that an animal should
discover such affectionate solicitude for a creature it was its nature to
destroy, surprised her, and her surprise was not lessened by the account the
farmer's wife gave of this

EXTRAORDINARY CIRCUMSTANCE The above is really a ^act.
.
"You must know, madam, said she, "that our p^ss has been the nurse to that
fowl: When first hatched, it was a poor little puny thing; I took it from the
hen, seeing it did not thrive, wrapped it in a bit of flannel, and kept it in a
basket by the fire, hoping the warmth would revive it. I took a world of
trouble, but it grew worse and worse, till at last its poor eyes closed, and I
really thought it dying. I was so vexed to think of the time I had spent upon
it to no purpose, that I threw it in a pet to the cat, who lay asleep by the
fire, in my husband's arm-chair. I thought, to be sure, she would have ^^apt it
up, and put it out of its pain in a moment; but, would you believe it, madam?
she lifted up her leg, and received it as though it had been her kitten! Yes,
madam, she purred over it, and the little creature seemed to revive by her
warmth. I was so surprised that I could scarcely believe my eyes; and my
husband was not less so, when he came home from work, to see the cat nursing
the chicken, with as much tenderness as if it had been her kitten. You may be
sure, Madam, we did not take it from her except to feed it, which was a part of
the business puss could not perform. In short, she seemed to receive it in the
place of a litter of kittens we had just before drowned, and grew fonder and
fonder of it every day. You see, madam, the chicken is now grown to a fine hen;
puss still continues her attention; you have just seen a proof of it. She no
sooner hears me call the poultry than she appears with her charge, which
attends to her voice as it would have done to the cluck of the hen, and will
not suffer one of the other fowls to touch a grain till her favorite hen is
satisfied, when she walks off, and leaves the rest in quiet possession of what
remains."

"Well," said William, "I am amazed, I could not have believed a cat capable of
such tenderness; I always thought them malicious and revengeful, and at school
have played them many a wicked prank."

"I have been told," said Mrs. Mills, "that cats furnish much cruel diversion
to schoolboys; but surely not to my William! he cannot tyrannize over a poor
animal, merely because it has no power to defend itself, and delight in
tortures at which every heart, not callous to the feelings of humanity, must
recoil."

"I cannot deny," replied William, "that I have joined our boys in many wicked
prank they played, especially in hunting of cats; but indeed, aunt, I never
reflected on what the poor animal must have suffered. I thought only of my own
amusement; but, I assure you, I will never again join in such cruel sports."

"Remember, my dear boy," said Mrs. Mills, "that God commands you to be
merciful to all creatures, and that he hears the cry of the weakest animal:
then reflect on the happiness which results from communicating pleasure, and I
am sure you will not seek it in inflicting pain."

"But, aunt, I always thought cats very malicious and revengeful."

"Cats, William, like other animals, are sensible of good or bad treatment: if
you use them well, they will carress you; if ill they will endeavor to
retaliate."

"But they are certainly less faithful than dogs," replied William.

"Perhaps so," said Mrs. Mils; "but there are many instances which prove them
not deficient in point of attachment. I remember, a few years past, reading in
a magazine of a cat, which discovered so strong an attachment to a dog, that,
seeing him one day engaged with another, before her master's house, she flew
into the street, and fell upon the antagonist of her favorite with such fury,
that she forced him, in the sight of numerous spectators, to quit the field."

"But is there not," said Clara, "in general, an antipathy between cats and
dogs?"

"It appears so," replied Mrs. Mills: "but when they are bred together, it
seems to subside, and I have known many instances in which it has given place
to cordial affection, which makes me the more readily give credit to the
anecdote I have just related: but, without forcing nature from her general
course, repeated instances prove that cats are capable of very strong
attachments."

"Well, aunt," said William, "though you are such an advocate for cats, you
must allow, after all, they are of little use."

"I could tell you," said Mrs. Mills, "of cats that were taught to hunt and
destroy serpents; for so it is recorded they did in the island of Cyprus; but
the services they render us in England are, in my opinion, sufficient to exalt
their fame, and entitle them to kind treatment."

"I do not," said William, "recollect any service they can do us, except the
killing of a few rats and mice."

"Do you not think that," said Mrs. Mills, "an essential service?"

"Truly, aunt," returned William, "if cats can render us no greater service, I
do not think we have so much reason to value them. What harm can such
insignificant creatures as rats and mice do us? To be sure, they make free with
a little of our bacon and cheese -- but that is not worth the thinking of."

"Very true, William," said Clara.

"These insignificant creatures," said Mrs. Mills, "as William calls them, may
be more formidable than either of you imagine: I once knew a gentleman whose
house, in Scotland, was undermined, and the foundaons shakened by rats."

"Indeed!"

"Yes; they came from a ship that touched at the port, and infested his house
in such numbers, that the foundation of it actually gave way: and the damage he
sustained from them, in this and other instances, was estimated at upwards of
five hundred pounds."

"Was it possible!" said Clara.

"There was scarcely a chest or a drawer in his house into which they did not
penetrate: The linen was gnawed in holes -- and as to the provisions! sugar --
meat -- bread -- rice -- corn -- nothing escaped the ravages of those merciless
spoilers."

"Well," said William, "could one have thought it possible for so small an
animal as a rat to do such mischief!"

"So it was," said Mrs. Mills, "and you cannot but confess the utility of the
cat, which preserves us from creatures which are capable of being so
formidable."

"I see," said William, "that Mrs. Puss is of more consequence than I thought
her."

"But, as I have acquainted you," said Mrs. Mills, "with the plunders of these
mischievous animals, I must not forget the ingenuity with which some of them
were executed: What do you think of their conveying eggs, unbroken, from the
top of the house, which was three stories high, to the bottom?"

"Why, I think," said William, it was, absolutely impossible."

"I should myself," said Mrs. Mills, "have thought so, had I not been told it
was a fact by my friend and his lady, upon whose veracity I can place the
firmest reliance."

"Well," said William, "I think it could be effected by nothing less than a
miracle: do tell us, aunt, how it was."

"I am myself," said Mrs. Mills, "ignorant how the business was performed; I
can only tell you that, at the season of the year when eggs are plenty, my
friend, as it is customary in the north, greased a number and put them into a
large stone jar, to preserve them sweet for use. A short time after, she was
much surprised to find the eggs, which were in the jars at the top of the
house, considerably diminished, though none had been used in the family. It was
thought impossible this could be the work of the rats; but so it proved: On a
strict examination, the eggs, in part whole and part shells, with the contents
sucked out, were found in burrows made by the rats, at the bottom of the house."

"How could they possibly carry them, without breaking?" said Clara.

"That is a mystery* my dear," said Mrs. Mills, "I cannot explain; I can only
assure you, upon authority I cannot doubt, that the fact really happened."

"They must have rolled them down the stairs," said William.

"Nay," said Mrs. Mills, "in that case, they must inevitably have broken."

"Oh," said William, "I have just thought how they managed the business; I
remember hearing my papa tell of a friend of his, who once watched and saw one
of these ingenious gentlemen hop down stairs, upon his hind legs, with some
corn which he had taken from the garret, in his fore paws; I dare say, the rats
you have been telling us about conveyed the eggs down in the same manner."

"It is very likely they might, said Mrs. Mills; "but I think it equally
probable that the business was effected by combination; that is to say, that
more than one was concerned in it, though I cannot say whether performed
exactly in the same manner AEsop represents in his fable of the two rats and
the egg. Since I have known the anecdote of my friend's eggs, it has more than
once occurred to me that it is possible the fable in AEsop might be founded
upon a fact; I am persuaded, that all animals have a language or sign, by which
they understand each other, as far as it is necessary for their mutual benefit
and preservation; and that rats have a language, and act in concert is evident
from a curious anecdote that I will relate to you:"

"A gentleman having a present of some Florence oil, the flasks were set in his
cellar, in the bottom of a shallow box: the oil not being wanted for use, they
remained there some time; when the owner, going one day by chance into the
cellar, was surprised to find the wicker work, by which the flasks were
stopped, gnawed from the greater part, and, upon examination, the oil sunk
about two, or two inches and a half from the neck of each-flask. It soon
occurred to him that it must be the work of some kind of vermin; and being a
man of a speculative turn, he resolved to satisfy the curiosity raised in his
mind; he accordingly found means to watch, and actually detected three rats in
the very act: but how do you think they managed to get at the oil? You know the
neck of the flask was long and narrow; it required therefore some contrivance.

"Indeed it did," said William; "but I dare say the rats found out a better
expedient for themselves than I should for them."

"I told you three rats were engaged in the business," resumed Mrs. Mills: "one
of these stood upon the edge of the box, while another, mounting his back,
dipped his tail in the (...) flask, and presented it to a (...) places, (...)
was his turn to act the porter, and he took his station at the bottom. In this
manner the three rats alternately relieved each other, and banquetted upon the
oil, till they had sunk it beyond the length of their tails."

"Well," said Clara, "if they were equal to such a contrivance, they could beat
no loss to convey the eggs to their burrows without breaking: one may believe
them capable of any thing: but is the story really to be relied on?"

"I had it from the mouth of the gentleman who was himself witness of the fact
he was a man of character and speculation, upon whose veracity I can rely."

"Well," said William, "it is a most extraordinary story, but nothing can
surprise me after puss and her chicken, that exceeds every thing I ever heard
of."

"It was a singular circumstance," said the Lady, "but I think Mrs. Goodman
told us puss had just lost a litter of kittens?"

"Yes, madam," said the farmer's wife, who had been listening with silent
attention to the discourse, "she had kittened a few days before, and my husband
had drowned the litter."

"This circumstance, then," said Mrs. Mills, "accounts in some measure, for an
attachment that appears otherwise, so foreign to the nature of the animal; we
can find no difficulty in supposing, that the instinct, which nature had
awakened in the cat, for the preservation of her own young, deprived of its
object, was easily transferred to the chicken, upon which it acted with equal
force."

"Well," said William, "whatever might be the cause, it was a droll sight, to
see puss march up the yard, with her feathered attendant; I declare it was
worth riding five miles to see her."

Mrs. Mills, now thinking it time to take leave of their obliging hostess,
wished her a good day, and stepped into the carriage, followed by her young
friends, who returned extremely pleased with the farm, and its inhabitants, in
whose countenance Clara thought she observed more happiness and content than
she had ever experienced in the possession of those gaities she had, three days
ago, considered as the chief blessings of life.

After dinner, Mrs. Mills asked the young people, in what manner they would
amuse themselves, till the time of their evening walk? "Here is the piano
forte; you are fond of music, my dear Clara -- or shall we retire to the study?
I have some books that I think will entertain you; or suppose we amuse
ourselves in

THE PICTURE GALLERY.
This last proposal was preferred; for though Clara and William had every day
passed through the gallery, to and from their chamber, they had not stopped to
observe one of the pictures; the entertainment, therefore, was new to them; and
Mrs. Mills, with her usual kindness, rendered it doubly agreeable, by pointing
out to them the beauties of each picture, and the different subject it
represented: "That engaging figure," said she, pointing to a piece on her right
hand, "represents Mahommed Akbar, Emperor of Indostan; he is de^c^^^ed by the
historians of his country as possessed of many virtues; but no part of his
conduct shines more amiable than that which respects his Minister Byram, whom
you see represented in the same piece. Byram, to whom Akbar's father, in a
great measure, owed his restoration to the throne, from which he was banished
by the treachery of his brothers, was appointed Regent of the kingdom during
the minority of Akbar, who, though only fourteen when he as^^^ded the throne,
gave an early Instance of his wisdom and confidence in this great man; for,
finding his kingdom involved in dangerous wars, he called Byram ^o him, and
addressing him by the title of Noble Baba, that is to say, father; he told him,
"that he reposed his whole trust in his prudence and good conduct, and desired
he would take whatever measures he thought necessary for the defense and
support of his kingdom; at the same time assuring him, in the most solemn
manner, that he would give no attention to any malicious insinuations that
might by his enemies be suggested to his prejudice."

"This prudent conduct of the young Emperor could not but engage the affections
of Byram, by whose exertion he was soon settled peaceably upon the throne, and
his kingdom in a flourishing state: but, though Byram was an able statesman,
and an experienced warrior, his disposition was suspicious and vindictive; he
grew jealous of the favors bestowed by his master upon others, and began to
suspect his affection estranged from him. On the other hand, the king incensed
at some acts of severity and injustice which he had committed, by power of his
authority, though he still personally respected Byram, thought it time to take
the government of the kingdom upon himself, which he accordingly did, and the
minister was dismissed from the regency.

"This so offended Byram, that he fell from his allegiance, and assembled
troops, with an intent of conquering some part of his master's dominions, and
founding an independent kingdom. The Emperor, hearing his design, sent troops
to quell his rebellion, and a battle ensued, in which Byram was defeated,
several of his principal officers killed, and himself obliged to take refuge in
the mountains. Where, reduced, at length, to the greatest distress, he sent one
of his slaves to represent his unfortunate situation, and to implore the king's
mercy.

"It was, on this occasion, that the character of this young monarch shone
forth in its full luster; he instantly dispatched one of his omrahs, to invite
Byram to court; and that no mark of favor and distinction might be wanting, a
considerable number of chiefs, were, by the orders of Akbar, sent to meet him
half way, and conduct him into his presence. When Byram appeared before the
Emperor, he hung his turban round his neck, in token of humiliation, and threw
himself in tears at the foot of the throne. Akbar instantly raised, and placed
him in his former station, at the head of the omrahs; then, as a mark of
peculiar honor, presenting him with a splendid dress: "If the Lord Byram,"
said the generous young King, "loves a military life, he shall have the
government of Calpe and Chinderi, in which he may exercise his martial genius;
if he choose rather to remain at court, our favor shall not be wanting to the
great benefactor of our family; but should devotion engage the soul of Byram,
to perform a pilgrimage to Mecca, he shall be escorted in a manner suitable to
his dignity."

Byram replied, "The royal confidence and friendship for me must now be
diminished; nay, lost: why then should I remain in the presence? the clemency
of the king is enough for me, and his forgiveness of my late errors, a
sufficient reward for my former services. Let then the unfortunate Byram turn
his face from this world to another, and pursue his pilgrimage to Mecca."

"The Emperor assented to his request, and ordered for him a proper retinue,
with 50,000 rupees a year, to support his dignity. Byram, however, did not
enjoy the bounty of his master, being basely assassinated, in his way to Mecca,
by one, whose father he had killed in battle."

Clara and William thanked their aunt for the information she had given them,
and expressed their admiration of a conduct so noble as that of the young
Emperor.

"I am particularly pleased," said Mrs. Mills, "with that part of his speech,
which reverts to the services of his minister: "our favor," says Akbar, "shall
not be wanting to the great benefactor of (...) family," with the view, no
doubt, of softening the poignancy of Byram's remorse, and lessening the weight
of the obligations, with which he was overwhelming him."

"It was indeed very generous," said William, "how Byram's heart must have
smote him, when he found how generously he was treated."

'Undoubtedly,' said Mrs. Mills, "it did; we may he assured that the kindness
of his master wounded him, more than the severest reproaches. The painter has
in the piece before us described, in lively colors, the shame, grief, and
admiration, that Byram must have felt when introduced into the presence of his
master, and treated with so much generosity: on the other hand, what generous
pity and benignity beams in the countenance of the young Prince, as he raises
the prostrate minister, to place him in his former dignity! -- but as we are
speaking of the heroes of Indostan, observe the picture which is opposite: the
principal figure is Durgetti, queen of Gurat, celebrated for her beauty and
accomplishments."

"She is clothed in armor," observed Clara, "and mounted on an elephant."

"Yes," said Mrs. Mills, "it was formerly the custom of many eastern nations to
use elephants in war; but since muskets and cannon have been introduced, the
elephants, being frightened at the noise of artillery, prove more dangerous
than useful in battle.

"The extent of Durgetti's dominions were very small, not exceeding three
hundred miles in length, and one in breadth* but so flourishing was this small
tract, that it comprehended more than seventy thousand towns and villages, well
inhabited. Asaph, the governor of a neighboring province, allured by the
riches of this kingdom, marched against it; the queen, with a force equally
powerful, prepared to oppose him. She led her troops to action, as you see the
artist has represented in the picture, clad in armor, and mounted on a castle
upon an elephant, with a bow and quiver lying at her side, and a lance in her
hand. Her troops were in general unacquainted with war, but the noble example
of their queen, and the love of their native independence, inspired every
breast with courage, and they repulsed the enemy with such fury, that they left
six hundred horsemen dead on the field, and pursued the rest, with great
slaughter. Night coming on, the queen halted with her army, and gave orders to
her troops that they might be ready to make an attack upon the enemy before
they recovered from their consternation: but her ministers and chiefs opposed
this measure, and insisted upon returning to the field of battle, to bury their
friends. The queen reluctantly consented; and after the bodies of the slain,
according to the custom of the country, were burnt, again solicited her chiefs
to accompany her to storm the Mogul camps. They, however, wanting her courage
and prudence, vainly imagined the enemy would of their own accord evacuate the
country, and refused to second the daring enterprise of their queen. Fatally
were they deceived. Asaph attacked them the next morning with his heavy
artillery, which he had the day before left behind on account of the badness of
the roads. The queen advanced, upon the approach of Asaph, to a narrow pass, to
oppose him; but he quickly opened himself a way into the plain beyond, where
the army was drawn up in order for battle. Prince Biar, the queen's son, a
youth of great hopes, exhibited prodigies of valor; till being wounded, he
became faint with the loss of blood, when his mother, who was mounted on an
elephant, in the front of the battle, seeing him ready to fall from his horse,
called to some of her people to bear him from the field. The loss of the
prince, and of many who quitted the field with him, struck such a panic into
the rest, that the unfortunate queen was le^t only with three hundred men in
the field. She, however, no ways affected with her desperate situation, stood
her ground, with her former fortitude, till she received an arrow in the eye;
in endeavoring to extricate it, part of the steel broke short, and remained
behind. In the mean time, another arrow passed through her neck, which she also
drew out; but nature sinking under the pain, she fainted: recovering, however,
by degrees, a brave officer of her household, who drove her elephant, singly
repulsed numbers of the enemy, wherever he turned the outrageous animal. He
begged permission, as the day was now irretrievable, to carry the queen from
the field, a proposal which she rejected with disdain."

"It is true," said she, "we are overcome in war, but shall we ever be
vanquished in honor? shall we, for the sake of lingering out an ignominious
life, lose the reputation and virtue we have been so solicitous to acquire? no;
let your gratitude repay the service for which I raised you, and which I now
require at your hands: haste, let your dagger save me from the crime of putting
a period to my own existence."

"Adhar, which was the name of the officer, burst into tears, and begged, as
the elephant was swift of foot, that he might be permitted to carry her from
the field, to place of safety. In the mean time, the queen finding the enemy
crowded fast around her, suddenly leaned forward, and seizing Adhar's daggar,
plunged it into her bosom, and expired.

"The death of the queen rendered Asaph's victory complete. A few days after he
beseiged the fortress of Jora, where all the treasures of this noble family had
been preserved for ten generations. The young prince, a little recovered from
his wounds, bravely exerted himself, and lost his life in defense of his
kingdom, and independence."

"What a pity it is aunt," said William, "that there is such a thing as war!
how many it makes miserable."

"In the present state of the world," replied Mrs. Mills, "war is sometimes
necessary; but then it must be undertaken in defense of our lives, property, or
independence. We turn with disgust and horror from the individual, who, hurried
on by an insatiable thirst of wealth or power calmly sacrifices thousands of
his species in pursuit of idols, which, when attained, can afford an imperfect,
and at best, but a transient, satisfaction. We feel very differently interested
for Asaph, whose sole object was the riches of the kingdom of Gurat, and for
the queen who so nobly exerted herself to preserve the independance and
property of the subjects."

"Certainly we do, aunt," said Clara; "but pray, do you think the queen of
Gurat did right to kill herself?"

"Can you ask such a question?" replied Mrs. Mills; "it is an action which
sullies all her former glories: The ignorance of the age and country in which
she lived, where it was held more noble to die than to suffer the ignominy of
captivity, might palliate the crime, did it not appear from the words she
addressed to her faithful officer, 'Haste, let your dagger save me from the
crime of putting an end to my existence,' that she did not err entirely through
ignorence. Let us, therefore, in paying a just tribute of praise to her courage
and magnanimity, draw a veil over her errors." Saying this Mrs. Mills called
the attention of her young friends to other pictures, and having entertained
them with several pleasing anecdotes that occurred to her, upon reviewing each:
"That," said she, "is Alfred, one of our British kings, disguised as a harper
in the Danish camp."

Clara enquired the cause of his disguise?

"The Danes," replied Mrs. Mills, "had usurped his kingdom; he, therefore, used
this stratagem to inform himself of their situations and designs".

"Pray, aunt," said William, "was it not Alfred who first divided England into
counties?"

"It was," replied Mrs. Mills; "long wars had introduced such disorders into
the kingdom, that vagrants every where abounded, who, having no settled place
of abode, after committing all sorts of outrages, by shifting their quarters,
easily eluded justice. To prevent this, Alfred divided the whole Island into
counties, the counties into hundreds and the hundreds into tythings. This done,
every inhabitant was obliged to belong to some tything, otherwise he was
considered as a vagabond, and the owner of the house where he lodged, in case
of his escape, became responsible for any misdemeanour he might commit."

"It was a very wise regulation," said William; "Alfred was a great king!"

"He was not only a great king," replied Mrs. Mills, "but a good man: his
character is the most perfect handed down to us by historians; especially, if
we consider the obscure age in which he lived: he protected his country by
arms, polished it by arts, and enacted many useful laws for the happiness and
future welfare of his people. He was the fifth king of the Saxon line.

"That picture," said Mrs. Mills, pointing to one on her right hand, "is a view
of Gibralter, which you know, William, was taken from the Spaniards by the
English, in the reign of Queen Ann, and was bravely defended by General Elliot
(afterward Lord Heathfield) in the ^ast war.

"The next piece deserves your particular attention, not only from the masterly
style in which it is executed, but from the useful lesson it contains. I need
not, I dare say, tell either of you, that the principal figure represents
Richard the Second, who, by his admirable presence of mind preserved his own
and the lives of his whole reti^^^."

"I am quite unacquainted with the story," said Clara.

"Have you not read the history of England?" rejoined Mrs. Mills.

"O yes, madam."

"It is astonishing then that you should not call to mind a circumstance so
generally known, and in itself so remarkable: The reign of Richard the Second
was disturbed by many civil commotions, and among others by an insurrection of
the common people, on account of the pole-tax, headed by a blacksmith, known by
the name of Wat Tyler. This rebellion became so formidable, that it was thought
advisable to offer terms, which being repeatedly rejected by the mutineers,
the king proposed a conference with their leader, which took place accordingly
in Smithfield* but, in this interview, the insolence of Tyler, who brandished
his dagger with an air of authority, so incensed Sir Thomas Walworth, mayor of
London, that suspecting his design was to stab the king, he stunned him with a
blow of his mace, and another of the king's retinue run him through the body. The
rebels, seeing their leader fall, immediately prepared to revenge him, and bent
their bows for this purpose; when the king, though at this time not sixteen
years of age, rode up to them, and in a resolute tone of voice: 'What, my
friends,' said he, 'will you then kill your king? be not concerned for the loss
of that traitor; I myself will be your leader; Follow me, and I will grant you
all your reasonable desires.'

"The magnanimity of the young king struck the multitude with such awe, that
they changed their first purpose, and, as if mechanically led, followed him
into the fields, where they laid down their arms."

"What an astonishing instance of courage and presence of mind!" said Clara,
"How surprising, that it should not strike me, when I read the history of
England! but I suppose I was thinking of something else."

"To be thinking of one thing and doing another," observed her aunt, "is the
certain way to preclude improvement; and of all ignorance, none is so
disgraceful as that which relates to the history and geography of our own
country."

"To say the truth, aunt, "replied Clara, "I always thought history very dry
and uninteresting: When Miss Smith, therefore, who was for some time my
governess, used to oblige me to read it, I generally sat down with an ill will,
and paid very little attention: but I certainly deprived myself of great
pleasure, as well as improvement; for I am convinced, from the entertainment
you have given us, madam, this afternoon, that, had I attended to what I read,
I should neither have found history dry nor uninteresting: -- but pray, madam,
what is the subject of the opposite piece?"

"It is Regulus at the gates of Rome," replied Mrs. Mills: "you remember the
story, William?"

"Yes," replied William, "I have read it many times!"

"I am very ignorant," said Clara, with a sigh, "there has not been one, among
all the stories you, madam, have mentioned with which I am the least
acquainted."

"Since time once past, my dear, cannot be recalled, let us," said Mrs. Mills,
"think only of improving the future: William, tell your sister the story of
Regulus."

"My sister," said William, "would be more entertained to read it in Dr.
Goldsmith's Romon History: but I will relate it as well as I can:

You must know, sister, that Regulus was a great warrior: The Romans sent him
to fight against the Carthagenians; he overcame them in several battles, but
was at last defeated and taken prisoner. After a long time, the Carthagenians
wished to make peace with the Romans; so they sent Regulus with their
ambassadors to Rome, thinking, as he had been a prisoner four years, he would
persuade his countrymen to put an end to the war, that he might be set free:
but, before the Carthagenians let Regulus depart, they made him solemnly
promise, in case the Romans did not agree to a peace, that he would return, and
deliver himself up their prisoner.

"All the Romans were rejoiced when they heard that Regulus was returning to
Rome: but he, with a settled melancholy, upon his arrival, refused to enter the
gates, saying, that he was a slave to the Carthagenians, and unworthy the
honors his country would bestow on him. So he stayed without the gates; and
when the Senate assembled there (as was usual, to give audience to the
ambassadors) he made proposals for a peace, as the Carthagenians had directed
him. The Senate were very much inclined to accept them, and it remained only
for Regulus, who had great influence with his countrymen, to give his opinion;
which, to the surprise of every one, he did for a continuance of the war. The
Senate, though convinced by his arguments, could not resolve upon a measure
that must end in the ruin of a man who had acted so nobly; but Regulus, fearing
they might be biassed by any personal concern for him, relieved their
embarrassment, by breaking off the treaty, and rising to return with the
ambassadors to Carthage, which, in spite of the entreaties of the Senate and
his dearest friends, he did, though he well knew the tortures he should
undergo: but nothing would prevail upon him to break the promise he had given
to the Carthagenians, who, I am sorry to tell you, were so enraged, when they
heard from their ambassadors that Regulus, instead of hastening a peace, had
given his voice for the continuance of the war, that for three days they
tortured him in the most cruel manner, and at last left him to expire in a
barrel stuck with spikes."

"What wretches they must have been," said Clara, "to punish him for acting so
nobly!"

"Their conduct," replied Mrs. Mills, "was indeed truly despicable; but of what
enormities will not rancour and revenge render human nature capable!"

"Porsenna," said William, "behaved very differently toward Mutius, upon a
similar occasion. How generously he acted!"

"His conduct," said Mrs. Mills, "was indeed very different -- Your sister,
William, looks as if she wished to hear the anecdote. You can oblige her."

"If you please, sister," said William, "I will repeat to you an abridgement
our usher made of this story; it was one of my tasks a few weeks before the
holidays:

"When Tarquin the proud was expelled Rome, he engaged in his interest
Porsenna, one of the kings of Eturia, who laid siege to Rome, and reduced the
inhabitants to the greatest distress. Mutius, a youth of undaunted courage,
resolving to deliver his country from an enemy so oppressive, entered the camp
of Porsenna, in the habit of an Eturian peasant, resolved to assassinate the
king, or to perish in the attempt. With this resolution, he made up to the
place where Porsenna was paying his troops, with his secretary by his side; but
mistaking the latter for the king, stabbed him to the heart, and was
immediately apprehended. When brought into the royal presence, and asked by
Porsenna the cause of so heinous an action? Mutius informed him, without
reserve, of his country and design, and thrusting his hand into a (...) that
was burning upon an altar before him, held it there, and addressing Porsenna,
with a steadfast countenance: 'You see,' said he, 'how little I regard the
severest punishment you can inflict; a Roman knows not only how to act, but how
to suffer. Three hundred youths like me have conspired your destruction.'
Porsenna, possessed a mind too noble not to acknowledge merit, though found in
an enemy; struck with the courage and magnanimity of the young man, he ordered
him to be safely conducted back to Rome, and offered the besieged terms of
peace, which, being neither hard nor disgraceful, were readily accepted."

Clara thanked her brother for obliging her with the extract: and observed, in
her turn, that the conduct of Prosenna formed a striking contrast to that of
the Carthagenians: "How noble," said she, "to forgive the young man who had
attempted to kill him!"

"You see," said Mrs. Mills, "that generosity and clemency exalt a character ^s
much as injustice and cruelty deba^e it. The generosity of the Eturian king has
handed his name down to posterity with honor, while the depravity of the
Carthagenians must ever reflect an indelible stain on theirs: but, my dears, we
have already exceeded the usual hour for tea."

"For tea, madam!" exclaimed Clara, "is it six o'clock?"

"It is full half after," replied Mrs. Mills, looking at her watch.

"Well," said Clara, "I am astonished! is it possible that we have been here
three hours?"

"Time, my dear Clara," said Mrs. Mills, "seems long only to those who know not
how to improve it."

They now left the gallery, and tea immediately followed. In the course of
their evening walk, Mrs. Mills called upon several poor villagers, who, from
various causes, stood in need of her assistance, and she was much pleased to
observe, that neither Clara nor her brother were insensible to the pleasure of
conferring happiness; their purses were immediately in their hand, and they
bestowed with a kindness and modesty that very much enhanced the gift.

As they returned, Mrs. Mills told the^^ that she had an excursion in
contemplation for the next morning: "About three miles from hence," said she,
"is a very fine aviary; the gentleman to whom it belongs is now in London, but
we can see the birds, which I think will afford you entertainment."

The young people were extremely pleased, and having completed their walk,
retired to rest, fully occupied with the thought of the pleasure they were to
enjoy the next day. But a disappointment awaited them; a continued rain put a
stop to the jaunt. Clara, who, though much improved by the conversation of her
aunt, had not yet acquired philosophy to bear a disappointment without
murmuring, began to be a little out of humor: she concealed it as much as
possible from her aunt, whose good opinion she was very ambitious to attain,
but could not forbear thinking they should pass a very dull day, and, during
breakfast, was so intent upon watching the clouds, that she could scarcely
attend to any thing that passed, till Mrs. Mills, having observed how necessary
it was to accustom ourselves to bear disappointment, added, that though the
weather for the present had put a stop to their intended expedition, she
doubted not, as her young pupils seem pleased with the contemplation of nature,
that she could supply them with amusement equally agreeable. Clara and William,
who wished much to have seen the aviary, were unwilling to believe this, till
Mrs. Mills, taking them into her dressing room, opened

AN INDIAN CABINET,
The contents of which was a large collection of the most beautiful shells,
arranged in exact order, according to their several classes. This was indeed an
agreeable surprise! The young people no longer regretted the aviary, but
thought their aunt had supplied them with amusement, if not for the whole day,
at least for a considerable part of it. Mrs. Mills, as usual, heightened their
entertainment by a variety of curious particulars, which she gave them of the
little tribe that had once occupied the shells. They were particularly
attentive to the account of the purple-fish, which she told them had upon its
back a little folded tunicle or bag, containing a white liquor, which dyed wool
of a deep and unfading purple, and was supposed to be the same used by the
ancients for their purple dye; but she added, that the quantity of this liquor
in each fish was so very small, that an immense number were necessary to dye
one piece of stuff, which caused the ancients to set a very high value on their
Tyrian dye, so called, probably, from its being first discovered or used by the
people of Tire.

Clara and her brother were also much entertained with the account she gave
them of the ^^ker, (...) mother of pearl, and with her description of the
manner in which the negroes dive, to furnish us with the pearls contained in
the body and beautiful shell of the (...).

This cabinet having for some time furnished entertainment, Mrs. Mills unlocked
ed the folding door of another, which stood in a niche opposite, and contained
a miscellaneous collection of natural curiosities. Clara's eye soon fixed on an
American humming bird, which, though dried, preserved a great share of its
natural beauty. She took it from the cabinet with wonder, admired the luster of
its plumage, and above all its size, which did not greatly exceed that of a
humble be.

"Dear," said she, "what a beautiful little creature! though so small, the
feathers, wings, talons, every part of it is as perfect as those of the largest
birds: how I should like to see one alive?"

"In America," said Mrs. Mills, "humming birds of various sorts are constantly
seen fluttering about the flowers, from whence they extract the honey that
supports them. The motion of their wings is so rapid, that it produces a
humming sound, from which their name is derived."

"I thought," said William, "it was impossible they could feed upon seed and
berries, as other birds do, the beak is so small; it is not larger than a fine
needle!"

"Small as it is," rejoined Mrs. Mills, "it renders them very formidable to
larger birds, and especially to one called the goosbee, which attempts to
surprise the young humming birds in the nest, but flies off on the appearance
of the mother, who pursues the invader close, and fastening her little talons
under his wing, pierces him with her pointed beak, till she has entirely
disabled him. Here is the nest of the humming bird; have you examined it."

"Well," said William, "this is indeed a nest in miniature! and, as I live! two
little eggs, not bigger than a small pea!"

"How small," said Clara, "the pretty creatures must be when they are first
hatched!"

"They are said to be about the size of a large blue fly," replied Mrs. Mills.

"Well," said William, "it would be worth taking a voyage to America to see a
humming bird.

"And pray," rejoined his aunt, "what do you think of a trip to the coast of
Guinea, where deer are said to be found no bigger than kittens!"

"Is that true?"

"Here is the leg of one," resumed his aunt; "it is a common article in the
cabinets of the curious: nay, I have seen them made into tobacco stoppers."

"Dear," said Clara, "how small! How I should like to have a Guinea deer and an
American humming bird!"

"And so should I," said William; "but pray, madam," continued he, "what is
this? to judge from its appearance, it should seem unworthy a place among so
many rarities. -- It is so dried and shrivelled, it is impossible to say what
is the form or color."

"It is," replied Mrs. Mills, "a leaf of the Papyrus, a large plant which grows
wild in Egypt amidst the stagnate waters, after the inundations of the Nile.
The Egyptians and Romans formerly used a part of this plant for the purposes we
do paper. The intermediate part of the stalk was cut and separated into
different plates or laminae, which were laid together upon a smooth board, so
as to form sheets. They were then moistened with water, which dissolved a kind
of glue that was in the pores, which served as a cement. The sheets thus formed
were dried, pressed, and kept for use. The Romans afterward invented methods
to bring it to further perfection. They beat it with hammers, to render it thin
and less porous, polished it with ivory, and, by a sort of calendar, gave it a
shining gloss. -- It is from this plant that the paper of our day takes its
name. The Egyptians, also, used the roots for firing, and many other purposes;
built little boats of the plant itself, and formed the inner bark into sails,
mats, garments, coverlids, and cordage; they also chewed it, and swallowed the
juice as a great dainty. You see, therefore, William, that the intrinsic worth
of this plant gives it a just title to observation."

"It certainly does, aunt," said William, "I see it is not right to trust
always to appearances; but what is this (...) bless me, it is a stone tree!"

"It has that appearance," said Mrs. Mills, "it is a petrifaction. Certain
springs abound with sparry particles, which being, by time, insinuated into the
pores of the substance put into them, suppose, for example, a vegetable, as in
the instance before us, form a crust round it, which gives it, as you see, the
appearance of stone."

"I have heard," said, William, "of those petrifying waters, but always
understood they actually changed the things that were put into them to stone."

"No," said Mrs. Mills, "that is a mistake, the vegetable undergoes no
alteration; the stony particles of the spring, only, by adhering to it, in the
manner I have told you, acquires the exact form, while the vegetable it has
enclosed decays."

"These petrifying waters," said Clara, "are, I suppose, very dangerous to
drink."

"I am not," said Mrs. Mills, "sufficiently acquainted with their physical
property to tell you, whether or not they be wholesome. But as no petrifaction
can happen in a vegetable, where there is a circulation of the juices, it
follows, I apprehend, that no immediate bad effect, can occur from the drinking
such waters, the blood being in constant circulation throughout our body."

"Here is another petrifaction," said Clara, "taking up a little stony branch,
but it is different from the other."

"That," said Mrs. Mills, is coral, which is now ascertained to be a regular
vegetation, though once thought by many learned men to be nothing more than a
petrified substance. It grows with the top downwards, in little caverns, or the
jutting out of rocks, at the bottom of the sea. On the branches are small
tumors, containing a sort of milk, and pinked in the form of stars, from
whence little flowers have been observed to shoot, but they withdraw upon being
exposed any time to the air. This is the mandrepore, another stony sea plant.

"It is in the form, you see, of a little tree, the branches of which are
studded with several holes; but there are different sorts of the mandrepore."

Mrs. Mills here ceased -- and looking at her watch, rose and shut the cabinet.

The young people thanked her for their entertainment, and were retiring, when
Clara stopped to examine a fine piece of embroidery that hung over the chimney.

"That piece," said Mrs. Mills, "is the work of my God-daughter, Miss Elinor
Reeves: I am indebted to her kindness and ingenuity for most of the pieces that
furnish this room; if I am not mistaken, you are no strangers to each other."

Clara replied, "that she had several times been in company with Miss Reeves."

"Then," rejoined Mrs. Mills, "I am sure you will look with pleasure upon these
little essays of her skill; for I will venture to affirm, no one can know my
dear Elinor without loving her. Her disposition is truly amiable."

Clara made no reply; accustomed from her infancy to flattery, the praises of
another were never welcome to her ear: wishing therefore, to change the
conversation, she turned to a landscape that hung on the opposite side of the
room; and having enquired from what part of Europe the view was taken,
observed, that it was a very fine engraving."

"An engraving!" said Mrs. Mills, "upon my word, you pay Elinor a great
compliment; it is executed with the needle."

Clara was disappointed -- she was vexed she had taken notice of the piece, and
was again silent.

"I am not a judge of needle work," said William, "but I think that fruit
(pointing to a piece of embroidery that hung near) is very natural. Do not you
sister?"

"Yes," said Clara, "it is not amiss; but, in these things, the praise is
rather due to the person who designed, than the person who worked the piece.
The effect does not altogether depend upon the needle."

"Very true," said Mrs. Mills, "the needle cannot make a bad design, a perfect
picture, but it can add great beauty to a good one; and with respect to these
before us, their chief beauty is derived from the needle: observe those
cherries and that peach; how admirably the colors are softened one into
another -- with what judgment the shadows are thrown -- one could almost fancy
it possible to take them from the basket. This is reckoned one of Elinor's most
capital performance, and you must allow it excellent."

"O!" returned Clara, "I do not say, it has not merit, but your partiality,
aunt, (excuse me) makes you blind to the imperfections. -- Now I think, had
more color been thrown into the peach, the effect had been better -- and are
not the stalks of the cheries a trifle too long?"

Mrs. Mills beheld with concern the envy that gave rise to these observations.
"Well, my dear," said she, "if you will not allow your friend merit, as an
artist, you must confess that her disposition is truly amiable."

"Why," said Clara, "she may be very amiable, but I own, I do not think her
quite so faultless as you seem to describe." -- "But, Madam," (continued she,
wishing to put an end to a conversation from which she experienced so little
pleasure,) "is it not time to dress for dinner?"

"I will detain you no longer, my dear," said Mrs. Mills, especially as I have
a little search to make for a manuscript, which it has just now occurred to me,
will furnish entertainment for the afternoon."

"How good you are, Madam," said Clara, "you are always thinking of us. Then
observing that William had left the room, she set off in pursuit of him to
communicate the agreeable news."

William was rejoiced, and after dinner, when the cloth was removed, listened,
as did also his sister, with the utmost attention, to

THE EXPLANATION, A TALE.
"Charlotte Graves, and Maria Wilmot, were nearly of the same age: Their
parents were intimate friends, and near neighbors, which caused the children
to be much together, strengthened the affection, which, in the tender years of
infancy existed between them; but this friendly intercourse was early
i^terrupted; the declining state of Mrs. Wilmot's health rendering it necessary
she should breathe her native air. Mr. Wilmot purchased an estate in Wales, to
which he shortly retired with his family. Maria was at this time eight years of
age, and her friend Charlotte just twelve months younger. The little girls shed
many tears at parting, promised to love each other always, and as they had both
been for sometime in joining-hand, to write to each other often.

"The year after the retirement of Mr. Wilmot, Charlotte had the misfortune to
lose her mother, who died suddenly, and a person from France was engaged to
superintend her education. Had this lady been worthy the trust reposed in her,
all had been well; but, unfortunately, no one more improper could possibly have
been chosen. Her manners were indeed polished; her address was insinuating, but
she was wholly without principle or sentiment; beauty, splender and riches,
were in her estimation, the chief blessings of life, and if she had a view
beyond her own interest, which she endeavored to promote, by flattering her
follies, it was to polish the manners of her pupil, rather then to cultivate
her understanding or to form her heart.

"At the early age of nine, with a mind little turned to reflection, it is not
surprising that Charlotte should imbibe the follies and prejudices of her
governante; she readily believed, that providence, in giving her beauty, had
bestowed on her its choicest blessing; and while she spared no attention to
embellish her person, suffered her understanding to lie wholly neglected. Vain,
frivolous, fond of admiration, her follies, by indulgence, swelled into vices;
among which, envy and detraction were not the least conspicuous; her heart
sickened at perfection in another, and her tongue was ever ready to depreciate
the excellence she could not attain.

"Maria, in the mean while, was rapidly improving in every amiable virtue and
elegant accomplishment. She, too, had lost her mother, but the kind attention
of her father, who dedicated the chief of his time to her improvement, and the
tenderness of a maiden aunt, who resided with them, softened the severity of
her misfortune: she already perfectly understood three languages, was mistress
of geography, played incomparaply on the pedal harp, and discovered a great
taste for painting; but these accomplishments, though joined to a handsome
person, constituted but a small part of her perfections. Her piety, her
respectful affection to her father and aunt, her sweetness of temper, her
gentleness, her humility, added a superior luster to her character; every one
loved, every one admired, every one esteemed her. Her accomplishments and
virtues, at length reached the ear of her friend Charlotte, who, at first paid
little attention to what she heard; but when two or three families, who had
made excursions into the part of the country where Mr. Wilmot lived, thinking
to give her pleasure, was lavish in the commendations of her old friend, she
felt a pang that she with difficulty concealed, and from this moment such are
the baleful effects of envy, experienced a decline in the affection she had,
till now, entertained for Maria.

"During five years that had elasped, since their separation, letters had
constantly past between them, but the correspondence on the part of Charlotte
now became less pleasing: The most affectionate epistles lie unanswered for
months, and at last excited only a formal apology; this was by degrees omitted,
and in the end the correspondence ceased.

"Among Mr. Graves' friends was an old Baronet, remarkable for his cheerfulness
and good humor; though upwards of seventy, he was always the first to promote
a party of pleasure for the young people, and had for some time promised to
give them a ball. The day was at last fixed, and all his young friends invited.
Charlotte, among the rest, was not a little pleased, to receive a card of
invitation; she immediately flew to consult with her governess upon what dress
she should appear in, being determined, she said, not to be outdone by any in
the ball room. Mademoiselle applauded her resolution, and tapping her on the
cheek," said, "it would be ashame, if, with that pretty face, she did not out
shine every one there." The important matter was then entered upon, and
supplied conversation till the happy day arrived; when, with all the advantages
an expensive dress could give to a person really handsome, though spoilt by
affectation and self sufficiency, she cutered the ball-room, where a crowd of
young people, with happy countenances, were assembled.

"The minuets being over, and country dances proposed, a young lady of the most
engaging aspect was presented by Sir William (for so the gentleman who gave the
entertainment was called) to Charlotte for a partner. They went down several
dances, to their mutual satisfaction, when Charlotte, understanding that her
partner was a little indisposed with the headache, proposed that they should
desist. This the young lady refused, till repeatedly assured it would be
equally agreeable to her companion, when she consented, and they sat down.

"What delightful dancers," observed Miss Shirley, for that was the name of
Charlotte's partner, "are those two young ladies! It is impossible to imagine
any thing more graceful than their movements; I have not been able to keep my
eyes off them the whole evening."

"Whether you think them fine dancers or not," replied Charlotte, "I will
answer for it they think themselves so."

"There is nothing," returned the young lady, "assuming in their deportment,
they appear to be perfectly modest and unaffected."

"Psha," said Charlotte, "it is easy to put on an air of modesty; but I have
known them long, and could always through that discover a great deal of
arrogance and self-conceit."

"We should endeavor to judge favorably of every one," said Miss Shirley;
perhaps you wrong them?"

"No," replied Charlotte; "I am seldom deceived in my opinion. They are twins;
pray, do you think them handsome?"

"Yes," replied Miss Shirley, "especially she in the white lutestring; her eyes
are beautiful."

"Why, yes," rejoined Charlotte, "her eyes are certainly fine; but do you not
think there is a little of the vixen in them? I have always observed, that
where there is so much fine, the temper is turbulent."

"It is illiberal," returned Miss Shirley, "to form your opinion upon such
proof; how often do we find an amiable disposition concealed under the most
irregular features, and the reverse where the countenance promises every thing
amiable?"

"Your argument," replied Charlotte, "may hold good in some cases; but, depend
upon it, Mary Danvers is a vixen."

"You are very severe," said Miss Shirley; "but pray, do you not think the
young lady, who stands next, very handsome?"

"Yes," said Charlotte, "if we give her credit for the white and red of her
complexion."

"What do you mean?" said Miss Shirley.

"You know," replied Charlotte, "there is such a thing as rouge and white
paint."

"I have heard so," returned the young lady.

"I have been told," said Charlotte, "that Miss Fairfax sometimes pays a visit
to her mamma's paint boxes."

"And can you believe it?" said Miss Shirley. "How absurd to suppose a girl of
thirteen or fourteen (I am sure she does not appear to be older) would paint,
or that her parents would permit her."

"Such things," returned Charlotte, "do however happen: Why now, perhaps, you
think the flaxen ringlets of her partner pure nature."

"They appear to be so," said Miss Shirley.

"Ah," said Charlotte, "appearances are often deceitful."

"You are very satirical," said Miss Shirley; "but here comes one in whom I
think you must allow beauty of person and good sense to unite.

"Do you mean Lady Eliza Elwin?"

"The same," said Miss Shirley; "you must confess that she is very amiable and
accomplished, and as to beauty of person few can, I think, exceed her."

"Why, Lady Eliza," returned Charlotte, "is certainly affable; her conversation
too is what the world terms agreeable; though, in my opinion, not (...) ^^ture
of the female pedant, which (...) allow is horrid; but, as to (...) though
regular, they want (...) laugh when I say, I never (...) without thinking of a
pretty wax doll, with cherry cheeks and glass eyes -- Speaking of eyes; pray,
do you really think Lady Eliza's so fine? For my own part, I am not fond of
those sleepy downcast eyes; I always suspect that something more is concealed
under them than people are aware of. Between you and I, I have heard it
whispered, that Lady Eliza, with all that softness, is not the best tempered;
but some people take a malicious pleasure in scandalizing their neighbors."

"Who," said Mrs. Shirley, "may hope to escape, if Lady Eliza is censured so
unjustly! She last year passed some weeks in Radnorshire; I had, therefore,
frequent opportunities of meeting her, and, assure you, I found her a most
amiable accomplished young lady; and as to her temper, I have been told by her
most intimate friends, that few can boast one more equal."

"I see," returned Charlotte, "that she is a favorite of yours -- we will,
therefore, change the subject. Pray, did not you mention Radnorshire? Do you
reside in that part of Wales?

Miss Shirley replied, that she did; and added, it was scarcely a week since
she left it.

"You are then acquainted, perhaps," returned Charlotte, "with Miss Wilmot?"

"Miss Wilmot?" exclaimed the other, "I am -- "

"O, you are intimate," interrupted Charlotte; I am rejoiced! I shall be glad
to ask a few questions about her -- Pray, is it true that she is so very
accomplished, and so very handsome?"

"I am an improper person," replied Miss Shirley, "to give you information upon
this point; for -- "

"Nay," interrupted Charlotte, who loved the sound of her own voice better than
that of any one's else, "since you are acquainted, I could not have asked one
more proper. I see she is not so great a favorite as Lady Eliza; but no
matter, you have, I dare say, your reasons; one cannot you know, be wholly
blind to the faults of one's friends: in truth, we have all faults; some of one
kind, and some of another, though none is, to be sure, worse than a covetous
temper."

"Do you mean," said Miss Shirley, "that Maria Wilmot is covetous?"

"Somewhat that way inclined," returned Charlotte; "but, as I observed before,
we have all our faults."

"But my dear Miss," said Charlotte's partner, "with earnestness, tell me, have
you reason for entertaining such an opinion? Surely, no heart, that is not lost
to every noble sentiment, can harbor so despicable a vice as covetousness."

Why, one would think so," returned Charlotte: but it is I believe too true,
that covetousness is poor Maria Wilmot's failing; what is your opinion?"

"I never thought it so," replied Miss Shirley, "but it is possible I may be
blinded by partiality."

"Depend upon it," replied Charlotte, "you are; I could give you twenty
instances of her stinginess: Would you believe it, she has never had a cap nor
mantua made in London since her father retired into Wales! Now, as to taste, I
have been told she has a great deal; therefore it can only proceed from her
stingy disposition.

"But she is at present young," returned Miss Shirley, "and it is possible may
not conduct these matters herself."

"O, I beg your pardon," returned Charlotte, "her father is so extravagantly
fond of her, that he does not contradict her in any thing, and, I have been
credibly informed, suffers her to draw on him for any money she pleases."

"If that be the case," returned Miss Shirley, "it behooves her to be cautious
of abusing the confidence he is so generous as to repose in her."

"I dare say, she does not think of that," said Charlotte* "no; I am persuaded
she is (...)* I will give you another instance of her^ covetous temper; I
seldom assert any thing but upon pretty clear proof: Last year, she accompanied
her aunt, who you know, poor old soul, is troubled with the gout, to Bath:
Well, would you believe it, I was credibly assured, by a friend of mine who was
there at the time, that she never, during the whole season, once put into a
raffle nor touched a card!"

"I have been told," replied Miss Shirley, "that cards, and also raffling, as
being a species of gaming, were two things to which her mamma had a particular
objection."

"But her mother has been dead these three years," replied the ungenerous
Charlotte, "it is, therefore, very unlikely she would be so scrupulous on that
account: No, no, depend upon it, she does not love to part with money. I Will
tell you another anecdote I heard, upon authority equally as good, which proves
her meanness beyond all dispute. Would you believe, that, before a whole
room-full of company, she refused to subscribe to a concert, at which Mara
sung! I declare I would not have let myself down so, had it been the last five
guineas I had in the world; and what makes it worse, it seems she pretends to
be fond of music, and, they say, plays finely on the harp; not that I believe
every thing of this sort that I hear, for all who pretend to give their opinion
are not judges of good playing. In short, you see she is naturally covetous and
mean."

"I hope," said Miss Shirley, "you do her injustice; but, if she be really so,
it would be kind to point out this as a part of her character, standing in need
of amendment."

"It would be a glorious task," said Charlotte, "to set about reforming the
world. Why now, Maria Wilmot and I have from our infancy been friends, and till
within these last two years correspondents; but I -- "

Miss Shirley looked astonished -- "Is it possible," said she, "that you can be
Miss Graves, the friend and correspondent of Maria Wilmot?"

"The very same," returned Charlotte; "but you seem surprised."

"I," said Miss Shirley, "am really Maria Wilmot, your old friend and
correspondent. My father has changed his name, on account of an estate that has
been left him on that condition, which is the reason I am called Shirley. I was
told you were upon a visit in the country; I had, therefore, till now, not the
slightest idea that I was conversing with my old friend."

Let the reader imagine what was the confusion of Charlotte, who had been
unjustly stigmatizing her friend with so despicable a vice! She seemed rooted
to the place where she stood, incapable of articulating a word either to
vindicate or excuse her conduct.

"Miss Shirley pitied and wished to relieve her embarrassment; but at this
moment Sir William, accompanied by her father and Mr. Graves, who had just
entered, came up to them. They soon understood that an explanation had taken
place between the young ladies, and told them, that having a mind to heighten
the pleasure of their meeting, after so long an absence, by the surprise, they
had purposely introduced them to each other as strangers, and did not intend
that the eclaircissement should have taken place, till they were all assembled
at supper: "but," continued Mr. Graves, in a jocular strain, "I find there is
no possibility of keeping a secret where girls are concerned: you were
determined to be before hand with us."

"Charlotte was too much chagrined to relish ^he jest: her cheerfulness was
fled for the remainder of the evening, during which her behavior appeared
awkward and constrained. She wished to apologize to Miss Shirley for the
improper license she had given her tongue; but what could she say? what excuse
could she frame for an attack on her character, so unjust and unprovoked? She
attempted more than once to enter upon on the subject; but her voice faltered
-- she knew not where to begin, and at length, having for some hours labored
under the most uneasy sensations, she returned home full of shame and vexation.
When retired to her chamber, she had leisure to reflect coolly on the
occurrences of the evening, and could not but admire the conduct of Maria, who
during the whole course of it, had generously endeavored, by every kind and
polite attention, to dissipate her chagrin, and convince her she harbored no
resentment on account of the past. "Maria," said Charlotte, "is certainly very
generous; how unfortunate that I should not know her! If I had, this would not
have happened; I shall in future be very cautious to whom, I express my
sentiments. -- Let me reflect. -- What was it I did say? -- O, that she was
covetous -- Well, there is no great crime in that; because it is very likely to
be true: but then, as she was my old friend, I should not have pointed out her
faults to another, and especially to one who appeared to be a stranger to me. I
am persuaded she is stingy; but let her be what she will, she has certainly
behaved to me this evening like an angel: how she might have mortified and
exposed me to every body! I am sure, had I been in her place, and she in mine,
I should have taken all the revenge I could, I wish I had made some apology --
I have a great inclination to go tomorrow morning, and tell her I am sorry for
what I said. I never did make concessions to any one before: but somehow I am
uneasy; I don't know what possesses me: I am half-inclined to love her -- I
wish I had not heard so much about her beauty and accomplishments: it is a sad
thing to be envious!"

"Fortunately for Charlotte, Mademoiselle had for some time left the family,
and was gone to reside with a relation in France: those good impressions,
therefore, which Charlotte had in her infancy imbibed, from the precepts and
example of an amiable mother, and which, though stifled by flattery and ill
advice, were not eradicated, had time to operate. She rose early in the
morning, and prompt by a natural impetuosity, which hurried on every impulse of
her mind, whether it was good or bad, she set off, attended only by her maid,
to Mr. Shirley's.

"Maria happening this morning to rise later than usual, on account of a slight
indisposition, had not left her chamber: Charlotte, therefore, on her arrival,
was shown into her friend's dressing room, when she waited half an hour.

"Though not very studious, the subject of her present visit afforded such
disagreeable reflections, that for once, in her life, she cast her eyes around,
in pursuit of a book: not finding one to her purpose, she so far infringed the
rules of good-breeding, as to open a drawer, the key of which was turned, and
in it found a ladies memorandum book: nothing could have suited her taste
better; she unclasped it, with an intent to peruse the songs and enigma's, but
in turning over the leaves for this purpose, some memorandums in the
handwriting of Maria caught her eye, and I am sorry to say, she was so
indelicate to peruse, among many other of the same kind, the following: "Paid
the school mistress, half a year, for John Gilies' two children, L. 1 1 0 For
Mary Duff's boy and girl, 1 1 0 For Ralph Field's youngest girl, 0 10 6 Books,
shirts, shifts, and shoes for the above children, 2 2 0 Dame Russel, against
her lying in, 0 10 6 My mite toward promoting the Sunday schools, 1 1 0

Resolved to new trim my white lutestring instead of buying a new dress for the
assembly.

Note -- The money saved to go toward replacing poor John Mils' cow, dead last
week.

Though Charlotte had suffered envy and many other vices to predominate in her
character, she could not withhold the approbation due to the benevolence that
shone through these simple memorandums: she blushed at the thought of her own
injustice, which had ascribed to avarice an economy, which evidently appeared
to proceed from the most generous of motives: Vanity had hitherto been a
leading feature in her character, but when, in every instance, she compared her
own conduct with that of her friend, she could not but feel her inferiority.
Absorbed in thought, sometimes looking on the memorandums, and sometimes
reflecting on the striking contrast they formed to her own, she continued with
the book in her hand, till the entrance of Miss Shirley recalled her to a sense
of the impropriety of her situation, and revived in her mind all the
circumstances for which she came to apologize.

"Maria received her with a look full of complacency and kindness, and thanked
her for so early a mark of her attention.

"Charlotte was again embarrassed; again at a loss when to begin: at length,
"ah, my dear Miss Shirley," said she, "if you wish to reconcile me to myself,
be less kind and less generous, for how, otherwise, can I forgive myself the
injury I did you last night?"

"Think no more of it," my dear said Maria, "my own conduct, in the instance to
which you allude, was by no means free from blame, I certainly possessed myself
of your sentiments, by means that were very unjustifiable: I should not have
suffered you to remain in an error I could easily have rectified: but I own,
the desire of knowing upon what grounds you accused me of a vice my soul
detested, induced me to take an advantage which I am sensible was ungenerous,
let us, therefore, since we are perhaps neither of us free from blame, mutually
forgive each other."

"You are very generous," said Charlotte, "but my conduct was unpardonable."

"Think no more of it," said Maria, "perhaps you thought you had reason for
what you said; but time will, I hope, justify me in your opinion."

"O, my dear Miss Shirley, my dear Maria," said Charlotte, "this (pointing to
the memorandum book) proves you to be every thing that is great and amiable:
yet, even your justification covers me with shame, how mean must I appear in
thus indelicately satisfying my curiosity!"

"A modest blush animated the blooming features of Maria, when she understood,
that memorandums, which were designed for her own perusal, had been exposed to
the view of another. Both, though from different motives, appeared confused --
and a silence of some moments ensued: it was at length broken by Maria: "Your
curiosity, my dear," said she taking Charlotte by the hand, "is its own
punishment, since my pocketbook contained so little to gratify it. With
respect to myself, I am sorry the perusal of a few insignificant memorandums
should expose me to encomiums of which I am so wholly undeserving."

"I sincerely," said Charlotte, "ask your pardon for my indelicacy; but I
cannot, in this instance, repent it. The perusal of your memorandums, my dear,
has taught me a lesson, which, I hope, will be of service to me throughout my
whole life. O, Maria, what money have I not lavished in dress, trinkets, cards,
and I know not how many frivolous things of the same kind, yet at this moment,
cannot call to mind one single action capable of affording me a pleasing
reflection!"

"Perhaps," said the gentle Maria, "you examine your actions with too great
severity; my poor mamma used often to observe, that we all owe something to the
world, and to the character we support in it: The large sums, she would say,
daily expended on the table, wardrobe, and numerous retinue of a person of
fashion, would, it must be owned, more than decently support many worthy
indigent families, yet these, in the present state of the world, are considered
as the necessary appendages of a high station, nor are they, when proportioned
to the fortune of the individual, at all hurtful to society; they are, on the
contrary, beneficial, as they furnish the means of subsistence to the
subordinate ranks of mankind."

"How kind!" said Charlotte, "to recollect this observation of your mamma, to
apologize for my extravagance!"

"Yet you," my dear Maria, "are constantly, I see, depriving yourself of
pleasures that you may distribute comforts to others."

"You are mistaken," said Maria, "I sometimes give up a lesser pleasure to
enjoy a greater, that is all."

"Do you then," said Charlotte, "set no value on dress, and a thousand other
enjoyments, the money you appropriate to others, would purchase?"

"Such low and frivolous enjoyments," said Maria, "acquire all their value from
our ignorance of higher; when once we have tasted the pleasures that spring
from acts of kindness and benevolence, be assured, my dear Charlotte, all other
must fail in the comparison."

"How few girls of our age," said Charlotte, "are there who think like you! yet
how amiable do you appear! till compared with yours, I never saw the deformity
of my own conduct; I thought, if indeed I thought at all, that it was
irreproachable; but you have undeceived me."

"You ascribe to me, my dear," said Maria, "much more merit than I deserve;
with respect to you and I, all that can be said is, that we differ in our ideas
of pleasure; you have, perhaps, been told, that it is to be found in company
and public amusements, and I was early taught to seek it in retirement, books,
the society of select friends, and especially in contributing to the happiness
of others."

"I too," said Charlotte, "will from this moment cease to look for it
elsewhere; you, my dear Maria, shall be the model by which I will endeavor to
form my future conduct."

"You have chosen one very imperfect," said the modest Maria.

"Ah!" said Charlotte, "what would I not attempt to regain your esteem and
affection; I once possessed it, but the ill return I have long since made to
your kindness, and above all the recollection of my conduct last night, must,
in spite of your generosity, cause you ever to despise me."

"Do not," replied Maria, "wrong me or yourself by such a supposition: I
should, I own, be guilty of great insincerity, were I to pretend, that my
sentiments in this respect, were the same last night, as they are at present:
No, my friend; though willing to frame excuses for a failing into which I was
sensible, I might myself have fallen, had it not been for the admonitions of a
watchful mother, and, after her death, to those of a father, who has made it
the study of his life to form my heart and cultivate my understanding, yet, my
dear Charlotte, pardon my freedom, when I found with what pleasure you pointed
out blemishes in, and heard you indiscriminately asperse the most faultless
characters, I own I felt an indignation and disgust, of which I thought myself
incapable; but your candor, in thus frankly acknowledging your errors, must
surely efface the remembrance of them, and entitle you to the esteem of
generous minds."

"You, my dear Maria," said Charlotte, "who are generosity itself, may forgive
me, but how can I ever be reconciled to myself! poor Miss Fairfax, whose only
fault, in my eyes, was that of being too lovely, what pains have I not taken to
depreciate your beauty, by attributing to art what was purely the work of
nature! How often have the elegant the unassuming Danvers' been the sport of my
unbridled tongue! The charming Lady Eliza Elwin too! whom envy itself must
surely admire, she could not escape the slander I indiscriminately cast upon
all! and you, my truest my best friend, how readily did I ascribe to
covetousness an economy which arose from the most worthy of motives!"

"Do not," said Maria, seeing Charlotte overwhelmed by the bitterness of these
reflections, "distress yourself by reverting with a severity too great on your
past errors; it is enough then you are sensible of them, and mean to make
atonement by your future conduct; remember them now only as they may be
necessary to secure you from a relapse, and to teach you, while you persevere
yourself in the path of rectitude, to view with an eye of pity and compassion
the failings of others. Detraction is certainly a detestable vice: my father
has often observed to me, that it comprehends many vices, particularly those of
envy and injustice; "I never knew a person," says he, fond of detraction, that
was not envious, nor did I ever find such a one, in the least scrupulous,
whether he indulged this vice at the expense of innocence or guilt."

"Surely," said Charlotte, "I shall never more be guilty of it! It Is indeed
odious! but I have so long indulged it, that, I fear, I shall find it difficult
to overcome. You, my dear Maria, must be my constant monitor."

"Alas!" said Maria, "I am myself much in need of a monitor, but we will
mutually assist each other."

This interesting conversation was here broken off by the entrance of Mr.
Shirley, but Charlotte took the earliest opportunity of renewing it: from this
moment, she studiously sought to cultivate the friendship of Maria, by whose
friendly admonitions she learnt, in time, to view the perfections of others,
without envy, to enjoy the world, without being enslaved by it pleasures, and
to ensure her own happiness by promoting that of others.

"Clara, who, in the character of Charlotte, saw her own strongly depictured,
doubted not, but that her aunt had selected the story she had just finished to
reprove and admonish her: she was, therefore, silent, not knowing what to say;
till her brother observed, what an odious character Charlotte's was, and
applied to her for her opinion: she then broke silence, and replied, "I am
ashamed to express my hatred of a vice from which I myself am not free." Then
looking significantly at her aunt, "Ah, madam," she added, "I fear I have lost
your good opinion -- I was indeed very illiberal -- I was too much like
Charlotte in the story -- The only fault I could find in Miss Reeve's work was,
that it had too much merit."

"My dear child," said Mrs. Mills, "how I love this charming frankness! it is
the presage of every thing great and good: yes, my dear, I saw you were not
uninfluenced by envy in your observations, and selected for the entertainment
of the afternoon a story, which I thought might serve to set so vile a passion
in its true odious colors."

"I see," said Clara, "that envy is indeed a dreadful vice; I hope I am not so
envious as Charlotte; but I own I do not like to hear other people praised."

"That, my dear child," said Mrs. Mills, "be assured, is a certain sign that
you are not without envy; be particularly cautious, therefore, of suffering it
to take root in your heart; the first impressions may be easily effaced, but
envy arrived at a certain height, is difficult to eradicate; a proper regimen
may check the approach of a disease which, if suffered to gather strength, will
baffle the skill of the ablest physician. The most effectual barrier we can
oppose to envy is a generous interest in the welfare of others; accustom
yourself, my children, to listen to the praises of your friends and
acquaintances, point out their several merits and perfections, and, if you feel
a tendency to envy, check it by reflecting that it springs from the most mean
and base of all principles, self-love."

"I will endeavor, madam," said Clara, "to follow your councils; for I am
sensible that envy is an odious vice."

"I do not," said William, who, during this time, had listened with the utmost
attention to the conversation of his aunt and sister, "recollect that I was
ever displeased with any of my school-fellows for excelling me: I always wished
to get up to them, and, if I could, before them. I hope, aunt, there is no harm
in that."

"No, my dear boy; what you experienced was emulation, a very noble passion,
which prompts us to aspire at excellence: Emulation, it is somewhere observed,
strives to excel by raising itself not by depressing others."

"I shall be very careful, aunt, however," said William, "lest I should be
envious; I shall remember what you say, and whenever I am angry at hearing
another praised, think it is high time to be upon my guard."

"Dear William," said Mrs. Mills, "be assured you will find an advantage in
this; could young people know the pain and misery they would spare themselves,
by thus early checking the approach of envy and such base passions, no
persuasions would be necessary to lead them to adopt so salutary a course."

The conversation now took a new turn, and different topics occupied the time
till tea; after which, Mrs. Mills caused a large pair of globes to be brought,
and entertained her young friends with a variety of curious particulars,
concerning the earth on which we live: she described to them the customs and
manners of its various inhabitants, and how, in the space of twelve months, it
performs its revolution round the sun, causing the variation of the seasons,
and, by constantly turning on its axis, the change of day and night: she the^
(...) them, on the celestial globe, the (...), which, in stated periods, also
(...) revolution round the sun; and (...) them the fixed stars, which she to
(...) were suns, supposed to enligthen (...) worlds, in the same manner as the
sun we daily see enlightens ours.

No entertainment had ever been more agreeable to the young people than this,
especially to Clara; to whom it was quite new; the many interesting truths, of
which Mrs. Mills convinced her, the sciences of geography and astronomy were
capable of informing her, created in her mind a strong desire to study them;
and she went to bed, fully resolved, when she returned home, to request her
father to let her have a master.

Clara and William were extremely pleased the next morning to see that the sky
was clear, and the wet dried from the ground; all nature seemed revived, and
nothing was new thought on but the expedition, which the rain had the day
before prevented.

The coach was accordingly ordered, and (...) conveyed them to the seat of the
gen^^^ (...) to whom the aviary belonged: Here they were for some time highly
entertained with the view of a very ^ine collection of (...) the greater part
of them from foreign countries. The beauty and variety of the (...) delighted
the young people, (...) Clara, who being asked on her way home (for Mrs. Mills,
at the request of her young friends, had consented to return on foot) to
purchase a linnet or a blackbird, observed to her aunt, that the boy had chosen
a very unlucky moment to offer his birds; for, said she, after the beautiful
creatures we have just seen, one cannot condescend so much as to look at a
blackbird or linnet.

"I am sorry," said her aunt, "to hear you pay so ill a compliment to the
songsters of your own woods."

"Nay, aunt," said Clara, "you cannot think blackbirds and linnets, and such
common birds, worthy to be compared with the beautiful foreign birds we have
seen in the aviary."

"Their plumage may be inferior to many," replied Mrs. Mills, "but what they
want in feather, is amply compensated by the melody of their notes; for my
part, I do not envy the inhabitants of the east, the glittering plumage of the
peacock, bird of paradise, nor many more, while my ear is delighted by the
charming melody of my native woods."

"To be sure," said Clara, "our birds sing delightfully; but you must allow,
there is more to be admired where a beautiful plumage and a fine song is
united."

"That my dear," replied her aunt, "seldom happens: those birds which have the
most beautiful plumage are generally found to be defective in song; while
others whose colors are less splendid ravish us with the most delightful
melody -- You see how equally Providence distributes its gifts."

"I should like extremely," said William, "to make a collection of foreign
birds, to observe the curious things related of them. Do you know, madam, I
yesterday read, in a book that lay on your dressing-table, of a bird that has a
pouch under its bill and throat, large enough to contain ten or fifteen quarts
of water! I have forgotten the name of it."

"It is the Pelican," said Mrs. Mills, "a native of Africa and America; the
pouch you mention is a reservoir for its provision, which it afterward casts
up and devours at leisure. This peculiarity gave rise to the fabulous story,
that the pelicans fed its young with its own blood."

"Well," said William, what a charming study is

NATURAL HISTORY!
I should like extremely to have a collection of foreign birds: what a number
of curious things one should have an opportunity of observing!"

"You undoubtedly would," said Mrs. Mills; "but as many foreign birds will not
exist in our climate, and others must be purchased at a large expense, I would
remind you, that your own country will afford you no inconsiderable field for
practical knowledge; I have given you more than one example of this."

"Yes, Madam," said Clara, "what you related of the bees was indeed very
curious, and the microscope discovered many wonders."

"Very true," said William; "but birds are not like insects, we can see them
without a microscope; and as to thrushes and linn^^s, and such birds, they are
so common, it is impossible not to know every particular about them."

"You have then I suppose, William," said Mrs. Mills, "since these common birds
are so familiar to you, observed the construction of their nests: Tell me, do
you think you could form any thing so admirably fitted to the purpose for which
they are designed?"

"The nests," said William -- "The nests -- Why really I don't know -- To be
sure, I have taken many, but I never paid much attention to any thing but the
birds that were in them -- I know they are made of grass or moss, or something
of that sort."

"Thus it is," said his aunt, "that we daily pass over a thousand objects,
which, if less familiar, would excite our highest admiration! But, my dear
William, had I known you had ever committed so cruel a theft, I should not have
suspected that you had ever considered attentively the construction of a bird's
nest, and consequently the labor it must have cost the little warbler you
deprived of it."

William hung his head, and was silent -- and Clara took this opportunity of
enquiring whether all the birds of our woods built their nests in the same
manner?

"All of the same species," Mrs. Mills replied, "build invariably alike, but
they vary according to their different kind: The wren, for example, builds her
nest in the form of a sugar loaf, leaving a hole about the middle for a passage
in and out, through which she not only supplies her young with food, but
conveys out all their dung, which would otherwise soil the nest. -- The
titmouse curiously interweaves its nest with moss, hair, and reeds -- The
blackbird, lapwing, and many others, rough cast the inside of the nest, with a
lay of mortar, and by the help of a little flue or moss, with which they temper
it while soft, form a complete wall within. -- Many birds connect the different
parts of their nest with a thread, which they weave from hemp or hair, but more
commonly from the webs of spiders. -- When the swallow has occasion to build
her nest, she wets her breast upon the surface of the water, and shedding the
moisture over the dust, works it up with her bill, and thus forms a plaster or
cement, of which she constructs a commodious habitation for her young family.
The martin does the same, but covers her nest at the top, leaving a hole at the
side, for a passage in and out."

"There is indeed," said William, "great ingenuity in all this -- it must cost
the little creatures great trouble and fatigue -- I never thought about it
before, but it is certainly cruel to deprive them of their little ones, after
they have taken such pains to prepare for their reception."

"You would say so, William," said Mrs. Mills, "if you knew all the cares they
undergo; as soon as the eggs, which are to produce the young birds, are laid,
the male and female brood over them by turns, with the most painful
perseverance, and when the young family make their appearance, encounter every
danger and fatigue to provide for their subsistence: they are constantly in
pursuit of provisions, first one and then the other, and sometimes both
together, and distribute the food they bring home with the greatest equality."

"I thought," said Clara, "that all the care of hatching and rearing the young
brood fell to the female."

"It principally does," said Mrs. Mills, "but the male has his part also: he
alleviates the fatigue of his faithful mate by a thousand tender assiduities:
while she is confined to the eggs, he brings her food, occasionally takes his
turn in brooding them, and, when the young birds appear, shares equally with
her the fatigue of providing them food: I had a male Canary bird, which
performed the office of a very kind father to some young linnets."

"To some young linnets madam!" exclaimed the young people.

"Yes," said Mrs. Mills, "I Will tell you how it happened. I had once a nest of
linne^^ brought me by a gardener, who, being lately come into my service, was
not acquainted that the feathered tribe are permitted to build unmolested in my
grounds. As the mischief could not be remedied, I admonished him as to the
future, and took the young nestlings under my protection. The nest had not been
long in my dressing room, before I observed that the chirping the little
creatures made, either for food or the warmth of the mother, was answered by a
fine Canary bird, which hung in the room, with that soft sort of twittering
birds usually make to their young. This inspired me with the thought of trying
whether he would rear the young linnets: I accordingly put the nest into the
cage, and found the experiment succeed; my little Phily, for so I called my
Canary bird, instantly left his perch, and brooded over the young linnets, as
the mother would have done. I then put some proper food into the cage, and had
the pleasure of seeing him drop first a morsel into the mouth of one, then
another, till he had satisfied the whole family, which he actually, in this
manner, supported till they were capable of providing for themselves."

"How I should have loved the pretty creature!" said Clara; "I have two fine
Canary birds at home, I should like extremely to get a nest of young birds, and
try if they would do the same."

"Be cautious," said Mrs. Mills, "of trying the experiment, lest the young
birds suffer. It Is true, it has once succeeded, but that is no reason it should
always; though you have seen a cat foster a chicken, such another instance may
not occur in the course of your life."

"Pray, madam," said William, "would Canary birds do you think live in our
woods?"

"By no means," rejoined Mrs. Mills, "our climate is by far too cold, great
attention and care is requisite in the breed of them even in houses."

"But in the Canary Isles," said William, "I suppose they are as common as
blackbirds and thrushes are with us?"

"Probably they are," said Mrs. Mills; "but their color there is a dusky gray,
and they are so different from those seen in England, that many people have
doubted whether they are of the same species. The Canary birds we see here are
imported from Germany, where they are bred in great numbers, and sold to
different parts of Europe."

"I have heard my dear mamma say," said Clara, "that she once saw a Canary bird
perform a number of curious tricks, -- it fired a little cannon, fell down as
if it were shot, and what was more wonderful, showed the color of every
person's gown in the room."

I saw the same exhibition, but, I assure you, with more pain than pleasure.

"Dear Madam," said Clara, "you surprise me very much! I think it must have
been a very entertaining sight."

"It was beyond all doubt a miracle," rejoined Mrs. Mills, "but such a one as
the thinking mind could not contemplate with pleasure; form to your idea the
sufferings of the little creature before it could be brought to perform ^eats
so infinitely above its nature: The man who showed it owned that he had killed
thirty by the severity of the discipline, before he could bring one to the
perfection we saw."

"Indeed!" said Clara, "I never heard that."

"Sights of this kind," said Mrs. Mills, "never afford me pleasure; an animal
acting in conformity to its natural instinct is, in my opinion, an object far
more capable of exciting agreeable sensations, than when tortured by the
caprice and ingenuity of man, beyond the limits prescribed to it by infinite
wisdom. At this moment they arrived at a neat white house:

"I have more than once," said Mrs. Mills, "promised that you should (...) our"

SCHOOL OF INDUSTRY
"I will now gratify your curiosity: saying this, they entered, and were
conducted by Mrs. Brown, whose story their aunt had related to them, into the
school room, where they saw a number of little people assembled, some spinning,
others sewing, others knitting, and others reading; among the rest they
observed Peggy Bartlet, seated at the top of the first form, a distinction
which marked the superior merit of those who obtained it.

"Mrs. Mills, with her usual affability, enquired into the different merits of
the young people, and was extremely pleased, when Mrs. Brown replied, they were
in general very good children: Observing one of them, however, set apart from
the rest, she enquired into the cause, fearing perhaps that all was not so well
as it should be."

The little girl, who was the subject of the enquiry, hung her head; her cheeks
were immediately covered with blushes, and Mrs. Brown replied, "that Polly
Bennet was doing penance for a fault she had committed three weeks ago, added,
that she had reason to hope she sincerely repented."

The little girl upon this, burst into tears, and assured her mistress and Mrs.
Mills, she would never more be so wicked as to tell a lie.

"I am sorry," said the lady, "to hear that you have ever been guilty of so
great a crime; but as your present tears, and what your mistress tells me,
leads me to hope you are fully sensible of it, I shall not mortify you by any
reflections."

Clara and William, who were affected by the poor girl's tears, interceded for
her very warmly, and requested Mrs. Brown, to mitigate her punishment, which
they understood, was to set apart from the rest three weeks longer.

"My good young lady and gentleman," said Mrs. Brown, "I am sorry to refuse any
request you can make, but I am sure, when you reflect on the greatness of the
fault, and are told, that Polly Bennet had contracted a habit of telling
untruths, you will think her punishment, in comparison, very light."

"The little girl said, she was sensible, she deserved to be punished, and that
she should not mind what she suffered, if she could but once gain the good
opinion of her mistress and school fellows; the latter of whom, she said,
shunned her as much out of school as they did in."

"Mrs. Mills said, she did not doubt, but by persevering in her good behavior,
she would; but observed, that if she had contracted a habit of telling
untruths, it was not to be wondered at that she was shunned by her companions:
she then took an opportunity of observing to the children, that, though she
highly commended the abhorrence in which they held Polly's fault; yet she
wished to remind them that it was not generous to insult their companion in her
distress, nor to add to the mortifications she already suffered by any slight
or unkindness on their part, especially as her repentance and resolution to
amend appeared to be sincere."

Mrs. Mills and her young friends then wished Mrs. Brown a good day, and
pursued their way toward home. Notwithstanding what had been said, Clara and
her brother could not forbear thinking that Mrs. Brown had acted with great
severity toward the little girl; for, said William, "I did not understand that
the untruth she told was meant to injure any one." "Perhaps not," replied Mrs.
Mills, "but an untruth is criminal, be the occasion what it may. There is a
noble simplicity in truth, for the absence of which, the most brilliant
accomplishments cannot compensate; while, on the other hand, it adds luster to
the brightest talents, and ennobles the most obscure origin."

Our present conversation brings to my mind a story which I will read to you
this afternoon.

"How good you are to us, my dear madam," said Clara, "we shall always
remember, with gratitude, the week we have spent with you -- it has indeed been
a week of pleasure -- but, bless me! is not today Saturday -- did not my papa
say he would return to morrow?"

"Yes," said William, "we shall have no more stories."

"How I wish," said Clara, "that we could persuade papa to let us stay another
week! how happy we should be! that is to say, if it be agreeable to you Madam,
said Clara, addressing her aunt."

"My dear children," said Mrs. Mills, "what higher pleasure can I enjoy, than
the society of those so dear to me! but we will talk of that when your papa
returns, at present let us quicken our pace. They did so, and were soon at
home. Dinner soon followed, and after the desert, Mrs. Mills read aloud,

THE TRIUMPH OF TRUTH, A TALE.
"Emily was the acknowledged child and heiress of Sir James Golding, a wealthy
baronet, in the west of England:

"Amiable in her temper, gentle in her manners, beloved and admired by all who
knew her, she had reached her thirteenth year, a stranger to care or
misfortune: then, for a while, the calm was interrupted, and she was
unexpectedly involved in a scene of trouble and perplexity. -- A servant, for
whom Emily had conceived a strong affection, had for sometime been declining in
her health, and, at last grew so bad that her life was despaired of.

"One day, as Emily was sitting at her bed side, she heaved a deep sigh, and
pressing the hand of her young mistress, with a look that bespoke a mind
disturbed and agonized," "my dear child," said she, "I have something heavy at
my heart, which I wish, yet dread to communicate -- I have been very wicked,
but what is done cannot be undone."

"Emily begged she would be composed, and tell her if there were any thing she
could do to relieve her mind."

"Promise me," said Alice, "that you will not discover to any one what I am now
going to tell you; you are young, but have discretion above your years."

"If it be a secret, that I can keep with honor," said the prudent Emily,
"depend upon my silence.

"Alas," said Alice, "it is of moment to your future peace and welfare; but
tell me first, had you a mother, poor, mean, friendless, would you not turn
from her with disgust and aversion?"

"My good Alice," said Emily, "whither does this question lead: I was never so
happy as to know a mother; but, if I were, can you suppose that poverty would
not endear her to me?"

"Amiable child!" exclaimed Alice, "in me then" -- and here she stopped -- in
me then behold that unhappy mother.

"These words were incomprehensible to Emily; she looked on Alice in silent
expectation of what was to follow -- but finding she did not proceed --
"Alice," said she, "what does all this mean? you are not lightheaded, nor am I
surely in a dream, yet how can I understand you! Did you not say something of
mother?"

"I did," said Alice, "I am indeed your unhappy mother."

"Impossible!" exclaimed Emily, "my mother died when I was scarcely a fortnight
old: you have some secret view in this untruth, and want to impose on my
credulity; my father, as soon as he returns, (for Sir James was out upon a
journey) must be acquainted with this." Having said thus, Emily was rising with
indignation, to leave the room, when Alice, collecting all her strength, caught
hold of her gown, and entreated to be heard."

Emily relented, and sitting down once more, listened to a tale, that agitated
her young heart with a thousand new and painful emotions. The purport was this:
Sir James, during his minority, had imprudently contracted a secret marriage,
and was shortly after obliged to set out upon his travels: this affected his
poor lady so much, that she lived only to become the mother of a fine girl,
which she committed to the care of Alice, who had formerly been her nurse, and
at whose house she then lodged. Alice had unfortunately a little girl, within a
few days of the same age, and this inspired her with the wicked thought of
aggrandizing her own child, at the expense of Sir James's. She accordingly gave
it the name of Emily, after the deceased Lady Golding, and when Sir James, the
following year, returned to England, imposed it on him for his own offspring,
which, in the mean time, she called Patty, and bred up as her daughter. Ten
years having elapsed since this transaction. Alice thought it time to profit by
her wicked artifice; with this design she offered herself to supply the place
of Emily's maid, who had lately left the family, thinking, in this situation,
to ingratiate herself by degrees into the affections of her young mistress,
and, when she arrived at years of discretion, to entrust her with the secret of
her birth, and lay claim to her future services, by representing the sacrifice
she had made in her behalf, or, if this failed, to intimidate her by the fear
of a discovery: Alice had, however, continued more than three years an inmate
of the family, and had not yet ventured to entrust Emily with a secret of such
importance. The prospect, however, of her dissolution, gave a new turn to her
ideas, her crime now stood before her in its true deformity; she reflected with
anguish on the injustice she had committed, and though she had not courage to
repair the injury she had done, she could not die in peace without recommending
Patty, the injured daughter of Sir James, to the care and protection of Emily.
Such were the motives which prompted this unhapy woman to the confession she
had just made, and the reader must form to his imagination the effect it
produced on the mind of Emily, since her emotions were too various, and too
powerful, for words to express.

Shocked at the crime of which Alice had been guilty, yet impressed with a high
sense of the duty due to her, however faulty, as a parent, Emily could only
weep, and in silence lament, till the entrance of a servant afforded her an
opportunity of withdrawing, to calm the tumult of her mind.

"When Emily was alone, and began cooly to reflect on the events Alice had
unfolded, her mind was still more disordered and perplexed:" "What a change,"
said she, "has a short hour made! but now I thought myself the child of Sir
James Golding, heiress to a vast estate -- what am I now? I am afraid to think
-- Alice, had indeed reason to say the secret was of importance! Should Sir
James discover it, what will become of me -- of my poor mother -- I tremble at
the thought -- but who will acquaint him! Alice says my father is dead, no one
but she and myself know the truth -- I will, therefore, think no more about
it." Saying this, Emily went into the garden. and began to busy herself about
her flowers; from thence she visited her birds, hoping, by these means to
divert her anxiety, but her thoughts insensibly returned to the subject of her
inquietude: "How can I," said she, "look my dear father, for she could not
forbear using the appellation, in the face, while I am possessed of such a
secret. Every kind word or look he addresses to me will reproach me -- What can
I do? Confess the truth to Sir James? -- he is all kindness and indulgence now
-- but then -- he will no longer love me, when he finds I am not his own Emily:
I shall forever lose his affection; that is hard, yet what is so bad as
falsehood and deceit; it is certainly my duty to confess the truth; and how
often, as my dear father told me, there is no satisfaction equal to the
performing of it. -- But will Alice consent? she is my mother, and I ought to
obey her. I will try if I cannot prevail upon her."

"When Emily returned to the chamber of Alice, she took her hand affectionately
between here is," how is it, my poor mother" said she, "are you more composed
than when we last parted -- have you slept?"

"Alice replied, that it was long since she had known composure;" "the
injustice I have done," said she, "presses heavy on my heart, and I find, too
late, that guilt brings along with it its own punishment."

"Well my poor Alice," said Emily, "make yourself easy, there is still a remedy
-- confess the truth to Sir James, his child still lives, and he is very
generous and kind -- I am sure I have always found him so."

"What is it I hear!" exclaimed the unhappy woman; have you considered -- "

"I have considered every thing," said Emily, "it is the only reparation you
can make; and indeed you owe it both to Sir James, and Patty."

"Think," said Alice, who little expected such a proposal, "what you will
suffer, should Sir James, which he certainly will, withdraw his protection from
you; think how his confidence has been abused; in what a tender point he has
been injured -- indeed, my child, there is no hope of his forgiveness, though
innocent, he will not consider you less the cause of the imposition which has
been passed upon him, and will drive you out to share the poverty of your
unhappy mother."

"I do not fear poverty," said Emily, "for riches cannot afford satisfaction,
if acquired unjustly; but I own, the thought of losing my dear father's, I mean
Sir James's affection, affects me sensibly;" yet, my dear mother, it is our
duty to acquaint him with the truth, and let the consequence be what they will,
to perform it."

"Alice seemed much agitated; for mine, if not for your own sake," said she, "I
charge you to keep the secret I have unfolded: I, at least, must be the victim
of Sir James's resentment, and think what would ensue, were (...), in this weak
state, to be turned friendless into the wide world."

"This suggestion touched the tender heart of Emily: no, said she, "Sir James
is generous; I will throw myself on my knees before him, and soften him in your
behalf -- if I fail, I will console you, work for you -- and share your
poverty; I would not enjoy affluence, were it in my power, while my mother was
in misery."

"Alice was affected, and half persuaded, by these artless arguments. Emily
observed it with joy, but fearing a continuance of the discourse, would be too
much for her, in her present weak condition, she pressed her for the present,
no further, but promising to return in a short time, left her to repose."

"Though the mind of Emily was distressed by a thousand contending emotions,
she fe^t a peace arise from having thus far performed her duty, that she would
not have exchanged for all the advantages riches could bestow; and was enjoying
the reflections that arose upon this subject, when a servant entered to
acquaint her, that an alarming change had taken place in Alice. Emily hastened
to the chamber, and was inexpressibly shocked, to find her speechless, the
physician was immediately sent for, but before he arrived the unhappy sufferer
had breathed her last.

"Emily was shocked at this unexpected event; but it consoled her to reflect,
that she had, in the last interview, apparently rendered her mother sensible
that it was her duty to make the reparation that was still in her power, though
Providence had so ordered it that she did not live to accomplish it; that task
now devolved upon Emily, and she resolved, painful as it might be to fulfill it
-- It Is true she was more than once tempted to pursue the opposite conduct:
"Patty," said she, "cannot feel the loss of what she never possessed, and does
not know she has a title to possess; when I am a woman, and have it in my
power, I can be kind to her, and provide for her, and that will make her just
as happy -- Then, as to Sir James, he believes me to be his child, and I am
sure loves me as well; and with respect to myself, I think, I may venture to
say, Patty could not love and honor him more than I do." -- These suggestions,
added to the fear of losing Sir James's affection, which was inexpressibly dear
to her, tempted her to confine the secret to her own breast; but truth, which
she had from her infancy been accustomed to prize as the most valuable
possession, soon suggested better thoughts, and she resolved to hazard all,
rather than unjustly support a character which did not belong to her. She,
therefore, met Sir James upon his return the next day, fully resolved to
disclose all, but with an embarrassment, arising from the uneasiness of her
mind, that did not escape his observation. He enquired, with affectionate
solicitude, if any thing material had happened in his absence?

"Emily blushed, and replied, in a tremulous voice: "Poor Alice, Sir, is dead."

"Sir James was surprised, and enquired when she expired?

"Last night, Sir," said Emily, "in my arms -- " She could say no more,
notwithstanding all the fortitude she had endeavored to assume; she burst into
tears. --

"My dear child," said Sir James, embracing her, "I do not blame this amiable
tribute to the memory of poor Alice; but death is a debt we must all pay; I see
your spirits are low, and for this the best remedy is employment: I have
brought you a geographical game; let us see which of us will make the best and
most expeditious tour of Europe." Saying this, he spread the map upon the
table, and took out the totum and counters.

"Emily, at his desire, sat down, and endeavored to attend to the rules of the
game, but her thoughts insensibly wandered, and her absence of mind was so
visible, that Sir James was displeased.

"Emily," said he, "your concern for a faithful domestic is certainly amiable;
but it should not cause you to forget the attention and respect due a parent,
who loves and studies every thing to make you happy."

"This was too much for the tender heart of Emily, already oppressed with a
weight of grief entirely new to her; she burst into tears, and throwing herself
upon her knees, and hiding her face with both her hands, entreated him to
forgive her.

"Sir James, astonished at the agitation of her whole frame, raised, and
pressing her to his bosom: "Is it possible, my dear child," said he, "that what
I have said should affect you so powerfully!"

"Ah, Sir," said Emily, somewhat relieved by the tears she had shed, "do not
call me your dear child; indeed, I am unworthy that name."

"Sir James was surprised; but knowing the ingenious disposition of Emily,
judged that her words alluded to some trifling fault she had committed in his
absence, and assured her of his forgiveness.

"I am very unhappy," said Emily "but thank God I have nothing to reproach
myself with: O, my dear father!" (for, accustomed to this epithet, she
unconsciously used it) "I am very miserable -- I fear you will never again call
me your dear Emily. -- Indeed, indeed, papa, I am not your own child."

The reader will easily conceive what must have been the astonishment of Sir
James: when Emily, as well as the agitation of her mind would permit, related
all the particulars before mentioned, and put into his hand a letter his lady
had addressed to him a few days before her death, and committed to the care of
the treacherous Alice, who had withheld it, on account of its describing a
particular mark which was visible on the forehead of his child, and would
naturally have been sought for by Sir James.

"His astonishment and indignation arose to the highest pitch -- For some time
he walked the room in the utmost perturbation of mind -- Then turning to Emily,
who sat in trembling expectation of the event, not daring to lift up her eyes
to Sir James: "My dearest child," said he, "my thoughts are at this moment too
much disturbed to pay, as I ought, the just tribute to your noble conduct --
Leave me for the present -- In the morning we will meet as usual."

"Emily withdrew to her chamber, much comforted by these kind expressions,
which left her no room to apprehend the resentment of Sir James, and gave her
reason to hope for a continuance of his favor.

"When Emily the next morning was summoned to the breakfast table, the
consciousness of the new character in which she must appear to Sir James gave a
timidity and restraint to her manners that fully informed him of all that
passed in her mind: "My dear Emily," said he, taking her hand in the most
affectionate manner, "why this reserve? Can you imagine that an event in which
you have borne no part, but what has served to reflect on you the highest
honor, can have lessened my esteem or affection? No, my dear, my noble girls,
it has rather increased than diminished both: From henceforth you can have no
RIVAL in my affections, and Emily is too generous not to admit a partner."

"As soon as breakfast was over, Sir James dispatched Rugby, a faithful
domestic who had grown old in his service, to a village about ten miles
distant, where Alice had placed Patty during her residence in Sir James'
family, with orders to pay the money due for her board, and bring her home. --
Emily, in the mean while, retired to her chamber, to enjoy the agreeable
reflections that arose upon her happiness. How sincerely did she rejoice in the
conduct she had pursued! had she acted with less integrity, how bitter had been
her reflections! For, with no small surprise, she learnt that the discourse
which had passed between her and Alice had been actually overheard, and when
she retired the evening before, related to Sir James by Rugby, whose chamber
was only divided by a thin partition from Alice's. Had Emily, therefore, acted
upon principles less noble, the very means she had taken to secure to herself
the fortune and esteem of Sir James had irretrievably deprived her of both. She
looked up, therefore, with gratitude to the Supreme Disposer of events, who had
inspired her with resolution to hazard the loss of every worldly consideration,
rather than purchase them by duplicity and injustice. From such reflections her
thoughts naturally turned upon Sir James; on his generosity and kindness -- and
then on Patty; "I am afraid," said Emily, "she is very illiterate, perhaps as
ignorant and vulgar as our washing-woman's poor child: how it will vex and
mortify my dear father -- I wish he were not to see her till she had been at
school a few months. But that cannot be -- If it were but possible to make her
appear a little genteel before he sees her -- Let me see -- Could not she wear
some of my clothes -- To be sure -- we are just of an age."

"Emily was delighted with this thought -- the moment she saw Rugby, from the
window, enter the court yard, she flew to beg he would for a few minutes
conceal his arrival from Sir James: Then, overjoyed, she hurried with Patty
into her chamber, where she put on her one of her finest muslin frock and a
dimity skirt -- and would have added a cap, had she not been unwilling to
conceal her beautiful auburn ringlets, which she thought a greater ornament.

"The artless simplicity of Patty who viewed every thing she saw with wonder
and rustic admiration, and the generous anxiety of Emily to embellish the
person of one, who, in a mind less noble, might have excited sentiments of envy
or jealousy, formed the most interesting contrast.

"The business of the toilet being completed, Emily led Patty to Sir James, who
awaited her arrival with impatience. Upon her entrance, he was struck with the
strong resemblance she bore to her mother, and embraced her with the tenderest
affection, shedding abundance of tears.

"Patty was quite ashamed to be kissed by so fine a gentleman: She had been
told that Sir James was her father -- but the distance that appeared between
them, for the present, entirely excluded every tender feeling the name might be
supposed to awaken, and glad would Patty have been to hide herself in any
corner from Sir James. -- This bashfulness, however, in a few hours, wore away,
and, in her artless observations, Sir James discovered a mind replete with good
sense.

"What a mind," exclaimed Sir James, "is here lost for want of culture!" Some
more words he let fall that expressed the keenness of his sensations on this
subject, which being observed by Patty, "Pray, Sir," said she, looking in his
face, with a sweet simplicity, "do not be angry with me -- To be sure, I cannot
read -- nor write -- nor play on the music, as Miss Emily can -- but indeed I
will love you -- indeed, Sir, I will."

"Sir James was affected by these artless expressions: "Do not, my sweet
child," said he, "imagine I shall love you the less for the want of knowledge
you have not the opportunities of acquiring: no, if you be good and teachable,
you will be equally dear to my heart as if you possessed the most brilliant
accomplishments, which after all, acquire value only from the virtues by which
they are accompanied."

"How happy it would make me," said Emily, "to communicate to Miss Golding the
knowledge you, Sir, have been so kind as to give me! Will you permit me, (I
will not say to be her tutoress, because I am sensible I am in need of one
myself) but to assist in so agreeable an employment? Patty has promised to
accept my services."

"My dear children," said Sir James, "nothing in this world can afford me such
heartfelt satisfaction as to see you amicably united: Yes, my dear Patty, if
you would secure my esteem and affection, Emily must be the pattern by which
you must from your conduct."

"Emily's eyes glistened with grateful sensibility at so high a mark of Sir
James's approbation; and Patty, taking her hand, said, "Indeed, Miss Emily, I
will mind whatever you say -- and will love you dearly, for I am sure you have
already been very good to me;" (alluding to the change Emily had made in her
apparel, a change which, as it gave another proof of Emily's noble sentiments,
had neither gone unnoticed nor unacknowledged by Sir James.)

"From this day Emily became the preceptress of Patty, whose attention and
application was such, that she improved rapidly; her mind unfolded by degrees,
and every day discovered new beauties; her bashfulness changed into a becoming
modesty, and in a few years the rustic cottager was lost in the elegant, the
accomplished Miss Golding.

"The particulars of Emily's birth was known, but to few; she was still
considered as the daughter of Sir James, who divided his affection and fortune
equally, between her and Patty. The friendship of the young ladies, being, in
the mean while, founded upon reciprocal virtues, was strengthened by time, and
proved as lasting as it was warm and sincere."

Thus was the virtue of Emily recompensed by the approbation of her own heart
-- the esteem of her benefactor -- the acquisition of a true friend -- and the
prosperity of her future life -- illustrating this useful precept; that it is
no less our interest, than our duty, to adopt and encourage good principles.

CONCLUSION.
CLARA and William were much entertained with the story their aunt had related,
and assured her, they would endeavor to cultivate the same integrity that had
rendered the character of Emily so estimable.

The next day being Sunday, they attended their aunt to church, a place which
Clara had hitherto considered as convenient to lounge away a few hours, on a
day the least productive of amusement of any throughout the week; she had
kneeled merely because other people did so, and repeated the prayers from the
same motive. During the sermon and lessons, she was engaged in criticizing the
persons and dress of the congregation, instead of attending to the instructions
contained in either; but a week passed with Mrs. Mills had produced a
surprising revolution: The exemplary conduct of that lady -- her discourse, and
the habit of assembling morning and evening to prayer, had impressed her with a
high sense of those important duties she owed to her Creator, whom she now
addressed with ^ervent devotion: she listened with attention to an excellent
discourse, and retired convinced that she was created for something more than
to dress, and trifle away her time in frivolous amusements. In their way home
they visited the Sunday school, where Clara and her brother assisted their good
aunt in examining some of the children, whom they rewarded and encouraged
according to their several merits; a new species of employment this to the
young people, who felt, that no satisfaction can exceed that of rendering
ourselves useful to others.

From hence the carriage conveyed them home, where they had the pleasure of
meeting Mr. Clement, who had arrived a few minutes before. My dear sister, my
dear children, were alternately repeated -- and then, a variety of interesting
subjects were discussed. Upon Mrs. Mills leaving the room for a few minutes,
Mr. Clement observed to the young people, that he had not exceeded the time in
which he promised to return.

"Ah! papa," said Clara, we are "always happy to see you; but I assure you, we
should be more so, if it were not to put an end to our visit!"

"How," said Mr. Clement, "did you not bind me by a promise, that it should not
exceed a week!"

"Very true, papa," returned Clara, but then we did not know my aunt, we could
not have thought the time would have passed so delightfully."

"I conclude then," said Mr. Clement, meaning to banter, "that you have had
balls, and cards, and visits, in abundance."

"O, no papa, not one," said Clara, "and yet the time has fled so fast, that I
can scarcely believe it a week since you left us."

"Nor I, papa," said William, "and yet I have not had one play-fellow; nay, I
have not so much as shot one marble; nor once flown my new kite."

"This is very extraordinary," said Mr. Clement, still continuing to banter; "I
cannot comprehend it."

"O! papa," said Clara, "my aunt is a charming woman, she has been so good to
us! she has told us all about the bees; and you know, papa, how terrified I
used to be at a spider; well, it is the most curious thing in the world! I have
seen it spin; and how many threads do you think it takes to make one that forms
the web."

"Upon my word," said Mr. Clement, I cannot exactly tell."

"One thousand! could you think it, papa?"

"The bees," said William, "delight me more than all; my aunt has a glass hive,
papa, and we have seen them bring home the wax and honey."

"But you forget the queen, William," interrupted Clara; she has a palace,
papa, and her subjects are so faithful!

"We have looked through my aunt's microscope too; a fly, papa, is a most
wonderful creature! and the dust on the wing of a butterfly is actually
feathers."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, papa, and an earwig has two large wings, that fold up, just like our
candle screens. Did you know these things, papa?"

"I know," returned Mr. Clement, "that nature is replete with wonders."

"How was it then, papa, that you never mentioned them to us?"

"Your brother, my dear, said Mr. Clement, has been absent, and you never
discovered a desire for information on such subjects."

"Because, papa," interrupted Clara, "I thought it impossible to be amused
without dress or company: but I see I was mistaken, we have neither wanted the
one nor the other here. My aunt has made us acquainted with so many curious
things! and told us such delightful stories! I wish, papa, you could let us
stay another week? don't you, William?"

"Yes, sister," replied William, "if papa can stay with us, but you know, I
have been at school six months, and have had very little of his company."

"Very true," said Clara, "I did not think of that, but if papa can stay with
us?"

"That is a pleasure," said Mr. Clement, "I cannot at present enjoy, as I have
engaged your cousin Milfords to pass a few weeks with us in town; we must set
off tomorrow, that we may be at home to receive them."

At this moment Mrs. Mills entered; "my dear sister," said Mr. Clement, with a
smile, "Clara and William have been imparting to me some of their newly
acquired knowledge, and telling me how agreeably you have entertained them."

"I am happ," returned Mrs. Mills, "if they think so."

"We should be very ungrateful, my dear Madam," said Clara, "not to acknowledge
your kindness, we have passed a most delightful week! Papa, I am sensible I
have given you a great deal of uneasiness -- I have been very idle, and
inattentive; but I now see the value of knowledge, and am impatient till I have
an opportunity of atoning for the time I have lost."

"How happy," said Mr. Clement, "do you make me by the avowal of such
sentiments! yes, my dear child, I have indeed, with concern, beheld your time
daily wasted in frivolous and unprofitable amusements, and have reproached
myself as, in some measure, the cause, by improper indulgence: shall I confess
the truth -- I opened my heart on this subject to your aunt, who kindly invited
you hither, in the hope of inspiring you with a taste for most rational
pleasures: The disgust you conceived to the visit induced me (too much
accustomed to indulge your inclinations) to limit it to a week; and little did
I expect the happy change so short a period has produced."

"Then you knew, Madam," said Clara, "how reluctantly I came hither? (Mrs.
Mills smiled) and Clara rejoined, turning to her father, you should not have
told that, papa."

"When we apply to the physician, Clara, for advice," returned Mr. Clement,
with a smile, "he should be fully informed of the complaint."

"I was neither surprised nor offended, my love," said Mrs. Mills; "the ideas
naturally excited by an old Gothic mansion, and a solitary aunt, accorded
little with the sprightliness of youth; I wished only to convince you, that
knowledge and virtue, which give the principal charm to society, can also
render the most dreary solitude agreeable, and that the rational and
contemplative mind will draw to itself, from objects apparently the most
insignificant, a source of entertainment. This being my design, I forbore to
introduce you to several neighboring families, whose society would have
enlivened the scene; I resolved, in this visit, that our pleasures should rest
more immediately upon ourselves, and I hope, that the week has past neither
unpleasantly nor unprofitably."

"No, indeed, Madam, said the young people; the hours have only seemed to fly
too fast; Clara then added, "I had no idea that knowledge could be attained
with so much ease; If I had, I should not now, be so ignorant."

"Do not deceive yourself, my dear" said Mrs. Mills; " time, application, and
perseverance, are necessary to the attainment of true knowledge: without these
you will acquire only that superficial kind which, by rendering you conceited,
will render you contemptible: My design, in our conversations this week, has
been to awaken in your mind a taste for rational studies; it is yours to improve
it by diligence and perseverance."

"Ah, my dear Madam," said Clara, "had I you to instruct and advise me! but
that cannot be; papa says we must really set off for town tomorrow morning."

"I have been wishing," said Mr. Clement, "that it were possible to purchase a
house within a short ride -- "

"O! that would be delightful," exclaimed the young people.

"I have a better plan," said Mrs. Mills: "What should prevent those whom
interest and inclination so closely unite making one family? This mansion is
large enough to contain us all."

"But, my dear sister," said Mr. Clement, "consider -- "

"I guess your scruples," interrupted Mrs. Mills, "and am prepared to answer
them. The obligation shall be mutual: In the summer you shall be my guest here,
and in the winter I will be yours in Portland Place."

"I am delighted with the proposal," exclaimed Mr. Clement; "but will you, my
dear sister, who have for years obstinately secluded yourself in this
retirement, consent occasionally to quit it, and mix again with the world?"

"Yes, brother," said Mrs. Mills, "what I have refused to the repeated
solicitations of my friends, I now offer as a sacrifice due to you and to these
dear children: I feel that I can be useful to you both; my heart expands in the
thought, and I no longer hesitate to pursue the path pointed out to me by new
duties."

"How, my dear sister," said Mr. Clement, "shall I express the sense I
entertain of your kindness! how discharge so high an obligation?"

"There is little merit," said Mrs. Mills, "in the performance of duties which
coincide so powerfully with our inclinations."

"And shall we really, madam," said Clara, "make but one family? What an
unexpected happiness!"

"I too," said William, "shall share it with you, sister, in the holidays."

"It is my intention, William," said Mr. Clement, "to take you from school, and
to receive a gentleman, with whom I am in treaty, into my family, as tutor to
you."

"Well," said William, starting up in an ecstacy, "that indeed will be
charming! You shall see, father, how attentive and diligent I will be; I shall
be so happy to live at home with you, and my aunt, and my sister!"

The day passed thus insensibly away, and the next morning, at an early hour,
Mr. Clement, with his son and daughter, set out for London: They bade a
cheerful farewell to Mrs. Mills, in the full assurance of a speedy return, which
took place in the course of a few weeks, when having enjoyed the beauties of
the country, at the close of the year, Mr. Clement had the pleasure of
conducting his sister, after an absence of more than twelve years, to the
metropolis -- From this time the families were united.

Clara, conscious of her imperfections, by diligence and attention, corrected
them; she became gentle, amiable, and accomplished; and Mrs. Mills, in whom she
ever found an affectionate friend and a faithful counselor, had, in time, the
happiness of seeing every female excellence united in her character. -- William
too, under a judicious preceptor, assisted by the counsels of his father became
a worthy man, and an elegantly accomplished scholar.

Thus William and Clara, by their conduct, constituted the happiness of a
parent and a friend, whom they loved and honored: To the end of their lives,
they looked back with pleasure on the week which had taught them the importance
of time; and convinced them, that it can be no way so well improved as in the
practice of virtue, and the acquirement of useful knowledge.



Poetical Appendix.
THE BIRD's NEST.
YES, little Nest, I Will hold you fast,
And little birds, one, two, three, four;
I Have watched you long; you're mine at last,
Poor little things; you will 'scape no more.
Chirp, cry, and flutter as you will,
Ah! simple rebels, it is in vain;
Your little wings are unfledged still;
How can you freedom then obtain?
What note of sorrow strikes my ear?
Is it their mother thus distressed?
Ah yes -- and see, their father dear,
Flies round and round, to seek their nest.
And is it I who cause their moan?
I, who so often in summer's heat,
Beneath yon oak have laid me down,
To listen to their song so sweet?
If from my tender mother's side
Some wicked wretch should make me fly,
Full well I know 'twou'd her be tide
To break her heart, to sink, to die!
And shall I, then, so cruel prove
Your little ones to force away?
No, no; together live and love,
See, here they are -- Take them, I pray.
Teach them in yonder wood to fly,
And let them your soft warbling hear,
Till their own wings can soar as high,
And their own notes may sound as clear.
Go, gentle birds, go free as air!
While often again in summer's heat,
To yonder oak I will repair,
And listen to your song so sweat.
THE MOUSE's PETITION. FOUND IN THE TRAP WHERE HE HAD BEEN CONFINED ALL NIGHT.
Parcere subjectis, et debellare superbos.
VIRGIL.
OH! hear a pensive captive's prayer,
For liberty that sighs;
And never let thine heart be shut
Against the prisoner's cries.
For here forlorn and sad I ^it,
Within the wiry grate;
And trembling at the approaching morn,
Which brings impending fate.
If ever thy breast with freedom glowed,
And spurned a tyrant's chain,
Let not thy strong oppressive force
A freeborn mouse detain.
Oh! do not stain with guiltless blood
Thy hospitable hearth;
Nor triumph that thy wiles betrayed
A prize so little worth.
The scattered gleanings of a feast
My scanty meals supply:
But if thine unrelenting heart
That slender boon deny,
The cheerful light, the vital air,
(...) blessings widely given;
Let nature's commoners enjoy
The common gifts of Heaven.
The well-taught philosophic mind
To all compassion gives;
Casts round the world an equal eye,
And feels for all that lives.
If mind, as ancient sages taught,
A never-dying flame,
Still shifts through matter's varying forms,
In every form the same;
Beware, lest in the worm you crush,
A brother's soul you fin^^
And tremble, le^t thy luckless hand
Dislodge a kindred mind.
Or, if this transient gleam of day;
Be all of life we share,
Let pity plead within thy breast,
That little all to spare.
So may thy hospitable board
With health and peace be crowned,
And every charm of heartfelt ^ase
Beneath thy roof be found.
So when unseen destruction lurks,
Which men like mice may share,
May some kind angel clear thy path,
And break the hidden snare.
COMPASSION.
PITY the sorrows of a poor old man,
Whose trembling limbs have borne him to (...),
Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span,
Oh! give relief, and Heaven will bless your store.
These tattered clothes my poverty bespeak,
These hoary locks proclaim my lengthened years,
And many a furrow in my grief-worn cheek
Has been the channel to a flood of tears.
Yon house, erected on the rising ground,
With tempting aspect drew me from my road;
For plenty there a residence has found,
And Grandeur a magnificent abode.
Hard is the fate of the infirm and poor!
Here, as I craved a morsel of their bread,
A pampered menial drove me from the door,
To seek a shelter in an humble shed.
Oh! take me to your hospitable dome;
Keen blows the wind, and piercing is the cold!
Short is my passage to the friendly tomb,
For I am poor and miserably old.
Should I reveal the sources of my grief,
If soft humanity ever touched your breast,
Your hands would not withhold the kind relief,
And tears of pity would not be represt.
Heaven sends misfortunes; why should we repine?
It Is Heaven has brought me to the state you see;
And your condition may be soon like mine,
The child of sorrow, and of misery.
A little farm was my paternal lot,
Then like the lark I sprightly hailed the morn;
But ah! oppression forced me from my cot,
My cattle died, and blighted was my corn.
My daughter, once the comfort of my age,
Lured by a villain from her native home,
Is cast abandoned on the world's wide stage,
And doomed in scanty poverty to roam.
My tender wife, sweet soother of my care!
Struck with sad anguish at the stern decree,
Fell, ling ring fell, a victim to despair,
And left the world to wretchedness and me.
Pity the sorrows of a poor old man,
Whose trembling limbs have borne him to your door,
Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span,
Oh! give relief, and Heaven will bless your store.
INFANT IN A CRADLE.
AH, happy babe! what wishes vain
Thy innocence and peace excite!
Ah! could thou but through life maintain
The bliss which gives such pure delight!
Sweet is thy sleep! while visions gay,
The friends of infantine repose,
Before thy dawning fancy play,
Nor vanish, till thy eyes unclose.
Thy opening eyes a father please,
Thy childish look a mother charms;
In turn thy little frame they seize;
Thy safest cradle is their arms.
Thou rising hope of all thy race,
Whose peace upon thy smiles depend;
If joy but brighten in thy face,
Over every face its rays extend.
Ah! happy babe! what wishes vain
Thy innocence and peace excite!
O, could thou but through life maintain
The bliss which gives such pure delight!
Free from regret, or vain desires,
Each object offered to thy view
Thy spotless soul with joy inspires,
And wakens pleasure ever new.
Or if thou chance to heave a sigh,
Nor long, nor bitter, is thy woe;
Thy ready smile is ever nigh,
Though down thy cheek a tear may flow.
Thy very weakness gives thee power;
Thy earliest will seems law and right;
And even the aged, rough, and sour,
Melt into softness at thy sight.
Ah! happy babe! what wishes vain
Thy innocence and peace excite!
Ah! could thou but through life maintain
The bliss which gives such pure delight!
But no! for see, with rapid wing
Approaching storms the prospect lour,
And cares and crosses with them bring
Thy sports to mar, thy joys to sour.
Even I, how'er I still preserve
A taste for nature's artless charms,
Start, sigh, and tremble every nerve,
With frequent fears, and quick alarms.
Now false, now fickle proves some friend;
Now death some loved companion steals;
Now fa^^^st hopes in visions end --
Alas! each day fresh woe reveals!
Ah! happy babe! what wishes vain
Thy innocence and peace excite!
Ah! could thou but through life maintain
The bliss which gives such pure delight!
If yet blind Fate, unknowing why,
The bitter cup of evil fill,
Quick to thy cradle will I fly,
To solace me for every ill.
Thy soft caresses, void of art,
Thy playful fearlessness of harm,
Shall to my sorr'wing soul impart
Some genuine drops of healing balm.
How sweet thy sight, how soft thy power!
Sole season of untutored joys!
Perhaps of mine the happiest hour
Is that which even thy praise employs!
Ah! happy babe! what wishes vain
Thy innocence and peace excite!
Ah! could thou but through life maintain
The bliss which gives such pure delight!
THE HERMIT.
AT the close of the day, when the hamlet is still,
And mortals the sweets of forgetfulness prove,
When naught but the torrent is heard on the hill,
And naught but the nightingale's song in the grove.
'T was then, by the cave of a mountain reclined,
An Hermit his nightly complaint thus began,
Though mournful his voice, his heart was resigned,
He thought as a Sage, but he felt as a Man:
"Ah, why thus abandoned to darkness and woe,
Why thus, lonely Philomel, flows thy sad strain?
For Spring shall return, and a lover bestow,
And thy bosom no trace of misfortune retain.
Yet if pity inspire thee, ah cease not thy lay,
Mourn, sweetest complainer, Man calls thee to mourn:
O soothe him, whose pleasures like thine pass away --
Full quickly they pass, -- but they never return.
"Now gliding remote, on the verge of the sky,
The Moon half-extinguish'd her crescent displays:
But lately I marked, when majestic on high
She shone, and the planets were lost in her blaze.
^^ll on, thou fair orb, and with gladness pursue
The path that conducts thee to splendour again. --
But Man's faded glory no change shall renew,
Ah fool! to exult in a glory so vain!
"'It Is night, and the landscape is lovely no more;
I mourn, but, ye woodlands, I mourn not for you;
For morn is approaching, your charms to restore,
Perfumed with fresh fragrance, and glittering with dew.
Nor yet for the ravage of Winter I mourn;
Kind nature the embryo blossom will save --
But when shall Spring visit the mouldering urn!
O when shall it dawn on the night of the grave!"
EULOGIUM ON THE BENEVOLENT HOWARD.
AND now BENEVOLENCE! thy rays divine
Dart round the globe from Zembla to the Line:
Over each dark prison plays the cheering light,
Like northern lustres over the vault of night. --
From realm to realm, with cross or crescent crowned,
Wherever mankind and misery are found,
Over burning sands, deep waves or wilds of snow,
Thy HOWARD journeying seeks the house of woe.
Down many a winding step to dungeons dank,
Where anguish wails aloud, and fetters clank;
To caves bestrew'd with many a mouldering bone,
And cells, whose echoes only learn to groan;
Where no kind bars a whispering friend disclose,
No sunbeam enters, and no zephyr blows,
He treads, inemulous of fame or wealth,
Profuse of toil, and prodigal of health;
With soft assuasive eloquence expands
Power's rigid heart, and opes his clenching hands;
Leads stern-ey'd justice to the dark domains,
If not to sever, to relax the chains;
Or guides awakened mercy through the gloom,
And shows the prison, sister to the tomb! --
Gives to her babes the self -- devoted wife,
To her fond husband liberty and life! --
-- The spirits of the good, who bend from high,
Wide over these earthly scenes their partial eye,
When first arrayed in VIRTUE'S purest robe,
They saw her HOWARD traversing the globe;
Saw round his brows her sun-like glory blaze
In arrowy circles of unwearied rays;
Mistook a mortal for an angel-guest,
And asked what seraph-foot the earth impressed.
-- Onward he moves! -- Disease and death retire,
And murmuring demons hate him, and admire.
A FATHER's ADVICE TO HIS SON.
DEEP in a grove by cypress shaded,
Where midday sun had seldom shone,
Or noise the solemn scene invaded,
Save some afflicted Muse's moan,
A swain, toward full-ag'd manhood wending,
Sat sorrowing at the close of day,
At whose fond side a boy, attending,
Lisp'd half his father's cares away.
The father's eyes no object wrested,
But on the smiling prattler hung,
Till what his throbbing heart suggested,
These accents trembled from his tongue.
"My youth's first hope, my manhood's treasu^^*
"My dearest innocent, attend,
"Nor four rebuke, or sour displeasure,
"A father's loveliest name is Friend.
"Some truths from long experience flowing,
"Worth more than royal grants, receive;
"For truths are wealth of Heaven's bestowing,
"Which kings have seldom power to give.
"Since, from an ancient race descended,
"You boast an unattainted blood,
"By yours be their fair fame attended,
"And claim by birthright -- to be good.
"In love for every fellow creature
"Superior rise above the crowd;
"What most ennobles human nature
"Was never the portion of the proud.
"Be thine the generous heart that borrows
"From other's joys a friendly glow,
"And for each hapless neighbor's sorrows
"Throbs with a sympathetic woe.
"This is the temper most endearing,
"Though wide proud Pomp her banner spreads;
"An heavenlier power Goodnature bearing,
"Each heart in willing thraldom leads.
"Taste not from Fame's uncertain fountain
"The peace-destroying streams that flow,
"Nor from Ambition's dangerous mountain
"Look down upon the world below.
"The princely pine on hills exalted,
"Whose lofty branches cleave the sky,
"By winds, long braved, at last assaulted,
"Is headlong whirled in dust to lie;
"While the mild rose, more safely growing,
"Low in its unaspiring vale,
"Amid retirement's shelter blowing.
"Exchanges sweets with every gale.
"Wish not for Beauty's darling features
"Molded by Nature's partial power,
"For fairest forms among human creatures
"Shine but the pageants of an hour.
"I saw the pride of all the meadow,
"At noon, a gay narcissus blow
"Upon a river's bank, whose shadow
"Bloomed in the silver waves below;
"By noontide's heat its youth was wasted,
"The waters, as they passed, complained;
"At eve, its glories all were blasted,
"And not one former tint remained.
"Nor let vain Wit's deceitful glory
"Lead you from Wisdom's path astray;
"What genius lives renowned in story,
"To Happiness who found the way?
"In yonder mead behold that vapor,
"Whose vivid beams illusive play,
"Far off it seems a friendly taper,
"To guide the traveller on his way;
"But should some hapless wretch, pursuing,
"Tread where the treacherous meteors glow,
"He Would find, too late, his rashness ruing,
"That fatal quicksands lurk below.
"In life such bubbles naught admiring,
"Gilt with false light, and filled with air,
"Do you from pageant crowds retiring,
"To Peace in Virtue's cot repair.
"There seek the never-wasted treasure
"Which mutual love and friendship give,
"Domestic comfort, spotless pleasure,
"And blessed and blessing you will live.
"If Heaven with children crowns your dwelling,
"As mine its bounty does with you,
"In fondness fatherly excelling,
"The example you have felt pursue."
He paused -- for tenderly (...)
The darling of his wounded heart,
Looks had means only of expressing
Thoughts, language never could impart.
Now Night, her mournful mantle spreading,
Had robbed in black the horizon round,
And, dank dews from her tresses shedding,
With genial moisture bathed the ground;
When back to city follies flying,
'Midst custom's slaves he lived resigned,
His face, arrayed in smiles, denying
The true complexion of his mind.
For seriously around surveying
Each character, in youth and age,
Of fools betrayed, and knaves betraying,
That played upon this human stage,
(Peaceful himself and undesigning)
He loathed the scenes of guile and strife,
And felt each secret wish inclining
To leave this fretful farce of life.
Yet to whatever above was ^ated,
Obediently he bowed his soul,
For, what all-bounteous Heaven created,
He thought Heaven only should control.
ODE TO INNOCENCE.
"HAIL Innocence! celestial maid!
What joys thy blushing charms reveal!
Sweet, as the arbour's cooling shade,
And milder than the vernal gale.
"On Thee attends a radiant choir,
Soft-smiling Peace, and downy Rest;
With Love, that prompts the warbling lyre,
And Hope, that soothes the throbbing breast.
"O Sent from Heaven (...) ^aunt the grove,
Where squinting Envy never can come!
Nor pines the cheek with luckless Love,
Nor Anguish chills the living bloom.
"But spotless Beauty, robbed in white,
Sits on y^n moss -- grown hill reclined;
Serene as heaven's unsullied light,
And pure a Delia's gentle mind.
"Grant, Heavenly Power! thy peaceful sway
May still my ruder thoughts control;
Thy hand to point my dubious way,
Thy voice to soothe the melting soul!
"Far in the shady sweet retreat
Let Thought beguile the lingering hour;
Let Quiet court the mossy seat,
And twining olives form the bower!
"Let dove -- eyed Peace her wreath bestow,
And of^ sit listening in the dale,
While Night's sweet warbler from the bough
Tells to the grove her plaintive tale.
"Soft as in Delia's snowy breast,
Let each consenting passion move;
Let Angels watch its silent rest,
And all its blissful dreams be Love!"
VIRTUE AND ORNAMENT: TO THE LADIES.
THE diamond's and the ruby's rays
Shine with a milder, finer flame,
And more attract our love and praise
Than Beauty's self, if lost to Fame.
But the sweet tear in Pity's eye
Transcends the Diamond's brightest beams;
And the soft blush of Modesty
More precious than the Ruby seems.
The glowing gem, the sparkling stone,
May strike the sight with quick surprise;
But Truth and Innocence alone
Can still engage the good and wise.
No glittering ornament or show
Will aught avail in grief or pain:
Only from inward worth can flow
Delight that ever shall remain.
INNOCENT PLAY.
ABROAD in the meadows, to see the young lambs
Run sporting about by the side of their dams,
With fleeces so clean and so white,
Or a nest of young doves in a large open cage,
When they play all in love without anger or rage,
How much we may learn from the sight!
If we had been ducks, we might dabble in mud;
Or dogs, we might play till it ended in blood;
So foul and so fierce are their natures:
But Thomas and William, and such pretty names,
Should be cleanly and harmless as doves or as lambs,
Those lovely sweet innocent creatures.
Not a thing that we do, nor a word that we say,
Should hinder another in jesting or play;
For he is (...) in earnest that is hurt:
(...) rude are the boys that throw pebbles and mire!
There Is none but a madman will fling about fire,
And tell you, "'It Is all but in sport."
THE EMMET.
THESE Emmets, how little they are in our eyes!
We tread them to dust, and a troop of them dies,
Without our regard or concern:
Yet, as wise as we are, if we went to their school,
There Is many a sluggard and many a fool,
Some lessons of wisdom might learn.
They don't wear their time out in (...) or play,
But gather up corn in a ^un-shiny day;
And for winter they lay up their stores;
They manage their work in such regular forms,
One would think they foresaw all the frosts and the storms,
And so brought their food within doors.
But I have less sense than a poor creeping ant,
If I take not due care for the things I shall want*
Nor provide against dangers in time.
When death or old age shall (...) in my face.
What a wretch shall I be in the end of my days,
If I trifle away all their pr^^^^!
Now, now, while my strength and my youth are in bloom,
Let me think what will serve me when sickness shall come,
And pray that my sins be forgiven:
Let me read in good books, and believe and obey,
That, when death turns me out of this cottage of clay,
I may dwell in a palace in heaven.
ODE TO HAPPINESS.
O Happiness! fair daughter of the skies,
Thou peaceful Calm^r o^ the human breast,
From whose great store unbounded blessings rise,
Which soothe the soul to undisturbed rest:
Offspring of Jove! direct my devious ^eet
Along the cheerful, flow'r-bespangled way,
Which leads unerring to thy blissful seat;
Nor ever permit my wandering steps to stray.
Where shall I seek thee, sphere-descended maid*
Does some more favored clime thy presence boa^^,
And art thou roving now appalled, dis^^ay'd,
"A wandering ex^^e on a foreign coast?"
Or shall ^^ather seek thee in a court,
Amid the purple splendors of a throne?
Ah! (...) for there to ^^rture thee'^^^ sport,
And (...) to hear thee deeply groan!
Art thou concealed in heaps of golden ore?
Can they thy cheering influence impart.
To him, whose coffers hold a plenteous store,
And drive each carking sorrow from his heart?
Ah, no! the rich no pure enjoyment prove,
Riches are but the harbingers of pain,
The wretched miser, buried in their love,
Sighs over his heaps, and counts "and sighs again."
The prodigal, with huge abundance blessed,
In folly lavishes his wealthy store,
In feasts luxurious dissipates his rest,
And dies forlorn and miserably poor!
Does ardent Cupid then engage thy smiles,
With him do thou take up thy peaceful home,
No, no! thou liv'st a stranger to his wiles!
Where then, O where, Celestial, do thou roam!
Scarce had I spoke, when to my wondering sight,
The heaven-born maid in bright effulgence glowed,
Around her steps diffusing beamy light,
She thus bespoke me with an awful nod!
' Nor in a court, nor on a splendid throne,
' Nor amid copious heaps of golden ore,
' Nor in luxurious revels am I known,
' Nor yet, O youth! where Cupid boasts his power.
' If to my seat the pathway you would learn,
' Turn, turn your course to where you summits rise,
' And first to VIRTUE's fane the road discern,
' VIRTUE, my sister-offspring of the skies.'
THE GOLDEN AGE.
THE golden age was first; when man, yet new,
No rule but uncorrupted reason knew;
And, with a native bent, did good pursue.
Unforced by punishment, un-aw'd by fear,
His words were simple, and his soul sincere;
Needless was written law where none oppressed;
The law of man was written in his breast:
No suppliant crowd before the judge appeared;
No court erected yet, nor cause was heard;
But all was safe, for conscience was their guard;
The mountain-trees in distant prospect please,
Ere yet the pine descended to the seas;
Ere sails were spread, new oceans to explore;
And happy mortals, unconcerned for more,
Confined their wishes to their native shore.
No walls were yet, nor fence, nor mote, nor mound;
Nor drum was heard, nor trumpets angry sound:
Nor swords were forged; but void of care and crime,
The soft creation slept away their time.
The teeming earth, yet guiltless of the plough,
And unprovoked, did fruitful stores allow:
Content with food, which Nature freely bred,
On wildings and on strawberries they fed;
Cornels and bramble-berries gave the rest,
And falling acorns furnished out a feast.
The flowers, unsown, in fields and meadows reigned;
And western winds immortal spring maintained.
In following years the bearded corn ensued,
From earth, unasked; nor was that earth renewed.
From veins of valleys milk and nectar broke;
And honey sweating through the pores of oak.
HYMN ON THE SEASONS.
THESE, as they change, Almighty Father, these
Are but the varied God. The rolling year
Is full of Thee. Forth in the pleasing Spring
Thy beauty walks, thy tenderness and love.
Wide ^lush the fields; the softening air is balm*
Echo the mountains round; the forest smiles;
And every sense and every heart is joy.
Then comes thy glory in the Summer months,
With light and heat refulgent. Then thy sun
Shoots full perfection through the swelling year:
And often thy voice in dreadful thunder speaks,
And often at dawn, deep noon, or falling eve,
By brooks and groves, in hollow-whisp'ring gales,
Thy bounty shines in Autumn unconfined,
And spreads a common feast for all that lives.
In Winter awful Thou! with clouds and storms
Around Thee thrown, tempest over tempest rolled,
Majestic darkness! On the whirlwind's wing,
Riding sublime, Thou bidst the world adore,
And humblest nature with thy northern blast.
Mysterious round! what skill, what force divine,
Deep-felt, in these appear! a simple train,
Yet so delightful mixed, with such kind art,
Such beauty and beneficence combined;
Shade, unperceived, so softening into shade;
And all so forming an harmonious whole,
That as they still succeed, they ravish still.
But wandering often, with rude unconscious gaze,
Man marks not Thee, marks not the mighty hand
That, ever busy, wheels the silent spheres;
Works in the secret deep; shoots steaming thence
The fair profusion that o'erspreads the spring,
Flings from the sun direct the flaming day;
Feeds every creature; hurls the tempest forth,
And, as on earth this grateful change revolves,
With transport touches all the springs of life.
Nature, attend! join, every living soul
Beneath the spacious temple of the sky,
In adoration join; and ardent raise
One general song! To him, ye vocal gales,
Breathe soft, whose spirit in your freshness breathes:
Oh talk of him in solitary glooms,
Where over the rock the scarcely waving pine
Fills the brown shade with a religious awe!
And ye, whose bolder note is heard afar,
Who shake the astonished world, lift high to heaven
The impetuous song, and say from whom you rage.
His praise, ye brooks, attune, ye trembling rills;
And let me catch it as I muse along.
Ye headlong torrents, rapid and profound;
Ye softer floods, that lead the humid maze
Along the vale; and thou majestic main,
A secret world of wonders in thy self,
Sound his stupendous praise, whose greater voice
Or bids you roa^ or bids your roaring fall.
So roll your incense, herbs, and fruits, and flowers,
In mingled clouds to Him, whose sun exalts,
Whose breath perfumes you, and whose pencil paints.
Ye forests bend, ye harvests wave, to Him;
Breathe your still song into the reaper's heart,
As home he goes beneath the joyous moon.
Ye that keep watch in heaven, as earth asleep,
Unconscious lies, effuse your mildest beams,
Ye constellations, while your angels strike,
Amid the spangled sky, the silver lyre.
Great source of day! best image here below
Of thy Creator, ever pouring wide,
From world to world, the vital ocean round,
On nature write with every beam his praise.
The thunder rolls: be hushed the prostrate world:
While cloud to cloud returns the solemn hymn.
Bleat out afresh, ye hills; ye mossy rocks,
Retain the sound: the broad responsive low,
Ye valleys, raise; for the Great Shepherd reigns;
And his unsuffering kingdom yet will come.
Ye woodlands all awake: a boundless song
Burst from the groves! and when the restless day,
Expiring, lays the warbling world asleep,
Sweetest of birds! sweet Philomela, charm
The listening shades, and teach the night his praise.
Ye chief for whom the whole creation smiles;
At once the head, the heart, the tongue of all,
Crown the great hymn! in swarming cities vast,
Assembled men to the deep organ join
The long-resounding voice, often breaking clear,
At solemn pauses, through the swelling base;
And, as each mingling flame increases each,
In one united ardor rise to heaven.
Or if you rather choose the rural shade,
And find a fane in every sacred grove;
There let the shepherd's ^lute, the virgin's lay,
The prompting seraph, and the poet's lyre,
Still sing the God of Seasons as they roll.
For me, when I forget the darling theme,
Whether the blossom blows; the Summer ray
Russets the plain; inspiring Autumn gleams;
Or Winter rises in the blackening cast;
Be my tongue mute, my fancy paint no more,
And dead to joy, forget my heart to beat.
Should fate command me to the farthest verge
Of the green earth, to distant barbarous climes,
Rivers unknown to song; where first the sun
Gilds Indian mountains, or his setting beam
Flames on the Atlantic isles, it is naught to me:
Since God is ever present, ever felt,
In the void waste as in the city full;
And where He vital spreads, there must be joy,
When even at last the solemn hour shall come,
And wing my mystic ^light to future worlds,
I cheerful will obey; there with new powers,
Will rising wonders sing; I cannot go
Where universal love not smiles around,
Sustaining all yon orbs, and all their suns:
From seeming evil still educing good,
And better thence again, and better still,
In infinite progression. -- But I lose
Myself in Him, in light ineffable!
Come then, expressive silence, muse his praise.
BOOKS Published by J. ORMROD, No. 41, Chesnut-street.
1. Letters containing a sketch of the politics of France, and of the
interesting scenes which have recently passed in the prisons of Paris. Price
6s6. 2. The travels of Cyrus in French and English; to which is annexed, a
discourse on the Theology and Mythology of the Pagans. Translated and arranged
in the most convenient order, for the greater and more immediate improvement of
those ladies and gentlemen, who wish to acquire speedily either the French or
English language, by J. E. G. M. De La Grange, etc. etc. etc. Price 15s. 3. The
Iliad of Homer; translated from the Greek, by Alexander Pope, Esquire. Price 7s6.
4. Select dialogues of Lucian. To which is added, a new literal translation in
Latin, with notes in English, by Edward Murphy, M. A. Price 7s6. 5. The
Triumphs of Temper; a poem in six cantos. By William Haley, Esqr. Embellished
with plates. Price 7s6. 6. The sublime and beautiful of Scripture: Being essays
on select passages of sacred composition. By C. Melmoth. To which is added. Dr.
Dwights dissertation on the Poetry, History and Eloquence of the Bible. Price
3s9. 7. Anecdotes of a Little Family; interspersed with fables, stories and
allegories, illustrated with suitable morals for the improvement of children of
different ages and both sexes. Ornamented with cuts. Price 1s10. 8. The book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other rites and
ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Protestant Episcopal
Church in the United States of America; together with the Psalter or Psalms of
David. Price 5s.
J. ORMROD constantly keeps for sale, a large assortment of BOOKS and
STATIONARY.


