Mr. PARKER'S Oration.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT CASTINE, JULY 4, 1796, AT THE CELEBRATION OF THE
Twentieth Anniversary OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY ISAAC PARKER, ESQUIRE.

Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON. 1796.

SIR,
THE Artillery Company of Castine have appointed us a Committee to wait on you,
and request a copy of the address, delivered by you yesterday, for the press.

RICHARD HUNEWELL,
in behalf of the Committee. July 5, 1796. ISAAC PARKER, Esquire.



GENTLEMEN,
IT may be considered presumptuous to submit to the public eye, a performance
which I had little more than twenty-four hours to prepare; but as I had rather
risk my reputation as a writer, than refuse compliance with a request so
politely urged, I deliver it into your hands, believing that if it is ever
read, it will be read with more candor than criticism.

I am respectfully yours, ISAAC PARKER.
The GENTLEMEN of the COMMITTEE.



AN ORATION,
FELLOW CITIZENS,
HAVING assembled to commemorate the day which gave birth to the independence
of our happy country, it may be well to retrace some of the causes which led to
that glorious event, and to awaken feelings, which, though the lapse of twenty
years may have in some degree enfeebled, can never be obliterated from our
minds.

The American states, prior to the fourth day of July, 1776, were in a state of
vassallage to Great Britain, were subject to her laws and government, and in
fact were her colonies, from which she expected obedience, without even the
return of protection.

While in infancy, and hardly strong enough to provide for, and defend
themselves, they met with a semblance of affection from the parent country, and
received that aid and assistance which promoted their growth, and hastened
their maturity.

Attachment to ancient friends, and respect for the government from which they
sprang, led the citizens of America to believe that affection and disinterested
kindness produced this attention; but the subsequent conduct of Great Britain
evinced the fallacy of the supposition, and showed that the aggrandizement of
the kingdom was the most operative cause of her apparently parental solicitude.

As the West-Indian planter cherishes the slave, from whose labor he looks for
an accumulation of his wealth, so did Great Britain nurture her American
colonies, looking forward to the plentiful harvest she expected ere long to
enjoy.

As soon as their unexampled increase of wealth and population warranted the
attempt, her motives became palpable: Taxes were demanded without regard to the
abilities of the people; and the pretended principles of her constitution were
violated, to fill ministerial coffers with American wealth.

The principle adopted by the parliament of Great Britain, that they could tax
the colonies to any extent, without admitting them to a share in the
government, was so monstrous in its nature and destructive in its consequences,
that the spirit of resistance was at once enflamed, and the cry for
independence became universal.

Few that witnessed the feeble state of this country, at that eventful period,
could have predicted so glorious an issue to the virtuous struggles which were
then made in resistance against tyrannic encroachment. Disordered in our
governments -- destitute of the means of war, -- scattered over an extensive
continent, and accustomed only to the peaceful implements of husbandry -- who
could have ventured to say, that the disciplined veterans of Europe, supported
by an exhaustless treasury, and impelled by wounded pride and resentment, would
have left the field, and yielded the point of contest. "But the race is not
always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong." The just pursuit of America
was better to her than a host.

Fighting for liberty, the inalienable right of man, and resisting oppression,
Heaven smiled upon her exertions, and she was crowned with success.

The termination of the contest seemed to promise the most unbounded prosperity
to our country: But experience proved that much was yet to be done, before our
liberties would be placed upon a permanent foundation.

The four years immediately succeeding peace were clouded with domestic
dissension; our commerce was annihilated; agriculture was without a spring; and
the general torpidity throughout America was afflictive to the friends, and
joyous to the enemies, of our revolution.

The latter tauntingly asked, What is your boasted independence? It has
destroyed your commerce; it has darkened your prospects; you have the name of
liberty, but for the name alone you have sacrificed the substantial interests
of your country. We could only reply, that we hoped for better things, and we
waited for some unknown interference to quicken us again into activity and life.

In the natural body, sluggishness and inactivity frequently succeed violence
of exertion; and in the body politic, convulsive agitations are commonly
followed by supineness and lethargy.

Whilst invaded by an enemy, and menaced with servitude, a sense of common
danger was sufficient to preserve union, and the magnitude of our object
ensured vigilance. But when danger was removed, carelessness succeeded, and our
country sunk into an indifference which threatened fulfillment to the
predictions of our enemies.

The several states, consulting their individual interests, neglected the
happiness of the whole: Divided councils, distracted measures, partial
pursuits, and local politics, were discoverable in all their proceedings.

Had another period of four years been marked with the same disgraceful
colors, we may say with confidence, that we should have courted the protection
of some foreign power, and should have remembered this now glorious anniversary
with ignominy and reproach. But Heaven had not forsaken us; the disasters of
the day taught the necessity of union, and evinced the impossibility of
happiness without a national government. This mighty continent felt the
disease, and was eager to procure a remedy.

From this state of things sprang the happy form of government which is now in
operation, and which is acknowledged, by Europe as well as America, to be the
most perfect republican system, which the ingenuity of man has yet devised.

It would be tedious, as well as unnecessary, to develope the various parts of
this beautiful machine. Suffice it to say, that the people are the source of
all the power it conveys; and that its object, the happiness of the people, is
most effectually secured.

I cannot, however, omit to mention the most prominent excellence it contains,
I mean the article by which, whenever experience proves a defect, or change of
circumstance suggests an alteration, it may be ameliorated without violence,
and rendered more and more perfect, without disturbing the public tranquillity.
Here is a sure guard against that turbulence which always attends an alteration
of government in other countries.

In Europe, the people must continue under oppression, or perhaps be destroyed
in attempts to remove it: But in America, alterations have taken place, and, if
necessary, will hereafter be made, not only without bloodshed, but without even
convulsing the public mind.

Like the majestic river, which imperceptibly seeks a new channel, and silently
changes its course, our federal government may assume new features, and
discover new beauties, whenever the people require it, without any disturbance
to the general movements of the machine. Here is a check to the licentious
spirit of innovation, far more effectual than the sanguinary codes of tyrants.
Here is a barrier against sedition and factious machinations, more solid than
the prisons of Germany, or the Bastille of France.

If ever a deluded part of the community should rise in opposition to the laws,
the great body of the people will be sure to repress them, and to preserve
inviolate this grand palladium of national liberty and happiness.

We, fellow-citizens, have peculiar reasons for admiring this magnificent
structure, for it is principally modelled after the constitution of our
Commonwealth, under which we have enjoyed, and, I trust, shall continue to
enjoy, so many rich and invaluable blessings.

The uninterupted, the unprecedented growth of America, since the operation of
our federal government; her increased population; her immense commerce; her
successful agriculture; her reputation abroad; her felicity at home, speak, in
terms incontrovertible, the excellence of that government; and these, beyond
contradiction, its unexampled merit.

Let us then strive to preserve it in its purity; let us yield our strength to
prop it, when in danger; let us furnish to the world a single instance, that a
government made by the people will promote their happiness, and will endure.

America was first to make the experiment; the French nation have gloriously
followed our steps; and every American will join me, sincerely, in prayer,
that, while liberty and good government are their objects, their exertions may
be crowned with complete success.

In revolving this important and delightful subject, it is impossible to shut
out from the mind, the recollection of those heroes and statesmen, who were
principally instrumental in our happy revolution.

It is unnecessary to particularize.

Each one of this assembly can recall the names of those distinguished patriots,
to whose exertions, under Heaven, we are indebted for our existence as a nation.

May the American name never be sullied with the stigma of ingratitude; but may
the memory of departed heroes be as immortal as the actions which dignify their
names.

Our Commonwealth can boast of many who were high in the lift of honor; and
the Union is still blessed with the services of the man who led our armies to
victory, and our country to independence. I can add nothing to enhance your
ideas of this exalted character, beyond what his actions have already
established in your minds. When he was crowned with success, and in full
possession of the hearts, as well as the persons of his soldiers, those, who
understood human nature, predicted that he would profit by his popularity to
secure to himself the government of his country; but we saw him lay his laurels
at the feet of the people, for whom they were gathered, and cheerfully reassume
the peaceful occupations of domestic life.

When called, by the unanimous voice of his country, to preside in her
councils, those who know the narrow limits of human capacity, and that it is
not often given to the same man to shine in different spheres, insinuated, that
he would lose in the cabinet the fame he had acquired in the field; and that a
life, which had commenced with brilliancy, would probably end in obscurity. But
we have seen him, in times of danger to our country, preserve the helm of
government with unshaken hand, and conduct us through rocks and quicksands with
unequalled dexterity.

And is the esteem of his fellow-citizens commensurate to his virtues? Yes; he
lives in the heart of every real friend to his country, and will be handed down
to distant generations, as the greatest, the best of men. Painful is it to say,
that even this character, as perfect as humanity can bear, has been the mark of
slander and unmerited reproach. The envenomed dart has been aimed at his
godlike breast; but meeting with the impregnable barrier of his virtues, has
recoiled upon the archers, and covered them with confusion and disgrace.

It may not be improper briefly to state a few of the measures, which will be
essential to prolong the liberties we have so happily acquired. Virtue is the
rock upon which republican governments must be built, or they will soon perish.

The people being the source of all power, if they are corrupt, every authority
which flows from them will be contaminated. Maintain, then, the virtue of the
people; and to this end, spread the means of education; cultivate the minds of
your youth; give them ability to understand their government, and they will be
always ready to support it.

In a community, of which the members are well informed, virtue will reside;
and where virtue dwells, liberty will be sure to remain.

Is there danger of losing our liberties, and again becoming subject to
tyrannic sway? Yes. If the youth are neglected, their morals will become
corrupt, they will be unable to discern when their liberty is invaded, and they
will barter their privileges to the ambitious and intriguing. Can our liberties
last forever? Yes. Check the influence of vice, inculcate the seeds of virtue,
circulate knowledge extensively. You will then find no domestic villain hardy
enough to attempt your slavery; no foreign tyrant able to reduce you to
subjection. Attend, also, to your militia establishments. It was these,
(inferior as they then were), which made resistance to Great Britain in the
least degree justifiable, and furnished the remotest probability of success.
Happy am I to say, that in this young country a military ambition begins to
prevail; and I am still happier to predict, that a few years will add much to
the spirit. From those gentlemen who are raised by their fellow citizens to
places of command, peculiar exertions are required: And I trust their zeal will
not be disproportionate to the confidence reposed in them.

From you, gentlemen, who are the first founders of a company which will
hereafter be as respectable for its numbers as it is now for the character of
its members, we expect such attention to military discipline and order, as will
lay a solid foundation for the future eminence of your company. It is not the
splendour of parade, or the frolic of the day, which originated your
institution: I trust you had a view to its usefulness in the protection of your
country. The mild voice of peace may soon be succeeded by the tumult of war;
and prudence requires a preparation for every event.

Should any unforeseen disaster interrupt the tranquillity of our country, you
may be called upon to take an active part in the conflict. In the event of war,
our exposed, and hitherto defenseless shores, will again be open to the ravages
of a plundering enemy; and we may have occasion to congratulate ourselves in
the possession of a military corpse, which will be forward in the place of
danger, and formidable in the field of fight.

Already, within our memory, has the ground over which you have marched,
witnessed the approach of American forces; but, that circumstance will never
form an honorable trait in the history of our country. Should a second
conflict call forth your exertions, I trust the name of Penobscot will be
rescued from dishonor, and history not be ashamed to admit it within her pages.

Fellow-Citizens, we are now in the perfect possession of peace, independence,
and good government. May our gratitude to Heaven be equal to the favors
bestowed; may our conduct be such as to ensure permanence to these blessings.
And when we have acted well our parts in this transitory stage, may we transmit
those inestimable privileges, pure and unimpaired, to latest posterity.

THE END.

