SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND RELIGIOUS EXERCISES OF MARY NEALE, FORMERLY MARY
PEISLEY.

PRINCIPALLY COMPILED FROM HER OWN WRITINGS.

DUBLIN -- PRINTED: PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED FOR, AND SOLD BY, JOSEPH
CRUKSHANK, NO. 87, HIGH STREET. 1796.

THE following christian experiences falling into my hands, I thought well to
collect and put them into some order for the perusal of others.

She led an exemplary life, being watchful over herself, and zealous for the
prosperity of Truth; her mind was so much to its center, and her attention so
inward, that she often drew others, by her awful sitting, into silence in
friends' families; and, as her cup overflowed, she ministered to them as one
having authority; so that it may be truly said, she was fervent in spirit,
serving the Lord.

Ample accounts have been received of her service both in England and America,
in which the Lord was pleased to bless her labor and sanctify it to many.

She mourned for the obvious declension of our society from its primitive
simplicity in manners and conduct; often declaring, that ere it shone again in
its ancient beauty, the rubbish must be removed, that there must be a division
between the precious and the vile, those who served the Lord and those who
served him not; but before this day come, greater degrees of darkness would
prevail amongst us as a people, and more of the night come upon us before the
day of beauty and reformation would again revive in splendor. And, therefore,
she was fervently engaged that the faithful every where might stand upon their
watch, and discharge themselves as watchmen and watchwomen upon the walls of
Zion, having their armor on and their lights burning, to be able to discover,
as well as oppose, the approach of the enemy.

The latter part of her time she was attended with much bodily weakness and
indisposition, which often rendered her unfit for traveling; these she called
visitations of the mercy of God to her soul, in order to preserve her to
Himself, and stain the beauty and glory of this world in her view, that her
affections might be weaned from terrestrial objects, and fixed upon those
things that are above, permanent and enduring to all eternity.

That the perusal of the following experiences may be blessed, and that the
footsteps of this handmaid of the Lord may excite and encourage all to press
into the path of self-denial, the sure way to sanctification, and the rest of
the righteous, in which she delighted, is, reader, the fervent desire of

Thy well wishing friend, SAMUEL NEALE
.
SOME ACCOUNT, etc.
MARY NEALE, otherwise Peisley, daughter of Peter and Rachel Peisley, was born
in the year 1717, at Ballymore in the county of Kildare, in Ireland, and
educated in the society of the people called Quakers; but a disposition to keep
company unrestrained by the cross of Christ, let her from truth's simplicity in
manners and behavior, whereof she thus expresses herself:

I count it an infinite mercy and high favor, that the omnipotent God suffered
not the thread of my life to be cut, during the many years that I lived in
disobedience to his holy will; and though often, by the operation of his grace,
inwardly touched and convicted of my errors, and the veil so far rent from off
my understanding, as to let me see that I stood on the brink of ruin, yet did I
as often suffer the enemy and adversary of my soul again to darken my
understanding, and benumb my spiritual feeling; and the tumultuous noises,
pleasures and allurements of this world stifled the intelligence of the still
small voice, which would have directed me, saying, this is the way, walk in it.
Our meeting also was favored with a living and powerful ministry, which I
often slighted; thus have I, with my hard and impenitent heart, stoned his
prophets, and by my unbelief and uncircumcised spirit, persecuted them that
were sent to declare and proclaim the glad tidings of the gospel; to invite and
call to those who were in captivity, held by the chains of sin, to come away to
the glorious liberty of the Truth. I have to remember, as an inexpressible
favor and mercy to my soul, that in the height of all my vanity and stupidity,
I was not suffered to run into the gross enormities of the world: I was kept
from those loud, crying, hardening, black crimes, which, had I run into, might
so highly provoke my Creator, as to have caused him to say in his wrath, "Thou
shall not enter into my rest."

A short time before my conversion I had a fall from my horse, by which I was
apparently in danger of having my neck disjointed, and a sudden end put to my
life; as soon as I arose on my feet and recovered my senses, the Lord by his
grace and good Spirit, showed me clearly that I was not in a fit condition to
meet him, the just and holy Judge of heaven and earth, and caused me solidly to
consider the dismal consequence of being hurried off the stage of mortality in
an unprepared state, the impression of which never left my mind till God, by
his grace, had made me more fit for his kingdom, the glory of which be given to
his everlasting name.

About this time two friends in the service of truth, appointed a meeting,
within the compass of that in which she resided. Their awful, reverent sitting
before the Lord, waiting upon him for his presence and aid, struck her in an
unusual manner, raising in her mind a fervent enquiry after the revelation of
the Father, through his Son. She had often heard tell of the comforts of the
holy Spirit, the instruction of the light that comes by Jesus Christ, and the
way of spiritual worship: but still remained a stranger to the true manner of
seeking and breathing after it, in her own experience. She has expressed how
deeply her mind was affected, by the silent and humble waiting of the
beforementioned friends, and by the operation of the universal principle of
grace shed in her heart, that she was aroused to enquire for herself; and as
she pressed to wisdom's gate her seeking mind was satisfied.

During this dispensation of inward enquiry, she was helped forward to
diligence by the ministry of some of the Lord's messengers, who spoke
comfortably to her state, and encouraged her in perseverance and well-doing,
speaking prophetically, that the Lord would raise up in that meeting some that
should bear his name among the Gentiles, and be the messenger of peace and glad
tidings to the people, if obedience and faithfulness to the heavenly
manifestations were kept to.

By an humble resignation to the divine will to form the vessel in what manner
the heavenly potter pleased, the work went forward prosperously, and she
appears to have been an instance of great fervency and devotedness to whatever
the divine influence dictated, watchful to hear the voice, and obedient to
fulfill the command, though it was in giving up that which might be as a right
hand or a right eye.

Her entrance into the work of the ministry was about the beginning of the year
1744, near which time she had unexpected domestic trials, which brought her
very low in mind, from a sense of the singularity of her situation, but her
trust being in the Lord, she was eminently supported, and writes thus to a
friend.

I doubt not but thou art touched in some degree with a sense of my deep and
heavy afflictions, which are of various kinds; many are the probations which I
have passed through and still am under. I can by no means set forth the wise,
prudent, and merciful manner that my tender and heavenly Father has dealt with
me, by fortifying my mind beforehand, and likewise supporting and upholding me
under my trials; was it not in the infiniteness of his wisdom, and boundless
mercy that he stained the beauty of this world in my eyes, wiped off the
varnish and gilding, and let me see before they were snatched from me, that
they were but momentary, fading enjoyments, and the greatest and best of them
were but short-lived blessings, and shadows that would vanish away? neither did
his kindness end there, for he likewise showed me what was substance, a pearl
of inestimable value, at the sight of which my soul was so transported that I
cried out in an extacy of joy, "Cause me, Lord, to possess this treasure, and
in lieu of it divest me of whatever seems good in thy sight;" this was my
covenant with the King of Kings. -- So great was the goodness of my God,
dispensed and proportioned in wisdom, that he did not at that time reveal
himself to me in so full a manner as he has since done; at a time when I most
of all wanted it; in my deepest plungings, he has caused my soul to taste of
joys and consolations which I was before a stranger to; nor would I have
presumed to ask for the favors of patience, and resignation, and fortitude of
mind, which he has undeservedly bestowed on me, an unworthy creature. An
opportunity presented for her to reside in the family of a friend, within the
compass of Mountmelick meeting, of whose daughter she had the care; in this
station she continued for some time, until she apprehended herself thereby
deprived, in some degree, of a full liberty to exercise the gift received, and
to live to him alone that had quickened her anew in Christ Jesus; at which time
she writes thus to a relation: I am resolved, by the blessed assistance of
Israel's God, not to bury that talent, which he has given me, in the earth, nor
to quit the occupying of it for any outward occupation; better would it be for
me to wander as the prophets formerly did -- destitute, distressed, and naked,
than to sell an unfading inheritance, for any prospect of advantage here; for I
am sure to drudge for the sustenance of the body, as do the beasts, and to live
for no nobler ends, than to eat, drink and sleep: such a life is not worth
living for; not that I am against moderate, honest industry, for I am convinced
it is good for both body and mind.

About this time a concern attended her mind, to visit friends of the three
provinces, which she pretty generally performed in company with Elizabeth Tomey
of Limerick, in sweet unity and concord. They met with low times and seasons,
deep baptism of spirit, and travailed for and with the seed, and at times were
set at liberty, in the authority and power of truth, to minister unto the
various classes of the people. Of the quarterly meeting of Ulster province held
in Lurgan, she gives the following account: We attended the meeting of
ministers and elders, where we had close work, but the power of the Lord upheld
us above the fear of man. Next day had some encouragement to the faithful and
well minded, but could not that day reach the libertine spirit, but waited for
renewed strength from the Lord, to engage against the Goliaths, who defy the
armies of the living God, The day after, being First Day, we sat in a low,
humble, depending state, until the Lord gave the spirit of supplication, after
which his power was set over all, and testimony borne to his name, and
transgressors were showed their errors in the demonstration of the Lord's
spirit and power.

After this journey she went to reside with a relation in Borris, from whence
she writes as follows: I am at times concerned for the whole bulk of mankind,
but in a more particular manner for my kindred according to the flesh, and
especially those who were my companions in my former vanities, as well knowing
what the life I then led would have ended in, had not my God, in his infinite
mercy, opened my eyes, and stopped my race to ruin; and though I was in the
broad way that leads to destruction, yet was I innocent of, and free from, the
gross enormities that are in the world, and because thereof the enemy persuaded
me, that I was safe enough; but alas! I found I was living as without God in
the world, in forgetfulness of him; a stranger and unregenerate; in short, that
I was an enemy to God, and under his just wrath and displeasure; and now I may
say, that I am jealous with a godly jealousy, that thou art yet in that
unregenerate state and condition: thou will say, perhaps, thou art not called
to the same work that I have been called to, viz. the work of the ministry, and
have no need to know what I have experienced. If this should be suggested to
thy mind, it is of the enemy, for if thou have not been called to bear a public
testimony, thou have, I doubt not, been called to holiness, without which we
are told, "no man shall see the Lord." Thou have the same pure, holy God to
fear, the same subtle, unwearied enemy to war against, a soul as precious, and
that must abide as long as mine, either in happiness or misery, therefore, it
behooves thee to be as strict in thy life, and as holy in thy conversation, as
any other, that so thou may be a terror to evil doers, and a praise and
encourager of them that do well. For I am sure if we be lovers and true
followers of Jesus, we cannot take pleasure in hearing his great name profaned,
and taken in vain: and the company that are guilty of such things we should
carefully avoid, as we would an infectious person.

It is, I think, impossible to be frequent in ill company, without being
somewhat leavened into the same spirit, except we keep a strict watch, and have
our minds armed with the pure armor of light and righteousness. This alone can
make us proof against the fiery darts of the wicked; which insensibly pierce
and wound the unwary soul. It is our interest and duty, all in our power,
carefully to avoid temptations, for those that we must inevitably meet with are
enough for us poor, weak creatures, to grapple with. Take care of poisoning thy
mind with vain and idle books, for I know them, by experience, to be very
pernicious; let thy leisure hours be spent in retirement, and reading the holy
scriptures, with other good books. Remember thou art the head of a family, and
it behooves thee to have a superadded care, for if thy example be not good, thou will have much to answer for. Watch over thy sisters in love, and be not an
instrument of bringing evil company in their way: there is an evil thou art
guilty of that is visible to more than me, and that is thy slighting and
neglecting weekday meetings: If thou had appointed a day to meet any of those
styled noblemen of the earth, and thou slighted and neglected the appointments
for weeks, yea, months together, would it not be a great affront and indignity
to them? yea, and I am persuaded thou would not do it, for fear of offending
them; and is the King of Kings and Lord of heaven and earth, less noble, less
discerning, when he is slighted and neglected? I observe thou have time and
leisure to ride many miles to sports and diversions, such as hunting,
horse-racing, and other sights; does not this show thou art a lover of pleasure
more than a lover of God, such as the apostle declares are dead while they
live? Dear cousin, bear with my dealing thus plainly; I have no view in it, but
the good of thy immortal soul, and the ease of my own mind, and I sincerely
wish that thou and I may be prepared for our great and final change.

We have daily instances of young and strong being snatched away in their bloom
as with their bones full of marrow: and why may it not be our case? we cannot
promise ourselves one hour to come, the present time is only ours, and Oh! it
is a dismal consequence to launch into eternity unprepared, where the worm
never dies, nor is the fire quenched: If we are so fond of a few transitory
pleasures in this world, how can we bear to be shut out from eternal felicity,
and doomed to everlasting misery? I beseech thee solidly to consider these
things, and I pray the God of love and mercy to give thee a wise and
understanding heart.

About the 8th month 1747, she returned to Mountmelick, to the house of her
friend where she before resided. Her continuance here was for a few months,
during which time she was attacked with a disorder in her stomach, which
occasioned great weakness, and brought her very low. In a letter to a friend
she thus expresses herself: I gratefully acknowledge thy unmerited kindness in
the concern thou showest for my health; I am sensible it is our indispensible
duty to endeavor to preserve life and health, by all lawful means that
Providence is pleased to afford; were it not so, I often think, that mine is
not worth caring for; instead of being useful to any, I fear I shall be a
burden to the creation, and miss the end of my being; surely none whom he has
sent into life, and visited with his matchless love and kindness, is more weak
and unworthy than I am; and were it so that he, by his divine power, was
pleased to make use of me, in any good work, it was all his own, of and from
him alone; I could have no part in it, but as passive clay in his hand; and
blessed be his name, he is not limited, nor his power confined to any
instruments; he that found me in a polluted state, can raise up and sanctify
many more for his work and service, and that he may in these dark and perilous
days, is the travail of my afflicted soul. During this dispensation she wrote
as follows to her brother, who had frequenty occasioned much anxiety and
disquietude to her mind: Dear brother, for so thou art by nature to me, would
to God thou were so in a twofold sense, viz. by adoption or new creation in
Christ, which far exceeds all the ties of affinity or consanguinity, and will
last beyond the grave, never, never to be dissolved; may thou happily
experience this, before time to thee here be no more, for which end Providence
has, in matchless love and condescension, wonderfully prolonged thy days,
amidst imminent dangers and difficulties: may this be deeply pondered and
wisely laid to heart by thee; otherwise it will add weight in the balance
against thee, in the great and notable day of account, that hastens on us both.
Thou know, dear brother, it has often been my concern thus to remind and
call thee to the important business of life, and thy neglect of it has almost
discouraged me from further attempts; this may perhaps be the last; and I do,
with all the ardency my soul is capable of, joined with natural affection,
earnestly desire it may have the wished-for effect. I am in a very poor state
of health, and little human probability of my being restored. My disorder is
attended with acute pain, but blessed for ever be the name of my God; patience
equivalent thereto has been administered. How it may be with me as to life or
death I cannot say; but this is my greatest consolation, and such a one as is
beyond the power of my tongue to express, or pen to set forth, viz. that I have
not spent my health and strength in the gratification of my passions, or
sensual appetites, but in some degree in the pursuit of that which now stands
by me, and will go with me beyond time, a good conscience toward God, whose
love I feel to flow in my soul, in such a manner as to admit of no doubt, that
he is my friend, or, in other words, that he is in me, and I in him, and will
be so to all eternity, if I forsake him not: Believe me, brother, when I tell
thee, at a time when dissimulation must vanish, at a season when we are best
capable of knowing ourselves, and judging of all things in the clearest manner,
when the mists of the world are removed from before our eyes, and eternity
presented to our view -- at such a time as this I may tell thee, I am not
afraid to die; nor is the sound of mortality and eternity frightful to my ears;
no, I cannot look on death as a king of terrors, but as a welcome messenger,
who comes with a happy release from all my trials, temptations, and
afflictions, to summon me to an eternity of unmixed felicity, to that which I
have most loved and delighted in for years past, though favored with but a
glimpse and foretaste of it, whilst my soul is loaded with its companion,
flesh; but what will it be when the face of the Divinity will be for ever
unveiled, faith turned into vision, and the full fruition come to? These are
words of truth and soberness. I know there is a kingdom of heaven, because I
already feel it within me, Christ in me, as said the apostle, the hope of
glory; and because he lives, I live also; not merely an animal life which must
perish; but a life hid with Christ in God. Without a new creation in Christ it
is impossible for us to enjoy God, or, in the words of his son Christ Jesus,
see or enter the kingdom of heaven; had we not bodies taken from the earth it
would be impossible we should enjoy or live by the same; and if we have not a
new birth begotten or formed of God in us, it is likewise impossible we should
live to or in him; more I might say to illustrate this important truth to thy
understanding, if bodily strength would admit, but unless thou centrest down in
true sincerity and humility, to the pure light of Christ in thyself, by which
alone what is to be known of God is manifest in man, these things, with all the
other truths of the gospel, will for ever remain a mystery to thee, as it has
done to ages and generations, and the wise and prudent of this world; but is
revealed unto the babes that are begotten and born of the incorruptible seed
and word of God: I conclude thy affectionate sister in the hope, and Oh! that I
could say, fellowship of the gospel.

M. P.




About this time she felt a weighty concern to visit the churches in England;
and having obtained the concurrence of her friends, accompanied by Elizabeth
Hutchinson, she set forward from Mountmelick in the 7th month, 1748. They
attended the province meeting held at Carlow, and went from thence to
Baltibois, where they had a blessed helping meeting. The testimony went forth
to those of other societies. They had a meeting at Timahoe, and went thence to
Dublin, where they had refreshing and comfortable meetings, the Lord's eternal
truth being over all: "We were," she expresses in a journal kept of this
journey, comforted one in another, and enabled renewedly to bless the name of
the Lord. The 27th of 7mo. we took ship for Whitehaven, and landed there the
28th; the 30th went to Pardshaw, where was held the quarterly meeting for
Cumberland; the public meeting proved a glorious one, and was a time of solid
worship: the testimony of truth was exalted over all, and the everlasting
gospel freely preached. After this meeting I had great consolation of soul, and
we spent the evening in company with several friends, in agreeable, edifying
conversation, and in much freedom and openness of spirit. Next day, being the
first of the week, we went to their general meeting at Cockermouth, the 3d to
Whitehaven, low and depressed in spirit. Next day had a meeting there, in which
I cleared myself; was led therein to set forth the call and qualification of a
true gospel minister; left it in peace of mind, but much spent in body with the
service thereof. The 5th had a meeting in Bronghton, where we were led to speak
closely to some who had been visited in their young years, and were now grown
lukewarm and indifferent. The 6th had a good meeting at Isell, though small.
Next day were at Keswick, the service chiefly to those not of our society; had
some close things to deliver to those that were. The 9th at Allonby, whither
came many friends from other meetings, to whom truth was fully declared. From
hence to Holme, where we had a silent meeting, and understood they seldom sat
free from disturbers. The 10th had a low season at Kirkbride, the 11th at
Bolton, the 12th at Wigton, which was large, but low as to the dominion of
life; next day had a meeting at Moorehouse, things close and hard to deliver;
at Carlisle, we had a good open meeting, my mind being much enlarged amongst
them, yet felt a concern rest with me to have another meeting in that city,
which friends readily agreed to. The 15th had a meeting at Kirklington, which
was large and satisfactory, and another at Carlisle in the evening: in
consequence of the concern already mentioned, there came a great number of the
town's folk; when I got there I found myself so weak in body and poor in
spirit, and the people so unsettled in their minds, that I almost feared I
should not be able to answer the service of the meeting. I earnestly desired
that the cause and testimony of truth might not suffer, let me suffer what I
might; I had not sat long, till I found a flow of doctrine open in my mind; I
stood up in the fear of the Lord, and the people soon became quiet and solid; I
was strengthened beyond my expectation, and the meeting ended well; and blessed
be the name of the Lord, I had great peace and satisfaction after it was over.
Went hence to Scotby, and had a meeting; so to Ann Greenup's, and was at the
monthly meeting in that quarter, where my mind was under much suffering; but as
I waited, the power of truth arose, and I found ease and liberty of mind; was
led in a very close manner; the seed had dominion, and the authority of truth
was over all. Went next day to Mosedale, and had a travailing season in that
meeting: thence to Terrill, and had a poor meeting there; thence to Isaac
Thompson's, being very poor in spirit and low in mind. Next day, we rested,
spending the day much in retirement, which proved very helpful to me; and as I
waited on the Lord to have my spiritual strength renewed, felt a concern to
have a meeting with the inhabitants, and one in the afternoon at Penrith on
First Day. After I had well considered and weighed these things, the friend,
with whom we lodged, said; they were a people of no religion, which did not
discourage me, for it immediately arose in my mind, that, they had the more
need of help, and that, perhaps, they might more readily receive the truth,
than those who were more bigoted to ceremonies. We went to Penrith next
morning; the friends asked me if I would have an afternoon meeting, I replied
that, I could better tell at the conclusion of the first meeting. We went to
meeting and it proved a good one, for truth had dominion and was over all; then
I felt strength to have an afternoon meeting appointed, which was large and to
great satisfaction, some of the town's folks being at the forenoon meeting, and
the town pretty large, the report spread and the people came till the house
could hold no more, with convenience; after this I spoke of the meeting which
my mind was drawn to propose at Amenbridge, where a friend said there had been
none before; friends seemed willing, but knew of no place to hold it in, except
the house where we lodged, which was large enough, and would have done well for
the purpose, but the friend said he could not admit of it, for fear of his
landlord, who was a priest; I said, I could not force their hearts nor houses,
but hoped, as I had laid it before them, I should be made easy; and if not, I
did not doubt that if I went to some of those who professed not with us, I
should be accommodated; he said, there was a town a mile off, that he thought
would answer better for a meeting, and that their town's people would go
thither; I told him I dare not go in my own will to have meetings where I
pleased, but where truth led me; he replied, if the folks of Penrith heard of
the meeting, the streets, much less the house, would not hold them; then, said
I, we may go to the fields. This, I believe, stirred him up -- he went away,
and in a short time returned, and told me not to be uneasy, I should have a
meeting; and accordingly it was appointed to begin at 6 o'clock next evening at
another friend's house in the town, which proved quite too small. They made all
the room they could in two apartments and a hall, but many were at the windows
who could not get in. We had a meeting at Strickland in the forenoon, which had
before been appointed. When I came to see and sit amongst the people at
Amenbridge, they seemed so ignorant of our manner of worship and principles,
that my faith almost failed to doing any service, or administering help to
them. After some time of waiting for divine aid, I stood up, and they appeared
to me as still and attentive while I was speaking, as ever I observed any
assembly. I labored amongst them till my natural strength failed, and after
meeting was over, I had great inward peace and comfort. Next day we waited for
their monthly meeting at Aldstone, and paid a visit to a friend's family, where
we had a sweet consolatory opportunity; and same evening went toward
Northumberland. The 25th we continued our journey, a very difficult and
dangerous road; much of it mountainous, and though reckoned but 14 miles, it
took from 9 in the morning till 6 in the evening, say that we stopped a little
to refresh ourselves: my mind was preserved tranquil and easy. Next day we had
a hard, laborious meeting, but I was mercifully helped through, to the ease of
my own mind, The following day went to Cornwood, where had a meeting. The 27th
rode to Allendale, and the way being rough and mountainous, it was dangerous.
My companion was thrown from her horse, and I seemed in imminent danger, the
way being narrow, and a considerable precipice just by where my horse stood,
which being interrupted by my companion's falling, was very uneasy; but at
length, through the merciful interposition of Providence, she was taken up,
very little hurt, and they got me safe off my horse. We arrived wearied with
fright and fatigue. In a short time friends got together, and we had a
comfortable, good meeting, which amply made amends for all we went through. The
28th had a large meeting. My Spirit was under deep suffering before I went to
it, and for some time after but, through divine aid, I fully cleared myself.
When I came to my lodging, I was under a baptism of spirit, and could not tell
the cause. I examined myself, and brought things to the closest scrutiny, to
know whether I had done or committed any thing contrary to truth, but could
find no condemnation. At dinner, I felt the spirit of supplication, which I
gave way to, and found my mind free and easy. Next morning the 29th set out for
Benfield; it was such hard weather, friends would have had us stay, but as the
meeting was appointed I could not be easy so to do. It blew such a violent
storm, that it was with difficulty we could sit our horses, or they keep their
feet, being several times blown out of the path. It was 14 miles over a black
moor, where there was no shelter; our guides missed the way twice, once on the
open moor. My companion, who was a young traveller, was discouraged, stopped
several times, wept and said, she thought she could hold it no longer. I
encouraged her to hold out to the end, and told her, there was no abiding
there. By the Lord's mercy, my mind was kept quiet and still, and about 7 at
night we got safe to our quarters, where we had an hearty welcome. The meeting
was appointed to begin at 9 next morning; it was small, but greatly to my
satisfaction. I was led in particular to some person who was under a temptation
to join in marriage with one of another society, and likewise to declare that I
had no outward information. After meeting, an elderly friend told me, that I
had hit the mark to an hair's breadth, for there was a young man, whom he knew
was under such a temptation, and had been advised against it. Went that night
to Newcastle, upon Tyne, 11 miles, staid there several days, had a good meeting
on 5th day, being 3d of 9th mo. though some states hard to speak to, there
being some deistical principles, I believe, cherished amongst them; and so
close was the testimony, that they could scarcely bear to sit. After this
meeting, a friend told me I had spoken by revelation, but was so prudent as to
say no more, as we were to stay until after the next First Day, to equip
ourselves for continuing our journey. In the interim visited the aged, who were
confined with weakness. First day truth eminently helped with its ancient
beauty and brightness, dispelling all mists and clouds; a glorious time it was
to the comfort and edification of the church; the afternoon meeting was very
full of friends, and those of other societies. It proved to me a sweet
consolating time; the spring of life being opened for my own help and
furtherance in best things; but had not any thing to communicate to the people.
The 6th went to Shields, and had a small meeting. In the evening went to
Sunderland. The 7th had a meeting in the forenoon, to an increase of comfort,
and praise to him that exalts his own testimony in the hearts of his children,
and gives tongue and utterance to magnify his name and power: Had a refreshing
season in the family where we lodged, the Lord breaking to us the bread of life
for the nourishment of our souls, and after had an evening meeting appointed
which was large and to good satisfaction. The 8th had a meeting at Shotton. The
9th at Durham, the 10th at Auckland, which was a good meeting, and I felt a
concern to have another there in the afternoon, of which I acquainted the
friend with whom we lodged; he pleaded many excuses; I told him, I apprehended
it was not the business of a minister to proceed contrary to the minds of
friends, especially one so young as I; and that, as I had told my concern, I
hoped I should be easy; and, if not, I could but come back again. My mind was
soon relieved of its burden; as the Lord my God knew my willingness to obey
him, he required no impossibility of me. Next day went six miles to Raby, and
had a large meeting there, several friends coming from diverse places to meet
us; but that spirit that obstructs the spring of the ministry, was amongst
them, and made it hard to speak; though, by Divine assistance, I was enabled to
clear myself, and came away with peace of mind. My companion was so ill that
she was detained from meeting two days. The 13th went to Lartington to meeting,
and returned in the afternoon. Next day to Darlington, and had a meeting there
the 15th; it ended well though hard in the beginning. The day following went to
Stockton; had a full meeting, and came away in peace. The 17th had a meeting at
Yarme; it was small, several young people came from Stockton, and it proved
upon the whole to good satisfaction. Next day was at a small meeting, where sat
a pretty while in silence and a state of mourning for the cause of truth. I
eased my mind amongst them, and came away in peace. The 21st had a meeting at
Gisborough, and 23d at Mooresome. The 24th was at the monthly meeting held at
Castletown, where were many plain, honest, sincere friends, and we were
comforted in the Lord and in one another. Next evening at Hinderweil and Roxby.
The 26th went to Whitby, and that evening had meeting with several friends who
came to see us. Next day attended a large meeting; my spirit was under great
suffering, and continued so until the afternoon, though I had delivered in the
forenoon meeting, what appeared to be given me; but in the afternoon the power
of truth was in dominion, and every opposite spirit made subject; things were
spoken to closely and clearly, and Babylon threshed as with a sharp instrument,
that she could not get from under. Then was my spirit made easy, and my soul
rejoiced in the Lord, who is worthy, and prayer, praises, and thanksgiving,
ascended unto him that lives for ever. Had the company of several friends this
evening, which was spent in, I hope, profitable conversation. The 28th had a
meeting at Stentondale. The friends in this quarter are but few, I think eight
families composed the meeting; it was with these few a memorable season of
humbling gladness. Came to Scarborough in the evening, and next day had a large
and satisfactory meeting. In a friend's family where we spent the evening, had
a reaching, affecting season, manifested by much brokenness of spirit. The 1st
of 10th month had a meeting at Pickerington, and the 2d at Kirkbymoorside,
which was large, and attended with the going forth of some seasoning
instruction. Went after meeting to John Richardson's, a man near 84 years of
age, very remarkable for sweetness and liveliness of spirit; full of love,
clear in his understanding, and his memory strong. He sat up till late with us,
relating the wonderful dealings of the Lord with him, which was truly edifying,
and such as I had never heard before. He was quite open with us, which I looked
upon as a favor from the Lord; I wept much at parting with him, and when we
took leave, he desired the Lord might bless us. Next day went to Malton. The
day following had a large meeting, and passed through a laborious exercise
amongst them. The evening was spent to spiritual profit, in waiting for a
renewal of strength, and imparting some of the bread handed to my soul to
others, whom I visited in their families: left this place with peace of mind.
The 6th was at a monthly meeting at Bridlington: it was a season of suffering,
my mind very low after it; which caused an examination; but finding nothing to
accuse myself of, was made easy. The 7th we were at Hornsea meeting; the Lord's
eternal power broke in upon us, to the comfort and refreshment of our souls,
and it was a time of solemn worship. Next day we were at a meeting at Oustwick,
to our great comfort, and solid refreshment. The 9th at East End. The 10th had
an evening meeting at Hull, to profit and edification, through the aboundings
of that life which enlightens and sanctifies. The 11th went to Beverly, a town
where no friend lives, having felt a particular draft to have a meeting there;
several friends from Hull attended, and the people flocked in until the house
was near filled. I stood up and began to speak; but people rushed in so, that I
was under the necessity of stopping, until they were settled; I then proceeded,
and a glorious meeting it was, the divine power and authority of truth
commanding silence throughout the multitude. Next day we went to visit a few at
Skitby that were lately convinced, with whom we had a good meeting, and some
open, profitable conversation. The 13th we went to Northcave, friends from
several parts adjacent came thither: which made the meeting large, but not open
and lively; we had hard labor, yet ended pretty well. The 14th had a meeting
at Howdon, there were but few friends, and some of the town's people, who being
in the Ishmaelitish, mocking spirit, the true seed did not reign amongst them.
The 15th were at Ratcliff. The 16th at Thorn. The 17th at Braithwaite, and the
18th again at Thorn. These meetings were generally small, and low as to the
life of religion, which caused laborious work to get down to the seed, so as to
minister to the states of the people. The 20th had a meeting at Beltoft, which
proved satisfactory; some who were not of our society attended, that were very
solid and attentive; some were tendered, and several came in the evening, with
a desire of having a meeting with us; but feeling no concern for it, I could
not encourage it. 22d visited the meeting of Blyth, in Notinghamshire, which
began at two o'clock, I was led very closely in it, had to remind them of the
practice of our elders; and told them, if they would search from whence that
custom of deferring meetings until afternoon, had its origin, they would find
it was not in the truth. It ended well, in the sweet consolating love of the
Lord my God. The friend we lodged with, not being at meeting, but engaged in
his shop, I had some close discourse with him, concerning his duty to God; at
first he seemed to put it off, but was brought to acquiesce with what I said.
Next day had a small, but good meeting at Wamsworth; had a loose, libertine
spirit to speak to; which the authority of truth helped me through with, to the
enlargement of peace in my own bosom, and the exaltation of that power, which,
when it rules, causes the righteous to rejoice. The 25th being First Day, was
at Pontefract meeting, which seemed very weak and dwarfish, as to the life of
religion; their undue liberty in externals, manifesting that their dwellings
were not with the humble seed, that crucifies to the world, and tarnishes its
beauty. Had little to communicate, yet felt a revival of light and strength to
my own state. I had a concern to have a meeting with those not of our society,
a great number attended, many of whom were light and vain, but while I was
exercised in speaking, they were mostly quiet and attentive, and I hope the
opportunity was to edification. The 26th had a meeting at Selby, which was but
small. That evening went to York, and attended the quarterly meeting, which
began at 5 o'clock, it was a season of travail and exercise to a living
remnant. Next morning, at 9, the meeting of ministers and elders began, when
the baptizing power of the Lord was witnessed by the faithful, and, through the
succeeding meetings, help was graciously afforded, and the church was edified.

Her written memoirs contained particular accounts of the meetings visited
throughout England, which were omitted for brevity sake (having given the above
specimen of her travels and baptisms) except one particular she mentions on her
visit to Yorkshire.

The following letter was written to a friend from Bradford, in Yorkshire, 2d
of the 11th month, 1748.

A few days ago thy acceptable letter reached me at the city of York, which I
read with a mixture of satisfaction and sorrow: satisfaction to find, that thou
still retainest thy love to the eternal excellency; and sorrow, that the powers
of darkness should still so far prevail, as to cause such struggles of soul,
and sore conflicts of spirit, as thou speak of: but I have not the least
doubt of thy deliverance, and firmly believe thy God will magnify and exalt his
own divine power in thy soul; and make bare his holy arm for thy salvation, by
revealing it in thee, an unfailing preserver in every needful time. This I
write not altogether from myself, nor the impulse of friendship and gratitude;
it is from a degree of that assurance and confidence, which truth has at this
juncture communicated. It is reasonable to think by thy complaint, the time of
thy release is at hand; it was so with Israel when they were to be brought out
of that dark land; their taskmasters were harder, and their burdens made
heavier; for, I believe, there has no temptation befallen thee, but what has
been witnessed by thy brethren who have trodden the same steps, even through
the region and shadow of death; by the gates of hell, yea, out of the belly of
hell have some called as Jonah did, and He heard them. His righteous ear is not
grown heavy that he cannot hear, but for the sighing of the poor, and groaning
of the needy soul, he will yet arise; and then it is that all our enemies are
scattered; one enabled to chase a thousand, and two to put ten thousand to
flight. Though, it must be confessed, it is a day of darkness, famine and
distress, yea, thick darkness, that may be felt; yet blessed be the name of our
God, he is as a Goshen to his children, giving them light in their habitations,
and setting a mark upon them that sigh and mourn for the abominations of the
people. Thou seem willing to give me an idea of thy spiritual state and
condition, by an outward representation; but I think I may say, I have both
seen and felt it, by sinking down below all that is of the creature, to the
pure humble seed of life; where the visions of light are seen, and the voice of
the great oracle heard, distinct from any other. Here have I found thee
present, in him that is omnipresent, and tenderly sympathized with thy soul,
according to my small measure. In this do I desire to have our friendship
renewed, and fellowship kept steadfast, which is with the Father and the Son.

I take kind thy seasonable warning to watchfulness, which I surely stand in
need of, in this time that drowsiness and spiritual lethargy have generally
infected mankind. Thou will, perhaps, like to hear an account of my spiritual
progress, and travel Zion-wards, and of the states of the churches here, so far
as my sight can reach; and I may say, it has been a real grief and affliction
to my mind, to see the desolation, darkness, and insensibility that generally
prevail; having been made to go mourning on my way, with this language in my
soul, Lord, to whom have thou sent me? where shall I find thy flock and family
upon earth? for I see very few who like even to hear or speak of thee; and,
surely, if thy love had the pre-eminence, out of the abundance of the heart,
the mouth would speak, or, at least, the soul love to wait in silence for thy
divine appearance. But alas! many seem to have nothing further to enquire
about, than whence we came? whither we go? our names, or if we be married? to
which I often answer, I hope I have been honorably espoused to one husband,
but they are quite ignorant of him whom my soul loves, and of my meaning. Yet
although it be thus, there is a living remnant in this part of the world, but
under great suffering and oppression, with which I have been made deeply to
sympathize, and have greatly admired the Lord's goodness and condescending
love; his forbearance and suffering to a disobedient and gainsaying people, not
willing that they should perish.

As to my own particular, I find the truth of that saying, that "they who
preach the gospel, live by it," in a spiritual sense; and though the Lord has
been pleased at times to cause his candle to shine upon my head, and clothe me
with his royal robes, yet I often witness a being entirely emptied, stripped,
and destitute almost of daily bread, and have had, as Mordecai, to go down and
sit at the king's gate; all which I see is for my good; for when a cistern is
let dry, the earthy sediment is discovered; a fit time for cleansing it, that
so the water may flow from it with greater purity; therefore I strive to learn
that great lesson, of being content in all states, and may say to the praise
and honor of my kind master, that he has (since I have given up the same to
serve him) caused his peace to flow in my soul as a river, whose current is not
long to be controlled by all the impediments which can be laid in its way.
Blessed for ever be his holy name, he has afforded me strength to discharge
myself faithfully, wherever my lot has been cast, both publicly and privately;
so that I have no condemnation on that account, nor have I repented leaving all
to answer his holy requirings, but humbly thank him, that he enabled me so to
do; and were crowns and diadems laid at my feet, I would not give his
approbation for them.

Before I conclude I would say, beware of Esau's crime; it was when his soul
was ready to faint, he despised his birthright; when he had been eagerly
pursuing something he delighted in, he came to this unwise conclusion, "Behold
I am at the point to die, and what profit shall this birthright do me?" He
wanted patience and solid reflection, and afterward had bitterly to repent
when too late. Had he not resigned it, none could have taken it from him;
neither can all the powers of darkness from thee, if thou resolve to keep it;
this must be done, by cleaving to the Lord with all thy heart, with all thy
soul, and all thy strength, which that thou may be enabled to do is my
fervent prayer.

As I quietly rode along, the Lord was pleased in mercy, to break in upon my
mind, by his living presence and power, and it became the language of my soul,
"Speak, Lord, and thy servant will hear." After which many things were divinely
opened to me, wherein I greatly rejoiced, and was thankful to the Lord my God:
I then found a sudden, but gentle rebuke, and heard as it were a voice, that
said in the secret of my soul, "the dispensations thou most delightest in, are
least pleasing to me, and not so beneficial to thy soul, as that pure poverty
of spirit, brokenness and contrition of heart, which brings into humility of
mind, and the reason why this is so little desired, and so unpleasant to the
creature, is, that it can have no part therein, but is wholly excluded and set
at naught; can discover no beauty or excellency in it; and for this cause it
is, that I will in no wise despise the offering of a broken and contrite
spirit, as it is most pure and without mixture of the creature. For, whether
there be prophecies, divine openings or revelation, consolations, joying or
rejoicing in the Holy Ghost, gifts of healing or tongue of utterance, in all
these self can rejoice, and have a share, being obvious to it, and bringing it
honor." Then said I, "Lord dispense to me what is most pleasing to thee, and
best for my soul, so long as my weak faith and patience can endure, and when I
am ready to faint, give me a little of the wine, well refined on the lees, that
my soul may rejoice in thee, the God of my salvation."

From London she wrote to a friend after this manner:

There are many hindering things to obstruct us in our journey; enemies within
and enemies without, with the general luke-warmness and indifferency about
religion, that prevails among the professors of christianity, of all sects and
denominations, so far as I see, their example, instead of inciting to zeal, for
the cause of God and the pursuit of virtue and piety, their deadness, dryness,
carnality and insensibility, are in great danger of leavening into the same
spirit. I find occasion for a strict and constant watch, with fervent prayer to
the God of my life, for help, strength, and deliverance from the flesh, the
world, and satan, which war against my soul. And I bless his great and glorious
name, in that he still continues, by the inshining of his divine light, to keep
me sensible of my weakness, frailty, and manifold infirmities; and the need I
have of looking steadily to my holy head, and of the help of my fellow members
in the mystical body. I have often desired, when scarce able to pray or breathe
for myself, that he might be pleased to hear, and have regard to their good
desires for my preservation, and I think I have often witnessed the benefit of
the help of their spirits. I have been through the north, south, east, and west
of this nation, at the meetings generally, great and small; there now remain
several of the mid-land counties, which I believe will take me up most of this
summer; and then I hope to see my native land in peace, which will be matter of
comfort to me, for a large share of suffering has fallen to my lot in this
land: but none of those things move me, neither count I my life dear, in
comparison, that I win Christ, the hope of glory: yea, I have rejoiced to be
found worthy to suffer for his sake, knowing it is such that shall reign with
him. Surely of all perils by sea and land, there are none so hard to bear, as
that of false brethren, which I have not been exempt from: but through all, am
preserved in peace of mind, and restored to a far better state of bodily
health, than I once expected; for which great blessings, with all other
unmerited favors, I humbly desire to be made and kept truly thankful. The
following was written to two friends in the ministry.

Many things have occurred, to hinder my writing to you sooner, not that I have
any thing material to communicate, except what concern^ my own particular,
which I hope you are not altogether strangers to; if I may boldly lay claim to
a part in the mystical body, whereof Christ is the head; members of which, I
fully believe you are, and doubtless have had a feeling in spirit of a weak
member suffering, though far remote in body, yet present in him that is
omnipresent. For I may truly say of late, it has been a time of deep trial to
my poor soul, its beloved having withdrawn as behind the curtain; and not only
so, but suffered the accuser of the brethren, to cast some of his most fiery
darts at me, and roar upon me like a lion; yet was the Lord's good spirit
lifted up as a standard in the most needful time. I humbly hope, it was for the
refining of my faith and fitting for further service, because we can never so
effectually or certainly speak of the wiles of satan, and God's deliverance
from them, as when we have seen them in ourselves. If I know my own heart, I am
truly willing to be emptied as from vessel to vessel, that so I may have no
lees or dregs to settle on. I do not complain of the Lord's dealings with me,
but rejoice that I am counted worthy, in some measure, to suffer, and desire I
may be humbly thankful, that he is using means, such as comport with his
infinite wisdom, for my preservation from the epidemical disorders which abound
in the visible churches, professing godliness. I traveled a week in the county
of Suffolk in silence, was at six appointed meetings, and had not strength to
open my mouth in any of them; a path, I am ready to think, more will be called
into, if rightly subject to the divine will, for the church in many places
groans under a dead, lifeless ministry. She wrote the following letter to a
friend in the ministry, who was instrumental, in the Lord's hands, to impart
such help and counsel, as had a tendency to awaken her when in the sleep of
carnal ease and forgetfulness.

Such a jealousy as possessed the mind of the eminent apostle, concerning the
believers in his day, has laid hold of me concerning thee; which was, lest he
that beguiled Eve, should beguile thee, from the smplicity that is in the
truth. As I was this day in my solitary retirement, it was brought into my
thoughts, to write thee a few lines, and I reasoned thus with myself. What
shall I, who am a poor weak child, say to one who was in Christ before me, and
instrumental in the great hand, to beget me in the truth; I likewise
remembered, the apostle travailed in birth for his little children, made
mention of them day and night in his prayers, wrote them excellent epistles,
and especially to his son Timothy, who was engaged in the weighty work of the
ministry. What excellent fatherly instruction does he give him, but none from
the son to the father. Where is thine to me in this the day of my great trial
and exercise? Ah! where is that which should come upon thee daily, the care of
all the churches, or at least the heritages of thy God? I wish no other care
may have intruded itself in the room thereof, which may have caused thee to
fall asleep, in this lukewarm, backsliding, degenerate age. Be arouzed, for the
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, thy soul's and the church's. Consider what thou art
doing with these excellent talents, which the Lord has committed to thy trust.
If thou should cease to use them to the honor of his name, those who are as
the stones of the street, will cry out against thee, and I, if I keep my place,
will be a witness to the sufficiency of that gift, thou have received. Do not
again become a slave to the world. Consider the dignity of thy high and holy
calling, which is no less than that of a king's son, to be an heir with God,
and coheir with Christ. Suffer not a sensual, worldly tincture, to pervert thy
taste, from that fountain of life, which thy soul had once so quick a relish
for, and thirsted after, even as the hunted heart does after the water brooks.
Bear with my freedom and jealousy, which proceeds from the universal love of
God, that wishes well to all. I would not have thee think I write from
prejudice of mind (thou know there is no cause for that) nor yet from
information. No, I never heard one word against thee since I left you. I should
be pleased to hear from thee, how it fares with thee, for I long to hear of thy
prosperity in the truth, which would be a great comfort to my poor soul, that
often goes mourning as between the porch and the altar, for the desolation of
spiritual Jerusalem. Let us so run as not uncertainly; so fight, not as beating
the air; but keep under the body of sin and death, as well as the mortal body,
bringing all into pure subjection and obedience to the holy cross of Christ.
The following letter was to a relation.

The one thing needful is only worth our care and constant pursuit; and surely
there are many impediments and hindrances in this dangerous, deluding world,
that are often ready to turn us out of that narrow path which leads to life:
This has my soul experienced, by being drawn aside through unwatchfulness, and
the prevalence of temptations, and I have found it hard work to return into the
right path. I have many times thought a soul rightly influenced and affected
with the love of God, is like the needle touched with the lodestone, that
which ever way it be turned, rests not nor settles, till it comes to its true
center, that is, while it retains the virtue of the lodestone. Thus it is with
the soul that has been quickened and renewed, by that efficacious power, which
has been extended to draw our souls from earth to heaven; for certain it is,
they have a natural tendency to sink into the earth, or earthly enjoyments, but
unless we renewedly witness the visitations of that warming, heart-melting love
of God, which keeps the soul alive to him, and brings into that holy fellowship
which is with the Father and his Son Christ Jesus, by livingly feeling him to
be in us, and we in him, all religion is but dead form and empty show; as the
branch cannot bring forth fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine, no more
can we, except we abide in him, and draw sap and nourishment from the pure
root, bring forth fruit acceptable in His sight, who looks at the purity and
sincerity of every heart and soul. He sees nothing in us, pure, amiable, or
lovely, but as his own work of grace is suffered to be carried on, that so
Christ may be made of God to us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption; and to do all in our power to facilitate and help forward this
great and glorious work, is the important business of our lives. The following
letter was written to a friend in the ministry.

Since we parted thou have been so much in my thoughts, with strong desires for
thy preservation and growth in the ever blessed truth, that I could not avoid
saluting thee by a few lines, in that love which seeks the peace and welfare of
Zion, with the enlargement of her borders, which a remnant are at times deeply
concerned for. And ah! says my soul, may no other concern whatsoever, erase
the remembrance of it from our minds, so as to hinder us from preferring it
before our chiefest joy. This is what will make for our peace here, and eternal
salvation hereafter, which it is our business and interest to pursue, with the
utmost vigilance our frail nature is capable of, seeing our adversary goes
about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour; and not only so, but as
a subtle serpent, working in a mystery of darkness, by which he has drawn down
to the earth, many bright stars, causing them to contend for the glory, honor,
and friendship of this wicked world, instead of the precious faith delivered to
the saints, which powerfully works by love, to the purifying of the soul, and
making them pure and holy, as he that has called them is holy. Oh! may my soul
fear always, lest I, or any of my dear brethren and sisters in the truth,
should fall short of an admittance in the great and notable day that draws near
apace. When I consider the very few bright, shining examples that this age
affords, who have disinterestedly devoted themselves to the service of truth,
and been kept unspotted of the world, having on the white linen which is the
righteousness of saints, my fears are augmented, and my cries to the God of my
life increased, not only for my own preservation, but that of his heritage in
general. In a peculiar manner am I concerned for those whom he has called to
the weighty work of the ministry, that the eyes of our souls may be kept so
single to the honor of God, as that we may minister suitably, from the divine
spirit, to the states and conditions of the people, without partiality, or
respect to persons, for in this case (as says the apostle) if we have respect
for persons, we commit^^h. In order to avoid this heinous, dangerous crime, we
had need to take notice of the wise caution frequently mentioned in the
writings of our worthy elders and faithful ministers, in the morning of this
latter day; not to be taken by the affectionate part with any, lest it should
prevent seeing rightly the situation of the lowly seed of immortal life, and
hinder ministering suitably to it, but minister life and strength to that which
should be slain, famished and brought to the death of the cross. Oh! may we
fulfill our ministry so as to be pure from the blood of all men, in the
tremendous day of account, studying to show ourselves approved unto God, as
laborers that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. A
letter written to two friends she was nearly united to in spirit, runs thus:

I received your acceptable letter at London, and would have answered it ere
now, but for want of leisure, and sometimes a fit frame of mind, being many
times deeply bowed, and dipped into suffering with, and for, my fellow members,
and the seed of God, which lies loaded and oppressed in the minds of very many,
even the professors of the blessed truth, as a cart under sheaves; this makes
the true ministers of Christ go heavily mourning on their way, often strewing
their tears in solitary places, for the slain of the daughter of this people;
yea, for his sake we are killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep to the
slaughter; and surely, of all perils we meet with by sea and land, there are
none so dangerous or hard to bear, as by false brethern: such are they who have
lost the spirit and power of godliness, but retain the form, being clothed
with a pharisaical righteousness, they, as our Savior said, sit in Moses's
seat; what they bid, we may do, but their example is to be shunned: instead of
coming up in their footsteps, we may justly cry, my soul come not into their
secret; unto their assembly mine honor, be not thou united, for their steps
tend to the chambers of death, and their ways to the gates of destruction. Oh!
the great loss we that are young have, for want of steady elders, to go before
us, who might take us by the hand with this amiable language, "follow us, as we
follow Christ." As this is the lot of our day, we must strive to keep to our
great Pilot, who is the alone safe conductor of his followers, through all the
storms, difficulties, and dangers that attend this pilgrimage and vale of
tears. Though he may sometimes suffer us to walk by faith and not by sight,
yet, as our eye is steadily looking unto him, he will be found near at hand to
help and direct, whose holy life (while in that prepared body) remains to be,
an unerring pattern, he, in whom there was no sin, neither was guile found in
his mouth, who was a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief. Alas! how hard a
lesson is this to our corrupt nature, poor, frail, wealk creatures! ah! what
need we have of boundless mercy, and the mediation of a tender, compassionate
Savior, an holy high priest, that was tempted in all points, as we are, and
well knows how to succor all the tempted; whose care is cast upon him, the
government of whose hearts is upon his shoulders, who have surrendered their
wills to his. These, and only these, are made truly free from the thraldom of
sin and death: know an overcoming themselves, the world and the devil, the only
conquest worth our labor and constant pursuit. May we ever keep so near that
holy, animating seraph, love, as that we may witness it, to fill us with a
generous indifferency to earthly and transitory objects; that so we may in
reality, count all things here, as loss and dross, in comparison of that
excellent treasure, which we have in our earthen vessels to the efficacy of
which has at times given (...) disrelish to every thing that would impede its
pure arising in the soul. It is the constant care and work of our adversary, to
strive to blind the eye of the mind, which can discern the transcendent
excellency of the eternal truth. She mentions, At the city of Cambridge had a
meeting with a few professors, the number about 5, in which place was greatly
favored in my mind with the living presence of God, in whose light I saw, and
was made to believe, that there would be a people raised up in that place who
should stand for the honor of his name, and to be valiant for truth on earth.
This I was led to declare to the few present, though at this time, a place
noted for contrary fruits. At Burford had a large and precious evening meeting,
though in the early part it was a very suffering time, there being diverse
priests, justices of the peace, so called, and rude people in whom the prince
of the air had dominion; but the Lord, whose power is above every power,
manifested his own arm and made it bare, for the help of his depending
children, who have none in heaven but him, nor in the whole earth in comparison
of him. His testimony was set over the heads of transgre^^^rs, and evil spirits
were made subject to his power, everlasting praises be given to his excellent
name! At another place where I had a meeting, the professors of Truth had heard
of my being silent at several meetings, and were afraid of the cross and
reproach of men so took me a back way to the meeting for fear (as I
apprehended) their neighbors that were not of our society should see us, and
come there, yet Providence so ordered it, that a large number came to the
afternoon meeting, to whom Truth was declared in the wisdom and demonstration
of the spirit of God, after which I had to speak closely to the professors.

In the latter part of this journey, I was seized with a violent intermitting
fever, which illness detained me several weeks, and caused me to travel in
great bodily weakness, yet the Lord was graciously pleased at times to
strengthen me for the service he had called me to, beyond my own and others
expectation. I waited near a month for a passage, which seemed tedious to me,
some of the time at a public house at Parkgate, destitute of friends or
acquaintance, but dared not repine at the will of Providence. In this journey I
rode about five thousand miles, and attended five hundred and twenty-five
meetings. I landed at Dublin the 9th month, 1750, being about two years and
nine months absent; had the company of My esteemed friend, Samuel Fothergill.
We had a rough, but swift passage, and were in danger of driving upon the Welsh
coast, but the Lord was our preserver. my friends rejoiced to see me, as I did
them, some were concerned at the state of my visibly impaired health. In this
city I felt great weakness of body and mind, being stripped, emptied and tried
as before the great Judge, by whom I was willing to be examined, and to bring
my deeds to his divine light, where my own weakness and manifold infirmities,
might be more fully manifested; it was several days before I was able to go out
to meetings. Though my life was despaired of by several, when I repaired to my
father's cottage, where all the wants of nature were fully supplied, that which
would gratify the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh and pride of life,
much excluded, I mended in my health faster than I expected, and contrary to
the opinion of diverse, who were against my coming, fearing the journey would be
too much for me, and the accommodation not suitable to my weak condition; but I
bless the name of my God, who never suffered me to want any good thing, since
my first knowledge of him. I had great peace in coming to my aged father, who
much desired my company: invitations I had to stations of great affluence; but
denied them, and found the Lord my God deserts not the poor and mean of this
world, but visits them in their lonely situations and humble retirements before
him. This I am a witness of, for he was often with my spirit in this time of
weakness; speaking peace and comfort to my soul, that could not live without
him. One day in particular, as I rode to meeting, being much better in health,
his living word ran sweetly through my mind, thus, "For this purpose have I
raised thee up, to show forth in thee my power of preservation and mercy;"
which greatly rejoiced my soul, and caused me to praise his excellent name (who
is everlastingly worthy) for all his mercies.

She kept pretty much at home during her weak state of health, and about this
time, wrote to a friend:

By the mercy of Providence, I am now much recovered, ah! says my soul, may I
answer the end for which I am continued longer among dreams and shadows,
mingled with deceit, ah! what soul that rightly knew its true center, would
desire to continue here longer than till it had performed the will of Him that
sent it into life. This is a state of infirmity and dependency, environed by
the most subtle, potent, unwearied enemies, which loudly calls for the greatest
vigilance, fear, humility and watchfulness, that our nature is capable of; let
us, therefore, sink down in our minds, to the lowly, humble seed of everlasting
renown, where the visions of life and light are seen, and the voice of the
great Oracle heard, distinct from every other sound, in the silence of all
flesh, freed from the noise of archers, where none can make us afraid. In
another letter she says:

I often wonder why the Lord and his people, should show so much regard to a
poor and unworthy creature, who am the least and last of his family, if meet to
be esteemed of that happy number. My soul sinks low under the weight of
obligations to him, to whom I can ^ake no returns, but of his own begetting;
who measures not his mercies by our merit, for then would they be a scanty
portion; but they are proportioned to his matchless love and kindness. The
summer following she accompanied Catherine Payton, who came to this nation on a
religious visit, finding a draft to join her to Munster and Ulster. She set
forward on this journey in the 5th month, 1751, and they joined as companions
at Waterford. They had many meetings amongst those of other societies. They
visited the town's people of Sligo, in Connaught, and felt much satisfaction;
she thought they were well worth visiting, and said there seemed much more
openness to declare the truth amongst those of other societies, than amongst
them that go under our name. After this journey, she staid most of the winter
with her father.

To a friend she wrote as follows:

I salute thee in that love, which nearly united our spirits at our first
seeing each other; yea, before I beheld thee with my natural eyes, a prayer was
begotten in my soul, that thou might be made an instrument of good to me, which
petition, I have cause to believe, was heard and excepted by the great I am.
For thou wast dipped into a sense of my state, and sympathy with me, by which
thou wast made the messenger of glad tidings and consolation to my distressed
spirit, and resolutions have been formed (which I trust, by the favor of
heaven, will be supported) to practice greater degrees of mortification and
self denial than I have yet done; for I see great occasion for it. I write not
this to exalt the creature or flatter my friend, but to magnify that grace, by
which thou art, what thou art; and to contribute my mite to the strengthening
of thy hands in the way of well doing, as I believe the strongest sometimes
have need of it; but, perhaps, I only judge by myself, who am at times ready to
faint in my mind, from a fear that I shall never be made a conqueror over those
potent enemies which oppose my happiness. I have compared my mortal spirit to a
kind of immaterial fire, that is continually catching at, or fastening on,
something celestial or terrestrial, and whichever it centres in, it may justly
be called an inhabitant of; as natural a tendency it has to fix on earthly
objects, that are continually assailing it, conveyed thereto by the organs of
my senses, as iron cast into the water, has to sink; which my soul is ready to
do, when I wait not carefully for the renewing of that power, by which we are
translated from the kingdom of darkness, to that of light. But so frequent and
painful are the operations of the sword of the spirit, when it comes to sever
my soul from the spirit of the world, and to divide asunder between the joints
and the marrow, that it makes we weary of this embodied state of imperfection,
wherein I am torn as between two, heaven and earth, so that I often long to be
dissolved and to be with Christ. Though this desire seems to carry in it
something laudable, inasmuch as it shows my union with the eternal excellency,
to be stronger than all the ties of nature, yet I am ready to fear, that in
part, this longing takes its rise from self-love, which would lead me to seek
an exemption from pain and trials before I had filled up in my body, that which
is behind of the sufferings of Christ: I hope it is excuseable, as our holy
pattern has set us the example; when about to partake of sufferings, he prayed
earnestly, that, if it were possible, the cup might pass from him; but came to
this noble result, which all his followers, that are so in reality, must be
brought to, viz. "Not my will, but thine be done." What could be grievous, that
he did not suffer? Rejoice, O my soul, then in thy tribulations, and count it
all joy, when thou fallest into diverse temptations for the trial of thy faith
in Christ. The following advice was communicated by letter, to a young man,
then under the baptizing power of truth.

There is one caution that has dwelt for sometime on my spirit to give thee, in
pure love and good will, that is, that thou may be particularly nice in the
choice of thy friends, now in thy setting out in a new and spiritual life,
which is a point of great wisdom; take special care of being too readily taken
with strangers, and of giving thy sentiments in word or writing of persons or
things, not well known. This thou will find, when duly considered, to be a hint
of singular service. Wait for the freedom and direction of truth, before thou
enterest into converse or familiarity with any, though it may be on religious
subjects, for there are many more talkers of the truth, than walkers in it.
This thou will find (as I have done) to tend greatly to the health and
well-being of thy precious soul; for there is a set of mortals, whose very
breath diffuses poison and infection to the mind; their throats are as an open
sepulcher, the poison of asps is under their tongues, they flatter with their
lips; I might enlarge on this subject, but a watchword is enough. She wrote to
another of her friends thus:

It is not forgetfulness of my near and dear friends, that makes me slow in my
answers to them, nor yet, because I have not a singular pleasure in hearing
from them; their converse by letter or otherwise, is, next to the divine good
in myself, the greatest satisfaction in this life; but thou know, that even
all of this kind must be through him, who is the source of all good, and can
command the clouds, that they shall or shall not rain; he can stop both the
upper and the nether springs, and cause a famine in the land, and who shall
say, what do thou? It is the Lord that works in and for his people, and
who shall let or hinder him, from doing it his own way, and after the manner
that he sees best? He is about to try his people every way, even as he did
Israel of old, by famine, captivity, and sore distresses, because of the
hardness of their hearts and stiffness of their necks, refusing to return to
him, who had done such great things for them and their fathers. This is the
case, my friend, of people in this our day, who are gone into captivity, and
refuse to return at the command of the Lord, who has long waited, and loudly
called, immediately and instrumentally, to them to return. And for this reason
a little remnant, who, like David, prefer Jerusalem above the chiefest joy,
have hung their harps as upon the willows, and dare not sing the songs of Sion,
neither can they in a strange land, for such as desire it from them; who are of
the number of those that spoil them, and yet require of them a song or mirth.
May all do as Daniel did, in their private chambers, set their faces toward
Jerusalem, oftener than the morning, and not be afraid to suffer for the law of
their God. It has been my lot, since my return from England, to be much shut up
as to word and doctrine, and to sit in great emptiness and poverty of spirit,
amongst a people big with expectation of words, and too much departed from the
light and life of the pure word in themselves. And of late since this
expectation has been disappointed, and their hopes frustrated, the Lord has
often made use of me in his hand, as a sharp threshing instrument, and put such
words in my mouth for them, as they could hardly bear; so that on all sides,
the poor creature is greatly despised and rejected, by the high and lofty
professors, and pharisaical righteous, who can speak their own words, and work
their own works; and indeed I am well content so to be, and expect no better
treatment, than our blessed Lord and his disciples have met with in all ages;
we are not greater than our Master, if they persecuted him they will also
persecute us. I only wish we may be found building on the same foundation, and
then the gates of hell will not prevail against us. She writes thus to a person
under religious impressions, whom she was made instrumental to help:

Does it not behove me to study thy preservation, as I am unavoidably led in
the wisdom of truth to do? It was for this end that I was chosen of the Lord at
this time for thy friend, I see it clearly, and feel it perfectly, thou art to
tread the same dangerous steps that I have had to stumble over, with this
advantage, that she who has gone the road before thee, is made willing to lend
thee her hand, and to point out the snares and traps that lie in the way. And
now it is in my heart to give thee a short account of my own experience in the
work of religion. When my soul was first thereby awakened to a life of
righteousness; I saw such beauty and excellency in the truth and the followers
of it, that I thought no temptation would ever prevail upon me to turn aside in
the least degree from what I knew to be my duty and interest in the truth (not
in the world, which I saw clearly lay in wickedness) and all my passions seemed
so subjected and engrossed in admiration and contemplation of the one great and
good object, and his wonderful works in me and the whole creation, that I
seemed to have no life in, nor relish for, any other employ. Nor could I hear
with pleasure any converse that did not savor more or less of the spirit of
truth, and even such as did, I delighted more in the feeling sense of it in my
own heart, than the hearing of it from any mortal. And to hear any speak of it,
that were not in the life and power of it, was the greatest pain to my spirit
that it could be tried with. All the wisdom of men seemed foolishness to me
without this, and it is really so in the sight of God and all good men. Alas!
this state lasted not long till my trials came on apace, and all my fortitude
was proved; nor will I, or dare I, ascribe my preservation to my own
watchfulness, stability, prudence, or wisdom; no, it must be for ever
attributed to the watchful eye of the Shepherd of Israel, who sleeps not by day
nor slumbers by night. The enemy of my happiness strove to draw me from the
true light, and set me upon acting by imitation, rather than the sense and
judgment of the truth in myself; and here self began to plead what need is
there for me to be more mortified in this, or that particular, than others of
my fellow laborers, that are greater ministers, and have seen farther into the
liberty which truth allows of, they being persons of far greater abilities than
I, and some other weak persons who make scruples of small matters? and what is
there in this, that, or the other trifle of dress or behavior? Thus did the
enemy work as in a mystery, to deceive my poor, proud heart, that liked well
this doctrine of his, and would have reasoned the secret, gentle dictates of
truth out of my mind; not considering that the enemy was leading me to imitate
the weaknesses of my fellow mortals, and overlook their virtues; thus did he
strive in another shape and form to open that eye in me, which had been shut to
all the glory of the world, in every kind and degree of it; all this and much
more, did the implacable enemy of my peace whisper in the ear of my soul, and
caused his agents to speak to my outward ear; yea, even some of the Lord's
servants, who were taken by the affectionate part, would have persuaded me from
the cross, as Peter would have done his Lord, when he said, "Far be those
things from thee," but what was his reply, "Get thee behind me, satan, thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men." Nor is
there any mortal, that rightly and truly savours the things of God, longer than
they are under the immediate influence of his own divine grace, and that in a
greater or smaller degree as they partake of it; let us therefore cast this
part in all the disciples, behind our backs, and look to him with a single eye,
that was never overcome in battle. He it was, who let me see, that no mortal
could be a perfect pattern to me, in all things; and that he would lead me in a
manner, different from most others, both as to my gift and conduct, and though
the manner in which truth led me, was often misconstrued, and wrongfully
censured, as the object of pride, singularity, temper, etc. my God knew it was
in obedience to him, and refined love and charity to my fellow mortals, which
would not, nor dare not, draw the hearts of the people from their true King, as
Absalom did, who perished for the same; and those innocent practices in
converse and behavior, which I saw used by others of my sex and condition,
whom I preferred before myself, were to me forbidden, though they might be to
them lawful, and for what I know allowable; especially toward the other sex, I
found it my duty to act with the utmost caution; if I found no danger on my
side, yet saw it needful to consult the good of those with whom I conversed:
and had I not been obedient in this particular* I am sure I should not have
been preserve^ till this time, to have been thy friend in the truth, as I am
this day. My own affections and the affections of others, would long since have
stolen me out of his hands, who has an absolute right to dispose of my body and
spirit, which are his. Such was the prevalency of the general love and esteem
that I met with for a time, which naturally drew my mind, and the prevalency of
the love of God, which powerfully attracted my soul toward himself from all
fading objects, that between these two powers, my mind was, at times, in that
position that Absalom's body was, when he hung in a dying condition in the
boughs of a tree, as between heaven and earth, scarce knowing which power would
have me; but as there was a faithful obedience to the voice of the true
shepherd, I found the power of Saul grow weaker, and that of David stronger.
About this time she wrote thus to a friend:

Though I am poor, low, distressed, and afflicted, having more need to be
ministered unto, than to minister to any, yet as thou have repeatedly desired
to hear from me by word or writing, I now feel a secret draft to let thee know
a little how it fares with me, though the source or cause of my sorrow must for
ever be concealed from all mortals, and penned within the narrow consines of
this troubled breast, save when admitted to pour out its complaints in the
bosom of my never failing friend and blessed redeemer, all other counselors
are denied; may he condescend to direct my steps in righteousness, and then all
will be well. Let it suffice to say that I have just been in silent and solid
retirement, considering my awful calling, and comparing my life to that of the
captain of my salvation, who was made perfect through suffering, and shall I
dare to say my life has some faint resemblance to his? yea, surely, as well
indeed it may who am called to be his minister. He was a man of sorrow and
acquainted with grief. So am I a woman of a sorrowful spirit, that have moved
my lips in prayer, when my tongue could not set forth the anguish of my soul,
pouring it forth in broken accents, sighs, and groans, not for riches, honor,
name, or fame, nor yet a mortal, earthly love, or a first born son after the
flesh; but, Oh! for divine wisdom, heavenly instructions and ability, to bring
forth fruits of righteousness to the praise and honor of him who has called me
to glory and virtue. Was my Lord despised and rejected of men? So am I. Hannah
like, I have been misunderstood even by the high priest, but not by the great
one of our profession, who knows and regards his own, gently whispering in the
ears of their souls, "Fear not worm, Jacob I am with thee," etc. My Lord was
betrayed: so have I been by a professed disciple. He was left alone in extreme
agonies, none to aid him, or to make his complaint to, but the Father alone. So
have I. Let me not longer dwell on this copious subject, than I find the
strength of his love to comfort my mind, and then I might for ever dwell on it,
and find new wonders in it. O the length, the breadth and the unfathomable
depth of it. I observe thy complaints of poverty, which was no incitement in me
to do the same, had it not been my state, and I thought it might not be
discouraging to thee, to know that thou shares the same lot with thy brethren
and sisters. Seek thou great things for thyself? Seek them not, for the Lord
has said, that he would bring evil upon all flesh, but if we have that promise
which was given to Barach, "thy life shall be given thee for a prey wheresoever
thou go," may this be our happy experience to save our spiritual lives, this
seems to be the ultimate of my wish, expectation, or desire, in this calamitous
day and time we live in, as to religion. The priests, the Lord's ministers,
mourn, the virgin daughters of Sion are in bitterness, saying with Barach, "the
Lord has added grief to my sorrow." Well let me not dwell longer on this theme,
but hope for beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the garments of
praise for the spirit of heaviness, how does this holy anchor keep my troubled
soul from foundering on the quicksands of despair. A concern, which at times
for years, had rested on her mind, to pay a religious visit to the churches in
America, appears about this time to have impressed her with additional weight,
the baptisms she passed through to fit her for this work, she thus describes:

The Lord was pleased to bring me exceedingly low, both in mind and body, the
latter so much so, that my life was despaired of by myself and others; and such
was my exercise of mind and pain of body, that life seemed a burden, yea, I was
ready often to wish my body dissolved that I might be with Christ. Yet, when
death looked me in the face, unaccompanied by that which alone can render it
supportable to human nature, viz. an incontestible evidence of eternal rest to
my immortal spirit, it appeared to me a gloomy prospect, and the cause of its
being so I believe was, that my time was not yet come.

For I knew not that I had wilfully offended the divine Being, that should
cause him to withdraw his life-giving presence, and suffer my mind to be
clothed with a thick cloud of darkness. During this time of trial and deep
exercise of body and mind, the Lord my God was pleased to extend his mighty arm
of power, and reduce my spirit to a calm, so as to make his holy voice
intelligible to my weary, distressed soul, and to inform me that he would raise
me from that low and dark state, and cause me, in his love, to visit the
churches in America the next year. And although this seemed to clash with my
temporal interest, as well as natural inclination, there was at the same time
when I heard the call, an entire resignation wrought in my mind, so that I
could say indeed and in truth, "Thy will be done in all things," which was to
me a confirmation that the thing was of the Lord, verifying that saying of
David, when addressing the Almighty, "In the day of thy power, thy people shall
be willing," and such was the prevalency of it, that it removed those things
which had been like mountains in my way, and caused them to be cast into the
sea of ann^^ilation.

This journey had been before me, by distant views, from a short time after my
receiving a gift in the ministry. There were many difficulties seemingly
insurmountable in my way, which the Lord in his own time was pleased to remove;
so that I may say of a truth, I was brought through the furnace of affliction
to perform this journey.

She corresponded with her friend Catherine Payton, who felt a like concern to
visit the churches in America, and great was the sympathy they had with each
other. She left home the 22d of the 3d month 1753, attended the quarterly
meeting at Edenderry, and went thence to Dublin, where she met with
considerable trials by opposing spirits, of which she says, she had a precious
sight, and thus writes:

I felt the power of darkness at work so as grievously to oppress my spirit,
but by degrees it was cast down, and the pure light prevailed. The design of
the enemy was to prevent my intended journey by raising contention, which,
blessed be the name of God, he was not able to do. I left Dublin in the 5th
month, in love and unity with my friends, and good desires for my enemies, if
any such I had, and landed at Liverpool, got safe to London. After attending
the yearly meeting at London, I went to the yearly meetings of Colchester,
Bury, Woodbridge, and Norwich: all which were attended with a good degree of
the life and power of truth, and an honest labor for the good of the people.
Before my leaving Ireland, I had a sight of Charleston, in South Carolina,
being the port for me to land at, which continued until I returned to London,
when I lost sight of it; which made me willingly conclude I might go with some
friends I was nearly united to, for Philadelphia, and went on board some
vessels bound for that port, but could not see my way in any of them. On more
deeply centring to the root of life, in humble resignation to the divine will,
I found it my duty to continue some weeks at London, and not being clear of
that city, was, I believe, the cause of my not seeing my way clear to
Charleston, I therefore concluded to stay the Lord's time, and when I found my
spirit clear, took my passage with my dear companion, Catherine Payton, for
that port. Before my leaving London, I had a large and comfortable
farewell-meeting at the Peel, for which my soul, with many more, had renewed
cause to bless and praise the name of the Lord; several friends accompanied us
from London to Portsmouth, where we took shipping and landed at Charleston. We
had a favorable passage, save hard weather toward the latter part of the
voyage; but by the infinite mercy of Almighty God, were preserved from any
terror or amazement, and our health continued beyond expectation, save the
sickness occasioned by the sea and heat. We had meetings on board every
First Day, when ability of body and the weather would permit, which the
passengers and ship's crew attended, to whom the way of life and salvation was
declared; but many of their hearts being hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin, the word had not that entrance, which could have been desired.

In Charleston the discipline was quite let fall, and I found it my duty to
endeavor to revive it. Herein I met with open opposition and evil treatment,
especially from one of my own countrymen, who was of a libertine spirit, and
had been under the censure of friends in his native land. But the Lord was
pleased to manifest his spirit, so that he could not frustrate our endeavors.
In this province we met with many difficulties both of body and mind, the
former by long journeys, in a very thinly inhabited country, through unbeaten
paths in the woods, dangerous creeks and swamps, with wild and venomous
creatures around us, and with such food and lodging as we had never been
accustomed to; yet the Lord our God was pleased to make it up to us by his
comfortable presence and good spirit, and to afford us the blessing of health,
at a time when the greatest part of the inhabitants suffered deeply with fevers
and agues. For which unmerited mercy, my soul at this time bows, in humble
thanksgiving, and returns him the praise of his works, who is everlastingly
worthy.

The following is a part of a letter written to her uncle:

It has dwelt on my heart for some days, to give thee a short history of a long
travel; and first may acquaint thee that through the matchless mercy of a never
failing God, to his poor depending children, we have been preserved in a good
degree of health, at a time when most faces gathered paleness through
indisposition of body. I do not remember that we have been in a house or family
since we left Charleston, but one or more were ill of a fever or ague, so that
it seems like an universal contagion which has overspread the inhabitants of
this quarter. We came hither from Charleston, taking no meetings in the way,
except in the families where we lodged, the distance being 150 miles, through
woods and swamps, where our lives seemed in jeopardy every hour, yet through
mercy our minds were so supported above fear, as to go on with a good degree of
cheerfulness of spirit, trusting in that holy arm of power, which has hitherto
wrought deliverance for us. I have sat down by a brook in the woods, eat my
Indian-corn bread, and drank water out of a calabash, with more content and
peace of mind than many who were served in plate, etc. and at night have slept
contentedly in my riding clothes, on a bed hard enough to make my bones ach,
and the house so open on every side as to admit plenty of light and air. I have
compared my passage through these woods, to my pilgrimage through the world,
and indeed in some things it bears a just resemblance; the path we rode through
was exceeding narrow, and sometimes so closed as not to see a footstep before
me, caught by boughs on one hand and bushes on the other, obliged to stoop very
low, lest my head should be hurt or eyes pulled out: this I compare to the
entangling things of the present world, which are ready to catch the affections
on every side and blind the eyes of the soul; my clothes are a little ragged by
these pulls, but through care not quite torn off. Oh! says my soul, may it not
be wholly stripped of the white robe which is the righteousness of saints; for
surely I have never been in more danger than now; the sense of which leads me
earnestly to desire, that I may have a place in the remembrance of those, whose
prayers ascend with acceptance to the throne of grace. I have not given the
foregoing account of my bodily hardship, by way of complaint or murmuring, no,
when I consider how much more, very many much better than I have suffered for
the cause of religion, and especially the good Shepherd who laid down his life
for his sheep, every cause of complaint is removed, remembering that the
disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord. Yea, it is
cause of rejoicing to my soul, when I can find my feet in the footsteps of the
tribulated flocks, who trod this narrow path, and tried way to eternal
blessedness. In this way of life I am exempt from many dangerous temptations,
which ease and supineness are inlets to. On my hard bed, I am free from the
fault of wasting too much of my time in a state of death and inactivity. At my
plain meals, I am freed from many of the temptations and evils, which attend
high and voluptuous living; and am often made to remember that excellent advice
of a great apostle to his son in the faith, "Endure hardness, as a good soldier
of Jesus Christ." And surely such as are sent out to war before the face of
their enemies, may expect it in an especial manner. But what, above all other
considerations reconciles me to every dispensation of Providence, is, the sight
and sense which truth gives me of my own unworthiness, of the least of all the
mercies I receive, either spiritual or temporal; for indeed I see myself to be
so exceedingly weak, and capable of so little service, as not to merit the
meanest food that is set before me, yet have never been suffered to doubt, but
that I am in my place, in coming here. -- I think very long to hear from my
friends and family, having been of late a little tossed, especially in the
night by dreams about my father's family and some others; whether it be the
work of the enemy to perplex my mind, or a foresight of the worst of trials
(except the loss of the favor of heaven) I cannot tell: but when I am assisted
to look beyond this transitory scene of uncertainty, I can welcome
tribulations, and rejoice in such adversities, as have the least tendency to
draw my mind nearer unto God; which I know must be by being weaned and redeemed
from earth and earthly satisfactions. Alas! while I carry about with me this
frail tabernacle, its affections and desires will bend toward its original
dust, when from under the immediate influence of that holy power, which alone
can redeem it from the thraldom of sin and satan. What need then have I and all
who have been made partakers of the powers of the world to come, humbly,
diligently, and chastely to wait for the enlightening and enlivening incomes
thereof to our souls, that so we may go on to perfection.

I have hitherto passed over our exercises in Charleston. It seems like a city
of refuge for the disjointed members of our society, where they may walk in the
sight of their own eyes, and the imagination of their own hearts, without being
accountable to any for their conduct, and yet be called by the name of Quaker,
to take away their reproach. We lodged at the house of one who had married out
of the society, which we went to with fear and reluctance, having first tried
all means to avoid it. Here we were greatly straitened, but I think we were
providentially cast there for his wife's sake, who is under convincement, a
tender hearted, good natured woman, and exceedingly kind to us, and he well
esteemed for a fair reputable trader. He received us with much civility and
hospitality, which yet did not blind our eyes, or prevent our telling him the
truth; I have gone so far as to acquaint him, that I was ashamed to walk the
streets with one under our name, who deviated so much from our principles as he
did, which he always took well, and would acknowledge his faults. We were often
visited by those of other societies, and had much kindness showed by them. We
had freedom to make a few visits amongst them, and had service for our master
in some of their families. We likewise paid a religious visit to every family
professing with us, in that place, and had very close work, but with the most
authority of any service we have entered on; and by this and such like labor,
I understand we have driven several from the meeting, who could not bear sound
doctrine, though ever so private. Whether there be any sound members added by
our labor, must at present be left: however that be, I say, amen to these
leaving the profession, whose lives and conduct are a scandal to it; and I wish
to be made more and more instrumental, in the hand of my God, for division in
the society, between the precious and the vile: let me as a creature suffer
what I may, by evil report and false brethren, which I have had, and still
expect a large share of, in the way my master leads me; for of a truth it was
his spirit, if ever I knew it, and not my own, that led me to this close work.
One appeared in open opposition, at a meeting appointed for conference, in
order to take steps for reviving the discipline amongst them; he attacked me in
particular, but I had then little to say to him, and what I did say was in
great mildness; he arose in a violent passion and left the room; since which we
have seen no more of him at meeting or elsewhere.

M. P.


Her account thus continues:

At Nuce in North Carolina, we had a large and comfortable meeting, in which I
thought it might be truly said the Lord's power was over all, and that even
devilish spirits were made subject to that power, by which we were assisted to
speak. In this province likewise, we met with abundant hardships and sufferings
of body, as we were drawn in the love of God, to visit many of the back
inhabitants, where I suppose, no European had ever been on the like errand: by
lodging in the woods in cold frosty weather, on damp grounds with bad firing, I
got a rheumatic pain in my jaws and head, by which I suffered much, and often
lost my rest after had traveling; yet through it all, the Lord was pleased to
support my spirit in a good degree of cheerfulness, without murmuring or
repining, though my weak constitution often deeply felt the effects of those
bodily hardships; yet by the goodness and healing virtue of the Lord, I was
often made to forget my bodily infirmities, and to see and feel that His
strength was made perfect in weakness.

Between Pedee and New-garden, where is a large tract of country, we rode two
days and an half, and lay two nights in the woods, without being under the roof
of a house. In these parts I seemed to have a hope that truth might yet spread,
because many of the people showed a love and esteem for friends, and a dislike
to the priests. We were often kindly entertained, according to their ability,
at the houses of these not of our society, though sometimes at our first
entrance they would look strangely at us, because they understood not the
lawfulness of women's preaching, having never heard any: thus did we pass for a
sign and wonder; some would say, when invited to meeting, that we were women
who ran from our own country for some ill act, not being acquainted with the
supernatural power of love, which had influenced our hearts, nor the rules and
discipline of friends. Through divine favor I have not heard of any of them
who went away dissatisfied from meeting; may the praise of all the Lord's works
be rendered to himself, who alone is worthy. In the upper part of this province
(North Carolina) there is a large body of prefessors, and I hope some valuable
friends, but too many I fear (yea, I think I sensibly felt) are trusting in a
profession, without a possession, of the living virtue of truth. We were at
their quarterly meeting, which was large; but the power of truth somewhat low,
at least in me, who suffered much under a loose unsanctified spirit. My
companion had the chief service in the public meetings, and was led, I believe,
to speak pretty much to the state of the society: my chief labor was in the
meeting of ministers and elders, in which we endeavored to strive for some
regulation in the discipline, particularly that they might have their meetings
for business select, and not set open for the people, which they were then in
the practice of. The weighty part of friends joined us, and seemed to conclude
they would strive for an amendment. I also proposed their holding a meeting for
the elders to confer in, before the ministers joined them, in order to their
hearing a more full and perfect account of the state of the ministry in each
meeting, and to have them both held before the quarterly meeting. This was
agreed to, and the meeting ended in a feeling sense of divine love, which makes
true unity and concord amongst brethren, for which my soul was thankful. I
labored with considerable openness at several of the particular meetings,
before the quarterly meeting; my companion being gone on a visit, southward of
these parts as far as Bath-town. In this journey she had the trial of having a
woman friend, who accompanied her from Perquimans, removed by death; her
remains were brought to her husband and children in eleven days from the time
she left home, being then well to all appearance. We attended at her funeral,
which was on the whole solid and satisfactory, though somewhat interrupted by
one who, as he thought, would preach the burial sermon. From thence we passed
to Virginia, and found things in the south side exceedingly weak and low, the
meetings very small, and in many places the discipline sadly let fall; friends
were very kind and hospitable, but from the poor seasons we had in spirit,
their hospitality sometimes lost its true relish; yet there is a seed in these
parts, with whom my spirit had true unity. We spent near two months in this
colony, in much inward suffering, and under some bodily hardships, their way of
living differing from what we had been accustomed to. One thing which friends
here, as well as in North Carolina, Maryland and some other parts of America,
were in the practice of, gave us considerable pain, and we apprehended was in
part the cause of truth's not prospering amongst them, as otherwise it would,
that is, buying and keeping of slaves, which we could not reconcile with the
golden rule of doing unto all men as we would they should do unto us.

At West-river, Maryland, I was concerned to write an epistle to the yearly
meeting to be held at Curles in Virginia, which had been on my mind for some
time; my companion united therewith, and subscribed here name to said epistle,
which was as follows: To the living, solid remnant of friends, at the yearly
meeting to be held at Curles, for the colony of Virginia, in the 6th mo. 1754,
and especially such as constitute the select meeting.
DEAR FRIENDS,
In a good degree of that universal, unchangeable, enlarging love which drew us
from our native land and near enjoyments, to make you a religious visit, do we
at this time tenderly salute you, and hereby inform you (as we have done some
of you heretofore verbally) that our hearts have been pained, on account of the
state of the church in your colony. And though we cannot accuse ourselves of
withholding any thing from you, either in public or private, which was given us
to deliver, we apprehend it our duty to stir up in your remembrance, some
truths already known, and we hope weightily felt by some of you.

First, we recommend to your solid consideration, when solemnly assembled, the
exceeding low state of the ministry and dicipline, in most, if not all the
monthly meetings in your colony. Sink down to the pure gift of God in
yourselves. Ask of Him with a sincere desire to be informed, Lord, what is the
cause that we flee before our enemies, and are taken captive by them? for thus
we believe it is with some, whether they are sensible of it or not, and as this
is the case, we hope and believe, the Lord will let some of you see and feel,
that the shortness has not been on his side, and that he has not forsaken his
people, but they him; and will also give power to amend your ways and your
doings. For we cannot, we dare not suppose (let our spirits be clothed with
ever so much Christian charity) that all who have been called, and even
initiated into the true church, have stood faithful, and kept a single eye to
the glory of God; no, no, if that had been the case, what a bright, shining
people would you have been ere this day; yea, as a city set upon a hill, whose
light would have diffused itself to those who were without, and have caused
many to flock to our Zion for rest and safety, as doves to the windows; and not
as birds of prey, to tear and devour, as is now too much the case, many we fear
coming in among you with unsanctified spirits; i. e. to make a profession of
the truth, which is now easy, without a possession or sure inheritance in it,
in which increase of number, some have seemed to glory, when in truth they have
but increased ungodliness in the church, by adding chaff instead of the solid,
weighty wheat, which alone will be gathered into the Lord's garner; but the
chaff of all kinds, will be burnt with unquenchable fire. Where then will these
light, chaffy, unsanctified professors appear, or what will they add to you,
except it be an incumberance and clog to the small handful of solid friends
amongst you, who, we believe, are too much oppressed and borne down; yea, lie
as hid and buried, under this light, windy spirit. Arise, we beseech you, in
the name and power of your God, and exert yourselves in his pure wisdom and
strength, for his cause and truth on earth. Victory is on the Lord's side, and
will be yours, if you faithfully follow him in the way of his requirings, not
fearing the faces of men, but strictly regarding the still, small voice and
gentle motions of the blessed spirit of truth. As this is the case, one shall
chase a thousand of these light, frothy spirits, and two put ten thousand to
flight, though ye may, yea, must be little and low in your own eyes. And we
earnestly desire, that such as have been called to, and in some measure
qualified for, the work of the Lord, and through a desire of some kind or
other, of filthy lucre, of which there are many, are become formal, blind, and
unfaithful, may repent, and do their first works, seeing from whence they are
fallen, lest the Lord come to them quickly, and remove such candlestick out of
its place, whose candles are already put out by the baneful breath of the
spirit of this world; with which they have universally mingled, and in which
they are held captive. Arise from this state, if possible, and shake yourselves
from the dust of the earth, with which some of you are laden as with thick
clay; but if you are so benumbed, hardened, and stupefied, through the
deceitfulness of sin, that this cannot be, yet cease at least, to pervert the
right way of the Lord, by meddling in things with which you have no business,
that is, putting yourselves forth in the ministry or discipline, when Christ
the true shepherd, has not put you forth therein. Remember what befell him who
stretched forth a hand to the ark, even when it tottered and seemed in danger
of falling; the same event will happen to the spiritual lives of all those, who
continue for a series of time, to mock and deceive themselves and people with a
sound of words without life or power, which however found in themselves and
well connected, are but as a dead letter, which kills instead of quickening the
soul. Let this certain, self-evident truth be weightily considered by you, viz.
that nothing but life and light, should move to act in the church of Christ;
not pity for the people, nor inclination to gratify their longing desire after
words, nor any other human passion or consideration, should move us thus to
tempt the Lord, and take his holy name in vain, in the worst sense of the
expression, for which as do so, he has declared he will not hold them
guiltless. And dear friends, we apprehend that a great part of the weakness and
unfruitfulness, which appears in the ministry amongst you, proceeds from want
of a right, sound discipline, established and conducted in the wisdom of truth,
which discipline is certainly not only as a wall of defense against the
encroachments of many dangerous enemies, but as a hedge to shelter from the
various baneful blasts, destructive to young and tender plants, which should be
sheltered as well as watered, pruned and dug about, by wise, judicious elders
and fathers and mothers in the church. But alas! how do the few of those who
are on the right foundation, stand as alone, exposed to the darts of their
enemies, and piercing blasts from every side, unpruned, unadvised in a great
degree; can such be expected to bring forth plentiful crops of full, ripe, well
flavoured fruit? nay, rather the savor of the wild grape is to be feared,
because the trees are left in a great measure without cultivation. Now as the
hedge is thus sadly taken away, and the wall greatly broken down, we are
sensible the reparation must be by gradual steps; yea, by laying a single stone
at a time, and planting a tender twig. And those who are engaged in this
necessary work, will find as Nehemiah did, before he went to repair the walls
of Jerusalem, sadness of countenance, ere they can entreat the Almighty for
liberty to engage in the work. Nothing short of a heart truly touched with love
and zeal for the good of the church of Christ, can adopt this language, "Here
am I, send me," or "qualify me and let me go." May it be yours, Oh! ye beloved,
tender plants of the Lord's right hand planting, and when it is, stifle it not,
but go on in the strength of the Lord, not saying, "Here am I, and I will go in
the strength of my own spirit, will, or wisdom." No, we give our testimony for
our Lord and master, that these forward, unsavory spirits, will never profit
the people, nor bring glory to God. But you who are of the former rank, though
you may meet with many discouragements, as Nehemiah did, yet if ye trust in the
Lord with all your hearts, and singly eye his light in yourselves, not
conferring with flesh and blood, nor seeking your own honor, but the honor of
him that sent you into life, it is our testimony to you for encouragement, that
the Lord will bless his work in your hands, and richly reward you for it,
though you may have a long and painful travail, and sometimes as in the night
season, before you come at the right place for building; and when you come
there, you will find much rubbish to be removed.

This we apprehend must be the first work before our stone can be properly laid
on the right foundation, i. e. to have all unsanctified spirits, both of your
own and other societies, excluded the privilege of sitting in your meetings for
business; otherwise we believe it will be building with the rubbish, which will
never stand to the honor of God and the good of his people.

Our minds are so sensibly affected with the pernicious tendency of that evil
custom, of suffering your meetings for the discipline of the church to be thus
mixed, that we cannot help advising (believing it to be the mind of truth) that
you use your christian endeavors for an alteration, by making a minute against
this disorderly practice, and strongly recommending the putting of it in force
in the several monthly meetings throughout the colony, for which you have
authority from the universal practice of friends where the discipline is
rightly conducted, as well as from the original institution of such meetings.

And now having in a good degree eased our spirits of what seemed to rest upon
them, on your account, we conclude in that love which seeks the preservation
and good of the heritage of God, with saying, be sober, be vigilant and of one
mind, and desiring the God of peace may be with you, in this your annual
assembly, we remain your friends in the truth.

M. P. C. P.

West-river in Maryland, the 4 th of the 5 th mo. 1754.



At this meeting of friends at West-river, we were falsely accused of speaking
from outward information, when in truth it was from the opening of the word of
life; this we were frequently suspected of, and charged with, by unbelievers,
who knew not the intelligence of the spirit, though they made profession of it.

We passed through the western side of Maryland called Sassifrax bay, and took
meetings in our way; but after we entered Pennsylvania, had no openness to
appoint meetings in that province, the Jerseys or Long Island, except one, but
passed on in a pretty direct line, falling in with some meetings as they came
in course till we got to Rhode Island, the day before the yearly meeting which
was held at Newport, it was large and attended with a good degree of divine
power, peace and concord. At this meeting we found our minds engaged to labor
for some regulation in the discipline, which was sadly out of order, in
particular that unwise practice of having meetings for that purpose, mixed with
the world's people, and such as were proper subjects to have it exercised upon,
which seemed to be the first step necessary to be taken. We prevailed so far as
to have a minute made against it, and sent to the several quarterly and monthly
meetings, as the result of the yearly meeting, which gave us an opportunity as
we fell in with them, to strengthen friends in having their meetings select. It
was remarkable that we fell in with so many of them in the course of our labor
and service: I write this for my own instruction and that of others, as an
incitement to follow the leading of truth and the way it points out to us,
though the cause may not immediately appear, and indeed on all accounts I have
seen it best so to do. One mark of providential care, which occurred in this
journey, is, I think, worthy of remembrance; when at New York some friends of
that city, and others, seemed inclined that we should go by water to Newport,
in a sloop that was to sail next day; accordingly we went to view the vessel,
and found her very small and inconvenient, having no cabin that we could well
sit, stand or lie in; they seemed to think we might make our passage in 24 or
at most 48 hours; we sat down quietly in her, to feel if there was freedom in
the truth for us to go, a practice I like to be found in on such occasions, in
which time, and before I went it appeared to me, that if we sailed in her, we
should meet with greater difficulties than if we went by land to South-hold,
and thence to Newport by water. I told friends that I had more freedom to go by
land, and they readily agreed to it. The vessel sailed from New York as
intended, we went as proposed, and had some meetings to good satisfaction,
amongst the Presbyterians at and near South-hold, and fell in with a small
meeting of friends in the way, having also some seasoning opportunities among
ourselves, wherein the divine presence was manifested to our mutual comfort. We
waited some days at South-hold for a fair wind, went on board and landed the
same evening: the sloop which it was intended we should go in, arrived only the
same day, being 8 days on her passage.

At Philadelphia the 23d of the 5th mo. I received the sorrowful tidings of the
death of my dear and tender father, who departed this life in much peace and
quietude of spirit, on the 23d of the 2d month last, according to the account I
received from those who were present; he having been favored with his
understanding and a sense of his change. This was of a truth sore and hard to
bear. I have great cause to bless and praise his great name, who supported me
beyond my expectation or desert under this trial, as well as prepared my mind
for it, by a foresight of it, both sleeping and waking. I saw, in a dream, my
father in the agonies of death, and in the time of his illness, day after day,
felt such a sympathy of soul as is not easily expressed, and after that such a
stop in my mind, from thinking of or writing to him, as convinced me that he
was gone, the account of which I fully expected.

We attended a quarterly meeting at Hampton in New England, where we had to
testify against an unruly separate spirit, though we had not seen or heard of
it outwardly, as I declared to them; nothing to convince us of it but the
spirit of truth, they would not believe, though high pretenders to revelation.
They abundantly convinced us before the quarterly meeting was over of our being
right, for such was their outrage, that they used the utmost of their power to
prevent us from speaking in the meeting, to ease our minds, by noises both
within and without the house; but truth gave us the victory and set our spirits
over them.

After we had spent some time in this quarter, and visited friends generally,
eastward of Boston, as far as North Yarmouth, on my return I found my mind
secretly drawn toward a separate people, at Hampton in New England, but as it
was a service likely to be attended with more than common difficulties, I
waited to have a more clear sign and stronger evidence of my duty, which the
Lord was pleased to give me in his own time; he knew the sincerity of my heart
and that I had no will to disobey him. We passed the place 14 miles, before I
received such a satisfactory evidence, as I had wished for, in which I believe
there was wisdom, as some friends might perhaps have judged me, as being too
forward on entering on a service of such weight and difficulty. At Newberry,
where were friends from several meetings, I found my mind so strongly drawn,
and with such weight toward this people, as rendered me quite unfit for any
other service, it seeming impossible for me to think of any thing else in that
meeting, except laying my concern before friends there; which I was fully
persuaded, was what truth pointed out to me. Accordingly at the close of the
meeting, I requested the most solid, concerned friends to stay, when I told
them how it had been with me; they readily agreed to my going, and diverse gave
up to accompany us. My companion at first seemed affrighted about going, and
wept considerably, I left her quite at liberty to stay or go, and in the
morning she found her way open and had good service. They received us with much
seeming kindness, particularly one who appeared to be like the head of them,
and was the person whom I chiefly wanted to see: He spoke many fair words to us
before the meeting, and told us that he looked upon it as a favor from the
Lord, that we were sent to them; but after meeting, when I came to tell him my
mind freely, and deliver the message which I had to him, he soon changed and
treated me roughly: declaring that I would not ^^nd mercy with the Lord, until
I repented of my proceedings against him and them, at the quarterly meeting at
Hampton. We had a seasonable opportunity to ease our minds, in which our master
was with us, by his spirit and power, and I was made sensible that there was in
that place, a people sincere in their searches and endeavors after religion,
which the Lord regarded, though under many delusions and mistakes. In this
quarter (New England) close and hard work fell to our lots, amongst those who
called themselves of our society, which was difficult to be accomplished,
because many thought themselves whole, while in reality they needed a
physician, manifesting an unlawful familiarity with the world. Unbounded
curiosity in the people, caused meetings to be thronged, that in hot weather it
was exceeding hard to sit them, and much more trying to speak in them; but he
who searches the hearts of all, and knows their intentions, disappointed these
wrong spirits, by closing our mouths in silence one meeting after another;
which greatly displeased the people, and drew upon us great reproach, lies and
slander, all which we were enabled to bear patiently, and rejoice in, for our
Master's sake. We were led to endeavor to separate those under our name from
others, and at times some of the ruling members from the rest, to whom we had
very close things to offer, feeling that the declension which so glaringly
appeared in the society, had reached many of their borders. This seemed a very
hard task to get accomplished because of their being so connected in marriage,
etc. and the discipline being so sadly let fall, they knew not who were, or who
were not proper members.

In some places we had to visit particular families, before we could cast off
our burdens, as in Boston; where I was led to find out some hidden works of
darkness, the workers whereof ought to be cut off from the name and society of
friends, in order to clear it and them from the scandal they brought on it; one
young man in particular, with whom we had to treat on his being likely to marry
with one of another society. It arose in my heart while we talked with him,
that he was deeply tinctured with deism, a disbelief of the scriptures, the
coming of Christ in the flesh, and his second appearance by his spirit; I told
him my opinion of him which he acknowledged to be true, and spoke in defense of
it; I told him the ground whence his unbelief sprung, viz. leaning to his own
understanding, and departing from the light, which alone can convince of God
and godliness. I left some parts of this country not quite clear in my spirit,
but under a weight, and particularly Newport, I was given up in my mind to
return to it, but could not then find my way open. I was advised by a friend to
leave it for the present; I did so, and traveled under great exercise of
spirit through Connecticut, but without condemnation. At Oblong I had a sight
that my dear companion C. P. and I were to separate, for the work's sake, I had
been at times much straitened in my service by preferring her and her gift, for
I was greatly afraid and jealous over my own heart, lest self should have any
part in our separation, from a desire of appearing greater than with a
companion; another thing which appeared to me with considerable weight, was her
youth, and the many dangers that might attend if not rightly suited with a
companion. These and many other considerations, would I believe have prevailed,
had not the Lord laid his hand upon me, in a remarkable manner, on this wise.
My mind was stripped of ability for service, and deeply bowed to the center of
all strength for instruction, in which state I had a desire given me to be at
Philadelphia, and to go thither pretty direct without appointing many meetings:
accordingly I desired that not more than two meetings, which lay in the way,
might be appointed, but my companion and some other friends, encouraged the
appointing more. I became passive, though I found my exercise for meetings in
those parts, was at that time taken away; which aftewards more clearly
appeared, having been silent in all, except one I found freedom to have
appointed, neither was my companion capacitated for the service, in the last
meeting which was at Longreach on the Main.

She appears by a very concise account kept of her gospel labors, to have been
closely exercised in visiting meetings mostly in the province of Pennsylvania,
from the 10th mo. 1754, to the spring of 1756. She and her companion having,
with the concurrence of friends, separated for the work's sake. Within which
period, she wrote as follows to a friend.

Philadelphia, 13th of 12th mo. 1755.
Thy acceptable letter, perhaps, might have been acknowledged sooner, had I not
a hope or expectation of seeing thee ere now; hope did I say? alas! I should
have none, but doing and suffering the will of God; all others seem forbidden,
and are through divine favor, pretty much restrained. My stay being prolonged
in this country, has been altogether unexpected to myself, and I have been held
in such uncertainty for some months past, as not to be able to give my friends
any information respecting future movements. I have stood as a soldier waiting
for the word of command, to march withersoever my holy leader may be pleased to
direct; and may say to the praise of his great name, that he is not an hard
master, but good and bountiful every way; for though I have (as recited) been
kept as a day-servant in a kind of undetermined state in regard to our stay,
yet may say of a truth, that I do not remember ever to have had such a degree
of steady peace, and holy, unmixed quietude of mind, so long together, amidst
many close, deep trials and exercises in religious duties, some of such a
nature as I had not been tried with before, and which required the utmost
fortitude, wisdom, and patience. There is here the old pharisaical spirit,
which I have heretofore had to war with, and it seems to love me no better than
usual. I shall now proceed to give thee a narrative of the manner of my stay,
which to do, I must begin with an unlooked-for prospect set before me the
summer after our landing, and has rarely, if ever, wholly disappeared. How it
may be, I cannot at present foresee: but this I know, that it has proved as
ballast to my mind, with respect to going homewards this fall, as also a means
to separate me and my dear companion, which I believe was in the wisdom of
truth. It was presented before last fall, with a draft to this city, so that I
was ready to conclude I must have gone before my visit to this continent was
ended, I mean to one or more of the West India islands, but after waiting some
weeks in this city, wrapped as in a thick cloud, as to any light which way I
should turn, whether home or elsewhere; (for to appoint meetings any where on
this continent I dared not till the light went before me, having attended some
that were forwardly appointed without my directions, till I was become as a
sign and wonder to myself and others) my way opened to finish my journey on
this continent separate from my former companion, which I was assisted to
perform with some degree of satisfaction to myself, and, I hope some little
edification to the churches. In the latter part of this journey, it pleased my
good master, to bring me under the most severe baptism and crucifixion, that I
ever knew in the course of my religious experience, partly on my own account,
and on the account of some, to whom I had been made a minister, and
instrumental to help into the way of life and salvation, who, looking at the
creature more than the Creator, who is worthy for ever, became entangled, as a
lamb caught in a thicket; it was then that I felt the depth, and true meaning
of that emphatical saying of the holy apostle, "my little children, for whom I
travail in birth till Christ be formed in you." And Oh! the pangs and throes,
the sighs and groans, which a mother in Israel has to pass through and put up,
it is something like the suffering which the captain of our salvation passed
through, in bringing many sons and daughters to glory; it is with the utmost
reverence and fear that I make the comparison, between him and his ministers,
who are to fill up in their bodies that which is behind of his sufferings. But
I seemed to myself, and was as one nailed to the cross, day and night, for
weeks together, with this desire or prayer fixed in my heart: "Let me not come
down from the cross, till the glorious design be fully accomplished, that so
thy will may be done by me, in me, and upon me, in time and in eternity:" and
truly the baptism was not removed until this became the happy situation of my
mind, that to live or die, to be in health or sickness, in prosperity or
adversity, in Europe or America, in France or Spain, to pass through good or
evil report, in the will of God, seemed just the same to me. I write not these
things boastingly, but to the glory of God. Thou and others know what I am by
nature, that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing. This was the
necessary preparative for the forenamed state of peaceful serenity of
conscience, in a situation to which nature is above all things most averse, to
wit, daily dependence and uncertainty, being indebted or obligated to others
for support, having nothing that it can call its own, save weakness and
infirmity, and this is that glorious mystery, and seeming contradiction, which
the holy apostle speaks of, in having nothing, and yet possessing all things.
In this situation of mind I entered this city, having looked round me every
way, with resignation to turn as I might be drawn by the power of matchless
love, and hoped from the looseness which I then felt from all parts of this
continent, that I might be permitted to return home with my brother (who I had
heard was in town, and likely to sail soon) even if my companion could not go
with me: but it was with this prospect, that I might probably return to this
country if life was spared, and I knew not how soon. On coming hither, found
that my brother was gone, and my companion not clear of this continent, so
concluded to wait for her a few weeks, or if it might be, months, she
expressing uncommon concern at the thoughts of being left behind. During the
time I waited for her, some friends proposed to accompany me in visiting part
of the families of friends in this city, a service which had diverse times been
presented to my mind in the course of my journey, yea, before I left London,
and when the proposal was made, I found a perfect freedom to to join with it,
it being with the concurrence of the monthly meeting, little supposing I should
be held to it in the manner I have been; but it is a service which the Lord
has been pleased to bless in a remarkable manner. I have been in 160 families,
and attended six meetings every week whilst in town, as health permits, besides
visiting the sick and afflicted, and taking some excursions to the country. My
companion when she came to town, being sometimes poorly in health, proceeded
but slowly; we now go together, having tired most of our companions, besides a
couple of men friends, who go to show us the doors, and be witness to our
labors; there are nearly as many yet to visit, as I have been with. Whether I
shall go this winter, or ever, to any of the islands mentioned, is at present
hidden from me; but had not the prospect afresh opened after I had been here
some time, I think I dare not have admitted the thoughts of staying this
winter; but have been blessed with seeing, yea, have been made instrumental to
help back some of the before mentioned lambs to the fold, one in particular, in
this city, who I hope may be made a serviceable instrument.

I have now given up expectation of seeing my native land before the spring; at
which time I hope to have the company of our beloved friend Samuel Fothergill,
on ship board. He is now in this city, also John Churchman and diverse other
friends, on the affairs of the society. It is a difficult time to friends in
those parts, who are concerned to keep up their Christian testimony against
wars and bloodshed: and especially to such as are concerned in state affairs. I
have had my health better than common in this city, for which blessing, with
all others, that I am an unworthy partaker of, I desire to be humbly thankful.


She wrote about this time as follows to a friend in Pennsylvania on the
subject of paying taxes for the support of war.

Without the least design to lessen parental authority, or filial obedience, so
far as they are either lawful or expedient, I would remark to thee, that diverse
parents of this age have bent their thoughts and desires too much to earth, to
have a clear, distinct discerning of the times and seasons in a spiritual
sense, and the sacred purposes of him whose wisdom is unsearchable, and his
ways past finding out, by all the penetration of finite understanding,
uninfluenced by his own eternal light, and even then we see and know but in
part whilst here, but some of us have believed and seen in the visions of
light, that the day of gospel light which has dawned, will rise higher and
higher; notwithstanding that some clouds may at times intercept its beauty and
brightness, as has been sorrowfully the case amongst us as a people who have
been highly favored. And though I have not the least design to derogate from
the real worth of those honorable sons of the morning, who were made
instrumental in a great degree to break down the partition wall, which carnal,
selfish man had erected between the people and the Sun of righteousness, I am
not afraid to say, and give it under my hand, that it was and is the design of
God that his people in future ages should carry on the reformation even further
than they did; and notwithstanding that a night of apostasy has come over us,
as a people (as day and night succeed each other in their season and God keeps
his covenant with both) I am of the judgment that that day has begun to dawn,
in which the Sun of righteousness will rise higher and with greater luster than
heretofore, and if those who are called of God to be the sons of this morning,
look back to the night, and to them who have slept and been drunken in the
night, by sipping of the golden cup of abomination, as even to the latter day,
they will frustrate the designs of Providence respecting themselves, though not
respecting his own work, for it is his sacred determination to be glorious in
heaven and glorified on earth, though those who would be called his Israel be
not gathered. And I am of the faith that when the gospel has been first
preached to them, as it is meet it should, that such as neglect to embrace it,
will be left, and the feet of the messengers turned another way, even to the
highways and hedges with a power of compulsive love which will prevail on the
halt, the maimed and the blind, to come to the marriage of the King's Son, and
by coming they shall be made strong, beautiful, and lively, and not look back
to those things that are behind, but press forward toward the mark, for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ, following no men's example further
than they follow him, and what if I say in the faith which is given me, that
God has designed to carry some of this generation in these parts of the world,
higher and further in righteousness than their forefathers were carried, even
such as were honorable in their day, and therefore let them take heed that
they limit not the Holy One of Israel, nor circumscribe the leadings of his
blessed unerring Spirit, by looking too much at the example of others; for this
has been a means of stopping the gradual progression of many glorious
well-begun reformations; instead of going forward, they have looked back, and
even sunk below the standard of the first reformers, and such as will be the
first happy instruments to labor for reformation in this degenerate age, must
differ in their trials from the sons of the former morning, and will find them
to be of a more severe and piercing kind; theirs were from the world, and such
as they might justly expect from them (though not exempt from false brethren)
our will chiefly arise from those under the same profession, clothed with the
disguised spirit of the world, and that among some of the foremost rank (so
called) in society, and what if I say (though my natural eyes may not see it)
that God will divide in Jacob, and scatter in Israel, before that reformation
is brought in his church which he designs.

And now in regard to the matter proposed by thee, I shall answer briefly, that
I am of the judgment that if thou stand single and upright in thy mind from
all the false biasses of nature and interest of things, stopping thine ear to
fallacious reasonings, thou will find it more safe to suffer with the people of
God, than to enter on or undertake doubtful things.

M. P.


After her return from America she attended the national meeting in the 11 mo.
1756, and returned a lively account of her journey. In the 2d mo. following she
laid her intentions of marriage, with Samuel Neale, before the monthly meeting
of Mountmelick, to which she belonged, after which she found a concern to join
in a visit to the familes of friends throughout that monthly meeting. When she
had performed this service she returned home, and on the 17th of 3d mo. 1757,
was married to our aforesaid friend in the meeting of Mountrath. On the evening
of that day, in a religious opportunity, she was led to describe how the
Almighty formed the great works of creation in six days, which having finished,
he appointed a Sabbath, and sanctified it, and that there were present who
should in a short time cease from their labors, and enjoy the Sabbath in which
they would have no work to do; she was clear and sweet in the delivery of it,
and the usual seal of her ministry attended. Two days after she was seized with
a violent pain in her stomach, and lay quiet and still, in an awful frame of
mind, and would sometimes raise her voice in a melodious manner, through the
efficacy and virtue of that divine power, which so often animated her to sound
forth praises to the King of saints. And though she did not express herself in
words, yet there was a language in the sound, which fully manifested, that she
triumphed over death, hell, and the grave, for she longed to be dissolved,
entreating the Lord to give her a release, if it was consistent with his holy
will.

About half an hour before her removal, her pain being taken away, she said, "I
praise thy name, O my God, for this savor." After which she quietly departed,
like one falling into a sweet sleep.

THE END.

