A SHORT VIEW, AND DEFENSE OF THE Ecclesiastical RIGHTS of MAN, IN A SERMON
DELIVERED ON CHRISTMAS DAY, A. D. 1795.

BY DAVID PERRY, MINISTER OF THE GOSPEL IN RIDGBURY.

Stand fast therefore in the LIBERTY wherewith CHRIST has made us FREE.

ST. PAUL. DANBURY: Printed by Ely and Nichols. M,DCC,XCVI^

PREFACE.
THE ensuing discourse, as is usually said, was hastily composed without any
thought of its being made public; which is now done at the repeated
solicitations of many of the hearers. And the purport of it is to show, that
the commission Christ gave his apostles, and the religion he empowered them to
teach, does not in the least infringe that equality which GOD had before
established among all the human race.

It has long appeared to the author, that all rule and dominion -- all
authority, power and government, under whatever form, either in church or
state, which does not originate from the free choice of the people, is usurped,
and ought to be held in the utmost contempt indignation and abhorance! And that
our Savior has guaranteed and secured the natural equality of men by express
precepts; as, Be not ye called Rabbi; for one it your Master, even Christ; and
all ye are brethren, etc. It is accordingly attempted to be proved in the
following pages, that Christ gave his apostles no authority or dominion over
mankind, but only simply commissioned them to baptize men, and teach them to
observe whatsoever HE himself had taught; and that the commission intended to
be continued to the end of the world, contains nothing more. The consequence of
which is, that a man cannot have any power or authority in the church any more
than he can in the state unless he derives it from the people!

Critics, -- Bigots, -- and the claimers of ecclesiastical power, may find
matter enough for censure: But if any are assisted and enabled to find truth,
or only excited in good earnest to seek after it, -- the end and aim of the
author will be answered.

MATTHEW, XXVIII -- From the 17th to the 20th. And when they saw him, they
worshipped him; but some doubted. And Jesus came and spoke to them, saying, all
power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. Go ye therefore and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. And lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the world. Amen.


WHILE we celebrate the birth day of this Jesus, it is proper to consider,
first, who he was?

Secondly -- For what purpose he came into our world?

And Thirdly -- By what means the end of his coming is to be accomplished?

First then we enquire, Who he was?

THE Disciples, who saw him after his resurrection, believed him to be GOD, as
well as man: for when they saw him they worshipped him. -- Well aware that they
ought not to worship any but God and fully convinced, by his rising on the
third day, according to his promise that he was GOD, they worshipped him. But
some doubted. -- Observing this, Jesus came -- (that is came nearer) -- and
spoke to them, saying, all power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. -- Go
teach and baptize all nations, and I will be with you to the end of the world
-- I will support you in the execution of your office -- I will give sufficient
proof, by the works I will enable you to do, that I have sent you and that
indeed I have all power in Heaven and in Earth.

WE learn from the other Evangelists, that Jesus, on this occasion, promised
the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost; the fulfillment of which promise,
together with his own resurrection, abundantly demonstrated that he was GOD And
if it was indeed a fact, that he did rise from the dead; and if it was also a
fact, that he did, according to his promise, enable his disciples to work
miracles. -- (and it seems scarcely possible that men could be imposed on in
such plain matters of facts) if these things, I say, were facts, it must be
that he was what he pretended, and had all power in Heaven and in Earth. We may
therefore safely conclude that he was GOD -- We proceed then to the second
inquiry: For what purpose did he come into our world?

HIS name Jesus, singnifies a Savior. The Angel who foretold his birth, called
his name Jesus, because he should save his people from their sins.

AND he himself tells us that he came -- to call sinners to repentance.

HE gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works.

HE suffered, -- the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to GOD. -- Who
so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

THE wretched and miserable state of Man, after he had transgressed the divine
law, moved the eternal fountain of compassion and mercy to contrive a way for
man's recovery; to make atonement for sin; to procure us pardon and acceptance
with GOD, and to bring us to that eternal glory and happiness for which human
nature was first intended! -- But the divinity of our Savior, and the end and
design of his coming into the world, are matters so well understood, that I
need not take up much of your time on these heads. -- What I chiefly intend at
this time, is to consider the means by which that end is to be accomplished.

THE death and sufferings of Christ are the only cause of the pardon of sin;
but as the pardon of sin is but a part of the design of his incarnation, other
means are yet to be used. Men are to be made fit to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light: And to accomplish this part of the design
he has instituted a religion; founded a church in the world, and commissioned
an order of men to make disciples to him, to baptize them, and teach them to
observe all things whatsoever he has commanded. What we call the Christian
religion is therefore a matter of great importance to mankind. Observing the
institutions of it; living according to the rules and precepts of it; is, so
far as we know, the only means of escaping eternal ruin, and being qualified
for the enjoyment of everlasting happiness.

THE commission therefore which Christ gave his Apostles, being the only means
of conveying to us the knowledge of this religion; and those who refuse to
comply with what that commission empowered them to require, being threatened
with damnation; it concerns us to enquire into the nature and import of that
commission.

HAD the Apostles taken it into their heads to require something which their
commission did not warrant, there could have been no harm in refusing to submit
to it. We find indeed that they have not done this; but it is more than probable
that some of their succesors have.

SOME who call themselves the Apostles' successors, have exercised powers and
authority which Christ never gave his Apostles, and which they never did and
never could give to any body else; for it is certain they could not give others
more power than they had themselves; but it is not certain that they gave them
quite so much.

THAT the commission which Christ gave his Apostles had no reference to one
place or district more than another is evident from the very words of my text.
Go ye and teach all nations, or as St. Mark records it; Go into all the world
and preach the Gospel to every creature. All power, says he, in Heaven and in
Earth is given unto ME; I therefore, by virtue of this power, send you; -- not
to be lords over particular districts -- nor indeed to be lords over any body;
but to teach and baptize -- to teach whatsoever I have commanded you; and to
enable you to do this, ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, who shall bring to your
remembrance whatsoever I have taught you. And I will myself inflict damnation
on those who refuse to believe that Gospel I send you to preach. I will still
hold all power in my own hands; and to overcome the opposition which my Gospel
will meet with at its first setting out in the world; I will, by the Holy
Ghost, enable you to speak with new tongues -- discern spirits, and work
miracles.

IT appears then that the Apostles' commission empowered them to do no more
than baptize men, and declare to them the will of their master. And lest they
should attempt to to exercise lordship and authority over their
fellow creatures; he more than once expressly forbids it. Be not ye called
masters -- it shall not be so among you!

AND as the Apostles had no jurisdiction, or authority over particular
districts, so neither did they pretend to give any body else. As they were not
placed over particular parishes themselves, so neither did they ever place any
body else over any.

AND further: As they had no power to discard or silence any of their brethren,
so neither did they, or could they, give any such power to their successors!

THE arguments on which the contrary opinion is grounded, are chiefly drawn
from the case of Timothy at Ephesus. And Titus at Crete. -- We are told, in the
postcripts to the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, that they were ordained
Bishops, the one over Ephesus, and the other over Crete. -- Who ordained them
is a question. We have no evidence that Paul did it: much less that he ordained
them over these districts. St. Paul indeed when he wrote his first Epistle to
Timothy, besought him to abide still at Ephesus, while he [Paul] went into
Macedonia. But it does not follow from this, that Timothy was at Ephesus when
that epistle was written; much less that Paul had placed him over that
district. I did at a certain time, says Paul, beseech thee to abide still
there; which shows that the Apostle did not authoratively place him there. Had
Timothy been ordained by an Apostle over Ephesus, and had he believed the
Apostle had power so to ordain him, he would have stayed there very cheerfully,
let him have had ever so many, and ever so great CALLS, to get elsewhere! So
that the Apostle need not have besought him to abide there.

BUT it is added that Paul in his second Epistle, enjoins Timothy to stir up
the gift of GOD that was in him, by the putting on of the Apostle's hands;
which shows, they say, that Paul ordained him.

BUT to this, I answer: that the gift here mentioned was probably not the
commission of a Gospel Minister, because there appears an impropriety in
requiring him to stir it up. Should any one say to me; come Sir, you don't stir
up your commission! You must stir up the commission that is in you by the
laying on of the hands of the Bishop; I should not think he spoke properly!

BUT if we observe that the Holy Ghost is frequently in Scripture called fire,
-- and that this fire was conveyed by the laying on of the Apostles' hands;
there appears a peculiar propriety in requiring Timothy to stir up that gift.
-- The spirit of the Prophets is subject to Prophets. -- A man who had the
miraculous gift of the Holy Ghost could exercise that gift or let it alone. But
you know how it is with fire, to make it shine and give heat, you must stir it
up. The gift was from GOD conveyed by the hands of Paul, but the exercise of
that gift was the business of Timothy. So far then was Paul from ordaining
Timothy over Ephesus that he did not ordain him at all. And the directions
given to Timothy respecting the qualifications of a Bishop and Deacon, and the
manner of receiving an accusation against an Elder, do not concern Timothy as
Bishop of Ephesus; but that he might know how he ought to behave in the House
of GOD. Which is, says he, the Church of the LIVING GOD: That is, the universal
Church. In this great house Timothy had a great deal of work to do. Accordingly
Paul calls on him to endure afflictions; to make full proof of his ministry,
and do the work of an Evangelist; which seems hardly compatible with fattening
in a Diocese. For the work of an Evangelist was to travel from place to place,
to propogate and establish the Christian faith wherever occasion and
opportunity offered. St. Paul had run the same course, and had, as he says, now
finished it; and calls on Timothy and Titus to do as he had done. It further
appears that Timothy was not bishop of Ephesus, from the 20th of Acts; where we
find him with Paul on his travels. And we find also Paul sending from Miletus
and calling the elders of Ephesus, and instructing them in their duty; which we
presume he need not have done, if Timothy had been settled there for life, as
overseer of those overseers. At this time Timothy did not reside at Ephesus;
and he was not there when Paul wrote his second epistle to him; neither do I
believe he was there when the apostle wrote his first epistle to him. Timothy
then was not bishop of Ephesus!

Let us next see how the case was with Titus, who, we are told, was ordained
the first bishop of the Cretians. Poor Cretians! they did not enjoy their
bishop but a little while! For we find Paul requesting him to come to him at
Nicopolis; and the year after, in his last epistle to Timothy, he tells us,
Titus had departed to Dalmatia. Paul therefore did not ordain Titus bishop over
Crete, he only left him in Crete, that he might set in order the things which
were wanting and ordain elders in every City. What a pity it is, the apostle
had not said, "ordain elders over every city!" By their wanting elders or
presbyters in every city, it seems there was not one priest on the Island when
Paul left it; to supply that defect, and some others not mentioned, Titus was
left in Crete; and when he had accomplished the business, he left Crete and
traveled on. Doctor WHITBY observes; that Timothy and Titus are never called
bishops of Ephesus and Crete by any writer of the three first centuries. But
says the learned Doctor, that defect is abundantly supplied by the suffrages of
the fourth and fifth centuries. Then, I suppose, the postscrips were written.


BUT it will be asked; does not the apostle call the elders of Ephesus
overseers? And does not this imply that they had authority over their flocks?
And did not Timothy ordain these overseers; and by ordaining them, gave them
the oversight of their particular flocks? To this I answer, I know not what
reason we have to suppose that Timothy ordained them? But if he did; his
ordaining them did nothing toward making them overseers: because the Apostle
says the Holy Ghost made them overseers. And it is probable these overseers were
able to give some proof of their having received their authority from the Holy
Ghost; otherwise their flocks would have had too much sense to regard them. But
what were these overseers to do? Nothing more than feed the Church of GOD! Not
thresh the members of it with an iron flail. Feeding the church of GOD being a
different thing from governing it, which makes it probable that these overseers
were not governors; but if they were, 'twas the Holy Ghost who made them such,
and not bishop Timothy. Their ruling and governing powers* if they had any,
were not derived from Christ by virtue of the commission he gave his Apostles,
and which he intended should be continued to the end of the world; but these
powere were imparted to them by the Holy Ghost and did not belong to their
commission as gospel ministers.

THE peculiar circumstances of the church at that time, required gifts and
powers, which were not necessary in after ages -- accordingly he gave Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, Governors, Helpers -- Speakers with
tongues, Interpreters of tongues, Descerners of spirits, Workers of miracules
etc. etc. All which offices, gifts and powers, ceased when the church was
established in the world; and can never exist again, unless it shall please GOD
again to pour out his spirit upon all flesh as he did in that day.

BUT what says Paul to Timothy? A Bishop, or overseer, must be one that rules
well his own house -- for if a man know not how to rule his own house; how
shall he take care of the Church of GOD! Take care of it! -- Alas; what a pity
it is, the Apostle had not said, how shall he rule the Church of GOD. We find
then nothing in the New Testament that answers to the modern idea of spiritual
rulers* and Ecclesiastical Governors!

WHAT then! -- you will say -- are we in this age, to have no church
government! no discipline! -- who shall judge, censure and excommunicate
offenders! who shall discard and silence a wicked Minister! --

To solve this we must look back to the XVII chapter of St. Matt. (and it is
wished that every body would read that chapter) where we had our Lord
instructing his disciples in the business of discipline. If thy brother
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if
he hear thee, thou have gained thy brother; but if he will not hear thee, then
take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word may be established. And if he neglect to hear them, tell it unto the
church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be to thee as a heathen
man, and a publican.

THERE will be no difficulty in understanding this, if we can only determine
what is here meant by the word CHURCH. And if men were lest to the dictates of
common sense, they doubtless would understand it just as our Lord intended. The
word Church, is indeed, in different places, used in different senses; but it is
most natural to suppose, our Lord here meant by it the congregation, or
society, to which the offending brother belongs. He surely did not mean to send
us to Rome! He did not mean that we should cross the Atlantic; nor ride
posthaste to New London; nor call a consociation. He doubtless intended that
his disciples, in all parts of the world, as many as can conveniently, should
meet together in one place to worship GOD. And wherever any number, if it be
but two or three, are met together in the name of Christ, there is he in the
midst of them; and there is the Church.

THE body, or society, be it greater or less, has a right, and sufficient
power, to expel from itself an unruly member, if he cannot be reclaimed; and if
he repents, they can restore him. If there is a clergyman in this society, he
is under the same law, subject to the same fate; we know no distinction. And we
know of no other discipline intended for the christian church after inspiration
and miracles ceased. See the 1st epistle to the Corinthians, 5th, 12th and 13th
Chapters. Do not ye judge them who are within [your society?] Them who are
without GOD judges. Therefore put away from among yourselves that wicked
person. See also, 2nd to the These. 3rd chap. -- 14th and 15th verses. If any
man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and have no company with
him, that he may be ashamed. Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as
a brother.

PUNISHING an offending brother with death, or with bodily diseases -- or
remitting and retaining sins, binding and loosing, inflicting corporeal or
pecuniary punishment -- is no part of the church's business at this day.
Whatever of this kind has ever been done by divine authority, has been done by
immediate inspiration. And the Pope is so far in the right: first to pretend to
infallibility, before he undertakes to remit and retain sins, or to punish
heretics. For even that injunction to bishop Titus -- (after the first and
second admonition) to reject a heretic, required and supposed inspiration in
Titus. Because the Apostle there says, a heretic is one who is self condemned;
which is impossible to be known without inspiration. And thus we see who is to
judge, censure and excomunicate offenders. It Is the church or congregation to
which the offender belongs.

But still you will repeat, and reiterate the question: Who shall discard and
silence a wicked minister? Why, we have already observed, that the minister is
subject to the same law with the rest of the congregation: we know no
distinction!

But still, you say, St. Paul instructed bishop Timothy how to receive an
accusation against an offending elder, or priest. It Is true he did so: but we
have shown that Timothy was an evangelist, had inspiration, -- and more power
than gospel ministers Alas for the POWER! -- Why don't they cure Joe Mudge?
at this day. But even Timothy with all his power, could do nothing about
silencing a wicked minister. All he could do was only to rebuke! Them who sin,
rebuke; says the apostle. Why hid he not say; hang them up; put them down; turn
them out; unordain them; take away their commission!

The apostle well knew that the commission originated from Christ, and none but
he could take it away. And the ordainer, if he is any thing, is the instrument
of conveyance only. If the commission originates from Christ, although the
ordainer does convey it, yet he can not take it away. No power, short of that
from which the commission originates is sufficient to recall it. -- He, who has
all power in heaven and in earth, might have ordered, that his ministers should
uncommissionate one another; he might have done this, I say; but I deny that he
has. As the case now stands; it is just as if the Governor of the state should
send me, by one of this congregation, a commission to execute some office in
the civil or military department; and the man who conveys and hands the
commission, should take it into his head to recall it, and forbid me to act
according to it. In that case, I believe, you would all call me a fool, if I
regarded him; unless he could prove that the power from which the commission
issued, had expressly ordered and empowered him to do so.

How any man can, at this day become a gospel minister? Is a question we shall
not, at present, meddle with. But if he once has that commission, he may defy
all the powers of earth and hell to take it away. If the ordainer conveys the
commission, the man who has it, may go into the world, and teach and baptize,
in despite of what the ordainer can do. If he is persecuted in one city, he may
flee to another. If any refuse to receive, or hear him, he may shake off his
dust, and pass on. He never can become the minister of any particular parish,
unless the people of that parish make a contract with him; and when they have
done so, all the powers under heaven cannot dissolve that contract. -- Not
dissolve it! -- What then must a congregation do, if their minister turns
wicked? They must be in a woeful ease, if they cannot find somebody to silence
him! Don't be frightened friends! -- A congregation, so far as concerns them,
may silence their own minister, if they find just cause. For, "if thy brother
tresspass against thee, go and tell him his fault." -- If thou find aught
against thy brother, who is a minister, (and I advise thee to keep a good
watch) go and tell him his fault -- if nothing else will do; tell it to the
church. Call the minister and the congregation together. And if it appears that
he has not fulfilled his part of the contract. If he has transgressed what the
gospel makes his duty, and refuses to be reclaimed; then let him be unto thee
as a heathen man and a publican. The congregation, in that case, may safely put
away from among themselves that wicked person: and sufficient will be his
punishment, which is inflicted by many. -- Oh! but, you will say, that will not
do; for he will draw his salary still. We shall have him to pay during life,
notwithstanding all this! -- Why so! -- Why, because the law of the land
empowered the ordainer to place him over the parish; and the same law impowers
the ordainer to take him down again, and unordain him. -- Ah indeed! -- Is it
the civil law that impowers gospel ministers to unordain one another! -- I have
long thought that they did not derive such power from Christ. And it seems the
legislators thought so too, or they would not have meddled with the matter.

If it be the civil power that makes a gospel minister; the civil power can,
without doubt unmake him. -- Or, if a man's having such and such qualifications
authorizes him to teach and baptize; then when he ceases to have those
qualifications, he looses his authority. In either of these cases; for the
ministers of Christ, as such, whether bishops or presbyters, to pretend to
suspend, or silence a minister, is but a solemn farce, a mere sham, and
deserves no other notice but ridicule. So that choose what method you will to
make a man a minister; when once he is made, his brother ministers have no
power over him. And he, by the law of Christ has no power over the people. All
he can do by virtue of his commission as a gospel minister, is only to teach
and baptize! -- What! you will say; is it not the priest's business to
administer the Lord's supper? Does not the apostle injoin the overseers of
Ephesus to feed the church of God? -- Yes: and they were to feed it as Paul had
done. They were to feed it with milk; (the sincere milk of the word) if it
could not bear strong meat but not with bread and wine. The fact is; according
to the new testament there is no administering about the Lord's supper, and the
priest has no more to do with it than any other christian. Consecrating the
elements, differs only in degree from TRANSUBSTANTIATING them. The priest may
as well, when his hand is in, perform the whole miracle, as a part of it. HE
may as well convert the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, as,
in ANY DEGREE, to change the nature of them! -- -- Whoever can believe that a
priest, by taking the bread and cup into his hand; or by dipping his finger
into the water of baptism, can make them any holier than they were before; may
even go on, and belive all the absurdities of Popery. Whoever can believe that
a DEACON may PREACH AND BAPTIZE, (which is all that Christ's commission
empowers ANY MAN to do) but that it requires a higher order to administer the
Lord's Supper; and a higher order still to administer the holy rite of
confirmation; -- may go on, and believe all the claims and pretenses of Saint
Peter's successor.
-- That christians, when they come together to eat the Lord's supper, should
consider it as the most solemn act of worship; -- That they should, by the eye
of faith, discern the Lord's body; -- That they should call to mind his death
and suffering, and that sin was the cause of them; -- That they should examine
themselves, and look well to the motives and views which govern them -- are
facts which none can doubt who read the new Testament: -- But that they cannot
eat that supper unless they have a priest to consecrate the elements and make
them holy* and then administer them, -- is a whim, which has no foundation in
that book, -- as is all pretense to lordship and ecclesiastical government,
derived from the commission Christ gave his apostles.

But, you will say; does not the apostle tell the Hebrews; to remember them
that had the rule over them, -- to obey them that had the rule over them, and
and submit themselves; and to salute them that had the rule over them? -- And
does our Lord tell Peter that he would give him the keys of the kingdom of
Heaven? And does not all this imply that Christ has given his ministers power
over men? By no means. For as we have already observed; that age was the age of
miracles and inspiration, and the Holy Ghost did then impart extraordinary
gifts and powers, which soon after ceased -- and these rulers, whatever they
were, might be immediately constituted such by the Holy Ghost, like the
overseers of Ephesus -- Or they might be constituted rulers by the free choice
of the people. But however they might become rulers over the Hebrews; -- what
they spoke being called the word of God, implies that they had inspiration.

And as to Peter's having the keys, it means no more than that he should unlock
the door, and set open the gate of the kingdom of Heaven, or the gospel church.
Which he did, by being the first preacher of the gospel both to Jews and
Gentiles. And as his name signifies a rock; -- and as he was the first preacher
and founder of christianity, it might be said, by a figure, that the church was
built on him. But having opened the door, he had nothing further to do with the
keys. And we do not find he attempted to make any other use of them.

Upon the whole it appears, that in this business of church government, we have
been as much hoodwinked, as ever we were in the business of state government.

It appears also, that as the christian religion is of infinite importance to
mankind; so it is also plain, simple and rational, -- every way adapted to the
circumstances and necessities of men; calculated, in the highest degree to
promote the peace and happiness of society -- and instead of infringing, was
intended indeed to secure and establish the inherent Rights, and native
equality of all the children of Adam!

To conclude then; -- All the use I wish you to make of this discourse is, to
be hereby excited to open your eyes, and then open your Bibles, and see for
yourselves. The Bible has been too often represented as a very gloomy sort of a
book; fit only to amuse a melancholy hour. It has been represented as full of
mystery and obscurity, and requiring a great deal of learning and study to
understand it, but it requires no great study to understand whence this notion
is derived! -- We are often told what a blessing it is to have the Bible in our
hands, and in our mother tongue. We are often pitying the poor Roman Catholics,
who are, by their spiritual rulers, denied the use of it. We are highly favored
indeed! But pray tell me what is the difference between having no Bible at all,
and only having it smoakdrying on a shelf, while we depend wholly on a priest to
tell us what it contains, or how we shall understand it. Does not the Bible
contain that very gospel, and the whole of it, which Christ sent his apostles
to preach, and are we not threatened with damnation if we refuse to believe it?
Were not the apostles inspired for that purpose; to guide them into all truth,
and bring to their remembrance whatsoever Christ had taught! And have they not
recorded that truth? And does it not concern us to look into it? Let me assure
you my friends; it is not that gloomy book! I have read a few books in my day,
and some with great eagerness and satisfaction; but never one, except the
Bible, but in a little time grew stale, I lost my relish for it, and laid it
aside. But the Bible is always new. The more I read it the better I love it.
The more I am acquainted with it, the more entertainment and satisfaction I
find in it: and it seems as if that would be the case to all eternity! And this
very circumstance clearly evinces, that the Bible is of a different origin from
all other books. And it is a mark of its divinity, that its contents are so long
unfolding. Oh! My friends! Could we read this book with that attention, candor
and impartiality, which the nature of it demands! Could we lay aside all
bigotry, superstition, and party spirit. Could we strip christianity of the
fooleries and fopperies -- Could we unload it of the lumber, which ignorance
and priestcraft have heaped upon it, we should be charmed with it -- We should
embrace it with eagerness -- Conform to it with cheerfulness -- obey its
precepts with sincerity, and should then have the witness in ourselves, and
feel the genuine influence of it on our hearts, and the power of it would
appear in our lives! 'Twould raise us above the world! 'Twould carry as
fearless through the valey of the shadow of death, and bring us to the regions of
eternal bliss and glory! And by these means would the end of our Savior's
coming into the world be accomplished.


