THE NARRATIVE AND CONFESSION OF THOMAS POWERS, A NEGRO, formerly of Norwich in
Connecticut, who was in the 20th year of his age.

He was EXECUTED at Haverhill, in the state of New Hampshire, on the 28 th
July, 1796, for committing a RAPE.

PRICE SINGLE, 4^.

Norwich, Printed, August 19 th, 1796.

THE NARRATIVE AND CONFESSION OF THOMAS POWERS, A NEGRO.
I THOMAS POWERS, was born in Wallingford, in Connecticut, September 15th,
1796. My father's name is Thomas Powers; and my mother before marriage was
Prudy Waterman. I was the second and youngest Son of my father, with whom I
lived, till I was two years old. He then put me out to live with Mr. Moses
Tharp, of Norwich, (Conn.) where I resided one year, and then returned to my
father, who, being a very pious man, endeavored to instruct me in my several
duties, to God, to my parents, and to all mankind; as far as my young and
tender mind was capable of receiving any virtuous impressions. But I was
naturally too much inclined to vice, to profit by his precepts or example; for
I was very apt to pilser and tell lies, if I thought there was any occasion.

When I was nine years old, I was put out to live with Isaac Johnson, of
Lebanon, (Conn) where I lived two years, and very early began the practice of
villainy and debauchery. It was here I began my career in the gratification of
that corrupt and lawless passion, which has now brought me to the threshold of
eternity, before my years were half numbered.

Being one Sunday at home from meeting, with nobody but a young Negro woman,
who lived in the house, she, enticing me to her bed, where she was sitting,
soon taught me the practice of that awful sin, which now costs me my life; for
which together with disobedience to my master, and many other villaneous tricks
which I used to play upon him, he often corrected me, but to so little purpose
that he dismissed me from his service.

Then I returned once more to my father, where I lived a few months, till he,
not liking my behavior, bound me out to Mr. Oliver Hyde, of Norwich, (Conn.)
D^ting my residen^^ with him, who was a pretty, kind master, I was taught to
read and write a tolerable good hand; but being naturally vicious I improved my
talents, (or rather misimproved them) to very bad purposes. I used to make a
point of pilfering whenever I could; for when I saw an opportunity, the devil,
or some other evil spirit, always gave me a strong inclination. I suppose it
was because I was naturally inclined to be light-fingered; for I never
hesitated to touch any thing that came in my way. Here too I played my pranks,
with the young black girls about the streets; and indulged myself as freely as
I could without discovery.

In the year 1789, I broke open a store in Norwich, (Conn.) owned by Mr. --
took a few articles of goods and fifteen dollars in Cash. In the next place,
knowing my present master, Oliver Lathrop, to have on hand a large sum of
money, I supposed that I might take about twenty dollars and neither of us fare
the worse. I, however, soon repented of this bargain; for being discovered, I
was forced to return the money, and take a few stripes on my back; but i^ I had
received my just deserts I might possibly have escaped the fate, which now
awaits me.

In the year 1793 I moved with my master from Norwich, in Connecticut, to
Lebanon, in New Hampshire, where I soon run the length of my chain, and
completed my villainy, committing a number of crimes, which black as I am, I
should blush to repeat.

Before I removed from Norwich, (Conn.) I attempted to ravish a young girl, who
was visiting in the neighborhood. For this purpose, I took an old sword, and
went into the woods where I supposed she would return in the evening, and
concealed myself in the bushes, where I waited till 12 o'clock; but as
providence ordered it, she did not go home that night, and so escaped the snare
I had laid for her.

On the 7th day of Dec. 1795, being at work with Mr. Gordon Lathrop, I agreed
to meet him in the evening, at Thomas Rowels, to wrestle. Accordingly a little
after sun down I sat out, without any evil intentions. I overtook a young
woman, whom I knew to be -- I passed on by her, a pretty good jog, till after a
little querying with myself, and finding nothing to oppose, but rather the
devil to assist me, I determined to make an attempt on her virgin chastity. --
So I way Laid her, and as she came up, seized her with one hand, and her
horse's bridle with the other, she asked me what I wanted? -- I told her to
dismount and I would tell her. At the same time taking her from her horse, I
threw her on the ground, and in spite of her cries and entreaties, succeeded in
my hellish design. Then left her, and went to the place proposed, where I found
my antagonist; but the evening being far spent, I returned to my master's house
and sat down, as usual, to play chequers with the children.

It was not long before I heard people round the house, and was afterward
informed they were after me; but seeing me so lively at play, says the Esquire. "It
cannot be Tom" -- so they went away. I soon went to bed; but in about two hours,
I was awaked from sleep by a number of people who entered my room, and called
me their "prisoner."

I was confined, till next day, when I had my trial before Esquire. Hough, who
sentenced me to prison; accordingly I was immediately secured in Haverhill
jail, on the 10th day of Dec. As we were passing by the place, where the crime
was committed, I was questioned concerning the fact; but, I, like a hardened
villain, as I was, denied every syllable of the truth, and had but little sense
of my situation, till the key of the prison was turned upon me, when my
feelings were such as no pen or tongue, can describe. On the fifth of April,
after 4 months confinement, with the help of two of my companions we broke goal
after three hours hard work. We went to the river, stole a boat, ran three
miles down, and sent her adrift. One of my com^ads, by the name of Bayley, went
to his father's, where he procured some refreshment for u^. --

From thence, we went to Capt. Frye Bailey's in Newbury, where we stole a
horse, and went fifteen miles to Ryegate. On Sunday evening we arrived at St.
Johnsbury, and took up lodgings in a barn. At twelve we took up our line of
march, and returned to B^^n^t, where I parted with my companions; It being my
object to go to Portland, and ship myself aboard o^ a vessel. I, however,
missed my road and came back to Littleton where I enquired for* Lake Champlain,
and as I was going quite the other way, I was suspected of being a rogue, and I
confess they had some grounds for their suspicion, as one of them was
acquainted with me. I was, of consequence, immediately returned to my old
lodgings in Haverhill. Here I was now hand-cuffed, and my arms pinioned; and
put into the upper loft of the Prison: but on Sunday, the 4th day after my last
commitment, I sawed of my pinions across the grates of the prison; and with the
help of a knife, got a piece of board, with which I pryed off the grate. I then
went to work to cut up my blanket, into strips, and tying them together from
the grate, I descended from the upper loft. As I passed by the grate of the
lower room, I called to the prisoners below telling them, of my liberty but
desired them to say nothing till I had got off; but Holmes swore he would stop
me, if in his power, and immediately raised the Jailor. -- I ran as fast as I
could, after being almost spent with fatigue, in getting my liberty, and
descending from the upper loft, with hand-cuffs on; and while they were looking
for me in the most obscure places, near the Goal, supposing me to be there
concealed; but I made my escape into the river road, and at break of day, I
found myself at Capt. John Mann's in Or-ford. I then thought it prudent, to
avoid discovery, to go back into the woods, where I lay till night.

I then proceeded on to Lyme, and broke into a blacksmith shop, to rid myself
of my Hand cuff's which in my travels, I found rather uncomfortable companions,
and I suspected, in case of being seen and noticed, they would prove but a poor
recommendation. However I could not succeed; so I went on to Gould's Tavern,
and took a horse, which I rode about three miles; but not being able to get him
any farther, I attempted to drown him to get my revenge; but could not easily
succeed, and I left him to shirk. I then proceeded on to a smith's shop on
College Plain, where I made another fruitless attempt to get my hands at
liberty. When I got into the edge of Lebanon, it was day light; so I wandered
about in the woods till evening, when I went to Mr. Quimbe's shop in Lebanon
and sawed, and twisted my hand-cuffs about two hours, and gave out being quite
overcome for want of food. I then went to my master's house, looked in at the
window, but guilt being my companion, I dared not enter. I then retired some
distance from the house and sawed my cuffs across a rock, till by the help of a
file, I liberated my hands, and went to Mr. T. Rowel's, whom I supposed to be a
friend; But he, like most friends, in adversity, forsook me, and turned my
enemy. For upon seeing how cold and hungry I was, he seemed to pity me, and
told me to go to a certain barn, and he would bring me some refreshment; but
instead of victuals, he mustered all the force he could to take me. Being
however, aware of his treachery, when day light appeared, I fled to the woods,
and lay there, where I suffered extremely with the cold. Upon seeing them come
into the woods I lay down under a log, and as they passed along one of them
trod on me, but did not perceive me. I then thought best to shift my course,
and taking a cross lot, one of them saw me, as I ascended a little rise of
ground, and nailed me. I pointed to a barn at some distance, and said, "he has
just gone by the barn. -- " which turned the attention of the whole that way;
he then supposed me to be one of their party, as it was between day light and
dark.

This gave me a little breath again, and I thought of trying to get some
refreshment by milk, from a cow of my master's, as I had not eat or drank for
nigh 4 days, but could not find her, where I expected. I however found some raw
potatoes and eat of them freely. At last I took up a resolution to use my
hand-cuff bolt, for my defense, and to go into the house; which I did, but
sound none but children round the tea-table, who where exceedingly frightened,
and run away, all but a boy, who told me to take what I wanted, if I was
hungry. I seized half a cheese, and half a loaf of bread, which was on the
table, and ran off. I soon met a Mr. Colburn, who knew me, and told me to go
with him, and nobody should hurt me adding that I should have any refreshment I
wanted. I followed him home, and no sooner had we got there, than he sent to
inform my pursuers. I stepped to the door, and saw them coming over the hill -- I
started to run and Colburn struck at me, but I escaped and ran till I fainted
and fell. His dog followed me, however, and barked till they came up and took
me, as their prisoner.

The time of my trial was now come on, and and instead of carrying me to
Haverhill, I was carried to Plymouth, where I immediately had my trial before
the Hon. Superior Court, and was sentenced, very justly, to death. At first,
upon hearing my sentance, it had no impression on my mind -- for my heart was
hardened beyond description. After a little reflection, however, I fainted, and
could not speak for some time. -- At length I came to myself, and desired to
see the young Lady, whom I had injured. This she refused, but said she, would
receive any message I wished to send to her. (...) set do^^ and wrote a
confession of my crime, and of the justness of my punishment. I begged pardon,
most sincerely for the injury, I had done her. She sent me for answer, that she
could forgive me, and hoped that God would do the same. I was then conducted to
prison and bound with irons. During my residence here under sentence of death,
I have not been wholly insensible of my pitiable situation; as my master as
well as the divines who have attended me, have ever endeavored to impress me
with a sense of a state of future happiness or misery to which I was destined;
but the secret hope of making my escape, and, the jollity of countenance that
appeared in most of my spectators; did in some measure banish the idea of death
from my mind. The ninth of June, a number of Doctors made application to me for
my BODY, for DISSECTION, after my execution; to which I readily consented for
the small sum of ten dollars, thinking it might afford me a comfortable
subsistence while here, and my BONES be of service to mankind after the
separation of soul and body, which must shortly take place, and at which time
may I receive forgiveness of all mankind, and of my God, before whom I must
appear through the merits of a Redeemer.

FINIS.

