Mary Thomson discovered asleep in the snow by. Mrs Leyster's Daughter
Engraved for Sam Etheridge, No. 9, Newbury-Street, Boston.



THE TWO COUSINS, A Moral Story FOR THE USE OF YOUNG PERSONS.

IN WHICH IS EXEMPLIFIED THE NECESSITY OF MODERATION AND JUSTICE TO THE
ATTAINMENT OF HAPPINESS.

By the Author of the "Blind Child," and "Dramatic Dialogues."

When man has cast off his ambitious greatness,
And sunk into the sweetness of himself,
Not great but good desires his daily servants
How quietly he sleeps, how joyfully
He wakes again, and looks on his possessions!
-- Smell to this flower,
Can all the perfumes of the empire pass this?
The carefullest lady's cheek show such a color?
They are gilded and adulterate vanities,
And here in poverty lives noble nature!
BEAUMONT and FLETCHER. From the Press OF SAMUEL ETHERIDGE, SOLD BY HIM, AND BY
THE BOOKSELLERS. Boston, 1796.

Address TO THE PUBLIC.
GRATIFIED as I am by the success which has attended my two former works, I do
not with the less diffidence submit this to the judgment of the Public. On the
execution of this little work I am unable to determine, but upon the intention
my heart pronounces an unequivocal sentence. Perhaps then I am not too bold, in
believing, that a love of virtue, of justice and religion, may be traced in the
following pages; and no hope can be sweeter to my heart, than that they may
ultimately impress a similar adoration of those great principles on the minds
of the rising generation. That author who, in the present age, exerts herself
to the utmost of her power against the inroads of luxury, of injustice, of a
disregard to the laws of her country and religion, however slight the effect of
her exertions may be, has surely not lived entirely in vain.

THE TWO COUSINS, etc.
CHAPTER I.
ABOUT a mile from a pretty town in Hampshire, lived Mrs. Leyster, a widow, and
still a young woman, with her only daughter Constantia, who was at the time
these anecdotes begin near eleven years of age. The house in which they lived
was a small white building, with a lawn before, parted from harvest fields by a
sunk fence, and commanding a fine extent of country. Behind the house, and on
the north side, was a little shrubbery surrounded by a green wire fence, and on
the south side the walled kitchen garden; so that the house being open only to
the west, was sheltered from the cold winds, and consequently extremely warm
and comfortable. A small village was situated at a very short distance from
this pleasant residence; it was entirely occupied by industrious poor, who
always found a friend in time of necessity at Fair-Lawn, for so Mrs. Leyster's
house was called. Constantia was, as the following pages will prove, a little
girl of an amiable disposition; she had very good sense, an even temper, and a
kind affectionate heart, so that she repaid, as far as possible, the
unremitting care and attention of her mother. I say as far as possible, because
it is only by a whole life of duty and virtue that a child can repay a tender
mother the debt which it begins to incur at the moment of its birth. The
anxiety which fills the heart of a mother while a child is in the state of
infancy, her watchful nights, her days of fear and caution, a child cannot even
imagine; and when this infant so anxiously guarded becomes older, do the
mother's cares lessen? on the contrary, they increase, the heedlessness of
youth continually awakens them, a blow, a fall, an accident of any kind gives
to the heart of a mother an exquisite pang. But ah! if she sees, or believes
she sees the least tendency toward peevishness, want of feeling or obstinacy,
then indeed her uneasiness becomes insupportable; she imagines all her cares
are useless, and the only hope of her life departing from her. Pardon this
digression, my young friends, in consideration of its consequence, and think as
you read it how carefully you ought to avoid, as much as possible, giving pain
to the hearts of your parents. Constantia indeed knew not the extent of her
obligations to her mother, but she knew enough to convince her that she could
never repay them; she studied therefore in every thing to be mild, tractable
and and obliging; she gave all her attention to those lessons her mother wished
her to learn, and in general was successful. Mrs. Leyster taught her to read,
work and write, and also the first principles of drawing: a dancing master came
twice, and a French master three times a week to give her lessons. Music made
no part of her plan, for as Constantia's fortune would not be large, Mrs.
Leyster considered an accomplishment which requires so much time an unnecessary
one. Constantia however had a sweet delicate voice, and a good ear, and Mrs.
Leyster, who had considerable knowledge of music, took pleasure in directing
both, so that before Constantia was ten years old, she could sing several songs
prettily and agreeably. In these pleasing and various amusements the days
passed on, when one morning in the winter, which completed Constantia's
eleventh year, after a heavy fall of snow which remained the depth of some feet
on the ground the sun shone out very bright, and the frost was so hard that
Mrs. Leyster imagined a walk in the shrubbery might not be unpleasant. The
trees hanging over had prevented the snow from covering the walks, and
Constantia, who had been confined some days by the weather, gladly prepared to
accompany her mother. She ran sometimes before her, sometimes in another walk,
with all the joy of a young bird who has just learned the use of his wings;
while Mrs. Leyster walked quickly on to keep herself warm, and admired the
beautiful winter piece which met her view, the snow sparkling in the sun, the
long icicles which hung from the trees, the branches covered with frost work,
were all agreeable to her eyes. Constantia at last came running to her mother,
and taking her by the hand, said, "Now, mama, I will walk with you."

MRS. LEYSTER. Do so, my dear, if you like it. You have warmed yourself, have
you not?


CONSTANCE. Oh yes, mama! -- It is charming to run, how dearly I love to come
out of doors!


MRS. LEYSTER. Especially after being shut up for two or three days!


CONSTANCE. Yes indeed! -- I fancied while I sat by the fire the cold much
greater than it is, and let me sit ever so close I could not be warm; but now I
am quite in a glow -- dear mama, I wish you would run too!


MRS. LEYSTER, (laughing.) Consider, Constance, I have more weight to carry
than you, and of course the exercise of walking pretty quickly warms me as much
as you are warmed by running.


CONSTANCE. Mama, how glad I shall be when Spring comes, and the flowers! -- My
bed of hyacynths will be beautiful! -- Oh, I wish they were come, I wish it was
Spring!


MRS. LEYSTER. But then, Constantia, it will be so warm, I shall not suffer you
to run; and besides, our charming long evenings, you will lose them!


CONSTANCE. Ah, our evenings! How sorry I shall be! It is so comfortable to sit
by the fire with the curtains down and work! And then, mama, you are always so
cheerful in a winter evening; you read to me such charming stories, and you are
so good as to sup an hour sooner, that I may sup with you! -- Ah, I shall be
sorry when winter is gone!


MRS. LEYSTER. Yet you just now wished for Spring! Thus you see, my child,
every season is charming if we are disposed to be pleased with it, and to put
ourselves in the way of tasting its charms. Do you suppose your cousin in
London enjoys the different seasons as much as you do?


CONSTANCE. No indeed, mama, for you tell me they have no flowers in London, so
she cannot enjoy the Spring as I do. -- Ah, but I had forgot, they leave London
in the Spring and Summer!


MRS. LEYSTER. They do so, but are they better situated? They go to the
seaside, not to enjoy a view of the ocean, or the beauties that surround it,
but to mingle with the same crowd in which they have lived all the Winter, and
pass the fine evenings of Summer in crowded rooms, from which the mild twilight
and the bright moon are excluded, and their place ill supplied by wax-lights
reflected from mirrors and diamonds.


CONSTANCE. True, mama, but at least in the winter.


MRS. LEYSTER. In the Winter they lead the same kind of life; and as in the
Summer they faint with heat, so in the Winter they tremble with cold, which all
their carpets and furs cannot exclude, since they take no exercise to render
them proof against it. I have tried this life, and found how little real
pleasure is to be derived from it, so that I willingly exchange it for that I
lead at present.


CONSTANCE. Ah, poor Alicia! -- I pity her -- don't you think, mama, she would
like to come hither in the Summer?


MRS. LEYSTER. No, my dear, although she is but thirteen, she has been
introduced by a mistaken indulgence into company; she has acquired a relish for
dissipation, and lost that desire which young people naturally have for the
charms and liberty of the country. But my dear Constantia, I think we shall be
able to go under the hedges to the village; it is some time since we saw the
poor people, and perhaps in this severe weather they may want something.


CONSTANCE. Yes, indeed -- I want sadly to know how poor Dame Burden's
rheumatism is -- I am afraid the cold will make her worse. They then walked on
a quick pace, still conversing with great cheerfulness, when they were startled
by the howling of a dog, who was concealed by the winding of the hedge from
their eyes -- but in a minute, as if at hearing their voices, he came running
toward them, wagging his tale and whining in the most expressive manner,
seemingly to entreat their assistance. -- "Poor fellow, poor fellow!" said
Constantia. The dog then jumped up and again whined, then ran a little way
forward, then stood still looking at them, and again whined, "What does this
mean," said Mrs. Leyster, "this dog seems to implore our assistance; they are
very sagacious, let us follow him." -- At that instant they heard the faint cry
of an infant, and the dog sprung out of their sight howling most piteously.
"What is this!" -- said Mrs. Leyster, "I heard the cry of a child -- good
Heavens, perhaps -- Let us hasten." Constantia quitting her mother's hand now
ran lightly on, while Mrs. Leyster followed, as fast as the snow and her
agitation would let her; but before she had turned the corner of the hedge,
Constantia out of breath, with her cheeks the color of crimson, ran back
exclaiming -- "mama, mama! -- Make haste, Oh, make haste, a woman! a poor
little infant!"


CHAP. II.
AT these words Mrs. Leyster redoubled her speed, and in two minutes arrived at
the place where the dog stood howling over the apparently dead body of a woman,
in whose arms lay a bundle wrapped in a long cloth cloak. As Mrs. Leyster
advanced, she discovered that this bundle was a young child, whose faint cries
seemed to deplore the loss of that nourishment it could no longer draw from the
breast of its mother. "Unhappy woman!" said Mrs. Leyster, "I fear she is frozen
to death! -- Good Heaven, what must she have suffered during the inclemency of
last night!"

CONSTANCE. Frozen, mama! -- Oh how dreadful! Poor little baby, how it cries --
Hush, poor child! mama, what shall we do?


MRS. LEYSTER, (shedding tears.) See, Constantia, how carefully the poor
creature has wrapped up her infant, so that it seems not to have received the
least injury -- poor little dear, how nice and clean it is, and the woman is
decently dressed -- Run, my child, as fast as possible, to the house; send
Martha and Thomas up hither, and bid them bring some brandy, some blankets and
a chair -- Make what haste you can, but be careful not to fall down.


Constantia hastened away, and in about a quarter of an hour returned, followed
by the servants with the things Mrs. Leyster had ordered: in the mean time she
had not been idle, she had employed all the means she could think of to recover
the poor woman, and fancied she could perceive a faint motion of the heart, and
other slight signs of life. The poor creature was quickly placed in the chair,
and carefully conveyed to the house by the wondering servants, while Mrs.
Leyster followed carrying the baby. As soon as they entered the house, they
would have carried the poor woman to the fire, under a notion of thawing her
frozen limbs, but this Mrs. Leyster forbade.

CONSTANCE. Not carry her to the fire, mama! Will not that recover her sooner
than any thing?


MRS. LEYSTER. On the contrary, my dear, it will cause her frozen limbs to
mortify directly. I have already rubbed her hands and feet with snow, an
application which must be continued.


CONSTANCE. Rubbed them with snow, mama? --


MRS. LEYSTER. Yes, that is the safest means of recovering her -- My dear
Constance, send Thomas for Mr. Horland the Surgeon, and desire he will come
directly.


The woman was then put to bed, and in less than half an hour strong signs of
life appeared, which continued to increase till the arrival of the Surgeon, who
approved of all that had been done, and used other remedies which had the
desired effect, for in a short time she opened her eyes and faintly exclaimed,
"Jenny! -- Oh, my dear baby!" -- This exclamation affected Mrs. Leyster to
tears; they flowed some time, and relieved her heart from the agitation which
oppressed it since she found this poor creature. The dog who had found his way
into the bedchamber, now jumped up, and licked his mistress' hands; she seemed
to recollect him, and said in a low voice, "poor Rover!" then added, "Jenny,
where is my poor Jenny!" -- Mrs. Leyster now took the infant from the arms of
her servant, where, after being fed, it had fallen into a sweet sleep, and put
it into the bed; the poor woman again opened her eyes, looked at the baby, and
said, "what, asleep my child? -- You are not cold -- thank God you are alive!"
-- She then looked wildly about her, exclaiming, "Oh, where am I? -- I thought
I was in the snow -- and so cold -- I dreamed it! -- But what room is this, who
are all these?" -- Mrs. Leyster then motioned for every body to keep out of
sight, and kneeling by the bedside, said, "my good woman, be composed, you are
with friends, and very safe, you have been ill, but try to sleep, and you will
soon be well again! -- "My head," said the poor creature, putting her hand to
it, "is so bad, I cannot recollect any thing -- But my child is here, and we
are not in the snow -- poor Rover, you are here too!" Mrs. Leyster then drew
the curtains, and went to the farther end of the room; she sent away every body
but Constantia, and sat down with her to watch the event. The poor woman was
soon asleep, and the dog lying down by her side slept also. When Mrs. Leyster
was convinced her patient was asleep, she with Constance left the room, and
sent Martha to sit there while they dined. The whole of that day the poor woman
passed in a sort of dozing insensibility, though she gradually amended, and by
the next morning was able to rise for a few hours, and to understand by what
means she had been brought thither. Her gratitude to Mrs. Leyster and all her
family was unbounded and inexpressible; she could only shed tears, utter broken
sentences, and press her child to her bosom, while she lifted up her eyes to
Heaven in thankfulness for its preservation, and to call down blessings on her
benefactors -- then turning them on Mrs. Leyster, she would say, "Oh, Madam! my
child -- you have saved her! May God reward you by blessing yours!" The force
of this blessing Mrs. Leyster fully felt; none could strike upon her heart with
so much power as that which had her daughter for its object! In a few days the
woman, whose name was understood to be Thomson, was perfectly recovered; she
eagerly strove to assist the servants in doing every thing they would suffer
her to have a hand in, and about the fifth day after that in which she had been
found, she sent to beg leave to speak with Mrs. Leyster, a request which was
immediately granted, and she came into the parlour with her child in her arms,
curtsying and with tears in her eyes. Constantia, who was grown very fond of
the child, took it in her arms, while the following dialogue passed.

MRS. LEYSTER. Come in, Mrs. Thomson, I am told you have something to say to
me: Sit down, Mrs. Thomson. -- Thank you, Madam, I will stand if you please.


MRS. LEYSTER. No, no, sit down, you are weak still.


MARY THOMSON. Ah, Madam, how good you are! I can never thank you as I ought to
do! I don't know how to speak, but my heart (putting her hand to it with great
emotion) Oh, Madam, my heart is so full I cannot bear it!


MRS. LEYSTER, (affected.) But this is not what you had to say to me!


MARY THOMSON. No, Madam, I don't know how to speak it, but I must not burden
you any longer -- God knows, "I was a stranger and you took me in!" but I will
not encroach upon your charity; I have no right to do it, I can never repay
what you have done for me already!


MRS. LEYSTER. You have been too ill hitherto to inform me who you are, or
whither you were going; will you tell me now?


MARY THOMSON. Yes, surely, madam, since you are so kind as to ask it: -- my
name is Mary Thomson, and I am a widow, my husband has been dead only five
months!


MRS. LEYSTER. What employment was he?


MARY THOMSON. Madam, he was a journeyman carpenter; we had been married four
years, and went on pretty well. I had one child before this you see here, but
it died. My husband was very industrious, but though we were poor, we never had
occasion to ask any thing of any body: besides, a good lady that I had lived
servant with many years stood godmother to my first child, and was very kind to
us indeed? but just before my little Jenny was born, this lady died; she left
me five guineas -- but alas! madam, just after that, my husband fell from a
scaffold and broke his arm. Then, madam, we both suffered indeed, he with pain,
and I to see him. My five guineas were soon expended, he could not work, and
every thing went heavily with us!


MRS. LEYSTER, (wiping her eyes.) Poor creature, you are too much affected, I
will hear the rest another time.


MARY THOMSON. No, ma'am, if you please I will tell you now; -- I have thought
of these things so often, and shed so many tears, that I don't seem to mind it
so much now. -- My husband, ma'am, was so weakened by the pain he went through,
that being always slight, it threw him into a consumption, of which he died at
the end of four months, and left me without money or friends; all my little
furniture was gone to keep him in his illness; the parish were forced to bury
him, and to allow me something, little enough, but sufficient with my own hard
work to keep us alive.


MRS. LEYSTER. And what caused you to leave this place in which you lived?


MARY THOMSON. Why, madam, I have a sister at Portsmouth; she wrote me word, if
I and my child would come to her, she could put me in a little shop with her
husband's aunt, who would be glad to have me, as I could write and keep a book;
so, madam, I sold what little I had, and came on about twenty miles to a
relation's, where my sister was to meet me; but there, madam, instead of my
sister, I found a letter, telling me, the person I was to have been in business
with had died suddenly, and as my sister had no means to provide for me, she
advised me to go back to my parish. I was fain to take her advice, and was
going back very sad on foot, when the snow came on just before night; I was
bewildered and lost my way, and at last, tired out, I sat down, intending to
rest a few minutes, and wrapped up my child as warm as I could in my own cloak,
when I found myself exceeding cold, and then so very sleepy, that I could not
keep awake; so I laid down for a minute, and from that time only remember
feeling cold and s;leepy till I found myself in this house, and more kindly
treated than ever poor creature was before!


MRS. LEYSTER. We must have been inhuman not to have done what we did.


MARY THOMSON. Oh, madam, how few people would have done so! to wait on me your
own selves, to speak so kindly to me, and to take such care of my poor baby --
Oh, I can never, never tell you half I feel!


MRS. LEYSTER. Well, well, I must have no more of this; your story affects me
greatly; do you wish to return to your parish?


MARY THOMSON. Ah, no, madam, if I could do any thing else: I shall be worse
off there than ever, for I have spent almost every farthing in this unlucky
journey, and have not a bed nor a chair, so I must go to the workhouse. -- Oh,
it is hard indeed.


CONSTANCE, (with great agitation.) Mama!


MRS. LEYSTER. My child!


CONSTANCE. Oh, mama, must my poor little Jenny go to the workhouse?


MRS. LEYSTER. Perhaps her mother will spare her to you.


MARY THOMSON. Madam!


MRS. LEYSTER. Will you leave your child with us?


MARY THOMSON. My child -- Oh, my God! -- Oh, madam, can I refuse any thing to
you? -- But my child! -- Ah madam, you are a mother!


MRS. LEYSTER. I am indeed, and know too well a mother's feelings to try yours
any longer. Had you consented to such a separation I should not have thought
well of you, but as you prove to me you are a tender mother, I will trust you
are in all respects a worthy character. But common prudence requires, that
before I exert myself in your service, I should be convinced your story is
perfectly true.


MARY THOMSON. Certainly, madam.


MRS. LEYSTER. Then you will not take it amiss if I should write to the
officers of your parish for an account of you?


MARY THOMSON. No, to be sure, ma'am, you will be quite right to do so.


MRS. LEYSTER. Well, if my inquiries answer, I have thought of a plan for you,
and Constance need not lose her little favorite Jenny; in the mean time you
are very welcome to remain here.


MARY THOMSON. You are all goodness, madam; I most humbly thank you. I have
nothing to fear from any inquiry, and I shall be happy indeed if I should be so
fortunate as to be placed near you.


MRS. LEYSTER. Very well, I am at present quite satisfied with you, and have no
doubt I shall be always so.


MARY THOMSON. Thank you, madam.


CONSTANCE. Here, Mrs. Thomson, take your little baby, she is almost asleep.


MRS. LEYSTER, (smiling.) The worst of it is, I am afraid, Mrs. Thomson, if
Jenny stays near us, Constantia will grow very idle and forget to work.


CONSTANCE. Oh, no, mama, because I shall have her to work for sometimes.


MARY THOMSON. You are too good, Miss.


She then left the room with the child, and Mrs. Leyster said, -- "I am pleased
with this woman; she speaks with great feeling, and she received my notice of
sending to the parish officers as she ought to do, without the least appearance
of confusion or displeasure; she placed herself in my situation; she saw that
what I proposed to do was right; I will write to these people directly." She
did so, and they waited for an answer to this letter before they resolved on
any thing.

CHAP. III.
A few days after this, Mrs. Leyster accepted an invitation to dine with a lady
at the town which was about a mile from her house: she was desired to bring
Constantia with her, as the lady had a daughter about a year younger than she
was. They arrived at Mrs. Selwyn's about half an hour before dinner time, but
Maria Selwyn did not come in till just as they were setting down to dinner.
Scarcely were they seated, when she said, "mama, I want a piece of pudden."
"Hush," said Mrs. Selwyn, "wait till every body else is helped, if you please!"
"Oh, but mama," said Maria, "I like to eat my pudding before my meat, and I
choose to have it now." -- "Well then," said Mr. Selwyn, "ask your papa to to
cut it for you" -- "Yes, my dear," said Mrs. Selwyn, "I will cut it for you
directly" -- which he did, to the great surprise of Constantia, who was quite
unaccustomed to see a little girl behave so rudely. Maria Selwyn, however,
always did behave so; she was quite a spoiled child, and suffered to do just as
she liked; so she eat enough for two little girls, and of the most improper
things, asking for every thing she wished to have, eating extremely fast, and
even putting her knife into the tarts to take out some of the fruit; she also
put her knife into her mouth instead of eating with her fork or spoon, and she
had so many untidy tricks at table, that a very delicate person would have been
made sick by her, and every body must be disgusted: she held her knife and fork
so low, that her hand came upon part of the blade: in short, she was more
awkward, and behaved worse than any child of five years old, who has been used
to eat with decent people. Mrs. Selwyn, indeed, sometimes checked her with,
"don't, Maria, upon my word I will send you from table;" but as this threat was
never put in execution, it was perfectly disregarded, and Miss Maria continued
to distress every body by her impertinence and voraciousness. After dinner,
when the fruit was set upon the table, any one would have supposed, that so far
from having eaten an amazing dinner, Miss Maria had not had any, for she
devoured apples, pears and nuts, together with almonds, raisins and oranges, so
as perfectly to astonish the moderate and simple Constantia. Mrs. Selwyn
earnestly pressed Miss I cyster to take more fruit than she seemed inclined to
do, and turning to Mrs. Leyster, said, "I am sure you will let Miss Constantia
eat another orange" -- "She is at liberty to do just as she pleases," replied
Mrs. Leyster; "I have entirely ceased to restrain her in point of eating for
this twelve month." Mrs. Selwyn then again begged Constantia to eat another
orange, but she declined it. When the table was cleared, Miss Selwyn sat very
quietly and seemingly half asleep in her place, till Mrs. Selwyn told her to
take Miss Leyster into her dressing room, "which," added she, "you have strewed
from one end to the other with your playthings, and even with your squirrel's
cage, though I always tell you I will not have him in my apartment!" "But,
mama," said Miss Selwyn, "may we not have Rose to play with us?" -- "Yes"
answered her mother, "if you will behave better to her than you generally do. I
dare say Miss Leyster would be ashamed to see you use her so ill! Ah, I wish
you would take pattern by her!" The two children then went away, and Miss
Selwyn led her visitor into her mother's dressing room, which was indeed, as
she had said, strewed from one end to the other with play-things; some whole,
some broken, and so various as to afford great amusement to Constantia, who was
used to have but few. There were no less than five dolls, tumblers, children
flying a kite, horses and hounds, a large box with a very pretty show, a magic
lanthorn, and a book of prints; on the sopha a cage with a squirrel, and under
it a basket with a cat and three kittens. Constantia very eagerly looked over
this extensive collection, but finding the variety distracted her attention, so
that she could examine nothing, she left every thing but the show, which amused
her very agreeably for some time; in the mean while Miss Selwyn was talking to
her about the things, but at last, finding her so much pleased with the show,
said, "dear, what do you like that ugly thing!"

CONSTANCE. Ugly! -- I think it is very pretty indeed!


MARIA. I used to think so, but I am tired of it, I hate it now.


CONSTANCE. How long have you had it?


MARIA. Oh, a whole fortnight; I shall pull it to pieces tomorrow.


CONSTANCE. Pull it to pieces! Oh, what a pity, it is so amusing!


MARIA. Oh, but I want the box to put my doll's clothes in.


CONSTANCE. A common wooden one would do as well for that.


MARIA. Yes, I have half a dozen of them about, but they are all filled with
rubbish. But, la! if you think it is so pretty I will give it to you, I don't
care a farthing for it!


CONSTANCE. Oh, by no means; I beg you will not think of it.


MARIA. Oh, but you shall have it! I will make you have it!


CONSTANCE. I cannot indeed. Mama would be very angry with me.


MARIA. Why?


CONSTANCE. Because it looks as if I had persuaded you to give it me; I beg you
will not think of it.


MARIA. Oh, such nonsense, I shall indeed, and if you are so nice about taking
it from me, I shall ask mama; I Am sure I don't want it, I shall be glad when it
is gone. But where is that Rose, I wonder! Why don't she come when she knows I
am here; how does she think I am to play unless she helps me!


CONSTANCE. Help one to play! That is very odd!


MARIA. Dear, why? Can you play by yourself!


CONSTANCE. Yes, to be sure!


MARIA. Well, but who picks up your ball or your shuttlecock?


CONSTANCE. Myself, certainly, that is half the amusement!


MARIA. Oh, I hate it, it tires one so: I Will ring for this girl; she is kept on
purpose to play with me and help mend my clothes.


She then rang the bell, and while Constantia was looking over the prints, she
pulled the cat and her kittens out of the basket, took the kittens in her
frock, and then calling the cat, she ran about the room laughing to see the
cat's distress at hearing her kittens cry.

CONSTANCE. Oh, don't, Miss Selwyn; poor thing, she thinks you are going to
hurt them!


MARIA. Oh, an old fool! I would not give a farthing for her if she will not
let me play with them. Here, puss! puss! here is one of your little squawlers!
(holding up a kitten over her head) mew! See how she runs, I wonder what she
thinks I shall do with it!


CONSTANCE. Indeed, she is very uneasy, why will you teaze her so?


MARIA. Oh, it is so droll!


CONSTANCE. Pardon me, I cannot think it droll to torment any thing.


MARIA. Dear, what signifies a cat! I like it, and that is enough.


CONSTANCE. But supposing you do like it, which I wonder at, do you think you
have a right to hurt and teaze the poor creatures?


MARIA. To be sure I do! What do I keep them for, I wonder!


CONSTANCE. The only use I know for a cat is to catch mice.


MARIA. Oh, but we have no mice.


CONSTANCE. Well then, if I kept a cat only to play with her, to be sure I
would not hurt her.


MARIA. Oh, but I will if I like it, and if you are so formal, miss, you will not
make me so, I assure you.


CONSTANCE. I am sorry if you are offended; come, let us play a little.


MARIA. What at? Why don't Rose come, I Will teach her not to come when I ring
for her.


She then rang again, and when Rose came, who was a pretty decent girl, Miss
Selwyn quite scolded her, called her names, and at last passionately struck
her! while the poor girl dared not so much as answer, and Constantia vainly
strove to call off Maria's attention; for as to reasoning, that she found was
quite useless. At last Maria's passion abated, and they began to play at
shuttlecock, but whenever the shuttlecock fell on Maria's side, she made Rose
pick it up, while Constantia, light and active, recovered it in an instant, and
frequently saved its fall; but Maria, oppressed by the quantity she had eaten
at dinner, found the play fatigue her too much, and soon gave it up. They then
took the dolls, but here Maria was equally idle; every thing she wanted she
made Rose fetch, and if she found any difficulty immediately gave it to Rose to
do. Constantia was heartily tired of this visit, for the instant she began to
take a pleasure in any thing, Maria was tired of it, or else by her continual
scolding at Rose put an end to the diversion. They were both glad when they
were called to tea, and the instant they came into the room, Mrs. Selwyn said,
"my dear child, what is the matter with you, you look as pale as death!"

MARIA. Oh, mama, I have the headache.


MRS. SELWYN. Poor thing, she always has in an afternoon; sit down by me, my
dear, you have tired yourself with play; Well, and did you amuse yourself very
well?


MARIA. Oh, yes, mama; Miss Leyster liked my show so much, I shall give it to
her.


MRS. LEYSTER. What is that, Constantia! I hope you did not ask for it, or
express any wish to have it given to you?


MARIA. No indeed, ma'am, she only said how pretty it was, and so I said I
hated it, and should pull it to pieces; and she said it was a pity, and I said
she should have it; and then she begged I would not give it her, for fear mama
should think she asked for it, and so I told her mama would like her to have it.


MRS. SELWYN. If Miss Leyster will accept of it, after your having offered it
so rudely, I am sure I shall be very glad to have it saved from being destroyed.


CONSTANCE, (blushing very much.) I thank you, ma'am, but, indeed, if you
please, I had rather not have it.


MRS. SELWYN. Why, my dear?


CONSTANCE. Because, ma'am, it looks so much as if I had admired it on purpose
to have it given to me.


MRS. SELWYN. My dear, I am pleased with your delicacy, but, as a present from
me I hope your mama will give you leave to accept it. It was bought but a
fortnight since, and is really too pretty to be pulled to pieces, which it will
be if you do not rescue it.


CONSTANCE. I am much obliged to you ma'am, and to Miss Selwyn; if mama pleases.


MRS. LEYSTER. Since Mrs. Selwyn is so kind, my dear, I can have no objection.


MRS. SELWYN. Very well, then; (to the footman) John, do you give it Mrs.
Leyster's servant when he comes. Rose will bring it down.


During this conversation Maria was eating cake and drinking coffee, till she
was really too ill not to be noticed, as she looked dreadfully. Mrs. Selwyn
rang for her own maid to wait on Maria, who, with a dreadful sick headache went
away, and was obliged to go to bed immediately. In about an hour afterward
Mrs. Leyster and Constance went home, and as they sat at their simple supper,
Constance repeated to her mother the conversation which had passed when she and
Maria were alone.

CHAP. IV.
MRS. LEYSTER. YOU see then, Constantia, this is an instance of what I have
often told you, that happiness depends far more on ourselves and our own
disposition to be contented, than on any outward circumstances. If any body had
told you yesterday of a little girl who had every plaything ingenuity could
invent, full leisure to amuse herself as she pleased, and even a little girl to
play with her and wait on her; perhaps you would have thought she must have
been happy.


CONSTANCE. I believe, indeed, mama, I should have thought so.


MRS. LEYSTER. But you see now how little these things constitute felicity.
Miss Selwyn has such and endless variety of playthings before her at all hours,
that her choice is bewildered, and she becomes tired of all; they cease to give
her any amusement, and she is angry to find that nothing diverts her. To you,
who see such things very seldom, they are a source of great entertainment; thus
you see that by an unlimited use the highest pleasures lose their relish,
though, taken in moderation, they enliven the spirits and animate the mind.
Miss Selwyn is also so accustomed to be waited upon, that she can do nothing
for herself, and has not even activity enough of mind or body to amuse herself.
Tell me, Constantia, should you not very much dislike to find that you wanted
some body "to help you play."


CONSTANCE. Oh, indeed, yes, mama, I was quite astonished to hear Miss Selwyn
use such an expression!


MRS. LEYSTER. As to the poor little girl who waits on her, she is indeed, much
to be pitied; she is truly a slave to this little feeble tyrant, who is
suffered to torment her, without being taught that she is in reality inferior
to the poor girl. Children are really totally dependent on others; if servants
did not help them they would be miserably situated; it is true servants are
paid for what they do, but children do not pay them, and they are therefore
doubly obliged to the kind parent who accommodates them with the assistance
they want and cannot do without. I believe my memory will furnish me with the
words of a great French author * on this subject, let me see if you understand
them. Ah "considerer l'enfance en elle-meme y-a-t-il au monde un etre plus
miserable, plus a la merci de tout ce qui l'environne, qui ait si grand besoin
de pity, d'amour, de protection, qu'un enfant? Ne semble t'il-pas que c'est
pour cela que les premieres voix qui lui sont suggeres par la nature, sont les
ecris et les plaintes;??Rousseau. qu'elle lui a done une figure si douce et un
air si touchant afin que tout ce qui l'approche s'interesse a sa foiblesse et
s'empresse a le secourir? Qu'y-a-t-il donc de plus choquant, de plus contraire
a l'ordre que de voir enfant imperieux et mutin, commander a tout ce qui
l'entoure prendre impudemment un ton de maitre avec ceux qui n'ont qu'a
l'abandonner, pour le fair perir?" And again: "Les domestiques ont une
veritable superiorite sur lui en ce qu'il ne sauroit se passer d'eux tandis
qu'il ne leur est bon a rien." Do you understand this, Constantia?


CONSTANCE. I think I comprehend the meaning of the sentence, mama, but I do
not entirely understand the words, will you be good enough to translate it for
me?


MRS. LEYSTER. "If we consider infancy in itself, is there in the world a being
more feeble, more miserable, more at the mercy of all who surround him, who has
so great need of pity, of love, of protection, as a child? Does it not seem as
if it were for this reason that the first sound, which nature suggests to him
are cries and complaints? That she has given him a figure so engaging, and an
air so touching, to the end that all who approach him may be interested by his
weakness, and eager to succor him? What then can be more shocking, more
contrary to order, than to see a child imperious and mutinous, commanding those
who are about him, boldly assuming the tone of a master with those, who have
nothing to do but abandon him to cause his destruction? Domestics have a real
superiority over him, in that he cannot do without them, while he is useless to
them."


CONSTANCE. Thank you, my dear mama, what a charming lesson this is, as well to
me as all other children! I wish Miss Selwyn could hear it.


MRS. LEYSTER. I should be afraid, my dear, that her mind is too much
over-clouded to permit reason and truth to make a proper impression upon it!
Another source of unhappiness to her is the unbounded liberty she has of eating
whatever she pleases in too large quantities. Mrs. Selwyn undoubtedly mistakes
this for one mean of giving her pleasure, and the consequence is, she spoils
her appearance, making her person large, heavy, and dull, and what is worse,
she injures her health, and of course clogs the activity of her mind.


CONSTANCE. But mama, is it possible any one can take pleasure in eating too
much?


MRS. LEYSTER. Alas! yes, my dear; and unhappily, not only children fall into
this delusion. Many people, whose age and good sense ought to teach them
better, will persist in eating such things as disagree with them, or too much
of those which are proper. As nothing is more degrading than the latter, which
reduces human nature to a level with the "brutes which perish," nay below them,
for they do not eat too much, so is there nothing more absurd or more weak than
the former species of folly! What; have we a right to risk our health, our
comfort, that of our families and friends, or even perhaps our lives, for the
sake of gratifying the taste for a few minutes, a gratification which is so
soon forgotten? Depend upon it, my dear child, from moderation and temperance
alone are any lasting pleasures to be derived


CONSTANCE. But I cannot think, mama, how any person can mistake so much as to
treat a little girl as Mrs. Selwyn treats hers!


MRS. LEYSTER. My dear child, there is certainly nothing so tender as the love
of a fond mother. It is hard to deny any thing to a child, which seems at the
time likely to give it pleasure; but in a mind regulated by principle, this
passionate fondness is repressed by the consideration, that in the end it will
render its object unhappy. A good mother is not selfish enough to endulge her
own feelings by indulging her child, when she knows, as a person accustomed to
reason must know, that a child always indulged is really not so happy as one
under proper control, and that the consequences of unlimited indulgence when
this child grows up, will be frightful. The world will not humor her as her
mother has done; she must then be often thwarted if she has good sense; her
life will be a constant struggle between her humors and her reason if she has
not! What a character will hers be, at once weak and mischievous; not knowing
how to be happy herself, and not suffering any other to be so! The anxiety and
trouble in the first, the hatred and misery in the last, might have been spared
her, had her mother known how to control her! When a mother considers that
these must be the consequences of unbounded indulgence, and that she is
accountable to God for the well-being of her child, can she dare to render it
wretched and criminal here, and hazard its happiness hereafter!


CONSTANCE. Oh mama, how sadly are those mistaken who do! But you, you indeed,
though you so fondly love me, though you make me so happy, you do not suffer me
to do what is wrong; and so good as you are, what must I be if I could wish to
do it! If I am wretched and criminal it is my own fault!


MRS. LEYSTER. God forbid, my dearest, you should ever be either! But we have
had a long conversation, and it is time to go to bed.


CONSTANCE. Ah, how I love these nice chats, they make me so happy, and I am
always the better for them. When you talk to me as if I was no longer a child,
I think I shall be ashamed ever to be childish again!


MRS. LEYSTER. You will not, I hope, often be childish enough to act
improperly; and as to the simple manners of childhood, I rather wish than not
you should retain them. I dislike extremely a womanly child, who has courage in
a large company to ask questions and make pert answers.


CONSTANCE. Ah, mama, your Constance is too ^dle and too playful not to be a
child a ^ong time.


MRS. LEYSTER. I am not sorry for that; but get you gone, prater, it is bed time.


CHAP. V.
THE next morning Mrs. Leyster received an answer to her letter respecting Mary
Thomson, by which she found that her story was perfectly true; and obtained a
conformation of the good opinion she had formed of her. Mrs. Leyster
immediately hastened to set her mind at ease, and to impart the plan she had
formed for her future comfort. There was a small house to be let in the
village, and Mrs. Leyster proposed that Mary Thomson should take it; that she
should keep a little school to teach children to read and work, a thing much
wanted in the village, and also a little shop for pins, threads, tape, etc. by
which she had no doubt of her getting a comfortable living. Mary Thomson
received this plan with the utmost gratitude; her only doubt was, whether the
owner of the house would trust her without security, and how she should raise a
little money to buy a small stock. "I am not rich," said Mrs. Leyster, "but I
can afford without inconvenience to let you have a few pounds to buy a little
furniture and stock, which you may increase by degrees; if you succeed, you
shall repay me at the end of five years; I will be security for your first
year's rent. I cannot do all I wish for you, but I will do all I can, and you
shall be welcome to it. You shall dine here every Sunday, and Constantia will
gladly be kind to her little Jenny.

The poor woman had no words to answer, but with a truly grateful heart
withdrew in tears.

CONSTANCE. Oh mama! how good you are! how happy you have made her, and me
also! I shall see my little Jenny every day, I shall call her my child, and
teach her every thing!


MRS. LEYSTER. I shall be very glad you should take the entire charge of her
education. But tell me, my child, what do you intend to teach her?


CONSTANCE. I will teach her, mama, as soon as she can learn, to read, to
spell, and to work, afterward she shall learn to write, and I will instruct
her in drawing and dancing.


MRS. LEYSTER. Very well; then I suppose you will finish by giving her a good
fortune.


CONSTANCE. Ah, mama, I should be very happy to do so, but you know it is not
in my power.


MRS. LEYSTER. Then my child, when you have given her the accomplishments you
talk of, what is she to do? Will she be fit for service?


CONSTANCE. No, mama, I see I am wrong; but tell me, then, if you please, what
I shall do for her.


MRS. LEYSTER. My dear, you are not the first who has been mistaken in this
matter. Many people have in like manner, adopted a child, taken it out of the
station in which Providence had placed it; refined its sentiments, taught it
various accomplishments, and then, either by accident or neglect, have at their
death left it to struggle with a world with which it was unfit to contend.
Luxury and refined ideas have already too much pervaded the lower as well as
higher classes of people. The notion of equality is an absurd, an unnatural
notion. The necessities of man are never so well obviated, as in societies
where distinctions of rank and degree are preserved. Are the savage tribes,
where every man hunts, cooks and builds for himself, so happy as those nations
where every man has his distinct occupation? God has made a difference in his
gifts, both bodily and mental, to different men; and undoubtedly God has always
intended a difference in degree, which these gifts will always preserve. For
instance, if five men were in an equal situation placed on a desert shore, the
wisest would soon become governor, the most courageous would be their guard,
their soldier; the strongest would be their woodcutter, their builder; the most
agile would provide their food; the most ingenious (for I distinguish between
ingenuity and wisdom) would be their mechanic. But Constance, I hardly know if
you will understand all this speculation; I get a habit of talking to you on
all subjects, hardly considering whether or not they are interesting to you,
and this, from some ridiculous opinions I have lately heard, has been much upon
my mind. It is to be observed, Mrs. Leyster is speaking soon after the
beginning of the French revolution.



CONSTANCE. I am always happy, mama, when you speak to me; I endeavor to
understand and to improve from what you say, and I think I comprehend all you
have now said.


MRS. LEYSTER. For common servants, in my opinion it is quite sufficient if
they are taught their duty to God and man, and to read it in the Holy
Scriptures. For them; especially for women servants, I disapprove of learning
to write. My experience has hitherto taught me, that those who are instructed
in that branch of learning, more frequently become idle scribblers, prying and
curious into the affairs of others, than useful and active servants. I speak
with diffidence, however, for many wise and good people have thought otherwise.
However, as Jenny will never, I hope, be reduced to the condition of a lower
servant, I will allow you to teach her to read and spell well, to write, and
the three first rules in arithmetic; plain work of every sort, but no curious
works. And she shall be instructed by Martha in confectionary and pastry. I
will also have her know how to assist in cooking, in cleaning fine linen, and
even doing the less laborious work of the house, that if any chance should
throw her out of our protection, she may not be a poor helpless creature, a
burden to herself and others. Activity, and the power of providing for
herself, are great virtues in hers, and indeed in every station. And very
early, I doubt not, my dear Constance, you will teach her the constant use of
prayer and the first principles of religion. And as she will be often with us,
there is not, I hope, much reason to fear but her principles and morals will be
good. And now, tell me how you like my plan?


CONSTANCE. Oh, mama, it is a thousand times better than mine; I long to begin!


MRS. LEYSTER. We are looking very forward indeed, for little Jenny may not
live to require all these cares.


CONSTANCE. Oh dear mama!


MRS. LEYSTER. Nay, my child, such an idea is not improbable, and I hope if it
should be realized, my Constantia would be resigned, and console herself that
her little adopted child was better provided for. But not to dwell on so sad an
idea, I must declare, that I will not at any time suffer the child to be
dressed with any degree of finery, no ribbons, no ornaments of any kind; her
dress shall be neat and clean, but no more; I will never have her taught to
forget her origin, or be ashamed of the lowly garb of her mother.


Here the conversation ended, and omitting many trifling occurrences, I shall
let a year pass in which nothing very material happened. Constantia grew and
improved: Little Jenny was to her a constant source of amusement and
employment. She could now talk, and Constantia waited impatiently the end of
another year, at which time she hoped to begin teaching her to read. Mary
Thomson was placed in the house Mrs. Leyster had promised her, and succeeded
extremely well. The spring was now beginning to appear, and Constantia spent
much of her time in her little garden. Her flowers were finer than usual; she
looked forward to their blooming, and drew from air and exercise a fine healthy
bloom, which proved the goodness of her constitution. She was now between
twelve and thirteen, tall and well made, with a face not indeed beautiful, but
extremely pleasing, because it spoke sweetness of temper, good sense, and an
affectionate feeling heart; nor was her appearance deceitful, for she really
possessed all these amiable qualities.

One morning the footman brought Mrs. Leyster a letter; she opened it, saying,
"from my sister!" while Constance went on with her work. "Bless me," said Mrs.
Leyster, having read it, "what a sad affair is this; I declare I am quite
shocked!"

CONSTANCE. May I, mama, ask what is the matter?


MRS. LEYSTER. My dear Constantia, young as you are, I hope and believe I may
depend on your prudence. I am a happy mother, in being able thus early to place
a confidence in my child!


CONSTANCE, (kissing her hand with tears in her eyes.) Oh, mama, never, never
will I abuse it; my heart promises, and you may depend upon that heart, which
owes not only the power of keeping a secret, but every thing it owns of
goodness to you!


MRS. LEYSTER, (affected.) My dear child.


CONSTANCE. But mama, I hope; I am not inquisitive, but, you seemed to say you
would tell me.


MRS. LEYSTER. What disturbed me; I will, my dear, indeed I will read to you
your aunt's letter.

TO MRS. LEYSTER.
MY DEAR SISTER,
THE system of education; against which you have so often argued, I at last
find to be erroneous. Alicia has deceived my expectations. She has been
imprudent, disingenuous, and unfaithful to her promise. These are harsh
expressions, and if I did not hope the error arose rather from habit and want
of thought than from her heart, I should be this day a miserable creature; as
it is, I am truly unhappy. Lest you should be too much alarmed, I will make
haste to disclose the nature of the evil I lament. When Alicia was thirteen, I
consented, at her request, to make her a yearly allowance for clothes and
pocket money, upon promise that she should never at any time purchase any thing
without immediate payment. My allowance rather exceeded what had been before
expended for her clothes, because I knew it was in vain to expect exact economy
from such a girl. For the first quarter she bought many expensive trifles, and
was in want of many necessary articles, such as gloves, shoes, threads, etc. I
remarked to her this folly, and hoped in the second quarter she had corrected
it. Here I allow I was myself guilty of a very great error: I ought to have
made her set down every thing she purchased, and have myself examined her
accounts; but this, depending on her promise not to run in debt, I neglected to
do. For this last quarter I have observed her frequently dejected, almost
always grave, and was in pain for her health. About a month after I had paid
her her last quarter, not having quite cash enough in my purse to pay a bill, I
requested her to lend me two guineas. I knew it was not a month since I had
paid her four, and as I had not observed she had bought any thing, I concluded
she had almost the whole by her: she blushed excessively, and after some
hesitation, said, she had but one guinea left. "What," said I; "three guineas
in a month! and what are you to do till your quarter is again due?" "Oh, I
shall not want to buy any thing." "But," said I, "what have you done with it,
you have nothing that I know of?" She still looked excessively red and
confused, and I determined to discover what all this meant. I will not tire you
with particulars, but tell you at once; she had been lead by the example of the
Miss Seymours, who are always in debt, and ridiculed her scruples, to run in
debt more than she had even yet paid to her milliner, shoemaker and
mantuamaker. I represented to her the folly and impropriety of her conduct; she
said it had made her excessively uneasy, and after much conversation, I agreed
to discharge her debts, which still amounted to some guineas, on two
conditions; one, that she should give up half her allowance for the next year,
and to break her intimacy with these idle girls, that she should go into the
country for at least half a year. And now, my dear sister, will you exert that
affection which I know you feel for me, and take upon yourself for a few months
the care of this mistaken girl. If you will, I shall feel myself for ever
obliged to you, to whom I shall entrust her with implicit confidence, etc. etc.



Mrs. Leyster, however unwilling to be charged with a young person whose
education had been so neglected, yet could not refuse a sister, whom, however
different from herself, she sincerely loved. She wrote, therefore, a letter of
consent, and Constantia one of invitation to her cousin. Constantia, shocked
and surprised as she was, yet made every excuse for her cousin, candor and
goodnature could suggest, and impatiently waited her arrival; not because she
expected any great addition to her own happiness from it, for her cousin, she
was aware, loved pursuits far different from her own, but because she wished to
sooth, by every kind attention, the distress she imagined Alicia must feel,
after having broken her promise and offended her mother.

CHAP. VI.
IN about a week's time Alicia arrived. She was in her person a fine shewy
girl, in her dress and air fashionable, but her countenance wanted that
softness, those smiles and blushes which adorned Constantia's expressive face,
and her manner that retiring mildness which Constantia's exhibited. Constantia
flew to welcome her, but her salute was coldly, even haughtily returned, and to
the graver look of Mrs. Leyster an air of sullen pride was opposed. Alicia
seemed to feel herself aggrieved by the obligation to visit those she imagined
beneath her, to be determined not to find amusement in any thing they could
offer her, and to think her fault much too severely punished by the necessity
of a residence so unpleasant. Not a word was spoken of the cause of her visit,
and Constantia recovering her spirits, which Alicia's coldness had damped,
anxiously tried to amuse her. After tea, Constantia asked her cousin how she
would like to employ herself.

ALICIA. It is indifferent to me.


CONSTANCE. Are you too much tired with your journey to take a stroll in the
garden, we shall have yet a light half-hour?


ALICIA. Yes, it is indeed early to have done tea.


CONSTANCE. In London, I suppose, you are later?


ALICIA. Oh, my God, yes; we have never done tea there till between eight and
nine.


CONSTANCE. Then what hour do you sup?


ALICIA, (coldly.) That depends on where we are. My mother is early, we sup
before twelve, the Seymours never till near one, and if one is at a ball, three
or four are usual hours.


CONSTANCE. But then you must lose half your day in bed!


ALICIA. Oh, we rise as early as other people; it is of no use to be up before
one's friends are stirring.


Constantia, perceiving their opinions were so different that an argument would
be endless, again proposed a walk in the garden, which, with a sort of indolent
indifference Alicia agreed to; but this walk afforded neither any pleasure;
Constantia vainly pointed out beauties, of which Alicia had no idea. The glow
of the setting sun, its beams brightening the distant view, over which the
various shades of spring were spread, its last rays softening by degrees from
rich purple and gold into the mild gray of twilight, afforded to Alicia no
pleasure, though Constantia's heart swelled with pleasure at the sight. Alicia,
perceiving her pleasure, said with a smile of contempt:

Well, it is vastly fine to be sure, but you have seen it before, I presume?

CONSTANCE. Yes, the setting sun, but surely never so brilliant; besides, after
the dreary months of winter the view of so fine an evening is attended with a
thousand pleasing ideas.


ALICIA. Oh yes, I can conceive that; you must have found the winter pretty
dull; to be sure the country is rather more tolerable in the summer! My God!
what in the world do you do in the winter?


CONSTANCE, (with a smile.) Oh a thousand things; I am very happy.


ALICIA. Happy in the country? Impossible!


CONSTANCE. No, my dear cousin, not impossible, since my mother is with me. To
hope you can be quite happy here without yours is absurd, but I flatter myself
you will be more so than you expect.


Alicia did not very well know what to say to this speech; she therefore only
with a peevish kind of shudder, remarked that it was cold, and desired to
return to the house.

The next morning the woman servant who had accompanied Miss Woodford from
London was to return. She came into the parlour to take a letter from Mrs.
Leyster, and then asked of Miss Woodford what message she should carry from her
to her mistress; but Alicia, distressed and unhappy, could not answer; the
tears which stood in her eyes, her trembling lips and fading color showed her
uneasiness. Mrs. Leyster and Constantia retired to the window, that she might
speak without restraint; but suddenly exclaiming; "Say; I will write soon," she
ran out of the room. Constantia much affected remained below some minutes, and
in the mean time Mrs. Woodford's servant got into the carriage and drove away.
Constantia then followed her cousin; she found her at the window of her room,
looking after the carriage in tears. "Ah!" she exclaimed, before Constance
could approach her, "she will again see London and my dear mother! and I am
left in this horrid place! Good God! was it my fault!" She stopped, hearing
Constantia's step, and with an angry tone, said, "Have I not even the privilege
of being alone? I am not used, Miss Leyster, to be thus intruded upon! Ah, I am
indeed very little used to any thing I can expect to meet with here!"
Constantia, who had been half terrified by her first address, now seeing her in
an agony of grief, approached, and clasping her in her arms said, "My dearest
cousin, I beg you to pardon me if I am an intruder; I came to see if I could do
any thing to comfort you, but if you wish me gone I will leave you. But why
should you wish it? Suffer me to be your friend; suffer me, if possible, to
make you happy!" Alicia, softened by her tenderness, now felt the coldness, the
contempt with which she had hitherto regarded her was melting fast from about
her heart; she returned Constantia's embrace, and shed tears of affection and
gratitude on her bosom. For some time neither could speak, but at last Alicia
said, "you are very good; better than I either expected or deserved. You know I
have much to lament; leave me, pray, my dear, I will soon come down."
Constantia instantly left her. In about an hour Alicia came down stairs, her
manner in a great measure changed. To her aunt she was more respectful and less
cold, and to Constance more affectionate. Still she treated her as a child, and
as being much inferior to herself; she still seemed to suppose it impossible
that a girl educated in the country could have any accomplishments, or be
enabled to form a proper judgment on any subject. To read, except the light
publications of the hour, she had never been accustomed. Needle Work, and most
of the little ingenious resources of women in general, she despised as beneath
her attention. The fifth morning after her arrival Constantia's drawing master
came. Her port-folio and implements were instantly produced. "Bless me, Miss
Leyster," said Alicia, "do you draw?" "A little," replied Constance, "but I am
very fond of it." "So am I," said Alicia, "though I have not practiced lately;
if you will give me a pencil I will try." "Oh, willingly," said Constance, well
pleased that she could find any amusement. They then sat down. Constantia's
master gave her a subject, and while she began the design, amused himself with
making sketches. Alicia began a bunch of flowers, and all was silent. In about
half an hour Constance asked her master some question, and Alicia, casting her
eyes on Constantia's drawing, exclaimed, "Bless me, Constantia, do you design
figures?" "Yes," answered Constantia, "why are you so surprised?" Oh, because,
because, you said you drew but a little." "Miss Leyster, is very modest,
Ma'am," said the drawing master, "but the fact is, I have very little more to
teach her. Very well done, indeed; pray Ma'am look at this figure, it is
Lavinia from Thomson's Seasons; is not the drapery well done?" "Yes, very
well," said Alicia coolly; then rising, she tore her own performance in two and
threw it into the grate. "Dear cousin," said Constantia, "are you tired, why
have you torn your drawing?" "Because I was not pleased with it," said Alicia
gravely. The drawing time was soon expired; Constantia's performance was
greatly advanced, and she was to finish it before her master came again. When
he was gone, Mrs. Leyster commended the drawing, and told Constance she had
given her great pleasure by her application. "Ah, mama," said Constance, "I
have no merit in applying to drawing, because I love it so much, but if it were
disagreeable to me, I should be over-paid by your being pleased. In the course
of this day Alicia, who fancied her cousin could know nothing because she had
been brought up in the country, had the farther mortification of finding she
knew French much better than herself, that she had some knowledge of Italian,
and that she danced vastly well. Her conversations also with her mother proved
her so well acquainted with all books proper for her age, and to possess so
much knowledge in geography, natural history, and the history of her own
country, besides a thousand little ingenious works, and that young as she was,
she assisted a great deal in the family management, that Alicia began to take
shame to herself for her. Thus they passed a fortnight, and every day added to
Alicia's concealed admiration of her cousin; when she saw how readily Constance
employed those hours which she found so heavy, how happy she was and how
agreeable, she began to wish herself like her. In looking over some books she
found the Tales of the Castle in French, which Constance warmly recommended to
her perusal. She took the first volume, because she knew not what to do. The
story of Delphine, arrested her attention; her heart told her there was some
similarity between herself and Delphine, and between Henrietta Steinhausen and
her cousin; she blushed as she read, and the tears swelled in her eyes. Mrs.
Leyster observed but would not interrupt her: in a few minutes she stole out of
the room with the book in her hand, and was not visible again till dinner time;
she then appeared to have been weeping, and her manner was grave and dejected.
After dinner they walked out. Alicia, who now began to feel real respect and
affection, walked with her arm through hers, Mrs. Leyster sometimes with them,
sometimes at a little distance gathering mosses and plants which the spring
produced; for such a long residence in the country had made her a sort of
practical botanist. They called on Mrs. Thomson, who received them with
grateful respect, and little Jenny with rapture. She had been confined by a
cold, but was to come the next day to pass two or three with Constantia. While
Constance was playing with her, Mrs. Leyster said she and Alicia would step in
and speak to Dame Burden; "I will follow you in ten minutes, mama," said
Constance, and away they went. Dame Burden was a poor old woman, who had been
confined many years to her bed with the rheumatism. They found her with every
thing about her quite clean, and though in great pain, rejoiced by the visit.
"But where," said she, "is my dear young lady; I hope she is not ill. I have
not seen her this fortnight, and I don't know when she has staid away so long
from her poor old woman."

MRS. LEYSTER. Constance is very well, she will be here presently, but we have
had this young lady, my niece, with us, and my girl has been engaged with her.


DAME BURDEN. To be sure, Madam; I am afraid her goodness will make me
encroaching at last, and yet I try not to be, but the sight of my young lady
does me good, and I do so miss her when she stays away.


MRS. LEYSTER. But how are you now; are you in less pain?


DAME BURDEN. No Madam, I cannot say I am; I don't hope I ever shall be; but I
try to be patient, and when I cannot sleep I think, and I know I shall not have
to suffer long.


ALICIA. But have you been so ill a long time?


DAME BURDEN. Oh dear Miss, yes, these seven years; Madam has tried every
thing, and sent to a great Doctor; but they cannot cure me; so I am content as
it is the will of God, and thank him that he has raised me up such good
friends, for you know, Miss, I might have been left to perish quite -- but,
madam, your aunt there is so good -- Oh, I am bound to pray for her and my dear
young lady.


MRS. LEYSTER. Has Mrs. Thomson been to visit you?


DAME BURDEN. O yes, Madam, she comes every now and then and reads a chapter to
me -- for now, Miss, my eyes fail me so sadly I can neither read nor work, but
my young lady is often so good, she comes and reads to me her own self, with
her sweet voice -- it is like hearing the finest clergyman, she reads so well;
and then so good-natured withal, so courteous, for all she is such a fine
scholar. Ah, God will bless her, for she "is meek and lowly in heart!"


MRS. LEYSTER. You see, my dear Alicia, it is not only by giving money one can
do good; Constantia is so happy as to be serviceable to Dame Burden at a very
small expense to herself.


DAME BURDEN. Ah, Madam, she is good to me every way; she brings me large
pieces of flannel to wrap myself in; she makes white wind whey for me with her
own hands, because my girl is not handy. Under God she has been the means of
prolonging my life, and what is better, of preparing me to die.


Mrs. Leyster, affected with these artless praises of her child, wiped her
eyes, and Alicia was equally moved and astonished. Constantia then came in, and
after talking a quarter of an hour with her old woman, who was delighted to see
her, they all returned home, Alicia's heart filled with soft emotions and real
admiration of her cousin.

CHAP. VII.
THE next morning Alicia, whose studies and observations the day before had
left upon her mind a sort of painful pleasure, who felt unsettled and
dissatisfied with herself, uneasy between her newly acquired consciousness of
being wrong and her pride, again went to the book-case. The volume she had been
reading was up stairs; she was too indolent to fetch it; she therefore took
down two new-looking books, and read two or three Dramatic Dialogues. By the
Author of this Work.
At last she turned to the little Country Visitor, and there she found
confirmation that she had been wrong; there she saw a character in many
respects like her own, placed in a ridiculous and striking point of view. She
was vexed and disturbed: still she read on, and when she had finished, she
struggled with her tears till she could no longer restrain them, and bursting
into a fit of crying, she was leaving the room; but Constance, who was reading
also, ran to her, exclaiming, "My dear cousin, what is the matter?" "Nothing,
nothing" sobbed out Alicia. "Nothing!" replied Constantia, "and yet you cry so!
-- Oh, Alicia, that cannot be!" -- Mrs. Leyster then approaching, embraced
Alicia, and said, "My dear child compose yourself, and do not strive to
suppress an emotion which does you so much credit! You have been affected by
the book you were reading, is it not so?

ALICIA. Oh yes, Ma'am -- It is so like -- I have been so absurd!.


MRS. LEYSTER. Since you feel that, my dear girl, you sufficiently prove that
your heart was not wrong; you were full of prejudices. -- You saw us with a
determination not to love us -- we love you, and you cannot help returning our
affection. You fancied in the country we could not be happy, or possess any
information; you found yourself mistaken, and your pride was hurt; a book, the
best teacher of a willing heart, has brought conviction to yours. Own your
conviction, my dear Alicia, and you will have gained a great victory over your
pride and prejudice, for which you are not so blameable as your education and
companions.


ALICIA. Ah, Madam, you are very good, you read my heart, I believe, and I am
afraid you despise me; you must, for my cousin is so good!


CONSTANCE. Dear, dear Alicia, I am sure mama loves you.


MRS. LEYSTER. To own an error is the greatest proof of a good heart and a
natural love of virtue. I have not the least doubt but Alicia having done so,
if she will continue thus open to affection and conviction, will soon be a very
charming character.


ALICIA, (kissing her hand.) How good you are to encourage me! Yes, if you can
forgive and love me still, I shall, I believe, be happier than I have ever yet
been.


MRS. LEYSTER. We cannot be happy with a sense of an error in the heart,
however stifled by pride. Let us sit down, and then I will tell my dear niece
in what respect I think she has hitherto been most blameable.


ALICIA. I shall be willing to hear, and I hope to amend.


MRS. LEYSTER. I have avoided hitherto, my dear, speaking to you on the cause
of your coming hither: till I could obtain your confidence, till Constance
could gain your love, we would not enter on the subject; hereafter I hope she
will be your sister, and I shall be your maternal friend.


ALICIA. Ah, if you will but permit me!


CONSTANCE, (embracing her.) Permit you! -- Oh my dear cousin, what joy you
give me!


MRS. LEYSTER. Henceforth I hope we shall be happy in each other. Permit me
then, my dear girl, to tell you, you have never seemed to me sufficiently
sensible of the fault which brought you hither.


ALICIA, (embarrassed.) In reality, Ma'am --


MRS. LEYSTER. You do not think it a great one? You did no more than other
young people -- you always intended to pay your debts, so where was the great
harm? Is it not thus you argue?


ALICIA, (confused.) But -- you think -- nay, perhaps --


MRS. LEYSTER. Hear me, my dear child -- In the first place, the allowance your
mother made you was really an ample one; even if it had not been, she thought
it so; she was perfectly aware what your expenses ought to be. She had by many
years experience learned in what manner it was proper a young woman should
dress. Believe me, my dear, if with sixteen guineas a year you could not keep
out of debt, you would have been involved if you had had twenty or thirty. To
be happy, we must learn to live within our income, be it what it may. Not only
justice requires this, but our own comfort, for nothing can be so harrassing as
a consciousness of owing what we have not to pay.


ALICIA. Oh, I am well aware of that -- but I know I should be able to pay at
some time or other.


MRS. LEYSTER. Yes, my dear, but consider, if every body acted thus, those you
employ would have no ready money to pay those who work for them, and though the
great shopkeepers may not be materially hurt, yet those who must have their
money from day to day would starve if they were not paid. Add to this, you pay
more than you ought to do for every article, and you are entirely precluded
giving any thing in charity.


ALICIA. Pardon me, my dear Ma'am, I always gave a little out of what I had.


MRS. LEYSTER. But what right had you to do that? you owed more than you
possessed, therefore you had really no money of your own, and what pretention
have you to give away that of other people? You feel this mortifying, but is it
not just?


ALICIA, (in a low voice.) I believe so, indeed!


MRS. LEYSTER. It is indeed mortifying to feel that one depends entirely on the
forbearance of others; who if they please may expose us to every body, as a
person who wants justice so much as to contract debts they cannot pay!


CONSTANCE. Oh, Mama!


ALICIA. Nay, I deserve it all -- I feel that I do.


MRS. LEYSTER. Believe me, my dear Alicia, that my earnest manner arises only
from my sincere wish to convince you of your error. That you were not worse
than your companions does not justify you, though it condemns them. But to
enforce what I say, suffer me to tell you a little story of which I know the
truth. When I was in London, just after my marriage, a young friend and myself
were passing through a narrow street in my carriage, when a little boy ran
directly under the horses feet; providentially I saw him time enough, by
pulling the check, to save him from being much hurt. I instantly jumped out,
and inquired of two or three people the accident had drawn together whose child
he was; they pointed out a mean looking house, where they said his parents
lived, and my young friend and I went in, followed by the footman carrying the
child, who though meanly dressed was clean and pretty. A young sickly looking
woman, who was rocking a cradle with her foot, while her hands were busily
employed in making a gown, rose with surprise to receive us, but she was sadly
alarmed when she saw the child pale and disordered. We soon composed her mind,
and she thanked us in terms above her station. I promised to call again the
next day to inquire after the child, and after slipping a guinea into his
little hand we went away. The next day I did not fail to call, and found the
child quite recovered. The young woman's thanks and manner of speaking were
modest and interesting; there was an air of cleanly poverty about them, and she
seemed sickly. I made a few inquiries about her way of life, and as she was
communicative, I easily learned the following particulars. She had been brought
up genteelly, but was reduced by her father's death to the necessity of getting
her own bread. A relation has apprenticed her to a mantua-maker, and when her
time was out she set up for herself, and soon obtained sufficient business to
support her, especially by the employment of two very young ladies of quality,
whose mother at that time superintended their clothes. She soon after married a
young man who was journeyman to a great silk-mercer, and they went on very well
till after the birth of their first child; then these two young ladies I spoke
of before having obtained an allowance from their mother, began not to be so
punctual in their payments. Still Mrs. Martin worked for them. She was
frequently ordered to buy linings and trimmings of various sorts, for which she
paid, but was not paid again. The person who employed her husband failed, and
went off some pounds in debt, and as she had now a long bill on her fashionable
customers, she ventured, the next time they ordered something, to hint she
should be glad of a little money. Promises were the reply, promises which were
never kept. Her affairs began to get deranged, as her husband was out of
employment, and was afflicted with a consumptive complaint which prevented his
getting any. At this unfortunate time poor Mrs. Martin lay in of her second
child, and her little stock of money was consequently all expended. She knew
the sum her two principal customers owed her would support them till she could
get again to work, she ventured therefore to send a note by her husband to
entreat the payment of it. But her husband returned with the sad intelligence
that only one servant was left in the house, and the whole family was gone to
Spa for a twelvemonth! This was a terrible stroke! They were slightly indebted
to their landlady, and a few other persons: these debts they had no means of
discharging but by selling some of their furniture. The woman with whom they
lodged took alarm, and at last informed them that she had let her apartments to
"people who would not be obliged to sell their furniture to pay her!" They were
therefore under the necessity of removing to the poor house, where I found
then, and where it was too much trouble to some of her fine customers to come.
-- "A mantua-maker in such a vulgar place! -- They were sorry for her, but
henceforth they should employ Madame A -- r, Mademoiselle B --, who lived in
such a square or street!" The poor young woman, harassed and hardly recovered
from her lying in, could now scarcely get work enough to find them necessaries.
I am afraid my dear, I tire you with my long story.


CONSTANCE. O no, mama, indeed!


ALICIA, (sighing.) No, it does not tire me!


MRS. LEYSTER. Her husband was not in hopes of getting a place in an eminent
silk-mercer's shop. I inquired the name of the ladies who had gone away in
their debt, and found I had a slight acquaintance with their family. I then,
after making inquiries which confirmed the truth of their story, and the good
opinion I entertained of them, drove to Mr. -- the silk-mercer's, with whom I
had laid out a considerable sum on my marriage. I did not leave him till I had
obtained his promise to employ poor Martin with a comfortable salary. I
afterward wrote in my own name to one of the young ladies at Spa, and after
severely censuring their unjust conduct, I told them if the money was not
remitted within a certain time, I should write an account of their behavior to
their mother. The money was almost immediately remitted to me, with a civil
letter, and many attempts at excuses. With this sum I advised Mrs. Martin to
remove to a genteel part of the town: I gave her my own custom, and recommended
her to many others. I had the pleasure of seeing my endeavors succeed, and with
very little expense or trouble to myself, I had the happiness of rescuing these
poor people from misery, and seeing them in a flourishing way. Poor Martin's
health was recovered, and they were both till their deaths, which happened soon
after each other within these four years, the most grateful, industrious
creatures I ever knew. The boy is now in the sea service, and the girl with a
milliner in Bond-street, and both likely to do well. I see, my dear Alicia, I
need not impress this strongly on your mind. You feel how unjust must be that
conduct, which may so easily involve a whole family in ruin. Besides, if this
unhappy propensity to living beyond your income grow up with you, when you are
your own mistress, and perhaps have the care of a family, the mischief will
become more extended: inevitable ruin to yourself and your family must ensue,
for no income can equal the profuseness of an extravagant, careless woman.
Besides, by your neccessarily large dealings, you involve numbers in your ruin.
A large tradesman stops payment, because his customers do not pay him, and
instantly half a dozen small families are reduced to absolute want; they again
draw in others, and there is no saying where the mischief will end.


ALICIA. Ah, Madam, I am indeed fully convinced. I will immediately write to my
mother and tell her so! Yet had she -- had she but inspected my accounts --


MRS. LEYSTER. There she herself allows she was wrong -- but Alicia, consider
-- It was her dependence on your promise made her thus secure!


ALICIA (starting up.) I will write to her this instant -- I will entreat her
to pardon me -- I will own that I am struck to the heart -- that my punishment
is just -- for though I submitted, I never thought it so before! -- But why do
I say punishment? I am convinced this visit, which I thought such a misfortune,
will prove the happiest event of my life.


CONSTANCE. I am sure it is of mine, since, instead of a cousin whom I had
never seen, I hope I have now a friend whom I shall always love.


ALICIA, (looking at Mrs. Leyster.) Am I worthy to be her friend?


MRS. LEYSTER. Yes, my dear girl; you have an excellent heart, and that is the
great security for all.


ALICIA. Ah, then, embrace me, my dear cousin, my friend, my sister! Now for
the first time in my life, I know what friendship is!


MRS. LEYSTER, (wiping her eyes.) It is true. Virtue alone is the sure basis of
friendship. Without it we may form intimacies, connections, and even unworthy
confidences, but friendship can only subsist between those who love virtue.


Alicia then withdrew to write to her mother, which she did in the tenderest
and most penitent terms. She shed many tears over her letter, but they were not
tears of resentment and vexation, they flowed from a heart convinced of its
errors, and tasting, for the first time, all the sweetness of candor and
ingenuousness, and as such they at once purified and gratified her feelings.

After this, tranquillity was restored at Fair Lawn, and Constantia and Alicia
became inseparable companions. The more Alicia knew of her consin, the more she
discovered that far from being her superior, she was really greatly below
Constance in every desirable acquirement. After having received an answer from
her mother full of pardon and affection, she wrote again, begging permission to
take lessons of drawing with Constantia, which was readily granted, and she set
about improving in it with the more alacrity, because she was really fond of
the art. Instead of contemptuously declining, she now endeavored to find
pleasure in the simple but natural and useful pursuits of her cousin; and
though her mind could not all at once gain that energy which made them so
delightful to Constantia, yet by degrees they became agreeable to her. As she
became more acquainted with books, and particularly the poems of Thomson and
Cowper, See Thomson's Seasons and Cowper's Task.
a thousand natural beauties she had before overlooked, now charmed her eyes
and gratified her heart; and learning to be charitable from those she was with,
she found that to sacrifice an expensive ornament or piece of millinery, by
giving the money they would have cost to the poor, gave her more pleasure than
she could have received from wearing them. Her person improved by exercise and
the new virtues of her mind, her manners acquired a softness and modesty, and
in three months time she would scarcely have been known. Mrs. Leyster, however,
observed, that she had not lost, and that Constance had acquired one of
Alicia's bad habits; she waited for a proper opportunity to rebuke her for it,
and it occurred. They sat at work one morning; Constantia rising hastily tore
her gown (which was confined by Alicia's chair) and instantly exclaimed, "Oh my
God, cousin, you have torn my gown!"

MRS. LEYSTER. Constantia!


CONSTANCE. Mama!


MRS. LEYSTER. Did I hear you right?


CONSTANCE. What, mama! -- I don't know what you mean.


MRS. LEYSTER. Is it possible that a habit so lately acquired can have gained
upon you so much, that you are not sensible when you do it?


CONSTANCE. No, mama, I know now what you mean.


MRS. LEYSTER. Yes, Constantia. -- Without any inducement, affected by a
moment's surprise, by any thing of no sort of consequence, you call eagerly
upon that great, that Supreme Being, whose name ought never to be invoked but
with sensations of awe and respect, who has expressly forbidden you "to take
his name in vain," or even without cause to swear "by the Heaven which is his
throne, or the earth which is his footstool!" Do you not blush Constantia, at
using on such an occasion a name so sacred?


CONSTANCE, (with emotion.) Mama -- I was not aware -- I hope I shall never do
it again.


MRS. LEYSTER. I hope you never will. Even if it were not extremely wicked,
which it is, there is something so bold, so unfeminine in a woman's using such
expressions, that I never can bear to hear it. My dear Alicia blushes and looks
abashed. I own my dear, I have observed this ill habit in you with great pain,
and only waited a favorable moment to tell you of it. Constantia has learned it
of you, you I suppose learnt it of your London friends. I know too many young
women think nothing of such appeals to the Deity, nor of other improper
exclamations. They think, I believe, that it gives them an air of fashion,
whereas in reality the lowest of the people are the greatest offenders in this
way. These young ladies allege that they mean nothing by it; but what then,
can they no express their surprise by more decent exclamations, and without
breaking an absolute commandmant? Some of them, I am afraid, seldom hear the
name of God, except when it "is taken in vain." For them I feel extreme pity,
for their instructors, utter indignation. But for religious young women, those
who know and reverence the "Father of all," to use such expressions, is really
shocking. And if for every idle word we shall be called to account, as the
scripture assures us, how shall those answer who wantonly and wilfully are
perpetually taking the name of "God in vain?" Correct, both of you, I entreat
you, this terrible custom, and let me never more have occasion to reprove you
on this subject.


Lectures like this on many errors Alicia frequently received, but delivered
with such sweetness of manner, such strength of reasoning, she could not be
displeased with them; they every day became less and less necessary, and by the
end of the six months which she had promised to spend in the country, she was
every thing that could be wished. Mrs. Woodford came at the end of that time to
see her sister and niece, and to fetch home her daughter; but Alicia, no longer
presuming, conscious of her former deficiencies, and fearful of loosing what
she had acquired, begged to remain another half year in the country, at the
expiration of which Mrs. Leyster and Constance promised to return with her to
London. To this Mrs. Woodford readily agreed, and delighted with the
improvement of her daughter, and the goodness of Constantia, whom she had not
seen for many years, she staid a month with them and then returned to London.
Constance had now the pleasure of seeing her little Jenny old enough to profit
by her lessons, and the child grew and improved as much as she could desire.
When Alicia returned to London, Mrs. and Miss Leyster went with her. They
remained some weeks in town, enjoying in moderation the pleasures it affords.
They then went back, leaving the grateful Alicia with her happy mother, with
whom she still remains, though a frequent interchange of visits is kept up
between the inhabitants of Fair Lawn and Mrs. and Miss Woodford. The latter is
become one of the most amiable young women of the age; she and Constantia are
universally beloved in the circle of their acquaintance; and both gratefully
and constantly allow, that they owe all their happiness to the kind
instructions of Mrs. Leyster, and a residence in the country, which has taught
them, that justice and moderation are the securest means of obtaining true
happiness.

FINIS.

