D'ARCY. A NOVEL.

BY CHARLOTTE SMITH.

DEDICATED (BY PERMISSION) TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF YORK.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY J. CAREY, 83, N. SECOND-STREET. 1796.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS FREDERICK, DUKE OF YORK.
SIR,
PERMIT me to shelter under the sanction of your name, a work I am fully
sensible is possessed of no merit, and can never claim notice, but from the
advantage of being honored by the patronage of your Royal Highness.

Two years have elapsed since Sir Charles Asgill solicited and obtained for me
the pleasing gratification of dedicating it to you. -- Unavoidable occurrences
have prevented its publication till the present period; but my having been thus
distinguished, I flatter myself, cannot have escaped your recollection; yet,
though your Royal Highness may forget many of the benevolent acts of
condescension which you perform, they must ever remain indelible on the hearts
of those on whom they are conferred.

I will not attempt any defense of this little volume, too trifling to deserve
an apology, and too humble to excite censure. Whatever may be its fate, I shall
submit without one murmur. It has already procured me the inestimable advantage
of thus publicly avowing the profound gratitude and respect with which I have
the honor to be,

YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS'S MOST OBLIGED, AND DEVOTED SERVANT, C. SMITH.

D'ARCY. A NOVEL.
To Mademoiselle D'Aubigny, at St. Omer's.
St. James's Square.
WHY did I suffer myself to be hurried from Boulogne? If I must be a dependant
upon humanity for subsistence, why not have availed myself of your generous
offer, and sought it at St. Omer's? In your sympathising bosom I had found a
receptacle for all my sorrows; and under my Marianne's protection I had been
(...) from every danger. (...) prospect is dreadful, and a retrospect still
worse. You are the only friend in whom I dare confide, and to ease the fullness
of a woe-fraught heart, I must inform you, that Stamford has proved a villain.
You are thunderstruck! While I fancy myself as just awakened from a dream of
horror.

You knew not that my parents were people of large fortune. In short it was a
secret which I arrived not at myself till after you had left our convent. But
it is now absolutely necessary you should be acquainted with circumstances
which contributed to render me totally neglected by and unknown to my nearest
relatives. --

My mother being of a gay disposition could not be persuaded that happiness was
mostly found in domestic life: but from adhering too strictly to an ill formed
judgment, plunged into a vortex of pleasure and lost sight of it for ever. My
father, young and fond of public amusements himself, gratified her every wish,
till he suspected she had formed an attachment of the tenderest nature for an
officer in the navy. He spoke very harshly to her on the subject; but being
innocent of the crime alluded to, my mother thought herself ill treated.
Consequently disregarded his reproaches, set his threats at defiance; and
merely for the sake of bravado kept up her acquaintance with the captain. A
conduct so derogatory from prudence furnished conversation for the town. My
father soon quitted England; his estates were mortgaged; and my mother left
with child of me, and totally destitute. Her relations had imbibed a strong
notion of her guilt, and positively refused seeing her. Her supposed dishonor
had not gone farther than appearance. They had treated her with indignity, and
her spirit was too high to permit a vindication of her conduct to those who
were so easily prejudiced against her; and though reduced to the utmost
distress, would not stoop to solicit assistance from any of them. Fortunately a
friend in the country, who had heard of her situation, died; and from motives
of compassion left her sixty pounds a year. With this poor pittance she retired
to Boulogne, and a short time after was delivered of me.

I need not animadvert on the time you and I passed at the convent: but date
the rise of misfortune from the time my mother met Mr. Stamford.

He had been acquainted with my father; and when she was seized with that
dreadful disease which terminated life, she claimed his protection for her
orphan child (who was the only daughter of his friend) and conjured him to do
the utmost in his power in striving to find whether my father was yet alive;
and if he were to convey me to him even if in the East Indies, having been
informed he went there on leaving England. He solemnly promised to comply with
her every request. And as villanously determined to break through all bounds
that led to my ruin.

At present I cannot add more, my eyes are dimmed with tears; and what I have
already written seems to dance before them: however I will not conclude till I
have subscribed myself,

My dear Marianne's affectionate D' ARCY BEAUFOY.
P. S. Direct for me, Mademoiselle Chattelherhault, at Sir John Osborn's, St.
James's Square.



To Mademoiselle D'Aubigny, at St. Omer's.
You are impatient to know why my name is changed, and still more the
particulars of Stamford's perfidy.

A month had scarce elapsed after my mother's funeral, when I expressed my wish
of going to St. Omer's. Mr. Stamford objected to it; said I was scarce fifteen
and being a handsome girl, destitute of fortune, and apparently of friends,
would be subjected to a number of insulting offers from men of rank, merely
from the want of a protector.

Convinced of his having my interest at heart, I felt satisfied with the
refusal, though mortified in the idea of not seeing my dear Marianne so soon as
I had hoped for. However it was necessary that my imagination should be kept on
the wing of expectation; consequently a fortnight after he informed me that a
letter from England had given him intelligence of my father's return from the
Indies; and in a jocular tone, asked 'if I should not be afraid of crossing the
ocean?' 'Can you put the question to me, my dear sir?' I replied with
quickness, 'Shall I not go to claim the blessing of an only parent, and
vindicate the conduct of an injured mother?' Tears burst from my eyes, which
the hypocrite wiped away, while he bid me prepare for our voyage on the
following morning.

We embarked on board the packet, and at six o'clock the same evening landed at
Dover.

The sensations I experienced from imagining myself in the same nation with my
father, are indescribable; and I had actually conned over every expression of
tenderness which I meant to make use of, to soften the severity of his anger
toward the memory of my poor depared mother; but the pleasing illusion
vanished on Mr. Stamford's proposing our staying that night at the inn
Unaccustomed to follow the dictates of my own reason, when opposed by that of
another, I acquiesced in his desire, and retired early to rest.

About one o'clock, I was awakened by some one opening the door of my chamber,
and instantly demanded who was there? No answer was returned.

I listened, but every thing was perfectly quiet. Recollecting that Mr.
Stamford slept in the adjoining apartment, and concluding no one would dare
offer to molest me while under his protection (having before our landing taken
the precaution to desire I would call him father till my own was found), I
quieted my fears, and was going to sleep once more; on a sudden, the bed
curtains were drawn aside, though it was softly as possible. 'Gracious God,'
exclaimed I, what can be the meaning of this? Where is Mr. Stamford?' continued
I, starting up at the same time. 'Be not alarmed, my dear D'Arcy, (said a voice
which I knew to be his) I mean not to hurt you.' However I found he was upon
the point of getting into bed. Oh! Marianne, I shudder even now, though secured
from the danger. I jumped out on the other side, screaming most violently; he
caught my hand and begged I would be pacified; but it was too late, my cries
had awakened the people who slept in the inn, and they had assembled at the
door and were demanding admittance. Fear gave me strength, I disengaged myself
from his hold and ran to open the door. The first person who presented himself
to my view was Mr. Osborn. Regardless of every thing, but my escape from
Stamford, I threw my arms around him and implored protection for the sake of
heaven, but fainted the moment that the sentence had escaped my lips. Stamford
took this opportunity of saying I was his wife, but had eloped and gone with a
vagrant fellow to France, whither he had followed and was bringing me back; but
that determined not to stay with him, I had behaved in that manner, in hopes
some one else would favor my escape a second time. Every person pitied the
unfortunate husband, while I got abused as an infamous creature, till the
chambermaid (an innocent girl, who had only been there a few days) said,
'Laws, sir, I thought as how the lady called you father last night?' Staggered
by the dread of being discovered, he hesitated and was beginning a plausible
story about my desiring he would suffer it. But Mr. Osborn's humanity was not
to be trifled with, he insisted that every syllable the other advanced was
false, and declared he would not relinquish my cause, nor quit the room till I
returned to assure him of the truth (for they had taken me into another
apartment on my fainting).

Stamford putting on a stern air, asked, If he meant to doubt his word? Said
that room was his, and no one should stay in it longer than he chose. This
behavior gave every one present a suspicion, from what the girl had said, that
I was ill-treated; and after my recovery, the landlady having assisted me in
putting my clothes on, they all entered the apartment, eager to hear in what
manner I could justify myself.

You know my mother took infinite pains, in striving to perfect me in the
English tongue, consequently I found no difficulty in making them understand
me. I related that part of my story, which concerned Stamford, in an artless
strain, while he with dreadful imprecations, contradicted all I had advanced.
Provoked to the last degree, I told him, that let what I had said be true or
false, I was determined not to continue any longer under his protection. 'Stop,
madam,' said the wretch, you are my ward at least, and whoever dares to protect
you, shall find the laws of this country will afford me ample revenge. You need
not be informed, returned Mr. Osborn, that the laws of this country will not
permit an unprotected female to be injured by the brutal machinations of a
villainous guardian; and to convince you I am as well quainted with the laws of
England as yourself, if, the lady will trust to my honor, in commiting herself
to my care till we arrive in town, I will place her under the immediate
protection of my mother and sister, and bid defiance to all your efforts in an
attempt to regain her. My name is Osborn, you are at liberty to use your
pleasure in regard to law. Favor me with your hand, madam, turning to me, and
allow me to lead you out of this room; my carriage will not be long; getting
ready, and the moment it is we will set out. So saying he led me out of the
room in triumph.

Stamford raved, and would certainly have struck Mr. Osborn, had not a
gentleman who was going to France the next morning prevented the blow; in
short, he was obliged to make a prisoner of him till we had left the house.

I did not at the time, consider the impropriety of consenting to accompany an
elegant young man, alone in a post chaise; reflecting not a moment that the
judgment of the world is decided by appearances, gladly accepted the offer
almost before it was made. I must resign the pen this moment, hearing Miss
Osborn's foot on the stairs, consequently cannot conclude this till tomorrow.

* * * * * * *

Once more I am seated at my writing-desk, to satisfy my Marianne's
apprehensions for my safety. In the course of our journey my deliverer said,
'He should not have been at Dover, but in the expectation of meeting the
Chevalier Chattelherhault and his sister, the packet was arrived in which they
were to have came, consequently he concluded himself at liberty to return to
town.'

In a very delicate manner, he hinted, that my situation was both awkward and
distressing, and really wished I could be prevailed on to assume the name of
Chattelherhault, till my father could be applied to. I objected to it, by
saying, his friends must certainly arrive at a knowledge of the imposition, and
for ever after I should be regarded by them in a degrading light. Mr. Osborn
begged my pardon for having proposed what was disagreeable to me, but said, 'he
only wished me to assume that name on my introduction to them, till he found an
opportunity of making them acquianted with my story, as his father, though a
good hearted man, had his peculiarities; however, as I was apparently averse to
the proposal, he would relinquish the thought.'

A thousand painful ideas rushed on my mind at the moment he was speaking; Sir
John Osborn might command me to leave his house that instant; I was a
friendless, an unprotected stranger in the nation. Could I but gain an asylum
for a week, my father might be found; I should be acknowledged as his daughter,
and the fraud passed on Sir John's family would be looked over, when they
understood I was sole heiress to a man of large fortune.

This thought determined me. I told him he was at liberty to act as he thought
proper. Now imagine me in the character of a French lady of fashion, arrived in
England, to be introduced at the British court. Oh! Marianne, this attempt at
vivacity, however it might appear like myself when at Boulogne, but ill suits
me at present.

You, no doubt, think me highly blameable, and conclude I cannot escape
detection; but to satisfy your doubts I must inform you, Mr. Osborn has written
to the Chevalier, who promises to remain in France, and keep his sister still
at their chateau, till he hears further from him.

I must not omit telling you, when we arrived in St. James's Square, Mr. Osborn
told Sir John, that the Chevalier arrived with me in the packet, but an affair
of honor demanding his return to France, he had entrusted me to his care.

It is near three weeks since I have been here, but the anxiety I suffered at
Dover has confined me to my room ever since; I even dread the idea of finding
my self in a good state of health, merely from the fear of being detected.
However let fate do with me as it will,

I must ever remain, My dear Marianne's affectionate, D'ARCY BEAUFOY.

To Mademoiselle D'Aubigny.
St. James's Square.
WHAT can be the reason for my not having heard from you? Surely my Marianne
can never mean to desert me because I am in distress! I will not entertain an
opinion so much to her prejudice; but conclude that her letters have by some
mistake been kept back. Or it is possible mine have not yet reached her; yet in
the hope that you may have received them before this arrives, I shall give you
a further proof of Stamford's perfidy.

Mr. Osborn promised to make enquiry after my father, and if he was in England
find him. To my extreme mortification he has learned, that no such person has
ever been heard of. And I am now convinced the wretch's desire of bringing me
among strangers, was only to gain his ends in a more effectual manner than he
could possibly have done at Boulogne. -- Heaven be praised his scheme has been
frustrated -- yet here I am in a strange country, dreading every moment the
shame of being detected as an impostor, which must inevitably happen if this
family persist in introducing me to their acquaintance. I have repeatedly told
Mr. Osborn I will return to France, and fear not the want of an asylum while it
is in your power to afford me one. He never suffers me to conclude a
proposition of this kind; for throwing himself on his knees before me, a kind
of anxiety takes possession of his looks. He speaks not, it is true -- but so
eloquent does that position plead for him, that I cannot proceed with what was
in my thoughts to have said. What can be the meaning of it? I never felt such a
strange palpitation at my heart when in company with any other man. Yesterday,
for the first time, we had a conversation on the subject; he said something
must be contrived to make us both happy. -- What had his happiness to do with
mine? I wished to put that question to him, but had not courage. -- When I am
alone I determine to come to you at all events; but while Mr. Osborn was
reasoning with me, I wondered how I could once suffer a thought of leaving him
to enter my head; especially since he urges the necessity for my remaining in
England.

Do advise me what to do; by that I will implicitly abide, even though it
should prove to quit Mr. Osborn, his amiable mother and sprightly sister, for
ever. -- I must now bid my Marianne adieu, by subscribing myself,

Her truly affectionate, D'ARCY BEAUFOY.

To the Honorable Miss Townshend.
St. James's Square.
POSITIVELY, Sophia, this is the last summons I will send for your return to
town. I have got the most charming little French girl that imagination can
suggest, for a companion; and if you make not an end of your visit shortly, I
must absolutely elect her my favorite and chief confidant in your stead.

Seriously though, the Chevalier Chattelherhault's sister is with us. She is
scarce fifteen, my brother says; but it is astonishing to hear how sensibly she
converses, and yet in such an artless strain that it is impossible to refrain
from loving her: in short, to tell you a secret, I believe poor Henry has lost
his heart without intending it. Though I Will answer for neither father or mother
making any objection to his marrying the amiable little creature. -- She has
been very ill ever since she came to England, and the good folk here conclude
it is occasioned by the fatigue of her journey: but you know I am a close
observer of human nature, and will be hanged if love does not prey more upon
her mind than fatigue has been able to do on her body. -- Being of a lively
disposition (most French people are, you know) she sometimes strives to exert
her spirits, and then is really captivating; but they soon flag. She sighs,
wipes her eyes, and turns her head aside, to prevent her emotion becoming
visible. Do not these symptoms favor strongly of a hopeless passion? Ay, ay,
this is ever the case with you people of sentiment; see a man you approve, and
souse, you're over head and ears in love; when, nothing will satisfy you till
you are happy in your choice.

Observe the contrast between a sentimental body and that of a girl of spirit
like myself. Place me in company with the man I love; but let a few more dear
charming creatures, whom I care not a rush for, be of the party, I ogle one,
flirt with another, and make downright love to a third. Though by the bye he
must be a conceited fool, that I have the most sovereign contempt for, and if
it happens to be overheard by the man I really love, Oh! the exquisite pleasure
it affords! Now attribute this to want of sensibility if you dare.

To make an honest confession to you, Sophia, my behavior does not proceed
from a total want of sensibility; for believe me I have experienced many and
many a severe pang, while I have affected a gaity which my heart disclaimed.
You will say a person of my volatile disposition cannot be so far caught, and
that my affections may be disentangled with as much ease as I flutter with
every fop. -- You are deceived: I flirt with every man whom chance throws in my
way, it is true; yet that more than one has ever found a way to my heart, I
disown. However this is a digression from the description of my little French
friend.

Yesterday we prevailed on her to appear in the drawing room, and I then
discovered that she possesses a certain timidity which few women of her nation
are troubled with. I attribute it to her not having been accustomed to the
company of a variety of strangers before. She curtsied aukwardly, blushed when
spoken to, and was evidently too much embarrassed to give a proper answer to
the most simple question that was put to her. In short, Mademoiselle
Chattelherhault never appeared to such a disadvantage in my eye, as when she
ought to have even looked to the greatest advantage. You know Chesterfield
says, "a person's behavior at first sight, will prejudice others either in
their favor or against them for life."

I cannot account for her stupidity any other way than by the observation
above, as she seemed one of the most accomplished girls I had ever seen. She
dances admirably. We once prevailed on her to walk a minuet with Henry, while I
played on the piano forte: she sings divinely, and plays to a miracle. Indeed I
had several times said that -- "the graces danced round her to join in her
train." Trebeck was of the party. -- I had totally forgotten you were
unacquainted with that original, and being in a humor to delineate, will give
you a short account of his general character.

In the first place, he affects to patronise our most celebrated performers of
the drama, for no other motive than because it is fashionable. Then he invites
every author, if it is only a novelist, to entrust their writings to his care,
and promises to dispose of them at a high price; though, if the truth was
known, the insignificant varlet has not interest enough with any bookseller in
town to get rid of his own, were he possessed of wit to write. Did his boasting
stop here it might pass unnoticed; but he would make you believe, if possible,
that the three royal brothers were hand and glove with him; and that the dukes
of P -- and B --, and half a hundred other noblemen, were his most intimate
acquaintances. At other times, he is promising places to a score of people,
when it is known by every person to whom he is acquainted, that he has been
soliciting one for himself these six years past, and has not been able to
obtain it yet. When an election is coming on, he is in the zenith of his glory,
and talks as pompously in company of himself and Mr. -- having been up late
with their voters the preceding evening, as if he were himself a member, rather
than a tool for members. However, the truth is, a certain man of fashion, well
known in the great world, countenances him very much, because he strives to
render himself consequential by going a voter hunting, and appearing every day
while the poll lasts upon the hustings. Merely from this mode of proceeding, he
has gained admittance into the houses of a few fashionable people, and was
introduced at ours by Sir George Loveall. So much for his character. Take his
person and face, assisted by a little rouge, when dressed for the drawing room,
and he is pleasing, though not irresistible; with an infinite loquacity, and
you have the man at once. You have likewise nearly read all you are likely to
receive from me this post at least, as my hand is perfectly cramped from
holding the pen; as witness,

MATILDA OSBORN.

To Mademoiselle Chattelherhault.
St. Omer's.
WELL might you fear, my dear D'Arcy, I meant to desert you, after having
written two letters but received no answer: I can justify myself, by telling
you, I have been at Paris, and only returned this morning. Your three letters
were given me with others, which I have not yet opened, so impatient am I to
assure you of what I feel for the sufferings you have endured. -- Would to
heaven you were with me at this moment. The hypocrisy of that villain prevented
you being here, and will, I very much fear, contribute toward your passing
many an unhappy hour after your leaving England; which, but for him, you never
could have known; I mean not from his attempt upon you, because you were
rescued from the danger, and will be more effectually so when settled with me.
You will scarce credit an assertion of your being in love with Mr. Osborn;
believe me, Beaufoy, it is literally true, and your danger is infinitely
greater at present, than it was at the time he rescued you out of the clutches
of that old savage, Stamford. To prove the reality of what I have advanced, I
appeal to your letter, wherein you say, "while Mr. Osborn was reasoning with
me, I wondered how I could once suffer a thought of leaving him to enter my
head, especially since he urges the necessity of my remaining in England." I
hope, on the perusal, it will strike you as forcibly as it does me. You were
highly blamable, in short, unjustifiable, in suffering an imposition so very
gross to be put upon the family of Sir John Osborn. -- You think me too severe
upon you while you are in distress; I cannot help it, though every sentence
which hurts your feelings, wounds my own beyond expression. -- My friendship
could not be real, did I not point out your faults, and endeavor to correct
them. -- Ask yourself, what could be Mr Osborn's motive for bringing me into
his father's house under a fictitious name? The answer occurs, to gain your
affections by a seeming disinterested behavior; then to suffer his family to
arrive at a knowledge of the fraud, you are thrown under his protection, and
your ruin is sealed.

Indeed D'Arcy, I shall be wretched till I have you with me. -- Gratitude has
awakened itself into love in your breast; and while you remain in England I
dread the consequences which are likely to ensue. -- Mr. Osborn says "something
must be contrived to make you both happy." Will he marry you? Or could you
possibly conceive yourself his lawful wife, by signing your name at the altar
Chattelherhault, supposing it is by the consent of Sir John? The idea of
becoming a mistress is so repugnant to your nature, that I am convinced the
bare thought will make you tremble as you read. I wish not to shock you with
chimerical, and horrid phantoms, but to place every circumstance strongly in
the view you ought to see it. You left France in the firm hope of finding an
only parent. -- Return to it in the strong assurance of meeting an affectionate
friend. Only consider what contempt and reproaches you are doomed to suffer, if
you remain with the family till the secret is known. -- Think what misery you
will escape by resolutely following the dictates of reason, and quitting the
man, who, it is certain, aims at your eternal ruin. -- You entreat my advice,
and give a promise, "implicitly to abide by it," -- have I not said as much as
ought to determine you against whatever he may urge to the contrary? -- My
heart feels all that yours will suffer, on being obliged to give up the object
of it is tenderest wishes. Though you will hereafter own, that it is easier to
endure the heart ache for a few weeks, or even months, than experience the
severity of cruel reflection whole years. -- I will not add more on the
subject, my D'Arcy possesses an uncommon share of sense, which, if attended to,
will carry her safe through every difficulty; and I doubt not, be the means of
her being with me this day three weeks. -- In that hope I conclude myself,

Your sincerely affectionate MARIANNE D'AUBIGNY.

To the Chevalier Chattelherhault.
I TOLD you in my last, Which does not appear.
Chattelherhault, what a divine creature I had rescued from infamy.

It certainly was wrong to introduce her at my father's house as your sister. I
see the impropriety now, though it did not strike me at the time -- yet there
appeared a something so indelicate in offering to place her in lodgings, after
having promised her a secure retreat under the protection of my mother and
sister, that I could not have been capable of it for the world, though by not
doing it I have rendered both her and myself perfectly wretched -- Mistake not
my meaning, I could not be wretched were it not that Miss Beaufoy has totally
become a prey to her fears -- she says she is terrified beyond expression at
the sound of every strange voice, left it should prove a person who can
discover the impostor in her looks. Charming, innocent, engaging girl, my
affection for her is so strongly rivetted, that I cannot suffer her to depart,
though I know it is madness to detain her -- You will reasonably ask, What I
intend doing with her, and whether my enthusiasm extends far enough to marry
her? I frankly own it does. Were I possessed of an independent fortune she is
the only woman who should share it with me; but situated as I am, it cannot be.
-- Of a noble family himself, my father thinks it a duty incumbent on his son,
to support it is dignity by marriage. -- Should I marry Miss Beaufoy, my
mother's future days will be embittered by cruel reflections from him for her
foolish indulgence of me when a boy; and though I never should value his
resentment toward myself on the occasion, I could not endure the mortifying
thought, of causing uneasiness for her tender nature to combat with. You are a
man of gallantry, and will wonder at my having even one difficulty to
encounter: nay will tell me the girl is in my power and I ought to make a good
use of my time; it is true she is in my power -- but honor forbids me to
trample on the laws of humanity, or the rights of hospitality -- In fact I love
her, and that love will not permit me to offer an indignity to her -- She is
extremely eager to return to France -- I think she has left a lover behind, and
that is her motive for hurrying from me. I have been prudent enough to conceal
from Miss Beaufoy the passion I entertain for her, which, hopeless as it is,
she never shall be acquainted with. I am convinced she entertains not a
suspicion of my being in love with her, but rather attributes my tender
solicitude to the effects of compassion. -- Would my stars had assigned it
really was so -- No man is more susceptible to the charms of beauty than
myself, and I could pledge my life on the truth, that it never cost a human
being more pain, to keep themselves, what the world terms honest than I have
suffered -- By heavens I cannot behold this charming girl with the eye of a
seducer, and must make no other determination but that of bidding her adieu.
The thought drives me desperate. I can only add,

Yours sincerely, HENRY OSBORN.

To Miss Osborn.
Hertfordshire.
YOUR summons, and even threats, are likely to avail you nothing. -- My dear
Mrs. Raymond has been ill, and still continues languid; she entreats I will
remain with her, and I cannot refuse: indeed the tie of friendship will not
suffer me to leave her till her health is re-established -- I am happy in your
having obtained so valuable in acquisition as your acquaintance with
Mademoiselle Chattelherhault -- I think I need hardly repeat here, that
whatever affords you pleasure gives me infinite satisfaction, though the idea
of your having disposed of that heart, which you have ever boasted was
invulnerable, is really a subject for mirth to me -- Pray who is this self same
somebody, on whom your mad cap ladyship has thought proper to bestow the little
flutterer? He must be a man of sense, or he had not attracted your notice; his
manners must be pleasing, or you never had regarded him with an eye of
affection. -- His birth must be noble, else had you not suffered the passion to
take possession of your breast, and I am sure, his fortune must be ample, or
your father will never consent to your having him. But why in the name of fate
do you persist in teasing the poor man? Beware, Matilda, of going too far.
There Is no great art requisite in the making a conquest, the difficulty lays in
securing the affections; but if you give a man cause to suppose your own are
estranged from him, is he to be blamed for withdrawing his? A heart once lost
to a woman in such a way is never to be regained. And why? the lover thinks
himself neglected, pays attention to other women, while the real object of his
choice remains totally unnoticed. She feels herself piqued and treats him with
disdain. An altercation ensues, the gentleman is of opinion, some trifling
acknowledgment is due from the lady for her first error, while too proud to
stoop, presuming on her charms, she bids him be gone and never see her more; he
takes her at her word, and some other possibly less fair, but more kind female,
compensates him for the loss of the first. You dare me to accuse you of
insensibility: how can I, while your charity toward distressed families, and
attention to sick friends, assure me you inherit it not in any degree. But why
suffer a playful heart to trifle with the happiness of him on whom your own
depends, by striving to convince, that sensibility is a virtue you have not yet
attained? You are allowed to be handsome: have gained a number of lovers; and,
as you have discovered the secret, I am no longer surprised at Grenville's
advantageous offer being rejected; for well I know, you never could consent to
become a wife to that man who was not sole master of your heart. But suffer me
to entreat, if he in question is worthy of it, that you forbear to wound his
feelings. You know the force of my attachment toward you, and cannot be
displeased at the liberty I have assumed. Adieu. Reflect on what is observed
above by,

SOPHIA TOWNSEND.

To Mademoiselle D'Aubigny.
St. James's Square.
THANKS to you, my Marianne, for your tender concern, and even for your
severity; it has convinced me of my error, and I am no longer insensible to my
danger. Yet I must do Mr. Osborn the justice to aver, that he has never once
professed a regard for me further than compassion extends. Surely such
behavior has not the meaning of a seducer in it, though men are designing, and
can put on the mask of friendship, while they have an unwary object's ruin in
view; but he shall find D'Arcy Beaufoy's virtue cannot be conquered. My mother
discovered a propensity in my juvenile mind toward levity; she fell an
innocent victim to it herself and determined to crush the dawning of it in her
child. Death suffered her not to complete the victory; but Stamford
accomplished what she wished to see performed. I mean not to insinuate that I
am become a prude, merely to deceive the penetrating eye of friendship. No, it
is a maenness I should despise in another early, and must detest in myself; but
to assure you that you have not so much to dread from my susceptibility (which
I confess is great), as your apprehensions for my safety suggests. Since I
received your letter I told Miss Osborn that I was alarmed at my brother's
remaining so much longer at home than he intended; and if he arrived not in
England next week I should positively return to France the ensuing one. She
looked astonished, and insisted on my renouncing every idea of the kind. I was
determined; she resolute: and each in her humor retired to dress; but I give
you my honor you shall see me at the appointed time. While I remain here I am
forced against inclination to appear every day in company, and dreading a
discovery ry I cannot divest myself of fear, which is certainly mistaken for
stupidity. What a different appearance does my behavior wear here, and at
Boulogne; there I was known as Mademoiselle Beaufoy, celebrated for the
elegancy of her manners; here cannot be otherwise distinguished than by the
name of Chattelherhault, an awkward French girl. I shall very soon bid adieu to
this amiable family forever. Surely gratitude cannot be accounted a crime, if
it were, I am guilty indeed. Mr. Osborn's noble generosity has demanded that
tribute of me, and I have given with it a heart, undivided by love for any of
his sex. To my Marianne I may acknowledge this truth; but it never shall escape
me to another soul. You will console me for the loss, till it is perfectly
regained. Much happier should I have found myself, had I never known the void;
yet why should I say that? The pleasing sensations a person experiences, when
contemplating the object of their tenderest wishes, though but in idea,
compensate for all their pain. Oh Marianne, too fatally I feel the imbecility
of the above assertion. I love -- and without hope. Those who find the pleasure
more than transient, must be allowed a reciprocal return. I will not awaken
your anxiety, by suffering murmurs to escape me, for that which I ought to
conceal, even from myself; but solicit your acceptance of the tenderest wishes
of,

D'ARCY BEAUFOY.

To Mademoiselle D'Aubigny.
St. James's Square.
WHITHER can I immure myself to escape the pursuit of the vile undoer? Oh,
Marianne, Stamford will certainly discover my retreat, and then I am lost
indeed! How could I suffer Mr. Osborn to prevail on me to come here? Why not
return immediately to France, rather than hasten to a place where no relatives
lived to protect me? A blind fate seems to pursue me, and I now look forward to
approaching shame, as an occurrence which must inevitably befall me. The
protection of Sir John Osborn's family, which should be my security, will help
to involve me in still greater difficulties, it will make my story become
public, and render my disgrace conspicuous. Say, will you receive the criminal,
after having been detected in the guilt of an imposition? Yes, I know you will;
and my heart feels already elated, by giving way to the pleasing idea. You are
impatient to be informed of particulars, while I am suffering my fears to hurry
me beyond the bounds of reason. Last night Miss Osborn would take no denial --
but I must accompany herself and mother, with Lady S -- to see a new comedy.
Fortunately her brother was engaged, before the party was made, or he would
have been our escort. We were in the stage box. At the conclusion of the last
act, Stamford appeared in the opposite one; a dreadful sickness seized me, and
I could only articulate, "I am very ill. Lady Osborn allow me to leave the
theater." Terrified at the alteration in my looks, neither her lady ship or
daughter would suffer me to go alone, but quitted the house instantly with me;
and 'twas with the utmost difficulty I was kept from fainting in the carriage:
the dread of his following, and claiming me when it slopt, operated so sorcibly
on my mind. Mr. Osborn is now convinced of the impropriety of my remaining any
longer with his family, and has at length promised, that the Chevalier shall
write an excuse for being obliged to defer his visit, and likewise desiring my
return immediately. Though he still insists, that I have nothing to fear from
Stamford, because when he finds I am countenanced by people of rank, he will
drop all hopes of regaining me. But I know his disposition too well, to imbibe
a notion of the kind; and shall be perfectly miserable, till safe in the
protection of my dearest D'Aubigny. -- Should Stamford discover with whom I am,
how, or in what manner shall I be extricated? Enraged at the imposition -- will
not Sir John deliver me into the vile man's hands, the moment I am demanded?
And then Mr. Osborn, what a contemptible light he will appear in, for having
introduced so wretched an outcast to his mother and sister as I am -- I can
only be commanded to leave the house; he, as a son of it, will be spoken of
with scorn by every branch of his family -- cruel reflection, that for the sake
of rescuing an injured orphan from infamy, he must bear the stigma of ill
treating relations who dote on him. Is it not D'Arcy Beaufoy who is likely to
draw on him every reproach he can receive? I cannot endure the mortifying
thought; stubborn heart why will you not break, and loose the bonds which
confine my soul to earth? Avaunt, rash murmurs, you shall not be permitted to
escape me. Indeed Marianne I have been very ill, and the pain I still feel
renders me somewhat peevish, so you must not be angry at the impatience I have
expressed above -- Mr. Osborn says I must remain main here till the Chevalier
writes, though if Stamford discovers my retreat, you will very soon see the
degraded orphan in

D'ARCY BEAUFOY.

To the Honorable Miss Townshend.
St. James's Square.
YOU tell me your friend is ill, that the tie of friendship will not suffer you
to leave her. Charming emanation, how I admire it, and charge the child to
remain with her till her health is re-established; in the mean time I will do
my utmost to divert you both -- Satire is my vein you know, if you approve it,
it is well; if not, I believe you will find my thoughtless brain is very barren
of invention: that it is fertile at embellishments, I think I have already
convinced you; and as a proof that I can delineate truly when will is at home,
I will even give you the sketch of a character, which I am sure you will know
again, should chance ever bring you into company with the original. You are to
know, I called on Mrs. Crisp the other morning, and found a Mrs. and Miss
Rawlins with her. Picture to yourself an old soul near seventy years of age,
whose hair had once been dark, but from the ravages of Time, turned three parts
white, Imagine this hoary hair, frizzed, not to say dressed, into no form
whatever, some long, dangling from what she terms the toupee, while the rest so
short, appears enviously peeping from under a very small fashionable white
bonnet, which, to make the owner look more like an old ewe dressed lambfashion,
must be stuck on one side, with her veil pinned up, to discover a broad red
face, ornamented with what I suppose she calls dimples; but what even I cannot
find a simile for. Her twinkling gray orbs look askaunce on a bottle nose, and
her mouth, when laughing, might easily be mistaken for a gash from ear to ear;
but what deity must I invoke to a assist me in describing her nonpareils of
teeth? which are decayed nearly to the gums, and what few stumps remain in
sight are quite sufficient to turn the strongest stomach. Her person, fat and
unweildy, is decked out in a blue satin gown, ornamented with cocq-le-coc
riband, and a petticoat of the same staring color, with a pink cloak, trimmed
with black lace. I will give you a flight sketch of her conversation presently.
It seems she has several children: but a son whom she calls Jacky is her
favorite, because he happens to be one of the most egregious fops living; the
daughter who accompanied her, is her aversion. The poor thing has the
misfortune to be amiable. I must bring you acquainted with her by the name of
Nan, which her mamma in thick lisp calls her in every company. In her usual
style, Mrs. Crisp was rallying me on Grenvill's account, and Mrs. Rawlins, to
show her wit, began with a loud laugh: 'and, I dare say matrimony would agree
with you. I say, why do you not try it?' -- Language like this was new to me,
and staring at her with astonishment, I turned my enquiring eyes toward my
friend, whose answering look bid me expect amusement. The sequel will show I
wanted not scope for ridicule. I had not returned an answer, but her daughter
had cast a correcting glance, which produced an interrogation of Lord, Nan,
what is it signify arent not we all women alike? I say Miss Osborn, Nan is
setting her eyes at me, because I axed you a simple question, now what harm was
there in that?' Willing to humor the joke, I replied, 'Oh none, madam, and I
assure you I have no objection to the marriage state; the difficulty lies in
getting the other sex in the mind.' Ah, I know you girls, all loves to get the
men in your suit; but its us widows they make up to for wives: but come now I
will tell you where to go to know who is to be your husband. I say, Nan, where
is that what is his name moved to?' Without waiting that I might be informed,
she went on. Well, I likes a bit of fortune vastly. Do you know I went to him,
to ax him about Jacky? and he says he is to be married to a Lady of vast great
fortune.' 'How long did he say it is to be before Miss Rawlins is married,'
interrupted Mrs. Crisp looking significantly at me. 'Oh, he says Nan is to die
a maid, and I am to be married before the years out; is not that droll now? He
says Jacky will be very extravagant; and so I have left him plenty of money,
for I does love Jacky's little finger better an all the bodies of the others;
is not that odd now? I say I will tell you something vastly drole; he said,
says he, if you go and walk as far as Greenwich park; but you must walk all the
way, says he, because I do not know whether he may not be on the road, the
twenty first of next month between the hours of twelve and two, you will see a
good lusty looking gentleman, and he will accost you, says he: and that man,
says he, is to be your husband; was not that, drole now? Hey' -- 'astonishing!'
said I, putting on one of my looks of surprise, which you know I can make use
of at pleasure, 'I hope you wont, ma'am?' 'Oh yes, and what was vastly
particular, I had but just got in at the gate, when he comes up to me. Was not
that odd now? and so after we began talking, he 'tempted to chuck me under the
chin; and so says he, you are a pretty girl, and says he if you have a mind to
live with me, I will allow you a guinea a week. But I told him, I was not the
person he took me for; and I was a Lady of vast great fortune.' Here I could
not have refrained from laughing, had I not perceived that Miss Rawlins was
very much hurt at her mother's making such a fool of herself; however she went
on. 'He begged my pardon and was vastly sorry, and hoped I was not offended,
and so I told him, no; and then he axed me for my card, and I gave it him, and
so he has visited me ever since. Was not that odd now?' 'Oh surprising to a
degree! but how in the name of fate, did you contrive to walk to Greenwich?'
said I. 'Why I walks about a great deal always, but I was so tired, though I took
a coach home, that I did not know what to do; was not I, Nan? 'Then there is no
doubt, ma'am, (said Mrs. Crisp,) of the match being concluded I suppose.''Why I
does not know that there is, for Mr. Sampson is so vastly good natured, and
he is so much in love with me, that I don't see how I can stand out, and what is
vastly particular, he is a man without a fault. Is not that odd now, hey?' 'Odd
indeed, returned I, for I never yet heard of such a one, and only wish, yours
may prove to be without a fault, after having got possession of your fortune.'
'Oh, he does not want me for my money, he says, for if I had not a farding he would
have me, for he is got a vast deal of his own; and he says as how, if I wont
have him, that he wont have any body else; is not that odd now?' Then the old
figure ran on in such extravagant praises of her man. that I was quite wearied
before she got up, and gave me what I suppose she thought a polite invitation.
'Well, I say, Miss Osborn, I shall be vastly glad to see you; I lives in
Grovenor Square; Mrs. Crisp will show you the house; and I shall take it vastly
ill if you don't come;' then making a bob curtsey, half side ways, she waddled
out of the room. 'In the name of every thing that is rational, exclaimed I,
where or in what company could you possibly have singled out that fulsome old
soul?' Mrs. Crisp said she was the widow of a rich citizen, who having made
himself by his assiduity to business, it might easily be seen from the
illiterate behavior of his rib, had been accustomed to associate with the
lowest class of people. It seems she met with her at the house of a relation,
through whose means the old fool has gained a few genteel acquaintances; but as
they only invite her for the sake of diversion, so they soon weary of ditto
repeated, and drop the acquaintance as soon as they can. For her part Mrs.
Crisp says, she shall be happy in finding her house rid of such a troublesome
visitant, and, to effect it, will plead an engagement whenever she sends. You
will certainly conclude I have been exaggerating, and say such a character
cannot exist, but in my flighty imagination. Positively, it is the woman, as
truly as truth can draw. I have not added a single ornament to either dress or
person, nor even a syllable more to the conversation, as those who have seen
her can testify -- so much for that, now to affairs of greater consequence. The
happiness you express in my having little Chattelherhault with me, is likely to
be done away very soon, the poor thing affects to be brother sick, though I am
out in my judgment if it favors not more of love; and declares as the
Chevalier is not come she will return to the continent, I remonstrate, but all
to no purpose, the urchin has absolutely fretted herself ill, and was obliged
to leave the theater last night; so I expect if this brother does not
disappoint her by showing; himself in England, that young sly-boots will find
an excuse for stealing a march upon us next week, and leave poor Henry to sigh
in solitude, and mourn his hapless fate: for if master Cupid has not been
playing him a slippery trick by catching him fast in his trammels, say I have
no discernment. The man has the assurance to deny it, but his heart must have
been adamant, could he have resisted the bright fire of her eyes, which for all
the demure looks she strives to put on, tells me she is not the inanimate soul
she would fain be thought; there is a spirit in the very glance of them, which
says, "I was born to triumph:' then she is such an amiable disposition that in
short I shall feel almost as much hurt on her departure as her sentimental
lover. There Is another rub in the way to plague me; here have I set my heart on
making a conquest of the Chevalier, and in the midst of the pleasing sensations
I was indulging of love, hearts, darts, and a thousand other pretty little
things, when Madam, whips into a post-chaise, drives away for the continent,
and at once puts a stop to all my ideal dreams of delight. Deuce take me if I
am not even with her before the year's out, and for the present will console
myself by spitting my spite, by teizing you. And so you really expect I should
divulge the only secret I ever kept from you, after the pretty sermon you were
kind enough to send? No, no, child, that will never do. What have I been
racking my brains for years past to conceal the weakness of my heart from the
world, and shall I now discover it to you? Affairs must take a very different
turn from what they are in at present, before I reveal myself to any one be
assured -- though notwithstanding your saucy lecture I still sign myself,

Your affectionate, MATILDA OSBORN.

To Mademoiselle Chattelherhault.
St. Omer's.
IN a strange country; you are distressed in mind, and likely to be ill. Wait
not for the Chevalier's letter; your last has made me wretched. Tell Sir John's
family you have a friend dying: tell them any thing that will favor your
escape from the nation, before a discovery can ensue; for well I know your
tender nature cannot combat with the shock it will receive. The shame can never
reach you here; and if you are afflicted with sickness, friendship shall watch
over it till health is restored. Never can I forget when the putrid fever
seized me, in our convent; the companions of my juvenile years in terror
deserted me, being fearful of the contagion; you alone remained to comfort and
attend me, nor would suffer yourself to be forced away, though it was by the
command of the abbess. It was not for friendship's sake you did it, as I then
sixteen, thought you who was scarce ten, too much of a child to bestow my
friendship on. No, it was innate goodness prompted the generous action. You
stopped not here; in completing a cure: change of air was necessary. I had no
parents alive, and those who were entrusted with the care of me, were at too
great a distance to be applied to in time. You prevailed on your mother to
suffer me to be with her. My health was established, and my affection for you
rooted. Madam Beaufoy was a second parent to me, ought I then to forget that
her child is unhappy? No, my dear D'Arcy, while respiration is allowed me, you
shall never want a friend. My fortune is ample; come and share it with me. It
is Marianne invites. It is the voice of friendship speaks. Suffer not Mr.
Osborn's flattering eloquence to prevail; trifle not another moment with your
future peace, but hasten to her who will be the guardian of your honor, the
comforter of your mind. You know my nature is not a severe one, I can allow for
your gratitude, and partake of the sensations it occasions. I will sooth the
agitations of your heart, till love is glided into esteem. I do nothing but
reflect on myself for not fetching you to St. Omer's the moment I knew of your
loss, then had the severe trials you have borne been prevented, and your heart
still have remained a stranger to love. I like not Miss Osborn; you only speak
of her in one letter as sprightly. I fear she is more than sprightly, she
appears to me volatile, and unthinking, ana by no means a fit companion for my
gentle Beaufoy, or why did she force you to accompany her to the theater, when
I am sure you pleaded illness or some other excuse which would have satisfied
her, had she been serious enough to attend to the dictates of good breeding.
However, that you may not be obliged to her brother, in pecuniary affairs, I
have enclosed a thirty pound note, with the assurance that I am and ever will
remain,

Your affectionate friend, MARIANNE D' AUBIGNY.

To Miss Osborn.
Hertfordshire.
YOUR last afforded us an infinite deal of mirth, though Mrs. Raymond is of
opinion with me that you have made the coloring to your finishing strokes too
high for the original to be known by the portrait. What an eccentric soul art
thou; were I not convinced of the innate goodness of your heart, I should
certainly think you one of the most malicious creatures living. You are
possessed of a lively imagination, and want not the power of making your
friends laugh at pleasure; if you wanted less inclination, to show your wit at
the expense of your good nature, I am sure those who are now afraid of your
very glance, would love you sincerely. In answer to this I know you will say
that if the ninnies are conscious of having merited the lash of satire, you are
not fond of disappointing them; however, not being willing to argue the point
with you, as I may stand a chance of being reproached for a saucy lecturer a
second time, I will drop the subject* and as you have given me the character of
a ridiculous old woman, in return, I will strive to exhibit a scene of woe to
you. It seems it is the custom here for woman to attend gentlemen's gardens as
well as the men. Mrs Raymond employs a pour industrious creature, who has a
worthless husband and half a dozen children to maintain, in assisting her
gardener; the poor soul was very big with child, and she had given her some old
clothes to make baby linen, and desired she would let her know when she was
down laying: the unfortunate woman sent a week ago, but through the remissness
of the servants Mrs. Raymond knew not of it till yesterday, when I accompanied
her to a house where this poor wretch lodged. On going up stairs we found all
the children, some crying for bread and butter, while others, making light of
even hunger itself, were contentedly playing on the floor; the eldest a girl of
fourteen, was sitting with her arms folded in a dejected attitude, on the side
of a truckle bed, which, except an old deal table, was all the furniture in the
room; the distressed mother and her infant child were laying on a mattress,
with nothing more than a rug for their covering. On our entrance, a little boy,
about five years of age, ran to a girl much less than himself, and snatching up
her pin cloth, cried, while wiping her eyes, 'Hush, Sally, don't ye cry no
more, here is ladies come to give ye some bread and butter, and bring poor mame
and the baby something to eat.' 'Will am give you some to Charly?' said the
little creature, blowing her nose, to speak the plainer, while her mother made
an attempt to sit up in the bed, but was so weak, from not having taken any
kind of sustenance for two days past, that she could not. The dear little soul
which was laying by her, had caught a cold in it is eyes, owing to a part of the
casement being broken away, and the want of a door to the room, as well as a
fire in it, for there was no stove, and only a few faggots to beset alight on
the hearth, to warm some bread and water when the little sufferer cried for
food, as it is mother had scarce any milk in her breast to afford it. A scene
The writer was witness (...) scene similar to the above not three years ago.
to equal this I had never so much as heard of before, consequently the sight,
which it is impossible to describe in the view it then appeared, shocked me to
such a degree, that had I not been relieved by tears I should certainly have
fallen into hysterics. It excited every tender feeling so much for the poor in
my breast, that if I had been possessed of the power, I wanted not for
inclination at the moment, to have raised every beggar in the nation to an
affluent fortune; we stayed but a short time, after giving them what silver we
had in our pockets, as Mrs. Raymond wished to hasten home and have something
comfortable made and sent to the poor woman, which she has done every day
since, with broken victuals for the children. She intends taking the eldest
girl in^^ the house, and have her taught plain work, that she may be useful to
her family; and the last child which is a boy, to stand godmother to, and put
him to school when big enough, and afterward bind him apprentice to some
trade; would every woman whose fortune was sufficient to allow it, follow her
example, what scenes of distress and wretchedness might they prevent; but a
love of gaming is become so prevalent in the breasts of our females that they
care not what meannesses they are guilty of, if it will enable them to sport a
larger quantity of money at the card table; and possibly one lady loses in four
hours, more than would render half a dozen families comfortable their whole
lives. Now would some of these fashionable women, whose conduct I have been
making so free with, say, that I am running on in the strain of a moralist,
without the aid of years or even sense to support the character, therefore to
oblige them, I will lay aside the subject to tell you how pleased I am, at your
being disappointed in your views on the Chevalier; how you can trifle with your
own feelings, I cannot reconcile with my ideas of knowing pleasure in that
state; for were I i^ love as you say you are, I could not afford one smile to
any other of the sex, while the object of it was in company; and if he chanced
to pay more attention to another, while I happened to be by, I really believe
that my foolish heart would discover it is weakness, by forcing an inundation
from my eyes. You laugh at my frank confession, and to put a stop to your
ridicule I end my epistle, by assuring you that I still remain,

Yours sincerely, SOPHIA TOWNSEND.

To Sir John Osborn, Bart.
New Bond-Street. SIR,
BY what authority you attempt to harbor Mademoiselle Beaufoy I know not; but
as her guardian must inform you, that I have a right to claim her, wherever
found. I have not a doubt, that some-atrocious falsehood has been advanced to
excite your humanity, and extort your protection of her. However, that you may
no longer be duped by an artful tale, I must tell you she eloped on our landing
at Dover, from France, with a young fellow whom no one knows any thing of. I
had not been able to discover her abode till this morning. I saw her in a
carriage which bears your arms; now an affair of this kind being made public, I
should apprehend, would by no means be agreeable to you, therefore if the lady
is immediately restored I shall suffer the story to sink into oblivion. If she
is not, be assured I will enforce the severity of the law in such a case to
it is utmost extent.

Your answer, Sir, will determine, W. STAMFORD.

To W. Stamford, Esquire.
St. James's Square. SIR,
A LETTER I have just received, informs me you have been left guardian to an
indiscreet young woman, who has eloped from you, for which I am sorry, though I
have not the honor of an acquaintance with you; but I assure you, upon my
honor, I do not know any thing of the person you mention; the lady you have
seen in my carriage, is Mademoiselle Chattelherhault, sister to a Frenchman of
distinction, with whom my son is very intimate. In the wish that you may soon
recover your ward, I have the honor to be, Sir,

Yours, J. OSBORN.

To the Honorable Miss Townsend.
St. James's Square.
THANKS to my father's prudence, or the town might have been obliged with a
paragraph in some of the news papers, that an extraordinary circumstance had
happened in a certain nobleman's family; a young, and beautiful French woman of
distinction was on a visit to them, and having been seen by some elderly madman
who claimed her as his ward, Sir -- 's credulity made him believe it was no
phantom of the brain, and therefore had given her up to the claimant; then
would have been added at the end, by the way of astonishment, O tempora, O
mores! Your curiosity is more awakened by the above from me, th^^ the public's
would have been from reading it in the Oracle, Herald, or Woodfall's Diary; so
now must I begin to elucidate. You are to understand, Henry was summoned to
attend poor Montagu, whose life was despaired of in Somersetshire; as soon as
we had seen him set off, Mademoiselle Chattelherhault, accompanied by lady
Osborn, and myself, went to take the air in Hyde-Park. An elderly man on
horseback rode up to the carriage, and staring very hard in, appeared as if on
the point of forcing his head through the glass. Oh mon Dieu, exclaimed the
timorous girl, changing color. Don't alarm yourself, my dear, said my mother,
it is customary in England for gentlemen to behave in such a manner, though it
certainly favors of ill manners. Pardon me my dear lady, returned she
recovering herself, I was terribly afraid he would have broke the carriage
window. This passed off, and we thought no more of it; in the evening a letter
was brought in to Sir John, with word that the servant waited for an answer. He
withdrew to the library, and Chattelherhault having been unwell the whole day,
took the opportunity of retiring to her room; on my father's return he showed
us a letter, which must certainly have been written by the man who had behaved
so rudely in the morning claiming our young visitant by the name of Beaufoy,
and his ward. My mother asked what answer he had returned; he said an assurance
that he knew not any such person. I said I would run up stairs and tell my
little French girl what an hair breadth escape she had had; but my mother ever
careful of preventing uneasiness for her friends, was afraid of her being
alarmed, and entreated I would not inform her of it till some time had elapsed;
so thus rests this important affair, though if my will had been complied with,
I believe for the joke's sake, instead of an answer I should certainly have
sent some of Monro's people to take charge of him; positively the man must be
mad as a March hare, or he never could have mistaken our timid little
Chattelherhault, for his forward minx Beaufoy.

Your description of the unfortunate gardening woman shocked me to a degree,
and I shall beg to be your debtor, till we meet, for a couple of guineas, which
I desire you will give her in my name. So you really thought I should laugh at
your frank confession; no, no, I will carry it a little farther, by supposing
if you could not force a deluge of tears that you would apply a handkerchief to
your eyes, and sham, rather than not appear hurt at the wretch's neglect of
you. Shame on the sex: well may the men be vain of themselves, while there are
such a number of soft, sighing, what shall I call them, foolish damsels as you
in the world, that take pains to convince them of the power they have over
them. Silly girls. Why I tell you it is the only way to effect the loss of your
man; a love of roving is inherent in the nature of the sex, and they are as
fond of gaining conquests, as ever a woman of us all. Make it no longer a doubt
to any one of them that your affections are fixed on him, oh then he is your
very humble servant, and prefers his devoirs to some other fair. Thus they
reward ye. Follow my precepts and observe the difference in the behavior of
the lords of the creation toward you. Support your dignity, and suffer not the
man who has gained your heart to make sure of it, supposing he really loves
you, is there any harm in keeping him in suspense, till he dares to insist on
your naming the time which will make you his. Your wise-acre ladyship putting
on a demure look, will ask, 'Whether it is customary for a man to go so great a
length, before he is convinced of a woman's affections being all his own?
Simpletonian! Do you imagine that I now for instance, would suffer any man to
dangle after me as a lover whom I despised; and are there not ways and means to
let the one whom at sight of your heart beats a strange palpitation, know you
have a regard for him, without making it appear that you are desperately in
love? a few encouraging smiles will inliven his humor a whole evening: he
dreams all night of your bestowing more favors on him than any other, arises
in the morning, fully persuaded that you love him, hastens to attend you,
pleased in the idea of having as many kind glances bestowed on him as on the
preceding evening. How grievously is he baulked; you look cool upon him; he
goes home, curses his stars, calls you inhuman, and vows never to submit to
your tyranny more; but ere two days have rolled their circuit over his head, he
catches himself, ha, ha, ha, in the act of worshipping at your shrine; and what
has effected this change, but his dread of losing you? Whereas if you had
convinced him of his being sole master of your heart, he would have shown his
resentment, by keeping his distance a whole fortnight; well, after a time
trifled away in doubts, anxiety, and fears, he determines not to be kept any
longer in suspense, but puts the question that he may know his doom; and after
the marriage-day is fixed, I have no objection to your showing as much love as
you think proper; and that woman must be destitute of every generous principle,
who will not strive after having taken a man for better for worse, to render
home more comfortable to him than any other place can be: though I am sorry
that some wives, whose conduct I have observed, oblige me to say, they have
forgotten their duty, with the vow they once made at the altar. Bless us what
faux pas have I catched myself in, the deuce take writing. Moralizing! as I
hope to live! Well, well, truth will out one time or other, so I will even copy
my neighbors, by making a frank confession, hey, Sophia, that if ever I marry,
which the Lord in his infinite mercy send I may, I do really and sincerely
believe, (the declaration must be solemn you know, by the way of adding weight
to what I advance) if my husband proves a reasonable man, that I may in process
of time be brought to dwindle as a wife, into what I never will be while a
maiden, an amiable piece of still life. Betray me not to the crops of our
acquaintance, Oh ye daughter of I know not who, or my triumph will be ended,
and my design totally spoiled before it can be executed; for you are to
understand, child, I don't mean to make any foolish protestations of what my
intentions are in regard to hereafter, but put the good man to a trial of his
confidence in my generosity, my honor, and all other et ceteras which appear
so becoming in a woman; and if I find he is willing to give me my way in
trifles, possibly I may fall into his humor where things of greater moment are
concerned. However for this time I have said enough, and think you will not be
sorry at having finished reading the scrawl of,

MATILDA OSBORN.

To Sir John Osborn, Bart.
New Bond-Street. SIR,
THE assurance you have given on your honor, that you know not such a person
as Mademoiselle Beaufoy, convinces me you have been most grossly abused, in her
being introduced at your house under a fictitious name; to prove which I will
wait on you this evening, bringing people with me who can swear to the identity
of her person; or resting the decision on the lady's emotion at sight of me.
Will attend you alone. Your acquiescence will oblige,

W. STAMFORD.

To W. Stamford* Esquire.
St. James's Square. SIR,
YOU still persist in your ward's being protected by me, and I can only say at
present, that a resemblance between two faces is sometimes striking, and the
similitude which Mademoiselle Beaufoy's features bear to Mademoiselle
Chattelherhault's must have deceived you. My son, Sir, is a man of honor, and
would scorn to practice an imposition on his family; he has been sent for by a
sick friend into Somersetshire; at his return I shall be happy to receive you,
as I would not choose to suffer our fair visitor, who enjoys an ill state of
health, to be seen by any one in an affair of this kind, without his
approbation.

I remain, Sir, yours, etc. J. OSBORN.

To the Chevalier Chattelherhault.
St. James's Square.
IF ever you wished to do me a kindness, Chattelherhault, it must be proved
now; that libidinous old dog, Mademoiselle Beaufoy's guardian, has taken the
opportunity while I was out of town, attending Jack Montague who has had a
violent fit of illness, of writing to Sir John, and claiming her as his ward,
who had eloped from him at Dover; my father declined receiving his visit till
my return, and I have insisted on her not being made acquainted with it,
consequently his not being permitted to see her, till your arrival in England.
The dear girl has some time past been impatient to return to the continent. She
has a friend at St. Omer's, she says, who is able, from her alliance with
people of consequence, to protect her against all Stamford's stratagems; her
name is D' Aubigny, possibly you have some knowledge of her, I have detained
the suffering charmer here thus long, in the hope that circumstances might turn
out favorably and Mademoiselle Beaufoy have become my wife; the dear illusive
hope must now be banished, and whatever it costs me, she shall return virtuous
to her friend, and may make some other man more happy than I can ever be after
it. Do you not know some one in whom you dare confide the secret? If so, bring
them with you, to attest she is your sister. In an injured orphan's cause, let
us leave no one thing unaccomplished to defend it. Let your haste to England be
the proof of your friendship to,

HENRY OSBORN.

To Mademoiselle D' Aubigny.
St. James's Square.
NOW, and not till now, has the measure of my woes been completed. Osborn has
just left my room; from him I learn, that instead of hastening to my dearest
Marianne I must remain a prisoner in this nation: detestable place, how I hate
it: have I not cause, on reflecting that the source of all my wretchedness
originated in it? Stamford, too, has discovered me, and I have been demanded of
Sir John. -- Mr. Osborn has written to the Chevalier to hasten here, and own me
for his sister: if he refuses, never more may you expect to see me; shame will
put an end to that life which misfortune has rendered tiresome. Surely my fate
is hard, born in sorrow as I may say, fostered in affliction, is it not enough
that my ^^per years are corroded by anguish, but I must fall a prey to the
severest trial, that art, villainy, and malice, can inflict. The nobly generous
Osborn does every thing in his power to afford me consolation, he says the
Chevalier has it not in his nature to refuse any request which he makes, but is
not the one he has now made what he cannot in honor comply with? too certainly
it is; he bids me assume a placid countenance on Stamford's appearance, and all
will end well. Does he think that one rash step has rendered me callous to
shame? God forbid it should, rather let me sink into misery, like one who is
conscious of her guilt, than justly incur an accusation which I cannot think of
without horror. Would that you were by to support my cause, I could then throw
my self at Lady Osborn's feet, confess my error and plead for forgiveness; but
now friendless and unprotected, my thoughts wander to recollect some person to
whom I may apply; but chilled in the knowledge that there is not one, they
return, and sink into a state of torpidity to which madness is surely
preferable. Oh, my mother! why was I permitted to remain on earth, if only to
be afflicted worse than you were? I scarcely know what I have written.
Marianne, but I am intent on complaining to you, who are at too great a
distance to afford consolation, and uttering an apostrophe to my dear mother's
shade, which I seem to see hovering over and lamenting the fate of her
unfortunate child. Well, but I have been very ill, and may not the knowledge of
what I am doomed to suffer conduce to the termination of my existence, and that
will prevent way shame; if it should, Marianne, you must not grieve for my
loss, but comfort yourself in the hope that I am happy. Do you think my death
would because for concern to Mr. Osborn? I do not wish him to be very much
afflicted, but methinks if he would shed a tear over my grave, as a
remembrancer that he had once known me I could more readily submit to death
now, than live half a century longer the happiest of human souls, if I thought
he would forget, and not lament me then. Miss Osborn too, I flatter myself, my
memory will not be hateful to her. Indeed you must not think hardly of that
young lady; she is the counterpart of her dear brother; accustomed from her
infancy, I am sure, to be beloved, she is at peace with herself, and in good
humor with the world; she is young, has never been known to misfortune, and
wants not for vivacity. I was once lively, but wretchedness became my inmate
and has taken entire possession of my breast I have given-up even the hope of
meeting with my father, while life remains I must be dependent on you; should
the Almighty power snatch that protection from me Stamford will renew his
persecution. I cannot proceed, horror has chilled my every nerve; but while
respiration is allowed me, I must ever remain your affectionate, though
wretched,

D' ARCY BEAUFOY.

To Henry Osborn, Esquire.
WHAT a devil of a rout you serious fellows make about a virtuous woman, as you
call a girl who is unwilling to run into your arms before you have begun the
attack; ply the sex closely, there is not one of them from the arrantest
coquette in nature, to the demurest prude among them, but will surrender at
discretion; and where a man does not accomplish his designs, it is more owing
to his want of patience, than any rare prudence on the woman's part. I am deep
read in all their tricks and subterfuges, and from persevering in pursuit of
the game, have never yet been obliged to give out, till it was run down; why
you might easily have prevented the present row, by taking the girl to a
bagnio; she, as a stranger, could not have known the difference between that
and your father's house; the family might have been out of town, not expecting
your return so soon, and the critical moment been seized on, she would gladly
have acceded to terms; you have hired private lodgings for her, and the whole
progress of the amor had ended by this time. Seriously though, for I know you
will curse my inhumanity on reading the above, you are the only man living for
whom I would risque my honor by lying through thick and thin to a whole
nation, as it is most likely I shall have to do on this occasion; yet what I
shall find much more difficult, will be silencing my sister's complaints of
being confined so much longer at our chateau than she expected; but as her
appearance in England would play the devil, by marring our plot, I intend to
quit France without her knowledge. You say Mademoiselle Beaufoy is known to
Mademoiselle D'Aubigny. I am acquainted with a relation of that lady's, and
would not hesitate in striving to serve any friend of here is; so the first fair
wind wastes me to Albion's white cliffs. As national politesse will not be
requisite in my rencontre with the old rascal, I am practicing a few I rish
airs, such as looking big, cocking my hat fiercely, strutting boldly, putting
myself in a menacing posture to demand satisfaction. Don't you think, Osborn,
that this en cavalier behavior will be quite comme il faut? I am now going to
tell a devil of a lie to my sister, and take the route to Calais:

Adieu, au revoir. L. CHATTELHERHAULT.

To Mademoiselle Chattelherhault.
St. Ome'rs.
YOUR last has almost broken my heart. I can scarce see the letters I write for
the tears which force their way in spite of all my endeavors to repress them.
What have you not suffered in that vile England? but what agitation, what
distress infinitely more, will you have to combat with, as the time approaches
for your facing the worst of villains; your emotion must betray you to Sir
John's family, and the wretch will triumph in your downfall: no friends in the
nation to whom you can flee for protection. What must become of you? I tremble
at consequences which are likely to ensue; and am determined to lose not a
moment in hastening to your relief. Your wish that I were by to support your
cause, shall not prove unpropitious. Yes, I will obey the call of anguish, and
snatch you from despair. You shall yet enjoy happiness without alloy, and claim
the reward due to injured virtue. Don't give way to dejection, nor suffer
despondency to gain an ascendant over your mind. Believe me, when the trying
moment arrives, you will find yourself equal to the contest. That Superior
Power, which is appointed to guard, is more watchful of our welfare at the
moment Hope is forsaking us, and brings to our rescue, heartfelt joy from the
quarter in which we look only for despair. Imagination has portrayed to your
mind's view a scene truly terrific, to avoid which you are welcoming death, and
cruelly charge me not to grieve for your loss, while you are wishing Mr. Osborn
to be susceptible of that sympathy which you entreat I will divest myself of.
Were it not for the known certainty of your being too wretched at the time you
were writing to attend to circumstances, I should be half inclined to be angry
with you; however, I conjure you, as you value my future quiet, to support your
spirits. I shall be in England possibly as soon as this reaches you; after that
I will bid defiance to every attempt on your honor. The post is going out, and
I cannot add more than that you know my rank has rendered me intimate with some
of the first English families. I shall avail myself of such a fortunate
circumstance, and you may depend on seeing me before your interview with
Stamford takes place. I remain your sincere and unalterable friend;

MARIANNE D'AUBIGNY.

To the Honorable Miss Townsend.
St. James's Square.
PRAY, child, are you fond of being present at a grand quarrel between the
French and English, where the latter stand a chance of being well drubbed? if
you are, Hey for London town. Positively, though, the man whose claim I treated
in so ludicrous a manner in my last, has renewed it, and actually insisted on
my father's resigning the charge of Chattelherhault up to him, or proving that
her name was not Beaufoy and his ward. To do this effectually the Chevalier's
presence was necessary, and Henry dispatched an express for him. So out of evil
springs good. The dear charming man arrived this evening, my heart leaped
when the post-chaise stopped at the door; but when he entered the room, oh what
joy seized it, in the hope of his becoming the most abject of my slaves; --
me-thought his sentimental sister hardly received him with a sisterly
affection. Most likely her langour proceeded from the illness she has had; but
I am sure, was I dying, the sight of such an affectionate brother as he appears
would infuse fresh vigor throughout my frame, and recall my soul to earth, if
winging it is flight toward the ethereal regions. Absolutely a body would
suppose he had thrown aside the brother, for the more tender character of a
lover* if the Chevalier can behave so politely attentive as a brother, what
would you not give, Sophia, to have him for an admirer? In short, my breast has
taken the alarm, and cautions it is colleague the heart, to beat to arms, to be
enabled to stand the attack of an invasion; for where a shot cannot prevail,
the French have a knack of levying a whole volley; don't mistake by imagining
courage is meant instead of sighs, and think it will be prudent to place the
sentinel apprehension as guard, because there is a strong probability of such a
man's being engaged. Thus speaks reason; but a faithful heart replies, that
life is nothing without love, and it would not be exempt from the passion to
obtain a universe, where it was not to gain admission, at the same time reminds
it is adviser, that love in the image of one clothed in friendship's sacred
garb, had crept through an avenue to it is utmost recess, unresisted by her at
the moment he had raised his throne on the firmest basis -- Esteem -- before
even her penetration could discover it, he reigned triumphant, and now would
not give up his claim on the whole, though the endeavor of all her allies
united were to strive to hurl him from it. I have written myself into that
softened kind of disposition in which I cannot proceed with my usual vivacity,
and must resign the pen till morning.

**** here I am, returned with a fresh supply of animation at command; but as I
am to proceed methodically it shall lay dormant, while I tell you this all
captivating hero informed his sister that expecting to find letters at the
post house, on his landing at Dover, he had sent his servant to enquire if
there were any directed to him, and was agreeably surprised on receiving one
from Mademoiselle D'Aubigny 'Sacre Dieu!' (exclaimed she clasping her hands as
if in the agony of despair,) 'surely Marianne will not, she cannot determine to
give up my cause, when it stands most in need of her assistance.' Henry looked,
I thought, confused, while the Chevalier, making a motion of putting his hand
on her mouth, cried, 'Hush, am not I your brother, and able to protect you?' O,
no, no, (said she, bursting into tears,) Marianne alone can protect, support
and save me; if she has deserted me, the whole world cannot afford
consolation.' 'Permit me to assure you, interrupted he, that Mademoiselle
D'Aubigny is now in England. I waited on her in my way hither, and she
comissioned me to present this letter.' Which he gave her with the most gallant
air imaginable. She snatched it eagerly, kissed it fervently, and held it to
her breast the space of five minutes, while her expressive eyes were turned
toward heaven in the attitude of thanksgiving; on a sudden they rolled, her
looks were wild; she kissed the letter once more, and sunk into an alarming
stupor. Terrified at the change, I rung the bell for assistance, while my
mother applied a smelling bottle to her nose, which was not potent enough to
prevent violent hysterics -- Horror was strongly imprinted on the countenance
of the Chevalier; but Henry raved, he acknowledged his love for her, and vowed
to take ample revenge on the villain who had occasioned her pain. Murder will
out, you find, one time or other; till then he had the confidence to deny the
power the deity had gained over him. However the dear girl was recovered and
put to bed, and this morning is charmingly. It seems this Mademoiselle
D'Aubigny is a friend with whom she was educated at a convent and so firm is
their affection toward each other, that it is generally supposed if any
misfortune happened to one it would be an infallible means of breaking the
heart of her friend, and in her letter to her brother she entreated he would
bring her over with him, and then she was certain of being secured from the
vile Englishman; for Marianne would rather die than suffer him to have her.
Poor thing, her terror would not give her leave to reflect that if her brother
thought proper to give her up, not all Mademoiselle D'Aubigny's endeavors
could prevent the Englishman's having her. However her friend paid her a visit
this morning, she received her alone in her dressing room, and soon after my
mother and self were admitted, and introduced to her, the Chevalier and Henry
joined us, and the conversation soon became lively and entertaining; for
Chattelherhault having her sister excellence present, strove to emulate, and
quite outdid herself; never, after having seen these two women together, dare I
venture to think so highly of myself, as vanity taught me I might; would you
believe, that instead of exciting the attention of half the company by my
prattle, as I am accustomed to do, I was frequently dumb, in the consciousness
of my own inability to support any share in a conversation which was entered
upon by these amiable friends.

Well, well, I have determined to bid adieu to trifling, and pursue the
footsteps of sense, till I have gained the track beyond their knowledge. The
arduous task being completed, I Will sit myself down contented in the pleasure
of having quite outrun them; there is an improveable disposition for you:
absolutely I have described the spirit of emulation as well in the few
preceding lines as if I had taken the trouble of writing a dissertation on the
subject. Lord, if those musty moral writers would but follow my example,
instead of whole volumes, which they publish to teach mankind what all the race
knew before was proper, they would pen a few of their reflections on one sheet
of paper; and if the world was determined to be enlightened, it would pay more
attention to that single sheet, than it does at present to thousands of them
which are printed daily for it is improvement. Now were any of those grave
gentry to read what I have written, they would knit their brows, by the way of
expressing disapprobation of the theme, and throwing it aside, with a
supercilious smile, would exclaim, in a tone of contempt, Ah that is an opinion
entertained by a foolish woman. (Now raising their voices,) How dare a
creature, whose whole sex have been denied the gift of soul, attempt to decide
judgment on our proceedings? Fair, and softly, thou boisterous lords of the
creation; admit, as you say, women have not a soul, yet you cannot deny that
they are endued with the sense of seeing, of hearing, and talking, consequently
they see the world does not grow a whit the better; they frequently hear the
most solid of your arguments turned into ridicule by your own sex; and from
being indulged with a tongue, have the liberty of proclaiming their own
thoughts on the subject. But if venting their malignity on your works was half
the mischief created by your striving to inculcate the idea in their mind that
none of them are in possession of a soul, it would by trifling indeed, for as
they need not dread the same punishment that is supposed to be inflicted on
yours in the world which is yet unknown, they naturally imagine the greatest
sin may be committed without the pain of reflecting, that it must be atoned for
at the expiration of existence. Half-witted mortals, what an error your
infinitude of wisdom would lead you into! A word to those husbands who wish to
prevent the sprouting of horns from their foreheads, and I have done with the
subject. If you votaries of Hymen were to take as much pains to convince your
wives of their being endowed with half a dozen souls, which would be tortured
beyond description if they commit a fault, as you take to assure them of being
perfectly soulless, a number of divorces might be prevented, and families enjoy
tranquillity, which at present know only wretchedness. You will not thank me for
this digression, Sophia; you wish to be informed of the Chevalier, and I am
leading as wide off the track as if it had never been in my view; but I am most
intolerably indifferent about the man. And why? because he is not comeatable.
So, as a friend, I advise you to secure your traitorous heart from receiving
any indelible impressions. Mademoiselle D'Aubigny has completed a conquest, and
you will be lost in any attempt to rival her. I am now, in haste, but will renew
the subject, with an account of the contest. Adieu.

To Madame Passerat.
Harley-Street. HONORED MADAM,
AS your illness prevented your accompanying me to England, I am sure you are
impatient to learn in what manner our amiable little Beaufoy was extricated
from the melevolence of her guardian. With my leave, she says, she will herself
inform you of every particular, and I think you will not be concerned, at my
resigning the pen to one who will certainly describe the sensations that she
experienced at the time more fully than I can possibly do. She is this moment
at my elbow, ready to snatch it from me, and I cannot refuse her the pleasure
she has enjoyed by anticipation these two days past, that of giving her friends
aunt a faithful detail of the whole affair.

My dear Mademoiselle D'Aubigny has permitted me the honor of writing you an
account, Madam, of the rencontre with the cruel man who designed my ruin. The
day arrived that he expected would consign the trembling victim to his
treacherous charge once more. To prevent it, your affectionate Marianne was in
St. James's Square by nine in the morning, as well as to prepare me for the
much dreaded scene, which was to ensue at twelve. We were to be assembled in
the drawing room at eleven, and you may easily conceive I was more dead than
alive, led into it. Five minutes had scarcely escapsed when a Sir Thomas Stuart
Morell was announced. Involuntarily I had cast my eyes on Mr. Osborn* he was
looking at the Chevalier* astonishment and distress were strongly marked in
every lineament of his face. That generous friend strove to correct the look by
an encouraging inclination of his head; arising at the same moment, he went up
to Sir Thomas, who not expecting, was surprised at meeting with him. Sir John
immediately said, You have not only the pleasure of seeing the Chevalier; but
may have the happiness of conversing with his amiable sister, who has honored
us by her visit likewise. I had put on a bonnet with a veil, that whatever
change my looks assumed might not be so readily noticed. Sir Thomas, with a
familiar smile, began congratulating himself on the unexpected felicity of
seeing me in England; as he approached the smile vanished, and a look of
surprise was constituted in it is stead, as Miss Osborn, giving me a pat on the
shoulder, in her lively manner, asked, whether I had forgot my old friend, Sir
Thomas? The Chevalier gave not any of us time to reply, for catching him by the
arm hastily, said, You may take another opportunity of paying your respects to
my sister, Sir Thomas, she knows I have a message of the utmost consequence to
you from Monsieur Houliers, and can readily pass it over. Will you excuse me,
ladies? Sir John, I have your pardon, come along Sir Thomas, and pulling him
out of the room, exclaimed, This national spirit of liberty has deranged his
affairs most damnably. I do not repeat this from my own knowledge of it is
having been said, Madam, but from what your dear niece has since told me, for
seated between her and Miss Osborn, it was with the utmost difficulty I could
support myself from fainting, while she in Spanish, which none of the family,
Mr. Osborn excepted, understood, told me, I need not fear a discovery, unless I
suffered my own emotion to betray me. The Chevalier, and Sir Thomas had been
absent ten minutes, when the parlour bell was rung, and a servant sent to say
the favor of my company was desired by the gentlemen, I arose, and but for Mr.
Osborn, who immediately offered his hand to lead me down stairs, I must have
fallen; my legs trembled, and I tottered; strength had nearly forsaken me; he
saw Sir John's eyes were on me, and said, I wish this said madman had given us
his visit, if he intends it; you know your brother's presence can secure you
against whatever he may urge, and yet I see fear reigns predominant in your
mind till the expected interview is over. Lady Osborn is one of the most
affectionately tender, women in nature; she said every thing which she thought
would quiet my apprehensions, while her charming daughter expressed her
surprise at my timidity, and her son conducted me to the parlour. Sir Thomas
bowed on my entrance. I burst into tears, he came toward me, and taking one
hand while Mr. Osborn held the other, said, 'Will you excuse me, Madam?'
'Pardonnez moi, Monsieur,' interrupted the sprightly Frenchman, snatching it
from him: no, curse me if she shall. Do you know, my lovely sister, he refuses
to acknowledge you as such? and pleads his long friendship with Sir John, as a
sufficient excuse for disobliging the most charming woman in the world, and I
have sent for you to try, what your own eloquence can do, as mine does not seem
to prevail. Never in my life was I assisted with so much fortitude as at that
moment; the big tears, that were chasing each other down my cheeks, forcing a
channel through the eyes, sorbore to flow, my countenance assumed serenity, my
voice became clear, my tone unbroken by sorrow, and I replied with energy, I
thank you, Sir, for the kindness of your intentions toward me, my present
concern is, that it never will be in my power to repay the most trivial part of
the obligations you have conferred -- You, Sir, (said I, turning to the baronet
and curtsying) will oblige me to revere you, though a refusal of the
Chevalier's request may clash with my present interest. Yet your noble
attachment to Sir John Osborn, and strict adherence to truth, actuates at this
moment, and ever will, to demand that tribute of me; continue to cherish the
sentiments you have imbibed, and no circumstance can tend to make your future
days unhappy. Would to heaven I had been as much averse to committing an error,
as you are tenacious of being led into one, I had not felt at this moment the
keen severity of being completely wretched. Indiscretion has in some degree
added to it, though I have yet the secret satisfaction of knowing myself
innocent of any capital crime. I mean not by what I have advanced to excite
your compassion, or create emotion for the finer feelings to operate on, by
giving a detail of the ill usage I have sustained from the man on whom the care
of me devolved on the demise of a tender parent. It will be sufficient if my
entreaties are suffered to prevail, that you will not strive to render Mr.
Osborn's conduct criminal in the eyes of his family; the motive for introducing
me to it as Mademoiselle Chattelherhault, was of the most delicate nature;
could I be allowed time to acquaint you with it now, I am fully persuaded from
a certain rectitude that appears to guide your every thought, you would admire
with infinitely more enthusiasm, than you at present condemn him. I shall be
content to endure the stigma so long as the odium can be kept from him: It is I
alone am blamable, and no other ought to suffer for my folly. 'Stop, Madam,'
(interrupted he) the woman that so generously strives to draw censure on
herself, by retorting the ball from him who alone has erred, has made for
herself a more strenuous friend in my bosom than I find myself inclinable to
acknowledge; but I must do myself and you the justice to say, that she who
entertains such exalted sentiments cannot be destitute of principle; and, if I
might truly assure myself that your virtue was unsullied, there is not that
trial in the world, I would not cheerfully essay to preserve it so. 'Most
generous of men,' exclaimed I, bursting into tears, (unexpected kindness
disarmed that fortitude which apparent severity had given strength to) my
virtue has ever been invulnerable, else I had not had occasion to appear to you
at present as a suspicious character. -- My conversation must appear
enigmatical to you likewise; to solve it in some degree, know, it is for the
preservation of my honor I am indebted to this best of men; the one who is
expected to claim would basely have deprived me of it, had not he stepped forth
the champion of injured innocence. -- 'Enough, Madam,'(said he) I find you have
been left to the care of a villain; such a circumstance too frequently proves
the fatal bane of numbers. Mr. Osborn has acted from motives of humanity. I
will assist him in supporting your cause with my utmost interest. But why not
have entrusted the secret to Lady Osborn? Or, if you had not courage to
acquaint her with it, Miss Osborn I am sure would not have abused your
confidence. She is a charming girl; her vivacity is tinctured with exquisite
sensibility, and she would have done the utmost in her power to serve you.
Never yet was she known to turn a deaf ear to the tale of sorrow, or disregard
the tears of a daughter of affliction; however, talking of what might have been
effected is losing time; we must now turn our thoughts on what is likely to
prove most advantageous. He stopped, expecting an answer. Mr. Osborn and the
Chevalier were denied by surprise the power of articulation, while I sobb'd
aloud in giving my gratitude vent. 'Come,' said he, breaking silence, I find
you are not prepared with an expedient, and it is now too late to make many
propositions. I can only say, if the wretch should bring presumptive proofs of
your being his ward, which is to be apprehended, and Sir John abandons you to
his care, my doors shall be open to afford you an asylum. Interrupting him, Mr.
Osborn hastily said, I thank you, Sir, in my own, and the Lady's name, for your
proffered kindness, but she has a friend above who will hardly allow her to
accept it. Has her friend honor with the interest to support her cause, young
man, against the attack of a lawless ruffian? asked the Baronet, looking
sternly at him. She has, Sir Thomas; it is a female. I am satisfied then. But
should her power be insufficient, Madam, (turning to me,) mine may be commanded
to add force to it. Oh, Sir Thomas, your goodness has made bankrupt my
gratitude; words are too poor to express my sense of such excess of friendship,
and I must be silent in the consciousness of an inability to speak. To effect
the silence which will send us up to the ladies, said the Chevalier with an air
of gaiety, suppose I stop the mouth of my more than lovely sister, (at the same
time making an attempt, which Mr. Osborn prevented, to salute me.) It is a
liberty, Frank, said he, I have never presumed to take with Miss Beaufoy,
neither will I permit you to make such an advantage I understand the force of
his intention perfectly, cried Sir Thomas, and I don't think it a bad one, if
we reflect, it is most likely the family will wonder at our long absence: allow
me, Madam, (offering his hand) 'to lead you up stairs.' We had hardly got into
the drawing room before a loud rap at the door warned us of our visitant's
approach; my newly acquired friend led me to a seat next Mademoiselle
D'Aubigny, and took himself the vacant one on the other side of me. The sound
of footsteps assured me that another moment would present my greatest enemy to
view, and totally unconscious of either words or actions, I exclaimed, 'Oh
shield me, heaven,' and caught fast hold of the Baronet's arm; the Chevalier
immediately came across the room. Let me conjure you, (said he in a half
whisper) to recollect I am supposed to be your brother; your behavior will not
only betray yourself and me, but subject Osborn to the reproaches of his
family. The door opened, unheeding what he had just said, I gave an involuntary
scream; but it proved to be one of the servants, sent by Stamford to say he
begged to speak with Sir John in private: the Chevalier objected to his going
down to him, said himself alone was empowered to set matters right, and with
leave of the company he should take the liberty of desiring Mr. Stamford to
walk up stairs. But my dear Chevalier, consider, the sight of him will occasion
your sister so much terror, That door, Sir John, belongs to a convenient
closet. I shall beg the favor of Sir Thomas to step in with her, till I
require him to bring her forward. Happy, you may be assured, Madam, I was, at
any reprieve, though of the shortest duration. We just entered the closet as
Stamford did the room; and I felt as if I could shrink into nothing at the very
sound of his voice. He accosted Sir John, I am sorry, Sir, to have occasioned
either yourself or family any concern on the business which I am now come: that
(continued he, looking around the room, and fixing his eyes on Mr. Osborn) is
the man with whom my ward eloped, and I demand her at his hands. Mr. Osborn
reddened, it seems, and told him that if he dared to insist on having a Lady
with whom he had no right, he would lead him out of the house by the nose; and
not suffering it to rest there, would make a point of posting him in every
coffee-house about town. It is a matter of indifference to me, Sir, with whom
your ward eloped, said the Chevalier, but I must desire you will be more
careful in future of pointing out any relation of mine as a fit object for
giving unnecessary uneasiness to, or you will find I am not of such a placid
nature, as tamely to put up with an insult offered to any part of my family,
especially where a sister's safety is endangered, my own honor is more nearly
concerned to protect it. Pardon me, Sir, (replied Stamford) for contradicting
the assertion of making a claim on your sister. I have an undoubted right over
the lady whom I saw in Sir John's carriage, and will maintain that right, in
spite of yours or that gentleman's threats, (extending his hand toward Mr.
Osborn) to oblige me to relinquish it. 'By G -- ' (said young Osborn
passionately) you must take my life before such right is acknowledged, or your
claim suffered to hold good. And I will defend her cause with the last drop of
my heart's blood, ere she is delivered to any old scoundrel (...) the world,
rejoined the Chevalier. 'Don't imagine,' (said Stamford) looking
contemptuously, I am not to be bullied out of my right in Miss Beaufoy. You are
deceived, Sir John, in the supposition of Mademoiselle Chattelherhault's being
in your house; the person who is here, your son has stolen from me. You
certainly are deceiving yourself (returned Sir John) the story does not appear
probable to me, nor will it I fancy gain credit in any court of equity;
therefore you must excuse me, if I say your plot should have been deeper laid
to ensure success. Sdeath, Sir, I scorn your mean insinuation of my laying a
plot; however I came not here to contend, concluding from your rank that your
behavior would be consistent with that of a gentleman's. I have waited on you,
that you may take your choice of resigning the lady quietly, or suffering a
higher power to wrest her from you. I have no right over her, she has a
brother, and I am apt to believe if your eloquence was as fluent as Cicero's,
it would hardly prevail on him to resign her. But that brother, as you please
to call him, shall be compelled to resign her very shortly. What method will
you adopt to oblige him? asked the Chevalier tauntingly. Apply to the
Chancellor, replied he, and you will find yourself obliged to accede to my
claim. On the Chancellor's decision the cause shall rest, said Mr. Osborn: his
known integrity will guide him to pronounce judgment against a rascal, though
he were to gain the first interest in the world to back him in an infamous
prosecution. Take that epithet to yourself, said Stamford, it does not belong
to me. I have never committed an action that merits it, (returned Osborn,) but
you wanted not inclination to be guilty of that which disgraces the man. An
altercation in the hearing of ladies is pitiful, (interrupted the Chevalier) we
must take another opportunity of meeting to settle the affair. It may be
concluded immediately, by Sir John's giving Miss Beaufoy into my care, replied
Stamford: If I harbored Miss Beaufoy, (said Sir John, angrily,) I could not be
surprised at your conduct; but since I have repeatedly assured you, that I have
never to my knowledge seen her, I think your uncommon behavior requires an
explanation; and I must, and do, insist on your giving me one before you leave
this house. Why not suffer the person whom you call Chattelherhault to face me,
and what you now call uncommon behavior, will appear extraordinary no longer.
There is not any necessity for your seeing her now, (said Osborn,) neither
shall you be allowed that satisfaction, till supported by good authority for
demanding it. Then I will take care to expose your villainy as it deserves.
'Don't be so hasty, Henry' (interrupted his father,) I see no impropriety in
the gentleman's being permitted to see Mademoiselle Chattelherhault; and think
the Chevalier cannot have any objection, as it will end the contest, by
convincing him of his error. If you think, Sir John, it will convince Mr.
Stamford of his error, my permission is granted; but he has imbibed the idea so
strongly of my sister's being his ward, that I very much question if he does
not swear more positively after seeing her to what he has had the effrontery to
affirm already. Impossible, replied Sir John, besides, Morell's assertion must
have weight, his word has never yet been doubted; nor can it, I trust, be
disputed now. We have another witness that certainly will gain credit; so
saying he came toward to closet. 'Oh Sir,' I exclaimed, as the door was about
opening, I may now conclude myself a lost creature, indeed. Have courage,
Madam, replied Sir Thomas, this business will terminate much better than I
expected. Will you be kind enough to bring Mademoiselle Chattelherhault,
forward, Sir, and let this unpleasant affair be put an end to at once, said Sir
John, as pulling the door open. In a moment I found myself in the same room
with Stamford. Horror thrilled through every vein: instead of coming toward
me, as I expected, he looked aghast, for, having arisen and advanced to meet
us, at sight of Sir Thomas he retreated a few paces and stood in the attitude
of surprise. 'Stuart!' cried he, recovering himself, 'How came you here?'
Oppressed innocence demanded my attendance. Mr. Stamford, painful remembrance
tells me you were the companion of my youth; this is the first time of our
meeting, since I embarked years back for India. I did not then expect the next
time of seeing you to be obliged to renounce the friendship you so strongly
proffered me. Whatever has been insinuated to injure me in you good opinion is
false as hell. It is a vile story trumpt up to gloss over their own conduct,
that will not bear a scrutiny. However, arguing longer is needless. Had you
sent me word your daughter had found a protector in -- 'My daughter!' echoed
Sir Thomas, interrupting him. 'Now, Sir,' said Osborn to his father, you find
every syllable this fellow has advanced is false; and I hope you will not
prevent my turning him out of doors. 'Hold,' said Sir Thomas, he says she is my
child, Great God! is there truth in the assertion? 'Not a word,' said the
Chevalier, (exultingly rubbing his hands for joy,) now we may sing Old Rose and
burn the Bellows, as I Have heard you English say. Oh, I^ diable, (exclaimed he
altering his tone) 'Osborn get help.' (For I had fainted in his arms) Too
surely there is, said Sir Thomas, (unheeding my insensibility) -- say, quickly
speak. Where is her mother? is she still my wife, or has she forgot she had a
husband? Fool; madman that I was, continued he, stamping his feet, she was
innocent of my accusation, and I have been the murderer of an honest man. Where
is she? But why wish to add to the misery I endure, from a knowledge of her
abode? Her name is changed, no longer Stuart, but Beaufoy. No wonder my
enquiries proved abortive. Tell me, yet I dread to hear, is this my own child,
of was her mother married again before she was born? Her name is Beaufoy,
(replied Stamford) remember yours is Stuart. Oh Christ! (exclaimed he striking
his hand on his forehead) tell me no more; she is inconstant and I renounce
her. Yet let me know all, proofs will assist me in tearing her once-loved image
from my fond mind. Vainly I flattered myself, when cherishing the thought my
fortune would atone for the ill usage she had sustained. During the whole of
this unconnected address to Stamford, lady and Miss Osborn were striving to
recover me, while Mademoiselle D'Aubigny, eager to learn my doom, could attend
to no one but the afflicted baronet. The first sentence I heard pronounced,
after gaining my recollection, was by her. Suffer me to entreat, Sir (said she)
you will not pay any attention to what that vile man says. The mother of this
young lady never had more than one husband. He went abroad, and she quitted
England, to reside in France. You have infused fresh life, throughout my
shattered frame, madam, (replied he). 'But why' (speaking with avidity) commit
the care of her child to him? There was no other on the spot to whose care she
thought she could entrust her with so much safety. Why place her under any
other protection than her own? 'Oh Sir Thomas,' (replied Mademoiselle
D'Aubigny) looking mournfully at him -- 'What,' (cried he hastily) 'Is she
dead?' 'Oh God,' (finding she forbore to answer) my cruelty has too surely put
an end to her wretched existence. When you are in a disposition to be further
informed, if you take the trouble of calling on me, (said Stamford) I shall be
happy to receive you, Sir; at present I have business of the utmost
consequence, and must bid you good morning. Osborn would have stopped him, but
was prevented by his father, while the Baronet in an agony of grief, flung
himself into a chair, vowing never to know comfort more. My dear
Chattelherhault, (said Miss Osborn,) so I must still call you, what mystery is
this? Do for heaven's sake, if the task will not be too painful, explain it.
Will you believe any thing I shall hereafter advance, Miss Osborn, returned I,
striving to conceal my half averted face with a handkerchief, after discovery
of my being an impostor? You have gained so much on my esteem, that I could not
suspect your veracity, though conviction stared me in the face, and be assured,
whatever is in my power shall not be omitted, in striving to make you happy.
Sir Thomas, starting from his seat, came with hasty strides toward me. Why if
you really are my daughter, did you submit to exchange the ancient name of
Stuart, for that of Beaufoy? That question, Sir, reminds me I must not be too
sanguine: Dare I flatter myself in the illusive hope of your being my father,
when yours is called Morell? It is not Morell, neither had I suffered that
name should take place of mine, but for an estate, which I fondly intended to
make your mother's life easy with. Imagine not, that I have totally renounced
it. No, the name of Stuart I pride myself more in than the empty title, annexed
to Thomas Morell. My mother was a Douglass, and I cannot forget my origin on
either side, arose from kings. The Douglasses and Stuarts are renowned the
world all over, for their honor, and ancestry. The families are of the first
in Scotland. Your mother descended from the Murrys and Campbells, was related
to me before our marriage; yet after it, relinquished the tie of consanguinity,
even in the names, with her family, and degraded both herself and me by
changing that of Stuart, for Beaufoy. I am obliged to resign the pen at
present, Madam, but will take the first opportunity of resuming it. I have the
honor of subscribing myself your obliged, no longer Beaufoy, but

D'ARCY STUART.

To Madame Passerat.
Harley-Street.
BEFORE I conclude my narrative, Madam, I cannot refrain from telling you, that
however ridiculous Sir Thomas's pride of family may appear to those who have
not to boast of their alliance with one, I must own, I have my life through
inherited, in some degree, his disposition. I have felt it eminently when a
child, if chastifed by those I conceived my inferiors, though hardly knowing
what the pride of family-ancestry meant, and my station in life degraded at the
same time. As I increased in years, my mind became more enlightened. I
considered every person endued with merit my more than equal; but if treated
with impunity, by those who were my superiors in point of fortune alone, my
spirit could not brook it, neither could I forbear reflecting at the moment,
that the great grandfathers of those very people were most likely begging their
bread, while mine were moving in all the splendor of affluence. The painful
idea has wounded my feelings to an excess -- when a ray of consolation darting
on my mind has dispelled the gloom and raised my soul superior to low malice. I
have triumphed in an inward self-assurance, that time would raise me infinitely
above their level; the time is now arrived. The claims of society demand my
civility toward those people; but friendship's sacred tie disowns them all.
You will readily excuse the hauteur that appears to guide the preceding lines,
they are written feelingly; I have been repeatedly ill treated, by the very
people who professed most friendship for me; yet if I know my own heart, it will
never permit the actuation (if I may be allowed the word) of ingratitude
toward any that have done me an act of kindness, though only oftentatiously
meant to evince it was in their power to confer, rather than prompted by innate
goodness of heart, to be capable of doing a generous action. I have surely said
enough, Madam, to tire you with observation; now proceed to dialogue. In answer
to Sir Thomas's reflection on my mother for changing her name, I told him, that
deserted by her friends, she had only a trifling pittance to support herself,
and considered a very short time might render her a mother, former rank could
not be supported; she therefore determined that the family of Stuart should not
be wittingly insulted by an unfeeling world in her; and renounced the name.
Beaufoy, she said, was answerable to the state of her own mind, for well she
knew, Sir, continued I, death would not be permitted to close your eyes before
you were thoroughly convinced of her innocence. She was purity itself, cried
he, and I a villain. I bartered my former peace of mind for rage and infamy. Do
not say so, Sir, interrupted I, my mother ever took the blame on herself; her
own conduct she said, had been the occasion of all her misery, and she must
endure misfortune without a murmur. If you wish I should preserve my reason,
tell me not of her superior excellence, the knowledge of her patient sufferance
will drive me desperate. Oh heavenly God! what cruelty is there in human nature
that I have not been capable of! Ruined the fair fame of a virtuous wife in the
world's eye, and pierced my sword through the heart of a man I supposed her
paramour Oh Jesus! the last words he pronounced as falling, still vibrate in my
ears, "Stuart, your wife is wronged, she is virtuous." He would have said more,
but death sealed his lips. Reason forsook my breast a whole twelvemonth; at
length returned; yes, cruelly returned, with double force, to awaken me to an
exquisite sense of complicated misery. So she is really dead? Best of women,
ejaculated he, your life I rendered wretched; to your memory I will be just.
Such meek forbearance to vindicate your conduct demands the tribute. It is the
only one I now can pay. Your fidelity shall no longer be suspected, nor your
child remain an alien to our family. He caught me in his arms; I wept, indeed
there was not a dry eye in the room, except his own. Why do you weep, said he?
looking wildly at me. Is it because you are consigned to the care of him who
treated your mother within humanity? Put confidence in my honor, and for the
sake of that suffering innocent I will treat you gently. His last speech,
delivered mourn fully, affected me, if possible, more than the former ones. I
could make no reply: taking my silence for a mark of disgust, he cried, pushing
me from him. Go, I find you hate me, you may from former behavior have
sufficient cause for it, but I will not tamely submit to receiving contempt
from you; though conscious of having merited it. 'Oh, Sir,' I exclaimed in
agony of mind, you know me not, my heart has received no impression, exclusive
of duty and affection; those I feel are too strongly engraven ever to be erased
by less tender passions. I hardly know what this mystery implies, (said Sir
John) or how it will prove on investigation; but think, if left alone a few
minutes, your thoughts will be more collected, and yourself better able to
make, or answer any enquiry. 'Leave me, quickly' replied my father, the sight
of my remorse for offenses past must be distressing to you all; besides I feel
I am unfit for any company but that of my wretched self. I will strive to calm
my mind and join you presently. Osborn and the Chevalier supported me down
stairs, where I acquainted the family with the occasion of my mother's
unfortunate loss of happiness. Luckily I am possessed of a letter which my father
sent her the day of taking his departure: happening to be looking over a small
casket of here is the preceding evening, that I had not till then opened, I found
it tied with a piece of black silk twist, to which was suspended a small
parcel; on opening it, I found a pair of diamond earrings. On the paper was
written: These were the last ornaments Mr. Stuart purchased for me; all my
other appendages to dress I have long since disposed of; but determined to
preserve these, (unless my child was destitute of the necessaries of life) as
relics of his affection for an ungrateful woman. I gave Lady Osborn the
letter to peruse, and through it have confirmed myself the daughter of Sir
Thomas. Miss Osborn was in raptures with her brother, for assuming so proper a
spirit at Dover. Sir John said, As it had turned out, there was no harm done;
but he hoped Henry would be more careful in future. I might have borne the most
infamous character for any thing he knew to the contrary; he had only my own
word for what I had advanced; and it was two to one, if every syllable had not
proved false. 'Well, well,' said Miss Osborn, in a lively tone, you find it has
not proved false, my dear Sir. I think instead of rebuking Henry for what is
past, you ought to thank your stars on your knees, night and morning, for
bestowing such a kind hearted fellow of a son on you; for my own part, I shall
certainly think the better of him all my life to come. Honestly speaking, Sir
John, continued she drily. Do you really think you deserve him? Immediately
altering her tone to a fearful one, I must be careful in putting too many home
questions; that serious air bodes me no good. Come, Sir, (observing him smile)
look cheerily, cast aside the dumps while you remain with us, at least. Are you
not a very saucy daughter, Matty? (asked Sir John) However I have spoilt you
myself by too much encouragement, and cannot blame any other person for it.
'Ah, Sir,' (in a tone of raillery) too late you find the fatal effects of not
checking young saucebox in her infancy. But what do you say now, to bestowing
me on some honest John Trot kind of a man, who will give me all my own way, and
taking in return this little demure looking damsel, for a wife to thy son
Henry? Do you think now an alteration in the family of this kind would be taken
amiss by either one of us? My dear Miss Osborn, (said I, in a faultering tone
and blushing) what do you mean? How can you talk so? You do not consider whom
you are talking before. I do not believe you pay a thought to a single syllable
you are uttering (replied she, smiling at my stupid confusion). Do let me
alone, I never invade your province, neither shall you mine. 'Very well,' said
I (blushing still more) 'have it all your own way.' 'Hark ye, my dear,'
(inclining her head toward mine, and spreading a fan before our faces) trust
to the honor of Matilda Osborn, it cannot betray a confidence placed in it;
but if once she finds you mean to deceive her, she gives no quarter. Ah those
pretty blushes speak for themselves. They say Henry has conquered one heart,
and I will be hanged if Miss Stuart has not been guilty of the same pretty
theft with another. Nay, no declaration, (I was going to speak) unless you are
going to confess; if you will do that I promise to fight your cause ever after.
My father coming in, put an end to the conversation and relieved my
embarrassment: soon after the family agreed they would not be interrupted by
visitants, and gave orders to be denied to whoever called on them that day. The
next we were all to spend at Sir Thomas's, where I was to remain, my dear
Marianne having promised to give me her company some months.

Mademoiselle D'Aubigny writes.

Nay it does not signify, contention will avail you nothing: this letter I
certainly must finish by the way of informing my aunt of what you would blush
to put pen to paper about. Miss Osborns hint has been improved, my dear Madam,
and your young correspondent will retain her new name but a very short time. To
spare her confusion, I took on myself the talk of informing Sir Thomas, that
Mr. Osborn was the only man his daughter could ever entertain a regard for. He
generously assured me, he thought the one who so nobly rescued her from infamy,
the only person worthy to possess her; and the gentlemen of the long robe are
as busy in preparing the marriage settlements as the expectation of good sees
can make them. I have given a promise to remain in England till the spring,
then my suite will be honored on returning to the continent, by Sir Thomas
Stuart Morell, his happy daughter and her husband, Sir John, Lady, and Miss
Osborn, with the Chevalier; more properly, according to the national assembly's
disposition of rank, Monsieur Chattelherhault. I am to be obliged in their
company till the dullest season of the year is rapidly approaching to assist me
in regretting the loss of such amiable friends. But they tell me I must not
anticipate evils, while at a distance, so to avoid that, and prepare to attend
a rehearsal, at the opera house, I subscribe myself, dear Madam,

Your truly affectionate niece, MARIANNE D'AUBIGNY.
P. S. Stamford removed from his lodgings in Bond-street the same night that
the happy discovery was made; and though the strictest enquires have been made
after him, neither Mr. Osborn nor Sir Thomas have been able to gain the
slightest intelligence as yet.



To the Honorable Miss Townsend.
St. James's Square.
AFTER all this ado, would you believe, Mademoiselle Chattelherhault has proved
the daughter and heiress of Sir Thomas Stuart Morell, instead of sister to the
Chevalier; the man might well be so polite to the little urchin if he had never
seen her before. I thought he overacted the part of brother, and now the
wonderment is out. That sly creature, Henry, too; well, I am not deceived in
regard to his head. I ever suspected that to be a plotting one: but his late
conduct has convinced us all he inherits a noble heart. 'The deuce take this
girl,' I know you will say, 'she begins where every one besides herself would
leave off.' It is a happy knack I have acquired, and you must content yourself
with the style, or forswear reading any more of my penmanship: to vex you still
more by the way of hastening your return to town, I have determined to keep you
in suspense for particulars, till you think proper in person to ask them;
though, to stretch your curiosity, which I know has been long since awakened,
I Will tell you; Henry and she are to be married. Mademoiselle D' Aubigny and
myself, are chosen bride-maids; and if Miss Townsend arrives in time, I promise
you she shall be invited to the wedding. What is to be done now? A message from
Sir John; I must attend him immediately. Appleton tells me, a smart young
gentleman has been closetted with him this half hour: my heart flutters. Do not
you think it must be something very extraordinary to occasion a palpitation
there; I attend the summons; you shall know the event the moment the interview
is over.

In continuation.

Surprise, and ecstacy united, have nearly deprived me of the little reason I
possessed. Congratulate me, Sophia, I am now at liberty to disclose the secret
of my heart, and invite you to partake of the happiness it occasions. You must
be expeditious to a degree in hastening here, or positively I must look out for
another bride-maid in your stead. Well; but the secret, lord I had almost
forgotten that, though my heart, my head, my thoughts, all, all, are full of
the subject. You certainly recollect young Hamilton, with whom Henry was at
Oxford; two vacations he spent with us in Hampshire and three in town. Now
comes the confession; shall I call him the wretch? Oh, yes, the pleasing wretch
(a very pretty epithet for a favored lover) made captive, the wandering heart
of Matilda Osborn, in the most assuming, nay, insolent manner you ever heard
of. You will scarcely credit, that so flighty a toad as Sir John frequently
calls me, could ever be won by the man who took pains to convince her he was
not blind to her faults. Ah, you may stare! It is absolutely true. I have been
flattered by one, treated with submissive respect by another, while a third
more impetuous than either of the others, has dared to be jealous of the very
people I despised; but not one, except Hamilton, presumed to say that I
inherited the foibles of the whole of my sex. He professed himself my friend;
strove to correct the errors of my judgment, while he made a point of
ridiculing my levities with good humor, till the criticism engaged my most
serious attention, and the author of it became dearer to my heart than a mind
at unison with itself could admit of. Love, he had never so much as spoken of
to me; yet the attention he paid me, was remarked by all my acquaintance. At
this period his uncle died, and he became the Marquis of D -- his visits from
being frequent, were withdrawn on a sudden; if by chance we met, a coolness
that pierced my soul was substituted for the warmth of friendship I had been
accustomed to experience. Hurt -- beyond description hurt, at a change of
conduct I had not wittingly given any occasion for, I determined his image
should be erased from my mind though it cost me my life accomplishing. In this
state of mind I continued when Grenvill's first visit was permitted; he was
submissive to a degree. I strove to regard him in the light of one who was
destined for my husband. It availed me little, and him still less: my heart
would not suffer the lesson of affection to take root in my mind, for a
character so opposite to that it had acknowledged for it is lord, and when he
pressed for a decisive answer, I was obliged myself to assure him, I never
could esteem him otherwise than a friend. He expostulated; but my heart was now
too firmly attached to it is first choice to suffer whatever he could urge to
prevail. His dismission was the consequence; since that, how often has my pride
been piqued and love wounded, by the Marquis's treatment of me at the houses of
different friends where we have met. I have witnessed his polite attention to
every other female in company, while I alone was neglected; or received the
distant civility due to an utter stranger. Instead of suffering a depression of
spirits to become visible at those times, as a serious soul like yourself would
have done, I have conquered my feelings in some degree, and to support a show
of equal indifference have coquetted with every other man in company; but this
gaiete was forced, and generally forsook me the instant I had quitted the house
which contained the Marquis; then I have given a loose to my sorrows; and the
instant I gained home retired to my apartment to indulge the horrors of
despair. How the dence I have been able to plod on in the plaintive strain of a
hopeless soul I cannot imagine, after the object of my every wish has not only
made a tender of his title; but what is still dearer his heart. The reason he
gives for the affected indifference I pen with pleasure, because it is an
assurance that his heart was incapable of change, as my own was of being
alienated. His mother wished him to marry lady Sarah Gibbons; to oblige her, he
owns he did his utmost in striving to estrange his affections. It is well for
me though the trial failed of effect; and the behavior I lamented in secret
was merely an effort to comply with her wish. Hang lady Sarah, I was going to
say, she has occasioned me the heart ache more than once; however I have no
great occasion at present to repine, the cause is removed, and I made happy in
the effect; so Mr. Care, my troubles having ceased, you may trudge, and I
sincerely conjure you not to think of becoming a companion of mine a second
time. After all, Sophia, I believe this said courtship would have proved but a
stupid piece of business, had not the old gentleman enveloped the prospect of
happiness a short time. Mercy on us, here am I, deliberately writing a long
letter to you, while hurry scurry, and confusion, demands my attendance in a
thousand different places. I have a headpiece, and so has a goose. I had forgot
the poor man has been waiting this half hour below, in eager expectation of my
approach. Nor should I have recollected it now, had not the impatient wretch
sent up a message to hasten me down. Adieu; fail not in performing the promise
you have frequently made to,

MATILDA OSBORN.

To the Honorable Miss Townsend.
St. James's Square.
YOU have assured me I may depend on your being in town before Saturday, yet a
love of scribbling is so inherent in my nature, that I could rather forswear
eating, when hungry, than writing, when tempted by the circulation of news.
That old figure, Mrs. Rawlins, has married the man she exultingly declared was
without a fault. He proving a fortune hunter has shrewdly marched off with the
whole of her fortune, and left his sturdy widow to bemoan her hapless fate, and
ponder over the dreadful certainty of possession being nine points of the law.
Her darling Jacky abuses her for not knowing when she was well off, and swears
she shall never get a farthing from him. As she has made her bed so let her lie
on it, by the way of giving ease to her old bones, said he, when Mrs. Crisp was
striving one day to prevail on him to allow her a trifle. Fortunately a man
whose circumstances are easy fell in love with and married Nan, as the vulgar
soul used to call her daughter, and the generous spirited woman has prevailed
on him to maintain her mother, that she may be kept from starving. To use
Derby's term. Master Jacky is nearly done over, from a smack at high life, as
he politely calls it: the inhuman brute lost thirty thousand pounds last week,
and twenty this; most likely the next ensures him a complete beggar; thus ends
the ostentatious grandeur of low life refined. Henry has written the memoirs of
his charming little Stuart, for your perusal; on looking it over, I see he has
forgot to mention where Sir Thomas met with the supposed seducer of his wife's
honor. He had been settled in the East twelve years, when a gentleman who had
professed a friendship for him, from the first of his arrival there, died,
leaving his estate and title to Mr. Stuart, with the proviso that the name of
Morell should take place of his own: a very short time after, hearing that the
captain was in India, he sent him a challenge, the fatal consequence Henry's
minutes inform you of; therefore I need not dwell on the distressing subject.
What tiresome creatures are the men after you have once given them cause to
suppose they have the least right over you. The Marquis has sent up his
compliments; hopes I am not indisposed; is rather fearful, as I have been so
long alone. I wonder if the man means this as a hint to remind me I am likely
to find a ruler in my lord; however next Thursday will witness two marriages;
little Stuart would not suffer me to be her bridemaid when my own wedding was
in agitation she said; so a cousin of hers is substituted in my stead. I have
not time to add more, therefore for the last time I sign myself,

MATILDA OSBORN.

To Madame Passerat.
Reading. HONORED MADAM,
YESTERDAY consigned the amiable D'Arcy to the future protection of her dear
Osborn. His sister, who next to our deserving friend prejudices every one in
her favor, gave her hand at the same time to the Marquis of D --; he will make
an addition to the party you may expect to see on my return. I retain in memory
the promise I have so frequently made of not marrying any person till you had
seen and approved my choice, otherwise I believe the two brides would have
prevailed on me to listen to Chattelherhault's solications of adding to the
group of married folks; however, they have obliged me to promise I will comply
with his wish, if you make no objection; so the days of my celibacy are
entirely submitted to your determination. I cannot lengthen this letter, having
promised Sir Thomas, and the Chevalier, to take the air with them this morning;
and I see the groom in the courtyard with the horses.

I remain, dear Madam, Your truly affectionate, MARIANNE D'AUBIGNY.

FINIS.

