AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT MENDON, JULY 4, 1796, AT THE CELEBRATION OF THE
Twentieth Anniversary OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY SOLOMON SIBLEY, A. B. STUDENT AT LAW.

Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON.

1796.

AN ORATION.
My respected Friends and Fellow-Citizens,
PERMIT me to address you, on this twentieth anniversary of American liberty
and independence. An epoch of national dignity; the regeneration of liberty
from the ruins of despotism; the emancipation of a large portion of mankind
from oppression and slavery. These are some of the leading features of that
memorable event, which guarantied to America her political salvation. An event,
which, whilst it engages the wonder and admiration of distant nations, cannot
fail to interest the particular attention of the citizens of these United
States.

WE are, at this time, called upon, neither to celebrate the birth day, nor the
coronation of a hereditary tyrant. Neither are we commanded to join the
procession of a conqueror; to perpetuate his acts of infamy and disgrace.

No; it is the birth day of liberty, rational liberty, and the unalienable
rights of man, which we celebrate. Let rigid economy, for a moment, resign the
empire of reason to innocent mirth and festivity. Let joyful gladness beam on
every countenance. We are, this day, assembled in commemoration of exalted
deeds; deeds meriting the highest eulogium. Let us join United America, in the
grand chorus of praise. Let us proclaim to the world the glad tidings of
liberty, established on the broad basis of national glory.

AMERICA has not, as at the present, always enjoyed the rich blessings of peace
and plenty. War, once, deluged our country in blood. Our verdant fields were
crimsoned with human gore. Many of our bravest and best citizens fell devoted
victims to its ravages. Long was the conflict, and doubtful the issue; till, at
length, virtue and patriotism completely triumphed over veteran discipline, to
the salvation of our country.

THE numerous circumstances, attending the late revolution in America, as
recorded in history, are both singular and interesting. They hold out to the
world "the tremendous uncertainty of all human grandeur." They afford to kings
and tyrants a striking lesson of their own weakness and folly. They demonstrate
to the despot, that the rod of terror will not always insure blind adoration to
him who wields it; -- that a government, built on any other foundation than
reason and the affections of the citizens, will never be able to withstand the
floodtide of opposition.

OUR forefathers, persecuted in their native country, fled to America.
Surrounded, on every side, by the most imminent dangers, they patiently endured
every hardship and cruelty, but death, in pursuit of liberty. They
presumptuously hoped, that a distance of more than three thousand miles from
their unnatural parent, would effectually screen them from her cruelties.
Neglected, in their infant state, they must have perished, had not their own
unparallelled vigilance, wisdom, and economy, raised them to opulence and
power. 'Twas now, they experienced, afresh, the same unabated system of
oppression, exercised toward them in America, which had driven them into the
wilderness. Their sudden and unexpected opulence drew on them the united envy
and jealousy of Great Britain. Laws were enacted for the sole purpose of
oppressing and impoverishing the then colonies. The Americans beheld the
injustice, in silent despair: till, at length, a righteous indignation roused
them into action. The heavenly spark was, at last, by repeated and reiterated
exertions, blown into a blaze; and with its bright effulgence illumined this
western world.

THE Angel of liberty, descending from his bright abode, unfurled the sacred
standard. The shrill trump of war was blown: A war, on our part, founded on the
eternal principles of self-preservation, could not fail, ultimately, to be
successful.

IF we take a retrospective view of the critical situation of our country, when
hostilities commenced; the inhabitants thinly scattered over an extensive
territory; unacquainted with the intricate science of war; and, what was still
more embarrassing, entirely destitute of the means of regular defense; the
issue, in the eye of impartial reason, at best, on the part of America, was
doubtful. But desperate cases require daring remedies. The opposition was
already begun. To shrink back and fail, would have been revolt and treason.
Every effort was made, every nerve was strained: And the result is well known,
as being highly favorable to liberty and the rights of man.

THE war, at first, on the part of America, was a war of redress. But it was
soon discovered, that the object was unequal to the magnitude of the contest.
Nothing less than the independence of America could reward the manly exertions
of her brave citizens. The new object of contention was, boldly, proclaimed to
the astonished world. The glorious tidings encouraged the firm; confirmed the
wavering; and reanimated the drooping. From this moment, the enemy beheld the
unexpected opposition with astonishment. Consternation painted, in their guilty
imaginations, all the horrors of an unsuccessful war. After a seven years'
contention, in fruitless efforts to conquer America, Great Britain, at length,
exhausted in men and money, gave up what she could no longer retain. Peace was,
once more, restored to our long desolated country. But prosperity had deserted
our borders. Government was prostrated, and every thing appeared, rapidly,
tending toward anarchy and confusion. At this awful crisis of affairs, a new
government was contemplated. To form a constitution, calculated to reduce into
union and harmony the opposite and clashing interests of thirteen discordant
states, required the utmost stretch of human wisdom. The grand experiment was,
at length, made; and it succeeded beyond the most sanguine expectations. It
produced a constitution, the legitimate offspring of great and exalted
abilities. And do we exaggerate, when we pronounce it, a model of political
perfection?

HISTORY unfolds a new era in the science of government. The reign of liberty
and prosperity over this western world; order and firmness restored to a
tottering state; national faith and honor built on the everlasting foundation
of justice.

WE claim not the liberty of nature. We glory in the possession of rational
liberty; we glory in submitting to the mild government of laws; laws calculated
to promote the greatest general good of community. It Is the uncivilized man who
exults in the liberty of nature. A liberty wholly inconsistent with a civilized
life. Man, united in society, no longer remains the man of the wilderness. He
is obliged to resign a certain share of his freedom to that society, which, in
return for the sacrifice he makes, guaranties to him the quiet and unmolested
enjoyment of the residue. Hence we have the origin of true government: A
voluntary association, or compact, entered into betwixt individuals, mutually
relinquishing a part of their liberty, with a view, the more effectually, to
enjoy the remainder. A government built on any other foundation, or having any
other object in view, does not answer the designs of government: It Is evidently
oppression, which continually, from the first moments of its existence, tends
to dissolution.

THE ancients received for a maxim, that a great and powerful nation could
never prosper and flourish under a Republican Government. This error grew out
of their ignorance of the genuine principles of Republicanism. Instead of
meeting in council, by their representatives, men chosen from their own body,
men who had signalized themselves by their wisdom, or their talents, they
rushed together in one indiscriminate mass. Assembled, in this manner, in the
heat and paroxysm of party, they proceeded to the discussion of topics, which
required the closest investigation of cool reason and unbiassed judgment. The
national legislature, formed thus, of the unprincipled and ignorant, was a fit
tool, in the hands of powerful individuals, to accomplish their wicked
purposes. We may hence account for the frequent revolutions and conspiracies,
which so often prostrated the sacred rights of humanity at the accursed shrine
of despotism.

AMERICA enjoys the advantages, possessed by ancient republics, without being
exposed to their dangers and imperfections. No powerful individual riots on our
liberties. The rulers, as well as the ruled, are strictly amenable to the laws
of their country. The Constitution sets the grand arbitress of unlimited power.
Her righteous decisions no human arm can withstand. A glorious system of checks
and balances forms an effectual barrier to unprincipled ambition.

WASHINGTON stands at the political helm. The Ship of State, under his
auspices, will have a safe and prosperous voyage. No pirate shall ever rob him
of his prize. Amidst contending storms, WASHINGTON moves in native dignity
toward the haven of safety. Durst any one question the ability or the
integrity of the "tried Patriot"? The American Hero stands aloof, unaffected by
base ingratitude. Her malignant shafts can, never, reach his exalted soul.
Should foreign powers, ever, ungenerously attempt to influence our politics,
their attempts must prove abortive. Our citizens are too much enlightened, and
too far initiated into their own interest, to credit base and groundless
insinuations.

OUR Constitution is the grand palladium of our liberties. Whilst that remains
unviolated, we are in little danger of being deprived of our freedom. England
may boast of her Magna Charta, of her Bill of Rights, extorted from tyrants.
America boasts of a CONSTITUTION, founded on the united suffrages of a free,
enlightened, and independent people; a Constitution boldly held up to the view
of the world; a mirror, in which every citizen may read his own political
character.

IF we contrast our own happy situation with that of the European world,
involved in all the complicated horrors of a desolating war, we, certainly,
have additional inducements to rejoice on this day. No field of battle, heaped
with the slain, presents itself to our view. No village, wrapped in flames,
terrifies the affrightened inhabitants. No arbitrary exactions rob the poor man
of his scanty pittance. Here, the virtuous citizen can set, under his own vine
and figtree, and feast, unmolested, upon the abundant fruits of his own
industry. Our commerce extends over the broad swelling ocean. Our flag flies
unfurled in every sea. The same enterprizing spirit which so eminently
characterized our pious ancestors, is still a prominent feature of their
offspring. Wherever prospects of gain rise into view, there you will behold the
American countenance. Since the establishment of our federal government, our
commerce has increased beyond every rational calculation; and with some few
exceptions, and those, in a great measure, owing to the unavoidable calamities
of a war uncommonly destructive, has been uniformly successful. Wealth and
opulence flow in upon our country from every quarter of the globe. Our national
resources are rapidly increasing, and bid fair, in a short time, to become as
extensive as our territory. The arts and sciences increase and flourish, under
the patronage of a generous public. Their salutary influence is felt and
acknowledged by a virtuous people. The dark cloud of ignorance and superstition
no longer veils our land. The vivifying rays of knowledge have darted athwart
the human mind; and by their genial influence, at once, transformed the citizen
into an enlightened politician.

SINCE knowledge is the foundation of Republicanism, let us be careful to
render the avenues to it easy and accessible. Let us put into the hands of the
poor man, as well as the rich, the means of ennobling his nature. No hereditary
distinctions, no titles of nobility, will ever be suffered to trample on our
equal liberties. Genius and exalted abilities will always receive sufficient
encouragement under a free government.

UNITED to the train of important privileges, which we enjoy, the unlimited
freedom of the press claims a high and distinguished rank. It Is one of the
grand pillars of political freedom. It is so essential to the existence of a
free government, that to abridge it, would be, wantonly, to hazard the
liberties of the people. It Is an impartial tribunal, by which men and measures
must eventually stand or fall. It Is the grand vehicle of national information.
Hence tyrants have, uniformly, considered the press as their enemy. They have
waged an eternal war against it. They are fully sensible, that the firmness and
durability of their usurped power depend on the ignorance of mankind, that to
let the light of reason into the minds of their subjects would be giving the
last and fatal blow to their greatness.

IN celebrating this day, let us not pass over, unnoticed, those brave men, who
fell martyrs in the glorious cause of liberty and their country. They nobly
contended for a rich and magnificent prize. They fell victorious, and in their
death sealed, with their blood, our Independence. Let us consecrate their
memories by administering the balm of comfort to their unfortunate and
distressed friends and families. Let us, from the cheek of the orphan, wipe the
swollen tear. It Is a sacred debt we owe to the cause of injured humanity. Let us,
this day, by our justice and liberality, demonstrate to the world, that,
notwithstanding the base assertions to the contrary, gratitude does dwell in
the republican bosom.

THE empire of liberty is, yet, confined to a small portion of the globe. The
immense regions of Asia and Africa present human nature debased and fallen.
Doomed to perpetual chains and bondage, millions, pining unto death, drag on a
miserable load of existence. Death to them is a welcome friend, a messenger of
peace. He comes to relieve the captive of a burden, nature can no longer
support. Unfortunate man! America weeps over thy miseries, without the power to
relieve or help thee. Ignorance has everlastingly barred the doors of thy
cottage against the approach of liberty.

EUROPE presents a more pleasing prospect to the future reign of freedom, in
that quarter of the world. Liberty has, already, reared her standard on the
banks of the Seine. She has spread her banner over oppressed Frenchmen; and she
is, now, gently inviting the weary of the whole earth to rest under its sacred
shadow. "Brave Frenchmen! Your cause is the cause of universal nature." Your
successes shake the tottering thrones of tyrants, which will, one day, entomb
their greatness. If Frenchmen, in the first stages of their revolution,
sometimes, committed excesses and violence, attribute it to necessity. Our
generous allies are humane, as well as brave. We ought to contemplate France,
in her critical situation, overthrowing an arbitrary government, cutting one of
the principal links in the grand chain of oppression, externally invaded by the
united powers of Europe, violently rent by internal sactions, desperadoes,
sacrilegiously, prostrating every law, both human and divine. Under these
circumstances, who can wonder, that France should, sometimes, let slip the
reins of moderation; and give a momentary scope to provoked vengeance? Far more
surprising, had she never, once, erred from the path of justice.

AFTER contemplating the degradation and disorder which reign in the other
quarters of the world, what exalted ideas must we entertain of our own happy
situation. Here, humanity, shielded from the chilling blasts of tyranny,
expands and blossoms, under the mild rays of freedom, producing rich fruits, to
gladden the heart of the unfortunate. We are, this day, at peace with the whole
creation of mankind. Safety and happiness restored to our extensive frontiers.
Our brethren in slavery soon to return into the open bosom of their country.
The clouds of contention, which, lately, spread over our political horizon,
portending storms and tempests, have happily subsided. Every thing has, at
length, returned to its perfect level. Our CONSTITUTION rises gloriously
triumphant. May its sacred princiciples leap the ocean, and run through
universal nature, enlightening and animating the ignorant and oppressed of the
whole earth.

MAY United America never forget, nor neglect to celebrate, this glorious
anniversary. Let us hand down the hallowed lesson to posterity, who, in their
turn, will teach the same to their prattling infants. It will be to them a
rich, a valuable, bequest. As we prize and adore liberty, so let us use every
righteous mean, in our power, to render its dominion universal, permanent, and
lasting.

Finis.
The following is copied from the COLUMBIAN SENTINEL of July 16, 1796.
MENDON, JULY 5, 1796.
THE anniversary of our National Independence was, yesterday, celebrated in
this town, with decent mirth and festivity. An oration (preceded by a
well-adapted prayer by the Rev. Mr. ALEXANDER) replete with sentiments that
were pertinent and federal, was pronounced by Mr. SOLOMON SIBLEY, A. B. to a
respectable auditory of gentlemen and ladies, assembled on the occasion, from
this and the neighboring towns; after which, under an arbor erected for the
day, a large and respectable number of gentlemen dined together, and partook of
the productions of our happy country, and enjoyed all the social and convivial
delight and satisfaction, which this auspicious day ought always to inspire.
The following sixteen toasts were given, and drank by the company before they
separated, viz.

1. The Day. May gratitude ever remind us of this auspicious anniversary.

2. The President of the United States. -- May we always delight to honor the
man who unites all hearts

3. The Vice President. -- May his country be long benefitted by his great and
distinguished talents.

4. The Constitution and Government of the United States. -- As they have
hitherto produced, may they continue to increase, the political happiness of
our country.

5. Governor ADAMS. -- May all his patriotic services be fully repaid, by the
gratitude and affection of his fellow-citizens.

6. The Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and its patriotic Legislature.

7. The Republic of France. -- May she soon enjoy the blessings of peace, under
a good Government of Laws, and not of Men.

8. Success to all people, who are struggling to obtain and secure the just and
equal Rights of Man.

9. A friendly union of all parties into one, and that one the great whole of
the American people, seeking only to increase the honor and prosperity of our
common country.

10. Our Agriculture and Manufactures. -- May they continue to flourish and
increase.

11. Our Commerce. -- May our Stars twinkle, and our Flag be unfurled, and
secure respect, in every clime, and amongst all the nations of the habitable
world.

12. An impartial Neutrality with all the powers at war; and continued peace
and prosperity to our happy country.

13. Speedy peace to all the contending nations of Europe.

14. Fayette and Kosciusko. -- If they are not now, may they soon be liberated
from their prisons; and here, in our happy-land, enjoy that Liberty and
Independence, for which they so nobly fought and bled.

15. General WAYNE and his brave army. -- May the peace they have secured to
our frontiers be perpetual.

16. Peace and good will toward, and a friendly intercourse with, all our
brethren of the human race.

Volunteer Toasts -- By BEZALEEL TAFT, Esquire. The Clergy. -- As we now have, may
we continue to be blessed with a learned and patriotic Clergy.

By Mr. LABAN BATES, of Bellingham. The old town of Mendon. -- May the
cultivation of its land, by its inhabitants, continue to be equal to the
richness and fertility of its soil.


