AN EULOGIUM, INTENDED TO PERPETUATE THE MEMORY OF DAVID RITTENHOUSE, LATE
PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, Delivered before the Society
in the First Presbyterian Church, in High Street, Philadelphia, on the 17th
Dec. 1796. AGREEABLY TO APPOINTMENT.

By Benjamin Rush, A MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR J. ORMROD, No. 41, CHESNUT-STREET, By Ormrod and
Conrad. COPY-RIGHT SECURED.

Philosophical Hall, December 17, 1796. In Meeting of the American
Philosophical Society,
RESOLVED, unanimously, That the thanks of this Society be presented to Dr.
Benjamin Rush, for the eloquent, learned, comprehensive, and just Eulogium,
which he has this day pronounced upon the character of our late respected
President, Dr. David Rittenhouse.

Resolved, unanimously, That Dr. Rush be requested to furnish the Society with
a copy of the Eulogium, to be published under their direction.

An Extract from the Minutes, Secretaries.
SAMUEL MAGAW, ROBERT PATTERSON, W. BARTON, JOHN BLEAKLEY,


AS a reason for introducing several sentiments into the following Eulogium,
apparently foreign to its design, it is necessary to inform the reader, that
the President, Senate and House of Representatives of the United States, the
Senate and House of Representatives of Pennsylvania, foreign Ministers,
Consuls, Secretaries of the General Government, the Judges of the Courts of the
United States and of Pennsylvania, the Corporation and Clergy of the City of
Philadelphia, the College of Physicians, the Trustees, Faculty and Students of
Philosophy and Medicine in the University, the Corporation of the First
Presbyterian Church, and a number of Ladies and Gentlemen attended the delivery
of the Eulogium, by an invitation from the Philosophical Society.

EULOGIUM.
Gentlemen of the Philosophical Society. Friends and Colleagues,
WE are assembled this day upon a mournful occasion. Death has made an inroad
upon our Society. Our illustrious and beloved PRESIDENT, is no more.
RITTENHOUSE, the ingenious, the modest, and the wise -- RITTENHOUSE, the friend
of God and man, is now no more! -- For this, the temple of Science is hung in
mourning, -- for this, our eyes now drop a tributary tear. Nor do we weep
alone. -- The United States of America sympathize in our grief, for his name
gave a splendour to the American character, and the friends of humanity in
distant parts of the world, unite with us in lamenting our common loss, -- for
he belonged to the whole human race.

By your vote to perpetuate the memory of this great and good man, you have
made a laudable attempt to rescue philosophers from their humble rank in the
history of mankind. It is to them we owe our knowledge and possession of most
of the necessaries and conveniences of life. To procure these blessings for us,
"they trim their midnight lamp, and hang over the sickly taper." For us, they
traverse distant regions, expose themselves to the inclemencies of the weather,
mingle with savages and beasts of prey, and in some instances, evince their
love of science and humanity by the sacrifice of their lives.

The amiable philosopher whose talents and virtues are to be the subject of the
following eulogium, is entitled to an uncommon portion of our gratitude and
praise. He acquired his knowledge at the expense of uncommon exertions, he
performed services of uncommon difficulty, and finally he impaired his health,
and probably shortened his life, by the ardor of his studies and labors for the
benefit of mankind.

In attempting to discharge the difficult and painful duty you have assigned
me, it will be necessary to give a short account of the life of Mr.
Rittenhouse, inasmuch as several of the most interesting parts of his character
are intimately connected with it.

The village of Germantown in the neighborhood of this city, had the honor of
giving birth to this distinguished philosopher on the 8th day of April, in the
year 1732. His ancestors migrated from Holland about the beginning of the
present century. They were distinguished, together with his parents, for
probity, industry, and simple manners. It is from sources thus pure and
retired, that those talents and virtues have been chiefly derived, which have
in all ages enlightened the world. They prove by their humble origin, that the
Supreme Being has not surrendered up the direction of human affairs to the
advantages acquired by accident or vice, and they bear a constant and faithful
testimony of his impartial goodness, by their necessary and regular influence
in equalizing the condition of mankind. This is the divine order of things, and
every attempt to invert it, is a weak and unavailing effort to wrest the
government of the world from the hands of God.

The early part of the life of Mr. Rittenhouse was spent in agricultural
employments under the eye of his father, in the county of Montgomery, twenty
miles from Philadelphia, to which place he removed during the childhood of his
Son. It was at this place his peculiar genius first discovered itself. His
plough, the fences, and even the stones of the field in which he worked, were
frequently marked with figures which denoted a talent for mathematical studies.
Upon finding that the native delicacy of his constitution unfitted him for the
labors of husbandry, his parents consented to his learning the trade of a clock
and mathematical instrument maker. In acquiring the knowledge of these useful
arts, he was his own instructor. -- They afforded him great delight, inasmuch
as they favored his disposition to inquire into the principles of natural
philosophy. -- Constant employment of any kind, even in the practice of the
mechanical arts, has been found, in many instances, to administer vigor to
human genius. Franklin studied the laws of nature, while he handled his
printing types. The father of Rousseau, a jeweller at Geneva, became acquainted
with the principles of national jurisprudence, by listening to his son while he
read to him in his shop, the works of Grotius and Puffendorf; and Herschel
conceived the great idea of a new planet, while he exercised the humble office
of a musician to a marching regiment.

It was during the residence of our ingenious philosopher with his father in
the country, that he made himself master of Sir Isaac Newton's Principia, which
he read in the English translation of Mr. Mott. It was here likewise he became
acquainted with the science of Fluxions, of which sublime invention he believed
himself for a while to be the author, nor did he know for some years
afterward, that a contest had been carried on between Sir Isaac Newton and
Leibnitz, for the honor of that great and useful discovery. What a mind was
here! -- Without literary friends or society, and with but two or three books,
he became, before he had reached his four and twentieth year, the rival of the
two greatest mathematicians in Europe!

It was in this retired situation, and while employed in working at his trade,
that he planned and executed an orrery, in which he represented the revolutions
of the heavenly bodies in a manner more extensive and complete, than had been
done by any former astronomers. A correct description of this orrery drawn up
by the Rev. Dr. Smith, is published in the first volume of our Transactions.
This masterpiece of ingenious mechanism was purchased by the college of
New Jersey. A second was made by him, after the same model, for the use of the
college of Philadelphia. It now forms part of the philosophical apparatus of
the University of Pennsylvania, where it has for many years commanded the
admiration of the ingenious and the learned, from every part of the world.

The reputation he derived from the construction of this orrery, as well as his
general character for mathematical knowledge, attracted the notice of his
fellow-citizens in Pennsylvania, and in several of the neighboring states, but
the discovery of his uncommon merit belonged chiefly to his brother-in-law, the
Rev. Mr. Barton, Dr. Smith, and the late Mr. John Lukens, an ingenious
mathematician of this city. These gentlemen fully appreciated his talents, and
united in urging him to remove to Philadelphia, in order to enlarge his
opportunities of improvement and usefulness. He yielded with reluctance to
their advice, and exchanged his beloved retirement in the country for this
city, in the year 1770. Here he continued for several years, to follow his
occupation of a clock and mathematical instrument maker. He excelled in both
branches of that business. His mathematical instruments have been esteemed by
good judges to be superior in accuracy and workmanship to any of the same kind
that have been imported from Europe.

About the time he settled in Philadelphia he became a member of our Society.
His first communication to the Society was a calculation of the transit of
Venus as it was to happen on the 3d of June, 1769, in 40 north latitude, and 5
hours west longitude from Greenwich. He was one of a committee appointed by the
Society to observe in the township of Norriton, this rare occurrence in the
revolution of that planet, and bore an active part in the preparations which
were made for that purpose. Of this Dr. Smith who was likewise of the
committee, has left an honorable record in the history of that event which is
published in the first volume of the transactions of our Society. "As Mr.
Rittenhouse's dwelling (says the Doctor) is about twenty miles north-west from
Philadelphia; our other engagements did not permit Mr. Lukens or myself to pay
much attention to the necessary preparations; but we knew that we had entrusted
them to a gentleman on the spot [meaning Mr. Rittenhouse] who had, joined to a
complete skill in mechanics, so extensive an astronomical, and mathematical
knowledge, that the use, management and even construction of the apparatus,
were perfectly familiar to him. The laudable pains he had taken in these
material articles will best appear from the work itself, which he has
committed into my hands, with a modest introduction, giving me a liberty with
them, which his own accuracy, taste and abilities leave no room to exercise."

We are naturally led here to take a view of our philosopher with his
associates in their preparations to observe a phenomenon which had never been
seen but twice before by any inhabitant of our earth, which would never be seen
again by any person then living, and on which depended very important
astronomical consequences. The night before the long expected day, was probably
passed in a degree of solicitude which precluded sleep. How great must have
been their joy when they beheld the morning sun, "and the whole horizon without
a cloud;" for such is the description of the day given by Mr. Rittenhouse in
the report referred to by Dr. Smith. In pensive silence, and trembling anxiety,
they waited for the predicted moment of observation; it came, and brought with
it all that had been wished for and expected by those who saw it. In our
philosopher, it excited in the instant of one of the contacts of the planet
with the sun, an emotion of delight so exquisite and powerful, as to induce
fainting. This will readily be believed by those who have known the extent of
that pleasure which attends the discovery, or first perception of truth. Soon
after this event, we find him acting as one of a committee appointed to observe
the transit of Mercury on the 9th of November in the same year. This was
likewise done at Norriton. An account of it was drawn up, and published at the
request of the committee by Dr. Smith. A minute history of the whole of these
events, in which Mr. Rittenhouse continued to act a distinguished part, is
given in our transactions. It was received with great satisfaction by the
astronomers of Europe, and contributed much to raise the character of our then
infant country for astronomical knowledge.

In the year 1775, he was appointed to compose and deliver the annual oration
before our society. The subject of it, was the history of astronomy. The
language of this oration is simple, but the sentiments contained in it are
ingenious, original, and in some instances sublime. It was delivered in a
feeble voice, and without any of the advantages of oratory, but it commanded
notwithstanding, the most profound attention, and was followed by universal
admiration and applause from a crowded and respectable audience.

From the contents of this oration, it appears that Astronomy was the favorite
object of his studies. Attempts have been made to depreciate this branch of
natural philosophy, by denying its utility, and application to human affairs.
-- The opinion is an unjust one, and as it tends to convey a limited idea of
the talents of Mr. Rittenhouse, I hope I shall be excused in saying a few words
in savor of this science.

It is to astronomy we are indebted for our knowledge of navigation, by which
means the different parts of our globe have been discovered, and afterward
cemented together by the mutual wants and obligations of commerce.

It was astronomy that taught mankind the art of predicting and explaining
eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and thereby delivered them from the superstition
which in the early ages of the world, was connected with those phenomenon of
nature.

We are taught by astronomy to correct our ideas of the visible heavens, and
thus by discovering the fallacy of the simple evidence of our senses, to call
to their aid, the use of our reason, in deciding upon all the material objects
of human knowledge.

Astronomy delivers the mind from a grovelling attachment to the pursuits and
pleasures of this world. "Take the miser (says our philosopher in his oration)
from the earth, if it be possible to disengage him -- he whose nightly rest has
been long broken by the loss of a single foot of it, useless perhaps to him;
and remove him to the planet Mars, one of the least distant from us -- Persuade
the ambitious monarch to accompany him, who has sacrificed the lives of
thousands of his subjects to an imaginary property in certain small portions of
the earth, and point out this earth to them, with all its kingdoms and wealth,
a glittering star, close by the moon, the latter scarce visible, and the
former, less bright than our evening star. -- They would turn away their
disgusted sight from it, not thinking it worth their smallest attention, and
seek for consolation, in the gloomy regions of Mars."

Once more -- the study of astronomy has the most friendly influence upon
morals, and religion. "Yes, (says our philosopher in another part of his
oration) the direct tendency of this science is to dilate the heart with
universal benevolence, and to enlarge its views. It flatters no princely vice,
nor national depravity. It encourages not the libertine by relaxing any of the
precepts of morality, nor does it attempt to undermine the foundations of
religion. It denies none of those attributes, which the wisest, and best of
mankind have in all ages ascribed to the Deity. Nor does it degrade the human
mind from that dignity which is ever necessary to make it contemplate itself
with complacency. None of these things does astronomy pretend to, and if these
things merit the name of philosophy, and the encouragement of a people, then
let skepticism flourish, and astronomy lie neglected. -- Let the names of
Berkley and Hume become immortal, and that of Newton be lost in oblivion." --

The following is a list of such of Mr. Rittenhouse's other publications as are
contained in the three volumes of our transactions.

Observations of the comet which appeared in June and July 1770, with the
elements of its motion and the trajectory of its path, in a letter to Dr.
William Smith.

An easy method of deducing the true time of the sun's passing the meridian, by
means of a clock, from a comparison of four equal attitudes, observed on two
succeeding days, without the help of the equation tables, communicated by Dr.
Wm. Smith.

An explanation of an optical deception, namely, that the surfaces of bodies
viewed through the double microscope, sometimes appear to be reversed, that is,
those parts which are elevated seem depressed, and the contrary.

An account of a remarkable meteor observed at Philadelphia on the 31st of
October, 1775, with some conjectures relative to the theory of of meteors, in
answer to a letter from John Page, Esquire. giving an account of the same meteor
seen in many distant places in Virginia.

Conjectures, corroborated by experiments, relative to a new theory of
magnetism; in a letter to John Page, Esquire. of Virginia.

A new method of placing a meridian mark for a transit instrument within a few
feet of the observatory, so as to have all the advantages of one placed at a
great distance; in a letter to the Rev. Dr. John Ewing.

Observations on a comet discovered in the month of January 1784.

An explanation of a curious optical phenomenon, namely, if a candle or other
luminous body be viewed through a silk umbrella, handkerchief or the like, the
luminous body will appear to be doubled; in a letter to Francis Hopkinson, Esquire.

A series of observations made at sundry times in the years 1784, 85, and 86 on
the new planet, or Georgium Sidus, also an observation of the transit of
Mercury over the Sun's disk on the 12th of November 1782.

An account of three houses in Philadelphia struck with lightning on the 7th of
June 1789.

An account of the effects of a stroke of lightning upon a house furnished with
two metallic conductors on the 17th of August, 1789; in a letter to Mr. Robert
Patterson.

Astronomical observations made at Philadelphia, containing an account of the
eclipse of the Moon on the 2nd of November 1789.

An account of the transit of Mercury over the Sun's disk, on the 5th of
November 1789.

An account of the eclipse of the Sun, on the 6th of November 1790, with an
account of corresponding observations, made at the university of William and
Mary, in Virginia, by Dr. J. Madison, and at Washington college, in Maryland,
by the Rev. Dr. Smith.

Short, and elegant theorems for finding the sum of the several powers of the
lines, either to a radius of unity, or any other; in a letter to Mr. Robert
Patterson.

An account of a comet discovered in the month of January 1793; in a letter to
Mr. Robert Patterson.

Besides these publications, our society is in possession of the following
communications from Mr. Rittenhouse, which are now in the press, and will be
speedily published in the fourth volume of our transactions.

A method of determining the true plane of a planet in an eliptical form, by
converging series, directly from the mean anomaly.

A new and easy method of calculating logarithms; -- in a letter to Mr. Robert
Patterson.

A description of an improvement on pendulum clocks, by which the error arising
from the different density, or resistance of the medium in which the pendulum
vibrates, is effectually obviated.

Lastly, experiments on the expansion of wood by heat.

Talents so splendid, and knowledge so practical in mathematics, are like
mines of precious metals. They become public property by universal consent. The
State of Pennsylvania was not insensible of the wealth she possessed in the
mind of Mr. Rittenhouse. She claimed him as her own, and employed him in
business of the most important nature.

In the year 1779 he was appointed by the legislature of Pennsylvania, one of
the commissioners for adjusting a territorial dispute between Pennsylvania and
Virginia, and to his talents, moderation and firmness, were ascribed in a great
degree, the satisfactory termination, of that once alarming controversy in the
year 1785.

In 1784 he assisted in determining the length of five degrees of longitude
from a point on the Delaware, in order to fix the western limits of
Pennsylvania.

In 1786, he was employed in fixing the northern line which divides
Pennsylvania from New York.

But the application of his talents and knowledge to the settlement of
territorial disputes, was not confined to his native state. In the year 1769,
he was employed in settling the limits between New Jersey and New York, and in
1787 he was called upon to assist in fixing the boundary line between the
States of Massachusetts and New York. This last business which was executed
with his usual precision and integrity, was his farewell peace offering to the
union and happiness of his country.

In his excursions through the wilderness, he carried with him his habits of
inquiry and observation. Nothing in our mountains, soils, rivers, and springs
escaped his notice. It is to be lamented that his private letters, and the
memories of his friends, are the only records of what he collected upon these
occasions. Philosopher, or naturalist, whosoever thou art! that shall hereafter
traverse the unfrequented woods of our state, forget not to respect the paths,
first marked by the feet of this ingenious, and faithful servant of the public.
Honor the fountains consecrated to science by his skilful hand, and inhale
with double pleasure the pure atmosphere of the mountains, on which he renewed
his acquaintance with the canopy of heaven, after passing whole weeks in
forests so shady, as to conceal from him the rays of the sun. And citizens of
Pennsylvania, friends and patrons of literature, be grateful for his services.
Let the remembrance of them be dear to the present generation, and let a part
of the state, distinguished in a more especial manner for its resources in
natural knowledge, bear his name with honor to the latest posterity.

In the year 1791 he was chosen successor to Dr. Franklin in the chair of our
society. In this elevated station, the highest that philosophy can confer in
our country, his conduct was marked by its usual line of propriety and dignity.
Never did the artificial pomp of station command half the respect, which
followed his unassuming manners in the discharge of the public duties of this
office. You will often recollect, gentlemen, with a mixture of pleasure and
pain, the delightful evenings you passed in the society, every time he presided
in your meetings. They were uniformly characterized by ardor in the pursuits of
science, urbanity and brotherly kindness. His attachment to the interests of
the society was evinced soon after he accepted of the President's chair, by a
donation of three hundred pounds.

But his talents and knowledge were not limited to mathematical or material
subjects; his mind was a repository of the knowledge of all ages and countries.
He had early and deeply studied most of the different systems of theology. He
was well acquainted with practical metaphysics. In reading travels he took
great delight. From them, he drew a large fund or his knowledge of the natural
history of our globe. He possessed talents for music and poetry, but the more
serious and necessary pursuits of his life, prevented his devoting much time to
the cultivation of them. He read the English poets with great pleasure. The
(...) of Thomson charmed him most. He admired his elegant combination of
philosophy and poetry. However opposed these studies may appear, they alike
derive their perfection from extensive and accurate observations of the works
of nature. He was intimately acquainted with the French, German, and Dutch
languages, the two former of which he acquired without the assistance of a
master. They served the valuable purpose of conveying to him the discoveries of
foreign nations, and thereby enabled him to prosecute his studies with more
advantage, in his native language.

In speaking of Mr. Rittenhouse, it has been common to lament his want of what
is called a liberal education. -- Were education what it should be, in our
public seminaries, this would have been a misfortune, but conducted as it is at
present, agreeably to the systems adopted in Europe in the fifteenth century, I
am disposed to believe that his extensive knowledge, and splendid character are
to be ascribed chiefly to his having escaped the pernicious influence of
monkish learning upon his mind in early life. Had the usual forms of a public
education in the United States been imposed upon him; instead of revolving
through life in a planetary orbit, he would probably have consumed the force of
his genius by fluttering around the blaze of an evening taper. Rittenhouse the
Philosopher, and one of the luminaries of the eighteenth century, might have
spent his hours of study in composing syllogisms, or in measuring the feet of
Greek and Latin poetry.

It will be honorable to the citizens of the United States, to add, that they
were not insensible of the merit of our philosopher. Inventions and
improvements in every art and science, were frequently submitted to his
examination, and were afterward patronised by the public, according as they
were approved of by him. Wherever he went, he met with public respect, and
private attentions. But his reputation was not confined to his native country.
His name was known and admired in every region of the earth, where science and
genius are cultivated and respected. The degree of Master of Arts was conferred
upon him by the College of Philadelphia, in 1768. The same degree was conferred
upon him by the College of William and Mary, in Virginia, in 1784. In the year
1789, he received the degree of Doctor of Laws from the College of New Jersey.
He was elected a Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences at Boston
in 1782, and of the Royal Society in London in 1795.


Such were the talents and knowledge, and such the fame, of our departed
President! His virtues now demand our tribute of praise. -- And here, I am less
at a loss to know what to say, than what to leave unsaid. We have hitherto
beheld him as a philosopher, soaring like the eagle, until our eyes have been
dazzled by his near approaches to the sun. We shall now contemplate him at a
less distance, and behold him in the familiar character of a man, fulfilling
his various duties, in their utmost extent. If any thing has been said of his
talents and knowledge that has excited attention, or kindled desires in the
younger members of our society, to pursue him in his path of honor, let me
request them not to forsake me here. Come, and learn by his example, to be
good, as well as great. -- His virtues furnish the most shining models for your
imitation, for they were never obscured in any situation or stage of his life,
by a single cloud of weakness or vice. As the source of these virtues, whether
of a public or private nature, I shall first mention his exalted sense of moral
obligation founded upon the revelation of the perfections of the Supreme Being.
This appears from many passages in his oration, and from his private letters to
his friends. In his oration we find the following pious sentiment. "Should it
please that Almighty Power who has placed us in a world in which we are only
permitted "to look about us and to die," to indulge us with existence
throughout that half of eternity which still remains unspent, and to conduct us
through the several stages of his works, here [meaning in the study of
astronomy] is ample provision made for employing every faculty of the mind,
even allowing its powers to be enlarged through an endless repetition of ages.
Let us not complain of the vanity of this world, and that there is nothing in
it capable of satisfying us. Happy in those wants, -- happy in those desires,
forever in succession to be gratified, -- happy in a continual approach to the
Deity."

"I must confess that I am not one of those sanguine spirits who seem to think
that when the withered hand of death has drawn up the curtain of eternity, all
distance between the creature and the Creator, and between finite and infinite,
will be annihilated. Every enlargement of our faculties, -- every new happiness
conferred upon us, every step we advance toward the Divinity, will very
probably render us more and more sensible of his inexhaustible stores of
communicable bliss, and of his inaccessible perfections."

There appears to be a natural connection between a knowledge of the works of
nature and just ideas of the divine perfections; and if philosophers have not
in all ages been equally devout with our President, it becomes us to enquire
how far the beneficial influence of philosophy upon religion, may have been
prevented by their minds being pre-occupied in early life with the fictions of
ancient poets, and the vices of the heathen gods. It remains yet to be
determined, whether all the moral as well as natural attributes of the Deity
may not be discovered in the form, and economy of the material world, and
whether that righteousness which descended from heaven near eighteen hundred
years ago, may not wait for philosophical truth to spring up from the earth, in
order by uniting with it, to command universal belief and obedidience. This
opinion, as far as it relates to one of the moral attributes of the Deity,
seems to have been admitted by our philosopher in the following elegant and
pious extract from a letter to one of his friends, "give me leave (says he) to
mention two or three proofs of infinite goodness in the works of creation. The
first is, possessing goodness in ourselves. Now it is inconsistent with all
just reasoning to suppose, that there is any thing good, lovely or
praiseworthy in us, which is not possessed in an infinitely higher degree by
that Being who first called us into existence. In the next place, I reckon the
exquisite and innocent delight that many things around us are calculated to
afford us. In this light the beauty and fragrance of a single rose is a better
argument for divine goodness than a luxuriant field of wheat. For if we can
suppose that we were created by a malevolent Being with a design to torment us
for his amusement, he must have furnished us with the means of subsistence, and
either have made our condition tolerable, or not have lest the means of
quitting it at pleasure, in our own power. Such being my opinions, you will not
wonder at my fondness for what Mr. Addison calls the pleasures of the
imagination. They are all to me, so many demonstrations of infinite goodness."

If such be the pious fruits of an attentive examination of the works of the
Creator, cease ye ministers of the gospel to defeat the design of your
benevolent labors, by interposing the common studies of the schools, between
our globe, and the minds of young people. Let their first ideas be those which
are obtruded upon their senses, by the hand of nature. Permit the firmament of
heaven, and the animal, vegetable, and mineral productions of the earth, to
instruct them in the wisdom and goodness of the Creator, and let the effects of
physical evil upon general happiness, vindicate the divine government, in
permitting the existence of moral evil in our world. Thus the perverse passions
of man, may be made to unite with storms and tempests, in furnishing proofs of
the goodness of the Creator of the universe.

But the religion of Mr. Rittenhouse, was not derived wholly from his knowledge
and admiration of the material world. He believed in the Christian revelation.
Of this, he gave many proofs, not only in the conformity of his life, to the
precepts of the gospel, but in his letters and conversation. I well recollect
in speaking to me of the truth and excellency of the Christian religion, he
mentioned as a proof of its divine origin, that the miracles of our Savior
differed from all other miracles, in being entirely of a kind and benevolent
nature. It is no small triumph to the friends of Revelation to observe, in this
age of infidelity, that our religion has been admitted and even defended by men
of the most exalted understanding, and of the strongest reasoning powers. The
single testimony of David Rittenhouse in its favor, outweighs the declamations
of whole nations against it.

As the natural effect of his belief in the relation of the whole human race to
each other in a common Father and Redeemer, he embraced the whole family of
mankind in the arms of his benevolence. The force and extent of this virtue in
his heart, will appeal from my reading one more extract from his oration. I am
aware how much I suffer by introducing quotations from that eloquent
performance, for they will cast a shade upon all I have said, or shall say upon
this occasion.

"How far, (says our philosopher) the inhabitants of the other planets may
resemble man, we cannot pretend to say. If like them they were created liable
to fall, yet some, if not all of them may still retain their original
rectitude. We will hope they do; The thought is comfortable. -- Cease then
Gallileo to improve thy optic tube, and thou great Newton, forbear thy ardent
search into the mysteries of nature, lest ye make unwelcome discoveries.
Deprive us not of the pleasure of believing that yonder orbs, traversing in
silent majesty the etherial regions, are the peaceful seats of innocence and
bliss, where neither natural or moral evil has ever intruded, and where to
enjoy with gratitude and adoration the Creator's bounty, is the business of
existence. If their Inhabitants resemble man in their faculties and affections,
let us suppose that they are wise enough to govern themselves according to the
dictates of that reason God has given in such a manner, as to consult their
own, and each other's happiness upon all occasions. But if on the contrary,
they have found it necessary to erect artificial fabrics of government, let us
not suppose they have done it with so little skill, and at such an enormous
expense, as to render them a misfortune, instead of a blessing. -- We will hope
that their statesmen are patriots, and that their kings (if that order of
beings has found admittance there) have the feelings of humanity. Happy people!
-- and perhaps more happy still, that all communication with us is denied. We
have neither corrupted you with our vices, nor injured you by violence. None of
your sons and daughters have been degraded from their native dignity, and
doomed to endless slavery in America, merely because their bodies may be
disposed to reflect, or absorb the rays of light different from ours. Even you,
inhabitants of the Moon, situated in our very neighborhood, are effectually
secured from the rapacious hands of the oppressors of our globe. And the utmost
efforts of the mighty Frederick, the tyrant of the North, and scourge of
mankind, if aimed to disturb your peace, becomes inconceivably ridiculous and
impotent."

"Pardon these reflections. They arise not from the gloomy spirit of
misanthropy. That Being, before whose piercing eye all the intricate foldings
of the human heart, become expanded, and illuminated, is my witness with what
sincerity, with what ardor -- I wish for the happiness of the whole race of
mankind. -- how much I admire that disposition of lands and seas which affords
a communication between distant regions, and a mutual exchange of benefits --
how sincerely I approve of those social refinements, which add to our
happiness, and induce us with gratitude to acknowledge our Creator's goodness,
and how much I delight in a participation of the discoveries made from time to
time in nature's works, by our philosophical brethren in Europe. But (adds our
philosopher) when I consider that luxury, and her constant follower tyranny,
which have long since laid the glories of Asia in the dust, are now advancing
like a torrent irresistible, and have nearly completed their conquest over
Europe, -- I am ready to wish -- vain wish! that nature would raise her
everlasting bars between the new and the old world, and make a voyage to Europe
as impracticable as one to the moon."

As when a traveller in passing through a wilderness, slackens his pace to
prolong the pleasure of a sudden and unexpected prospect of a majestic river
pouring its waters down the declivity of a cloud-cap't mountain, and spreading
fertility and verdure throughout the adjacent valleys, so we feel disposed to
pause, and feast upon the sublime sentiments contained in the passage which I
have read. Citizens of the United States, receive and cherish them as a legacy
from a friend, or a brother. Be just, and loose the bands of the African slave.
Be wise, and render war odious in our country. Be free, by assuming a national
character and name, and be greatly happy, by erecting a barrier against the
corruptions in morals, government, and religion, which now pervade all the
nations of Europe. Mr. William Barton, nephew to Mr. Rittenhouse, has favored
me with the following extract of a letter dated in September, 1755, to his
brother-in-law, the Rev. Mr. Barton, who was the friend and correspondent of
his youth, which shows how early and deeply the principles of universal
benevolence were fixed in his mind.

"I would sooner give up my interest in a future state, than be divested of
humanity; -- I mean that good will I have to the species, although one half of
them are said to be fools, and almost the other half knaves. Indeed I am firmly
persuaded, that we are not at the disposal of a Being who has the least
tincture of ill nature, or requires any in us. -- You will laugh at this grave
philosophy, or my writing to you on a subject which you have thought of a
thousand times: but, can any thing that is serious, be ridiculous? -- Shall we
suppose Gabriel smiling at Newton, for laboring to demonstrate whether the
earth be at rest or not, because the former plainly sees it move?




But the philanthropy of Mr. Rittenhouse did not consist simply in wishes for
the happiness of mankind. He reduced this divine principle to practice by a
series of faithful and disinterested services to that part of his fellow
creatures, to which the usefulness of good men is chiefly confined. His
country, his beloved country, was the object of the strongest affections of his
heart. For her, he thought, -- for her, he labored, -- and for her, in the
hours of her difficulties and danger, he wept, -- in every stage of the
American revolution. Patriots of 1776, you will acquit me of exaggeration here,
for you feel in the recollection of what passed in your own bosoms, a witness
of the truth of each of these assertions. The year of the declaration of
Independance, which changed our royal governments into Republics, produced no
change in his political principles, for he had been educated a Republican by
his father. I can never forget the pleasure with which he avowed his early but
secret attachment to an elective and representative form of government. Often
have I heard him above twenty years ago, predict the immense increase of
talents and knowledge which has been produced by the strength and activity that
have been infused into the American mind, by our republican constitutions.
Often, likewise, at the same remote period of time, have I heard him anticipate
with delight, the effects of our revolution in sowing the seeds of a new order
of things in other parts of the world. He believed political, as well as moral
evil to be intruders into the society of men, -- that general happiness was the
original design, and ultimate end of the divine government, and that a time
would come, when every part of our globe, would echo back the heavenly
proclamation of universal peace on earth, and good will to man.

Let it not be said, that he departed from the duties of a Philosopher, by
devoting a part of his time and talents to the safety and happiness of his
country. It belongs to monarchies, to limit the business of government to a
privileged order of men, and it is from the remains of a monarchical spirit in
our country, that we complain when clergymen, physicians, philosophers and
mechanics, take an active part in civil affairs. The obligations of patriotism
are as universal and binding, as those of justice and benevolence, and the
virtuous propensities of the human heart are as much resisted by every
individual who neglects the business of his country, as they are by the
extinction of the domestic affections in a cell. Man was made for a republic,
and a republic was made for man, otherwise Divine Power and goodness have been
wasted, in the creation and gift of his public affections. -- Our philosopher
adopted this truth from the evidence of his feelings, in common with the rest
of mankind, but it was strongly reinforced in his mind by numerous analogies of
nature. How was it possible for him to contemplate light and air as the common
and equal portions of every man, and not acknowledge that heaven intended
liberty to be distributed in the same manner among the whole human race! Or how
could he behold the beauty and harmony of the universe, as the result of
universal and mutual dependence, and not admit that heaven intended rulers to
be dependant upon those, for whose benefit alone, all government should exist.
To suppose the contrary, would be to deny unity and system in the plans of the
great creator of all things.

I shall make no apology for these sentiments. They are not foreign to the
solemnity of this discourse. Had I said less of the political principles and
conduct of our enlightened President, hundreds and thousands of my
fellow-citizens would have accused me, of an act of treachery to his memory.
May the time never come, in which the praises of our republican governments,
shall not be acceptable to the ears of an American audience!

In the more limited circles of private life, Mr. Rittenhouse commanded esteem
and affection. As a neighbor he was kind and charitable. His sympathy extended
in a certain degree to distress of every kind, but it was excited with the most
force, and the kindest effects, to the weakness, pain and poverty of old age.
-- As a friend he was sincere, ardent, and disinterested. As a companion, he
instructed upon all subjects. To his happy communicative disposition, I beg
leave to express my obligations in this public manner. I can truly say, after
an acquaintance with him for six-and-twenty years, that I never went into his
company, without learning something. With pleasure have I looked beyond my
present labors to a time, when his society should constitute one of the
principal enjoyments of the evening of my life. -- But alas! that time, so
often anticipated, and so delightful in prospect -- will never -- come!

I hope it will not be thought that I tread too closely upon his footsteps,
when I presume to lift the latch of his door, and to exhibit him in the
domestic relations of a husband and father. It was the practice of the
philosophers of former ages, to pass their lives in their closets, and to
maintain a formal and distant intercourse with their families; but our
philosopher was a stranger to pride and imposture in every thing. His family
constituted his chief society, and the most intimate circle of his friends.
When the declining state of his health, rendered the solitude of his study,
less agreeable than in former years, he passed whole evenings in reading or
conversing, with his wife and daughters. Happy family! so much and so long
blessed with such a head! and happier still, to have possessed dispositions and
knowledge to discern and love his exalted character, and to enjoy his
instructing conversation! -- Thus sir Thomas Moore lived with his accomplished
wife and daughters; -- Thus Cicero educated his beloved Tullia; and in this way
only, can the female sex be elevated to that dignity, and usefulness in
society, for which they were formed, and by which, from their influence upon
manners, a new era would be created in the history of mankind.

The house, and manner of living, of our president, exhibited the taste of a
philosopher, the simplicity of a republican, and the temper of a Christian. He
was independent, and contented with an estate, small in the estimation of
ambition and avarice, but amply suited to all his wants and desires. He held
the office of treasurer of Pennsylvania, by an annual and unanimous vote of the
legislature, between the years 1777, and 1789. During this period, he declined
purchasing the smallest portion of the public debt of the state, thereby
manifesting a delicacy of integrity, which is known and felt only by pure and
elevated minds.

In the year 1792, he was persuaded to accept of the office of Director of the
mint of the United States. His want of health, obliged him to resign it in
1795. Here his conduct was likewise above suspicion, for I have been informed
by his colleague in office, Dr. Way.
that in several instances, he paid for work done at the mint out of his
salary, where he thought the charges for it, would be deemed extravagant by the
United States.

His economy extended to a wise and profitable use of his time. No man ever
found him unemployed. As an apology for detaining a friend a few minutes, while
he arranged some papers he had been examining, he said, "that he had once
thought health, the greatest blessing in the world, but that he now thought
there was one thing of much greater value, and that was time." The propriety of
this remark will appear when we consider, that Providence, so liberal in other
gifts, bestows this, in a sparing manner. He never gives a second moment, until
he has withdrawn the first, and still reserves the third in his own hand.

The countenance of Mr. Rittenhouse, was too remarkable to be unnoticed upon
this occasion. It displayed such a mixture of contemplation, benignity, and
innocence, that it was easy to distinguish his person in the largest company,
by a previous knowledge of his character. His manners were civil, and engaging
to such a degree, that he seldom passed an hour, even in a public house, in
traveling through our country, without being followed by the good wishes of
all who attended upon him. There was no affectation of singularity, in any
thing he said, or did. Even his hand writing, in which this weakness so
frequently discovers itself, was simple and intelligible at first sight, to all
who saw it.

Here I expected to have finished the detail of his virtues, but in the
neighborhood of that galaxy created by their connected luster, I behold a
virtue of inestimable value, twinkling like a rare, and solitary star. It is
his superlative modesty. This heaven born virtue was so conspicuous in every
part of his conduct, that he appeared not so much to conceal, as to be ignorant
of his superiority as a philosopher and a man, over the greatest part of his
fellow creatures.

In reviewing the intellectual endowments and moral excellency of Mr.
Rittenhouse, and our late intimate connection with him, we are led to rejoice
in being men.

We proceed now to the closing scenes of his life.

His constitution was naturally feeble, but it was rendered still more so, by
sedentary labor, and midnight studies. He was afflicted for many years with a
weak breast, which, upon unusual exertions of body or mind, or sudden changes
in the weather, became the seat of a painful and harrassing disorder. This
constitutional infirmity was not without its uses. It contributed much to the
perfection of his virtue, by producing habitual patience and resignation to the
will of heaven, and a constant eye to the hour of his dissolution. It was a
window through which he often looked with pleasure toward a place of
existence, where from the increase and perfection of his intuitive faculties,
he would probably acquire more knowledge in an hour, than he had acquired in
his whole life, by the slow operations of reason; and where, from the greater
magnitude and extent of the objects of his contemplation, his native globe,
would appear like his cradle, and all the events of time, like the amusements
of his infant years.

On the 26th of June, of the present year, the long expected messenger of
death, disclosed his commission. In his last illness, which was acute, and
short, he retained the usual patience and benevolence of his temper. Upon being
told that some of his friends had called at his door to inquire how he was; he
asked why they were not invited into his chamber to see him. "Because (said his
wife) you are too weak to speak to them." "Yes (said he) that is true, but I
could still have squeezed their hands." -- Thus with a heart overflowing with
love to his family, friends, country, and to the whole world, he peacefully
resigned his spirit into the hands of his God. Let the day of his death be
recorded in the annals of our society, and let its annual return be marked by
some public act, which shall characterise his services and our grief, and
thereby animate us and our successors, to imitate his illustrious example!

It has been the fashion of late years, to say of persons who had been
distinguished in life, when they left the world in a state of indifference to
every thing, and believing, and hoping in nothing, that they died like
philosophers. Very different was the latter end of our excellent president. He
died like a christian, interested in the welfare of all around him -- believing
in the resurrection, and the life to come, and hoping for happiness from every
attribute of the Deity.

Agreeably to his request, his body was interred in his observatory near his
dwelling house, in the presence of a numerous concourse of his fellow-citizens.
It was natural for him in the near prospect of appearing in the presence of his
Maker, to feel an attachment to that spot in which he had cultivated a
knowledge of his perfections, and held communion with him through the medium of
his works. Hereafter it shall become one of the objects of curiosity in our
city. Thither shall the plilosophers of future ages resort to do homage to his
tomb, and children yet unborn, shall point to the dome which covers it, and
exultlngly say, "there lies our Rittenhouse."

Let us my respected colleagues, repair for a few minutes to that awful spot.
-- In entering it, -- we behold the telescope, dear instrument of his
discoveries, turned upon its axis, and pointed to the earth, which has closed
its master's eyes. -- How artless -- the inscription upon his tombstone! -- It
contains nothing but his name, and the simple record of the days and years of
his birth and death. -- Very different would have been the monument of his
worth and fame, had not the gratitude and affection of his friends been
controuled by his dying request. His head would have reclined in marble, upon
the lap of religion. At his feet, science would have sat -- bathed in tears;
while the genius of republican liberty, in the figure of a venerable hermit,
bending over his grave, would have deplored the loss of his favorite son. --
Alas! -- too -- too soon has our beloved president been torn from the chair of
our society! -- Too soon has he laid aside his robes of office, and ceased to
minister for us day and night at the altar of science! -- Ah! -- who now will
elevate his telescope, and again direct it toward yonder heavens? Who now will
observe the transit of the planets? Who now will awaken our nation to view the
trackless and stupendous comet? Who now will measure the courses of our rivers,
in order to convey their streams into our city, for the purposes of health and
commerce? -- Nature is dumb; -- for the voice of her chief interpreter is
hushed in death. -- In this hour of our bereavement, to whom shall we look? --
but to THEE, FATHER of life and light: -- thou author of great and good gifts
to man. O! let not thy Sun, thy Moon, and thy Stars now shine unobserved among
us! may the genius of our departed president, like the mantle of thy prophet of
old, descend upon some member of our society, who shall, as he did, explain to
us the mysteries of thy works, and lead us step by step, to THYSELF, the great
overflowing fountain of wisdom, goodness and mercy, to the children of men!


