AMERICAN COOKERY, OR THE ART OF DRESSING VIANDS, FISH, POULTRY and VEGETABLES,
AND THE BEST MODES OF MAKING PASTES, PUFFS, PIES, TARTS, PUDDINGS, CUSTARDS AND
PRESERVES, AND ALL KINDS OF CAKES, FROM THE IMPERIAL PLUMB TO PLAIN CAKE.

ADAPTED TO THIS COUNTRY, AND ALL GRADES OF LIFE.

By Amelia Simmons, AN AMERICAN ORPHAN.

PUBLISHED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN. FOR THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
AS this treatise is calculated for the improvement of the rising generation of
Females in America, the Lady of fashion and fortune will not be displeased, if
many hints are suggested for the more general and universal knowledge of those
females in this country, who by the loss of their parents, or other unfortunate
circumstances, are reduced to the necessity of going into families in the line
of domestics, or taking refuge with their friends or relations, and doing those
things which are really essential to the perfecting them as good wives, and
useful members of society. The orphan, though left to the care of virtuous
guardians, will find it essentially necessary to have an opinion and
determination of her own. The world, and the fashion thereof, is so variable,
that old people cannot accommodate themselves to the various changes and
fashions which daily occur; they will adhere to the fashion of their day, and
will not surrender their attachments to the good old way -- while the young and
the gay, bend and conform readily to the taste of the times, and fancy of the
hour. By having an opinion and determination, I would not be understood to mean
an obstinate perseverance in trifles, which borders on obstinacy -- by no
means, but only an adherence to those rules and maxims which have stood the
test of ages, and will forever establish the female character, a virtuous
character -- although they conform to the ruling taste of the age in cookery,
dress, language, manners, etc.

It must ever remain a check upon the poor solitary orphan, that while those
females who have parents, or brothers, or riches, to defend their
indiscretions, that the orphan must depend solely upon character. How immensely
important, therefore, that every action, every word, every thought, be
regulated by the strictest purity, and that every movement meet the approbation
of the good and wise.

The candor of the American Ladies is solicitously entreated by the Authoress,
as she is circumscribed in her knowledge, this being an original work in this
country. Should any future editions appear, she hopes to render it more
valuable.

DIRECTIONS for CATERING, or the procuring the best VIANDS, FISH, etc.
How to choose Flesh.
BEEF. The large stall fed ox beef is the best, it has a coarse open grain, and
oily smoothness; dent it with your finger and it will immediately rise again;
if old, it will be rough and spungy, and the dent remain.

Cow Beef is less boned, and generally more tender and juicy than the ox, in
America, which is used to labor.

Of almost every species of Animals, Birds and Fishes, the female is the
tenderest, the richest flavour'd, and among poultry the soonest fatened.

Mutton, grass-fed, is good two or three years old.

Lamb, if under six months is rich, and no danger of imposition; it may be
known by its size, in distinguishing either.

Veal, is soon lost -- great care therefore is necessary in purchasing. Veal
bro't to market in panniers, or in carriages, is to be prefered to that bro't
in bags, and flouncing on a sweaty horse.

Pork, is known by its size, and whether properly fattened by its appearance.

To make the best Bacon.
To each ham put one ounce saltpetre, one pint bay salt, one pint molasses,
shake together 6 or 8 weeks, or when a large quantity is together, bast them
with the liquor every day; when taken out to dry, smoke three weeks with cobs
or malt fumes. To every ham may be added a cheek, if you stow away a barrel and
not alter the composition, some add a shoulder. For transportation or
exportation, double the period of smoking.

Fish, how to choose the best in market.
Salmon, the noblest and richest fish taken in fresh water -- the largest are
the best. They are unlike almost every other fish, are ameliorated by being 3
or 4 days out of water, if kept from heat and the moon, which has much more
injurious effect than the sun.

In all great fish-markets, great fish-mongers strictly examine the gills -- if
the bright redness is exchanged for a low brown, they are stale; but when live
fish are bro't flouncing into market, you have only to elect the kind most
agreeable to your palate and the season.

Shad, contrary to the generally received opinion are not so much richer
flavored, as they are harder when first taken out of the water; opinions vary
respecting them. I have tasted Shad thirty or forty miles from the place where
caught, and really conceived that they had a richness of flavor, which did not
appertain to those taken fresh and cooked immediately, and have proved both at
the same table, and the truth may rest here, that a Shad 36 or 48 hours out of
water, may not cook so hard and solid, and be esteemed so elegant, yet give a
higher relished flavor to the taste.

Every species generally of salt water Fish, are best fresh from the water,
though the Hannah Hill, Black Fish, Lobster, Oyster, Flounder, Bass, Cod,
Haddock, and Eel, with many others, may be transported by land many miles, find
a good market, and retain a good relish; but as generally, live ones are bought
first, deceits are used to give them a freshness of appearance, such as
peppering the gills, wetting the fins and tails, and even painting the gills,
or wetting with animal blood. Experience and attention will dictate the choice
of the best. Fresh gills, full bright eyes, moist fins and tails, are
denotements of their being fresh caught; if they are soft, its certain they are
stale, but if deceits are used, your smell must approve or denounce them, and
be your safest guide.

Of all fresh water fish, there are none that require, or so well afford haste
in cookery, as the Salmon Trout, they are best when caught under a fall or
dateract -- from what philosophical circumstance is yet unsettled, yet true it
is, that at the foot of a fall the waters are much colder than at the head;
Trout choose those waters; if taken from them and hurried into dress, they are
genuinely good; and take rank in point of superiority of flavor, of most other
fish.

Perch and Roach, are noble pan fish, the deeper the water from, whence taken,
the finer are their flavors; if taken from shallow water, with muddy bottoms,
they are impregnated therewith, and are unsavory.

Eels, though taken from muddy bottoms, are best to jump in the pan.

Most white or soft fish are best bloated, which is done by salting, peppering,
and drying in the sun, and in a chimney; after 30 or 40 hours drying, are best
broiled, and moistened with butter, etc.

Poultry -- how to choose.
Having before stated that the female in almost every instance, is preferable
to the male, and peculiarly so in the Peacock, which, though beautifully
plumaged, is tough, hard, stringy, and untasted, and even indelicious -- while
the Pea Hen is exactly otherwise, and the queen of all birds.

So also in a degree, Turkey.

Hen Turkey, is higher and richer slavor'd, easier fattened and plumper -- they
are no odds in market.

Dunghill Fowls, are from their frequent use, a tolerable proof of the former
birds.

Chickens, of either kind are good, and the yellow legged the best, and their
taste the sweetest.

Capons, if young are good, are known by short spurs and smooth legs.

All birds are known, whether fresh killed or stale, by a tight vent in the
former, and a loose open vent if old or stale; their smell denotes their
goodness; speckled rough legs denote age, while smooth legs and combs prove
them young.

A Goose, if young, the bill will be yellow, and will have but few hairs, the
bones will crack easily; but if old, the contrary, the bill will be red, and
the pads still redder; the joints stiff and difficulty disjointed; if young,
otherwise; choose one not very fleshy on the breast, but fat in the rump.

Ducks, are similar to geese.

Wild Ducks, have redder pads, and smaller than the tame ones, otherwise are
like the goose or tame duck, or to be chosen by the same rules.

Wood Cocks, ought to be thick, fat and flesh firm, the nose dry, and throat
clear.

Snipes, if young and fat, have full veins under the wing, and are small in the
veins, otherwise like the Woodcock.

Patridges, if young, will have black bills, yellowish legs; if old, the legs
look bluish; if old or stale, it may be perceived by smelling at their mouths.

Pigeons, young, have light red legs, and the flesh of a color, and prick
easily -- old have red legs, blackish in parts, more hairs, plumper and loose
vents -- so also of gray or green Plover, Black Birds, Thrash, Lark, and wild
Fowl in general.

Hares, are white fleshed and flexible when new and fresh killed; if stale,
their flesh will have a blackish hue, like old pigions, if the cleft in her lip
spread much, is wide and ragged, she is old; the contrary when young.

Leveret, is like the Hare in every respect, that some are obliged to search
for the knob, or small bone on the fore leg or foot, to distinguish them.

Rabbits, the wild are the best, either are good and tender; if old there will
be much yellowish fat about the kidneys, the claws long, wool rough, and mixed
with gray hairs; if young the reverse. As to their being fresh, judge by the
scent, they soon perish, if trap'd or shot, and left in pelt or undressed;
their taint is quicker than veal, and the most sickish in nature; and will not,
like beef or veal, be purged by fire.

The cultivation of Rabbits would be profitable in America, if the best methods
were pursued -- they are a very prolific and profitable animal -- they are
easily cultivated if properly attended, but not otherwise. -- A Rabbit's
borough, on which 3000 dollars may have been expended, might be very
profitable; but on the small scale they would be well near market towns --
easier bred, and more valuable.

Butter -- Tight, waxy, yellow Butter is better than white or crumbly, which
soon becomes rancid and frowy. Go into the center of balls or rolls to prove
and judge it; if in ferkin, the middle is to be preferred, as the sides are
frequently distasted by the wood of the firkin -- although oak and used for
years. New pine tubs are ruinous to the butter. To have sweet butter in dog
days, and through the vegetable seasons, send stone pots to honest, neat, and
trusty dairy people, and procure it packed down in May, and let them be brought
in in the night, or cool rainy morning, covered with a clean cloth wet in cold
water, and partake of no heat from the horse, and set the pots in the coldest
part of your cellar, or in the ice house. -- Some say that May butter thus
preserved, will go into the winter use, better than fall made butter.

Cheese -- The red smooth moist coated, and tight pressed, square edged Cheese,
are better than white coat, hard rinded, or bilged; the inside should be
yellow, and flavored to your taste. Old shelves which have only been wiped down
for years, are preferable to scoured and washed shelves. Deceits are used by
salt-petering the out side, or coloring with hemlock, cocumberries, or safron,
infused into the milk; the taste of either supercedes every possible evasion.

Eggs -- Clear, thin shell'd, longest oval and sharp ends are best; to
ascertain whether new or stale -- hold to the light, if the white is clear, the
yolk regularly in the center, they are good -- but if otherwise, they are
stale. The best possible method of ascertaining, is to put them into water, if
they lie on their bilge, they are good and fresh -- if they bob up an end they
are stale, and if they rise they are addled, proved, and of no use.

We proceed to ROOTS and VEGETABLES -- and the best cook cannot alter the first
quality, they must be good, or the cook will be disappointed.

Potatoes, take rank for universal use, profit and easy acquirement. The smooth
skin, known by the name of How Is Potatoe, is the most mealy and richest
flavor'd; the yellow rusticoat next best; the red, and red rusticoat are
tolerable; and the yellow Spanish have their value -- those cultivated from
imported seed on sandy or dry loomy lands, are best for table use; though the red
or either will produce more in rich, loomy, highly manured garden grounds; new
lands and a sandy soil, afford the richest flavor'd; and most mealy Potatoe
much depends on the ground on which they grow -- more on the species of
Potatoes planted -- and still more from foreign seeds -- and each may be known
by attention to connoisseurs; for a good potatoe comes up in many branches of
cookery, as herein after prescribed. -- All potatoes should be dug before the
rainy seasons in the fall, well dried in the sun, kept from frost and dampness
during the winter, in the spring removed from the cellar to a dry loft, and
spread thin, and frequently stirred and dried, or they will grow and be thereby
injured for cookery.

A roast Potatoe is brought on with roast Beef, a Steake, a Chop, or Fricassee;
good boiled with a boiled dish; make an excellent stuffing for a turkey, water
or wild fowl; make a good pie, and a good starch for many uses. All potatoes
run out, or depreciate in America; a fresh importation of the Spanish might
restore them to table use.

It would swell this treatise too much to say every thing that is useful, to
prepare a good table, but I may be pardoned by observing, that the Irish have
preserved a genuine mealy rich Potatoe, for a century, which takes rank of any
known in any other kingdom; and I have heard that they renew their seed by
planting and cultivating the Seed Ball, which grows on the tine. The manner of
their managing it to keep up the excellency of that root, would better suit a
treatise on agriculture and gardening than this -- and be inserted in a book
which would be read by the farmer, instead of his amiable daughter. If no one
treats on the subject, it may appear in the next edition.

Onions -- The Medeira white is best in market, esteemed softer flavored, and
not so fiery, but the high red, round hard onions are the best; if you consult
cheapness, the largest are best; if you consult taste and softness, the very
smallest are the most delicate, and used at the first tables. Onions grow in
the richest, highest cultivated ground, and better and better year after year,
on the same ground.

Beets, grow on any ground, but best on loom, or light gravel grounds; the red
is the richest and best approved; the white has a sickish sweetness, which is
disliked by many.

Parsnips, are a valuable root, cultivated best in rich old grounds, and doubly
deep plowed, late sown, they grow thrifty, and are not so prongy; they may be
kept any where and any how, so that they do not grow with heat, or are nipped
with frost; if frosted, let them thaw in earth; they are richer flavored when
plowed out of the ground in April, having stood out during the winter, though
they will not last long after, and commonly more sticky and hard in the center.

Carrots, are managed as it respects plowing and rich ground, similarly to
Parsnips. The yellow are better than the orange or red; middling sized, that
is, a foot long and two inches thick at the top end, are better than over grown
ones; they are cultivated best with onions, sowed very thin, and mixed with
other seeds, while young or six weeks after sown, especially if with onions on
true onion ground. They are good with veal cookery, rich in soups, excellent
with hash, in May and June.

Garlicks, though used by the French, are better adapted to the uses of medicine
than cookery.

Asparagus -- The mode of cultivation belongs to gardening; your business is
only to cut and dress, the largest is best, the growth of a day sufficient, six
inches long, and cut just above the ground; many cut below the surface, under
an idea of getting tender shoots, and preserving the bed; but it enfeebles the
root: dig round it and it will be w^t with the juices -- but if cut above
ground, and just as the dew is going off, the sun will either reduce the juice,
or send it back to nourish the root -- its an excellent vegetable.

Parsley, of the three kinds, the thickest and branchiest is the best, is sown
among onions, or in a bed by itself, may be dried for winter use; though a method
which I have experienced is much better -- In September I dig my roots, procure
an old thin stave dry cask, bore holes an inch diameter in every stave, 6
inches asunder round the cask, and up to the top -- take first a half bushel of
rich garden mold and put into the cask, then run the roots through the staves,
leaving the branches outside, press the earth tight about the root within, and
thus continue on through the respective stories, till the cask is full; it being
filled, run an iron bar through the center of the dirt in the cask, and fill with
water, let stand on the south and east side of a building till frosty night,
then remove it, (by slinging a rope round the cask) into the cellar; where,
during the winter, I clip with my scissars the fresh parsley, which my
neighbors or myself have occasion for; and in the spring transplant the roots
in the bed in the garden, or in any unused corner -- or let stand upon the
wharf, or the wash shed. Its an useful mode of cultivation, and a pleasurably
tasted herb, and much used in garnishing viands.

Raddish, Salmon colored is the best, purple next best -- white -- turnip --
each are produced from southern seeds, annually. They grow thriftiest sown
among onions. The turnip Raddish will last well through the winter.

Artichokes -- The Jerusalem is best, are cultivated like potatoes, (though their
stocks grow 7 feet high) and may be preserved like the turnip raddish, or
pickled -- they like,

Horse Raddish, once in the garden, can scarcely ever be totally eradicated;
plowing or digging them up with that view, seems at times rather to increase
and spread them.

Cucumbers, are of many kinds; the prickly is best for pickles, but generally
bitter; the white is difficult to raise and tender; choose the bright green,
smooth and proper sized.

Melons -- The Water Melons is cultivated on sandy soils only, above latitude
41 1-2, if a stratum of land be dug from a well, it will bring the first year
good Water Melons; the red cored are highest flavored; a hard rine proves them
ripe.

Muskmelons, are various, the rough skinned is best to eat; the short, round,
fair skinn'd, is best for Mangoes.

Lettuce, is of various kinds; the purple spotted leaf is generally the
tenderest, and free from bitter -- Your taste must guide your market.

Cabbage, requires a page, they are so multifarious. Note, all Cabbages have a
higher relish that grow on new unmanured grounds; if grown in an old town and
on old gardens, they have a rankness, which at times, may be perceived by a
fresh air traveller. This observation has been experienced for years -- that
Cabbages require new ground, more than Turnips.

The Low Dutch, only will do in old gardens.

The barley Yorkshire, must have rich soils, they will not answer for winter,
they are easily cultivated, and frequently bro't to market in the fall, but
will not last the winter.

The Green Savoy, with the richest crinkles, is fine and tender; and although
they do not head like the Dutch or Yorkshire, yet the tenderness of the out
leaves is a counterpoise, it will last through the winter, and are high flavored.

The Yellow Savoy, takes next rank, but will not last so long; all Cabbages
will mix, and participate of other species, like Indian Corn; they are cu^l^d,
best in plants; and a true gardener will, in the plant describe those which
will head, and which will not. This is new, but a fact.

The gradations in the Savoy Cabbage are discerned by the leaf; the richest and
most scollup'd, and crinkled, and thickest Green Savoy, falls little short of a
Colliflour.

The red and redest small tight heads, are best for slaw, it will not boil
well, comes out black or blue, and tinges other things with which it is boiled.

BEANS.
The Clabboard Bean, is easiest cultivated and collected, are good for string
beans, will shell -- must be poled.

The Windsor Bean, is an earlier, good string, or shell Bean.

Crambury Bean, is rich, but not universally approved equal to the other two.

Frost Bean, is good only to shell.

Six Weeks Bean, is a yellowish Bean, and early bro't forward, and tolerable.

Lazy Bean, is tough, and needs no pole.

English Bean, what they denominate the Horse Bean, is mealy when young, is
profitable, easily cultivated, and may be grown on worn out grounds; as they
may be raised by boys, I cannot but recommend the more extensive cultivation of
them.

The small White Bean, is best for winter use, and excellent.

Calivanse, are run out, a yellow small bush, a black speck or eye, are tough
and tasteless, and little worth in cookery, and scarcely bear exportation.

Peace -- Green Peace.
The Crown Imperial, takes rank in point of flavor, they blossom, purple and
white on the top of the vines, will run from three to five feet high, should be
set in light sandy soil only, or they run too much to vines.

The Crown Pea, is second in richness of flavor.

The Rondeheval, is large and bitterish.

Early Carlton, is produced first in the season -- good.

Marrow Fats, green, yellow, and is large, easily cultivated, not equal to
others.

Sugar Pea, needs no bush, the pods are tender and good to eat, easily
cultivated.

Spanish Manratto, is a rich Pea, requires a strong high bush.

All Peace should be picked carefully from the vines as soon as dew is off,
shelled and cleaned without water, and boiled immediately; they are thus the
richest flavored.

Herbs, useful in Cookery.
Thyme, is good in soups and stuffings.

Sweet Marjoram, is used in Turkeys.

Summer Savory, ditto, and in Sausages and salted Beef, and legs of Pork.

Sage, is used in Cheese and Pork, but not generally approved.

Parsley, good in soups, and to garnish roast Beef, excellent with bread and
butter in the spring.

Penny Royal, is a high aromatic, although a spontaneous herb in old ploughed
fields, yet might be more generally cultivated in gardens, and used in cookery
and medicines.

Sweet Thyme, is most useful and best approved in cookery.

FRUITS.
Pears, There are many different kinds; but the large Bell Pear, sometimes
called the Pound Pear, the yellowest is the best, and in the same town they
differ essentially.

Hard Winter Pear, are innumerable in their qualities, are good in sauces, and
baked.

Harvest and Summer Pear are a tolerable desert, are much improved in this
country, as all other fruits are by grafting and innoculation.

Apples, are still more various, yet rigidly retain their own species, and are
highly useful in families, and ought to be more uuiversally cultivated,
excepting in the compactest cities. There is not a single family but might set
a tree in some otherwise useless spot, which might serve the two fold use of
shade and fruit; on which 12 or 14 kinds of fruit trees might easily be
engrafted, and essentially preserve the orchard from the intrusions of boys,
etc. which is too common in America. If the boy who thus planted a tree, and
guarded and protected it in a useless corner, and carefully engrafted different
fruits, was to be indulged free access into orchards, whilst the neglectful boy
was prohibited -- how many millions of fruit trees would spring into growth --
and what a saving to the union. The net saving would in time extinguish the
public debt, and enrich our cookery.

Currants, are easily grown from shoots trimmed off from old bunches, and set
carelessly in the ground; they flourish on all soils, and make good jellies --
their cultivation ought to be encouraged.

Black Currants, may be cultivated -- but until they can be dried, and until
sugars are propagated, they are in a degree unprofitable.

Grapes, are natural to the climate; grow spontaneously in every state in the
union, and ten degrees north of the line of the union. The Madeira, Lisbon and
Malaga Grapes, are cultivated in gardens in this country, and are a rich treat
or desert. Trifling attention only is necessary for their ample growth.

Having pointed out the best methods of judging of the qualities of Viands,
Poultry, Fish, Vegetables, etc. We now present the best approved methods of
DRESSING and COOKING them; and to suit all tastes, present the following

RECEIPTS.
To Roast Beef.
THE general rules are, to have a brisk hot fire, to hang down rather than to
spit, to baste with salt and water, and one quarter of an hour to every pound
of beef, though tender beef will require less, while old tough beef will require
more roasting; pricking with a fork will determine you whether done or not;
rare done is the healthiest and the taste of this age.

Roast Mutton.
If a breast let it be caused, if a leg, stuffed or not, let it be done more
gently than beef, and done more; the chine, saddle or leg require more fire and
longer time than the breast, etc. Garnish with scraped horse radish, and serve
with potatoes, beans, colliflowers, watercresses, or boiled onion, caper
sauce, mashed turnip, or lettuce.

Roast Veal.
As it is more tender than beef or mutton, and easily scorched, paper it,
especially the fat parts, lay it some distance from the fire a while to heat
gently, baste it well; a 15 pound piece requires one hour and a quarter
roasting; garnish with green-parsley and sliced lemon.

Roast Lamb.
Lay down to a clear good fire that will not want stirring or altering, baste
with butter, dust on flour, baste with the dripping, and before you take it up,
add more butter and sprinkle on a little salt and parsley shred fine; send to
table with a nice sallad, green peace, fresh beans, or a colliflower, or
asparagus.

To stuff a Turkey.
Grate a wheat loaf, one quarter of a pound butter, one quarter of a pound salt
pork, finely chopped, 2 eggs, a little sweet marjoram, summer savory, parsley
and sage, pepper and salt (if the pork be not sufficient,) fill the bird and
sew up.

The same will answer for all Wild Fowl.

Water Fowls require onions.

The same ingredients stuff a leg of Veal, fresh Pork or a loin of Veal.

To stuff and roast a Turkey, or Fowl.
One pound soft wheat bread, 3 ounces beef suet, 3 eggs, a little sweet thyme,
sweet marjoram, pepper and salt, and some add a gill of wine; fill the bird
therewith and sew up, hang down to a steady solid fire, basting frequently with
salt and water, and roast until a steam emits from the breast, put one third of
a pound of butter into the gravy, dust flour over the bird and baste with the
gravy; serve up with boiled onions and cramberry-sauce, mangoes, pickles or
celery.

2. Others omit the sweet herbs, and add parsley done with potatoes.

3. Boil and mash 3 pints potatoes, wet them with butter, add sweet herbs,
pepper, salt, fill and roast as above.

To stuff and roast a Gostin.
Boil the inwards tender, chop them fine, put double quantity of grated bread,
4 ounces butter, pepper, salt, (and sweet herbs if you like) 2 eggs molded
into the stuffing, parboil 4 onions and chop them into the stuffing, add wine,
and roast the bird.

The above is a good stuffing for every kind of Water Fowl, which requires
onion sauce.

To smother a Fowl in Oysters.
Fill the bird with dry Oysters, and few up and boil in water just sufficient
to cover the bird, salt and season to your taste -- when done tender, put into
a deep dish and pour over it a pint of stewed oysters, well buttered and
peppered, garnish a turkey with sprigs of parsley or leaves of cellery: a fowl
is best with a parsley sauce.

To stuff a Leg of Veal.
Take one pound of veal, half pound pork (salted,) one pound grated bread, chop
all very fine, with a handful of green parsley, pepper it, add 3 ounces butter
and 3 eggs, (and sweet herbs if you like them,) cut the leg round like a ham
and stab it full of holes, and fill in all the stuffing; then salt and pepper
the leg and dust on some flour; if baked in an oven, put into a sauce pan with
a little water, if potted, lay some scewers at the bottom of the pot, put in a
little water and lay the leg on the scewers, with a gentle fire render it
tender, (frequently adding water,) when done take out the leg, put butter in
the pot and brown the leg, the gravy in a separate vessel must be thickened and
buttered and a spoonful of ketchup added.

To stuff a leg of Pork to bake or roast.
Corn the leg 48 hours and stuff with sausage meat and bake in a hot oven two
hours and an half or roast.

To alamode a round of Beef.
To a 14 or 16 pound round of beef, put one ounce saltpeter, 48 hours after
stuff it with the following: one and half pound beef, one pound salt pork, two
pound grated bread, chop all fine and rub in half pound butter, salt, pepper
and cayenne, summer savory, thyme; lay it on scewers in a large pot, over 3
pints hot water (which it must occasionally be supplied with,) the steam of
which in 4 or 5 hours will render the round tender if over a moderate fire;
when tender, take away the gravy and thicken with flour and butter, and boil,
brown the round with butter and flour, adding ketchup and wine to your taste.

To alamode a round.
Take fat pork cut in slices or mince, season it with pepper, salt, sweet
marjoram and thyme, cloves, mace and nutmeg, make holes in the beef and stuff
it the night before cooked; put some bones across the bottom of the pot to keep
from burning, put in one quart Claret wine, one quart water and one onion; lay
the round on the bones, cover close and stop it round the top with dough; hang
on in the morning and stew gently two hours; turn it, and stop tight and stew
two hours more; when done tender, grate a crust of bread on the top and brown
it before the fire; scum the gravy and serve in a butter boat, serve it with
the residue of the gravy in the dish.

To Dress a Turtle.
Fill a boiler or kettle, with a quantity of water sufficient to scald the
callapach and Callapee, the fins, etc. and about 9 o'clock hang up your Turtle
by the hind fins, cut of the head and save the blood, take a sharp pointed
knife and separate the callapach from the callapee, or the back from the belly
part, down to the shoulders, so as to come at the entrails which take out, and
clean them, as you would those of any other animal, and throw them into a tub
of clean water, taking great care not to break the gall, but to cut it off from
the liver and throw it away, then separate each distinctly and put the guts
into another vessel, open them with a small penknife end to end, wash them
clean, and draw them through a woolen cloth, in warm water, to clear away the
slime and then put them in clean cold water till they are used with the other
part of the entrails, which must be cut up small to be mixed in the baking
dishes with the meat; this done, separate the back and belly pieces, entirely
cutting away the fore fins by the upper joint, which scald; peal off the loose
skin and cut them into small pieces, laying them by themselves, either in
another vessel, or on the table, ready to be seasoned; then cut off the meat
from the belly part, and clean the back from the lungs, kidneys, etc, and that
meat cut into pieces as small as a walnut, laying it likewise by itself; after
this you are to scald the back and belly pieces, pulling off the shell from the
back, and the yellow skin from the belly, when all will be white and clean, and
with the kitchen cleaver cut those up likewise into pieces about the bigness or
breadth of a card; put those pieces into clean cold water, wash them and place
them in a heap on the table, so that each part may lay by itself; the meat
being thus prepared and laid separate for seasoning; mix two third parts of
salt or rather more, and one third part of cyanne pepper, black pepper, and a
nutmeg, and mace pounded fine, and mixed all together; the quantity, to be
proportioned to the size of the Turtle, so that in each dish there may be about
three spoonfuls of seasoning to every twelve pound of meat; your meat being
thus seasoned, get some sweet herbs, such as thyme, savory, etc. let them be
dried and rubbed fine, and having provided some deep dishes to bake it in, which
should be of the common brown ware, put in the coarsest part of the meat, put a
quarter pound of butter at the bottom of each dish, and then put some of each
of the several parcels of meat, so that the dishes may be all alike and have
equal portions of the different parts of the Turtle, and between each laying of
meat strew a little of the mixture of sweet herbs, fill your dishes within an
inch an half, or two inches of the top; boil the blood of the Turtle, and put
into it, then lay on forcemeat balls made of veal, highly seasoned with the
same seasoning as the Turtle; put in each dish a gill of Madeira Wine, and as
much water as it will conveniently hold, then break over it five or six eggs to
keep the meat from scorching at the top, and over that shake a handful of
shread parsley, to make it look green, when done put your dishes into an oven
made hot enough to bake bread, and in an hour and half, or two hours (according
to the size of the dishes) it will be sufficiently done.

To dress a Calve's Head. Turtle fashion.
The head and feet being well scalded and cleaned, open the head, taking the
brains, wash, pick and cleanse, salt and pepper and parsley them and put bye in
a cloth; boil the head, feet and heartslet one and quarter, or one and half
hour, sever out the bones, cut the skin and meat in slices, strain the liquor
in which boiled and put by; clean the pot very clean or it will burn too, make
a layer of the slices, which dust with a composition made of black pepper one
spoon, of sweet herbs pulverized, two spoons (sweet marjoram and thyme are most
approved) a tea spoon of cayenne, one pound butter, then dust with flour, then
a layer of slices with slices of veal and seasoning till completed, cover with
the liquor, stew gently three quarters of an hour. To make the forced meat
balls -- take one and half pound veal, one pound grated bread, 4 ounces raw
salt pork, mince and season with above and work with 3 whites into balls, one
or one an half inch diameter, roll in flour, and fry in very hot butter till
brown, then chop the brains fine and stir into the whole mess in the pot, put
thereto, one third part of the fried balls and a pint wine or less, when all is
heated through take off and serve in tureens, laying the residue of the balls and
hard boiled and pealed eggs into a dish, garnish with slices of lemon.

A Stew Pie.
Boil a shoulder of Veal, and cut up, salt, pepper, and butter half pound, and
slices of raw salt pork, make a layer of meat, and a layer of biscuit, or
biscuit dough into a pot, cover close and stew half an hour in three quarts of
water only.

A Sea Pie.
Four pound of flour, one and half pound of butter rolled into paste, wet with
coldwater, line the pot therewith, lay in split pigeons, turkey pies, veal,
mutton or birds, with slices of pork, salt, pepper, and dust on flour, doing
thus till the pot is full or your ingredients expended, add three pints water,
cover tight with paste, and stew moderately two and half hours.

A Chicken Pie.
Pick and clean six chickens, (without scalding) take out their inwards and
wash the birds while whole, then joint the birds, salt and pepper the pieces
and inwards. Roll one inch thick paste No. 8 and cover a deep dish, and double
at the rim or edge of the dish, put thereto a layer of chickens and a layer of
thin slices of butter, till the chickens and one and a half pound butter are
expended, which cover with a thick paste; bake one and a half hour.

Or if your oven be poor, parboil the chickens with half a pound of butter, and
put the pieces with the remaining one pound of butter, and half the gravy into
the paste, and while boiling, thicken the residue of the gravy, and when the
pie is drawn, open the crust, and add the gravy.

Minced Pies. A Foot Pie.
Scald neets feet, and clean well, (grass fed are best) put them into a large
vessel of cold water, which change daily during a week, then boil the feet till
tender, and take away the bones, when cold, chop fine, to every four pound
minced meat, add one pound of beef suet, and four pound apple raw, and a little
salt, chop all together very fine, add one quart of wine, two pound of stoned
raisins, one ounce of cinnamon, one ounce mace, and sweeten to your taste; make
use of paste No. 3 -- bake three quarters of an hour.

Weeks after, when you have occasion to use them, carefully raise the top
crust, and with a round edged spoon, collect the meat into a basin, which warm
with additional wine and spices to the taste of your circle, while the crust is
also warmed like a hoe cake, put carefully together and serve up, by this means
you can have hot pies through the winter, and enriched singly to your company.

Tongue Pie.
One pound neat's tongue, one pound apple, one third of a pound of Sugar, one
quarter of a pound of butter, one pint of wine, one pound of raisins, or
currants, (or half of each) half ounce of cinnamon and mace -- bake in paste
No. 1, in proportion to size.

Minced Pie of Beef.
Four pound boild beef, chopped fine, and salted; six pound of raw apple
chopped also, one pound beef suet, one quart of Wine or rich sweet cider, one
ounce mace, and cinnamon, a nutmeg, two pounds raisins, bake in paste No. 3,
three fourths ofan hour.

Observations.
All meat pies require a hotter and brisker oven than fruit pies, in good
cookeries, all raisins should be stoned. -- As people differ in their tastes,
they may alter to their wishes. And as it is difficult to ascertain with
precision the small articles of spicery; every one may relish as they like, and
suit their taste.

Apple Pie.
Stew and strain the apples, to every three pints, grate the peal of a fresh
lemon, add cinnamon, mace, rose water and sugar to your taste -- and bake in
paste No. 3.

Every species of fruit such as peace, plums, rasberries, black berries may be
only sweetened, without spices -- and bake in paste No. 3.

Current Pies.
Take green, full grown currants, and one third their quantity of sugar,
proceeding as above.

A buttered apple Pie.
Pare, quarter and core tart apples, lay in paste No. 3, cover with the same;
bake half an hour, when drawn, gently raise the top crust, add sugar, butter,
cinnamon, mace, wine or rose water q: s:

PUDDINGS.
A Rice Pudding.
One quarter of a pound rice, a stick of cinnamon, to a quart of milk (stirred
often to keep from burning) and boil quick, cool and add half a nutmeg, 4
spoons rose water, 8 eggs; butter or puff paste a dish and pour the above
composition into it, and bake one and half hour.

No. 2. Boil 6 ounces rice in a quart milk, on a slow fire 'till tender, stir
in one pound butter, interim beet 14 eggs, add to the pudding when cold with
sugar, salt, rose water and spices to your taste, adding raisins or currants,
bake as No. 1.

No. 3. 8 spoons rice boiled in 2 quarts milk, when cooled add 8 eggs, 6 ounces
butter, wine, sugar and spices, q: s: bake 2 hours.

No. 4. Boil in water half pound ground rice till soft, add 2 quarts milk and
scald, cool and add 8 eggs, 6 ounces butter, 1 pound raisins, salt, cinnamon
and a small nutmeg, bake 2 hours.

No. 5. A cheap one, half pint rice, 2 quarts milk, salt, butter, allspice, put
cold into a hot oven, bake 2 and half hours.

No. 6. Put 6 ounces rice into water, or milk and water, let it swell or soak
tender, then boil gently, stirring in a little butter, when cool stir in a
quart cream, 6 or 8 eggs well beaten, and add cinnamon, nutmeg, and sugar to
your taste, bake.

N. B. The mode of introducing the ingredients, is a material point; in all
cases where eggs are mentioned it is understood to be well beat; whites and
yolks and the spices, fine and settled.

A Nice Indian Pudding.
No. 1. 3 pints scalded milk, 7 spoons fine Indian meal, stir well together
while hot, let stand till cooled; add 7 eggs, half pound raisins, 4 ounces
butter, spice and sugar, bake one and half hour.

No. 2. 3 pints scalded milk to one pint meal salted; cool, add 2 eggs, 4
ounces butter, sugar or molasses and spice q. s. it will require two and half
hours baking.

No. 3. Salt a pint meal, wet with one quart milk, sweeten and put into a
strong cloth, brass or bell metal vessel, stone or earthern pot, secure from
wet and boil 12 hours.

A Sunderland Pudding.
Whip 6 eggs, half the whites, take half a nutmeg, one point cream and a little
salt, 4 spoons fine flour, oil or butter pans, cups, or bowls, bake in a quick
oven one hour. Eat with sweet sauce.

A Whitpot.
Cut half a loaf of bread in slices, pour thereon 2 quarts milk, 6 eggs,
rose water, nutmeg and half pound of sugar; put into a dish and cover with
paste, No. 1. bake slow 1 hour.

A Bread Pudding.
One pound soft bread or biscuit soaked in one quart milk, run through a sieve or
cullender, add 7 eggs, three quarters of a pound sugar, one quarter of a pound
butter, nutmeg or cinnamon, one gill rose water, one pound stoned raisins, half
pint cream, bake three quarters of an hour, middling oven.

A Flour Pudding.
Seven eggs, one quarter of a pound of sugar, and a tea spoon of salt, beat and
put to one quart milk, 5 spoons of flour, cinnamon and nutmeg to your taste,
bake half an hour, and serve up with sweet sauce.

A boiled Flour Pudding.
One quart milk, 9 eggs, 7 spoons flour, a little salt, put into a strong cloth
and boiled three quarters of an hour.

A Cream Almond Pudding.
Boil gently a little mace and half a nutmeg (grated) in a quart cream; when
cool, beat 8 yolks and 3 whites, strain and mix with one spoon flour one
quarter of a pound almonds; settled, add one spoon rose water, and by degrees
the cold cream and beat well together; wet a thick cloth and flour it, and pour
in the pudding, boil hard half an hour, take out, pour over it melted butter
and sugar.

An apple Pudding Dumplin.
Put into paste, quartered apples, lie in a cloth and boil two hours, serve
with sweet sauce.

Pears, Plumbs, etc,
Are done the same way.

Potatoe Pudding. Baked.
No. 1. One pound boiled potatoes, one pound sugar, half a pound butter, 10
eggs.

No. 2. One pound boiled potatoes, mashed, three quarters of a pound butter, 3
gills milk or cream, the juice of one lemon and the peal grated, half a pound
sugar, half nutmeg, 7 eggs (taking out 3 whites,) 2 spoons rose water.

Apple Pudding.
One pound apple sifted, one pound sugar, 9 eggs, one quarter of a pound
butter, one quart sweet cream, one gill rose water, a cinnamon, a green lemon
peal grated (if sweet apples,) add the juice of half a lemon, put on to paste
No. 7. Currants, raisins and citron some add, but good without them.

Carrot Pudding.
A coffee cup full of boiled and strained carrots, 5 eggs, 2 ounces sugar and
butter each, cinnamon and rose water to your taste, baked in a deep dish
without paste.

A Crookneck, or Winter Squash Pudding.
Core, boil and skin a good squash, and bruize it well; take 6 large apples,
pared, cored, and stewed tender, mix together; add 6 or 7 spoonsful of dry
bread or biscuit, rendered fine as meal, half pint milk or cream, 2 spoons of
rose water, 2 do. wine, 5 or 6 eggs beaten and strained, nutmeg, salt and sugar
to your taste, one spoon flour, beat all smartly together, bake.

The above is a good receipt for Pompkins, Potatoes or Yams, adding more
moistening or milk and rose water, and to the two latter a few black or Lisbon
currants, or dry whortleberries scattered in, will make it better.

Pompkin.
No. 1. One quart stewed and strained, 3 pints cream, 9 beaten eggs, sugar,
mace, nutmeg and ginger, laid into paste No. 7 or 3, and with a dough spur,
cross and chequer it, and baked in dishes three quarters of an hour.

No. 2. One quart of milk, 1 pint pompkin, 4 eggs, molasses, allspice and
ginger in a crust, bake 1 hour.

Orange Pudding.
Put sixteen yolks with half a pound butter melted, grate in the rinds of two
Seville oranges, beat in half pound of fine Sugar, add two spoons orange water,
two of rose water, one gill of wine, half pint cream, two naples biscuit or the
crumbs of a fine loaf, or roll soaked in cream, mix all together, put it into
rich puff-paste, which let be double round the edges of the dish; bake like a
custard.

A Lemon Pudding.
1. Grate the yellow of the peals of three lemons, then take two whole lemons,
roll under your hand on the table till soft, taking care not to burst them, cut
and squeeze them into the grated peals.

2. Take ten ounces soft wheat bread, and put a pint of scalded white wine
thereto, let soak and put to No. 1.

3. Beat four whites and eight yolks, and put to above, adding three quarters
of a pound of melted butter, (which let be very fresh and good) one pound fine
sugar, beat all together till thorougly mixed.

4. Lay paste No. 7 or 9 on a dish, plate or saucers, and fill with above
composition.

5. Bake near 1 hour, and when baked -- stick on pieces of paste, cut with a
jagging iron or a doughspur to your fancy, baked lightly on a floured paper;
garnished thus, they may be served hot or cold.

Puff Pastes for Tarts.
No. 1. Rub one pound of butter into one pound of flour, whip 2 whites and add
with cold water and one yolk; make into paste, roll in in six or seven times
one pound of butter, flowring it each roll. This is good for any small thing.

No. 2. Rub six pound of butter into fourteen pound of flour, eight eggs, add
cold water, make a stiff paste.

No. 3. To any quantity of flour, rub in three fourths of it is weight of
butter, (twelve eggs to a peck) rub in one third or half, and roll in the rest.

No. 4. Into two quarts flour (salted) and wet stiff with cold water roll in,
in nine or ten times one and half pound of butter.

No. 5. One pound flour, three fourths of a pound of butter, beat well.

No. 6. To one pound of flour rub in one fourth of a pound of butter wet with
three eggs and rolled in a half pound of butter.

A Paste for Sweet Meats.
No. 7. Rub one third of one pound of butter, and one pound of lard into two
pound of flour, wet with four whites well beaten; water q: s: to make a paste,
roll in the residue of shortning in ten or twelve rollings -- bake quick.

No. 8. Rub in one and half pound of suet to six pounds of flour, and a spoon
full of salt, wet with cream roll in, in six or eight times, two and half
pounds of butter -- good for a chicken or meat pie.

Royal Paste,
No. 9. Rub half a pound of butter into one pound of flour, four whites beat to
a foam, add two yolks, two ounces of fine sugar; roll often, rubbing one third,
and rolling two thirds of the butter is best; excellent for tarts and apple
cakes.

CUSTARDS.
1. One pint cream sweetened to your taste, warmed hot; stir in sweet wine,
till curdled, grate in cinnamon and nutmeg.

2. Sweeten a quart of milk, add nutmeg, wine, brandy, rose water and six eggs;
bake in tea cups or dishes, or boil in water, taking care that it don't boil
into the cups.

3. Put a stick of cinnamon to one quart of milk, boil well, add six eggs, two
spoons of rose water -- bake.

4. Boiled Custard -- one pint of cream, two ounces of almonds, two spoons of
rose water, or orange flower water, some mace; boil thick, then stir in
sweetning, and lade off into china cups, and serve up.

Rice Custard.
Boil a little mace, a quartered nutmeg in a quart of cream, add rice (well
boiled) while boiling sweeten and flavor with orange or rose water, putting
into cups or dishes, when cooled, set to serve up.

A Rich Custard.
Four eggs beat and put to one quart cream, sweetened to your taste, half a
nutmeg, and a little cinnamon -- baked.

A sick bed Custard.
Scald a quart milk, sweeten and salt a little, whip 3 eggs and stir in, bake
on coals in a pewter vessel.

TARTS.
Apple Tarts.
Stew and strain the apples, add cinnamon, rose water, wine and sugar to your
taste, lay in paste, royal, squeeze thereon orange juice -- bake gently.

Cramberries.
Stewed, strained and sweetened, put into paste No. 9, and baked gently.

Marmolade, laid into paste No. 1, baked gently.

A ppricots, must be neither pared, cut or stoned, but put in whole, and sugar
sifted over them, as above.

Orange or Lemon Tart.
Take 6 large lemons, rub them well in salt, put them into salt and water and
let rest 2 days, change them daily in fresh water, 14 days, then cut slices and
mince as fine as you can and boil them 2 or 3 hours till tender, then take 6
pippins, pare, quarter and core them, boil in 1 pint fair water till the
pippins break, then put the half of the pippins, with all the liquor to the
orange or lemon, and add one pound sugar, boil all together one quarter of an
hour, put into a gallipot and squeeze thereto a fresh orange, one spoon of
which, with a spoon of the pulp of the pippin, laid into a thin royal paste,
laid into small shallow pans or saucers, brushed with melted butter, and some
superfine sugar sifted thereon, with a gentle baking, will be very good.

N. B. pastry pans, or saucers, must be buttered lightly before the paste is
laid on. If glass or China be used, have only a top crust, you can garnish with
cut paste, like a lemon pudding or serve on paste No. 7.

Gooseberry Tart.
Lay clean berries and sift over them sugar, then berries and sugar 'till a
deep dish be filled, cover with paste No. 9, and bake some what more than other
tarts.

Grapes, must be cut in two and stoned and done like a Gooseberry.

SYLLABUBS.
To make a fine Syllabub from the Cow.
Sweeten a quart of cider with double refined sugar, grate nutmeg into it, then
milk your cow into your liquor, when you have thus added what quantity of milk
you think proper, pour half a pint or more, in proportion to the quantity of
syllabub you make, of the sweetest cream you can get all over it.

A Whipped Syllabub.
Take two porringers of cream and one of white wine, grate in the skin of a
lemon, take the whites of three eggs, sweeten it to your taste, then whip it
with a whisk, take off the froth as it rises and put it into your syllabub
glasses or pots, and they are fit for use.

To make a fine Cream.
Take a pint of cream, sweeten it to your palate, grate a little nutmeg, put
in a spoonful of orange flower water and rose water, and two spoonfuls of wine;
beat up four eggs and two whites, stir it all together one way over the fire
till it is thick, have cups ready and pour it in.

Lemon Cream.
Take the juice of four large lemons, half a pint of water, a pound of double
refined sugar beaten fine, the whites of seven eggs and the yolk of one beaten
very well, mix altogether, strain it, set it on a gentle fire, stiring it all
the while and skim it clean, put into it the peal of one lemon, when it is very
hot, but not to boil; take out the lemon peal and pour it into china dishes.

Raspberry Cream.
Take a quart of thick sweet cream and boil it two or three wallops, then take
it off the fire and strain some juices of raspberries into it to your taste,
stir it a good while before you put your juice in, that it may be almost cold,
when you put it to it, and afterward stir it one way for almost a quarter of
an hour; then sweeten it to your taste and when it is cold you may send it up.

Whipped Cream.
Take a quart of cream and the whites of 8 eggs beaten with half a pint of
wine; mix it together and sweeten it to your taste with double refined sugar,
you may perfume it (if you please) with musk or Amber gum tied in a rag and
steeped a little in the cream, whip it up with a whisk and a bit of lemon peel
tied in the middle of the whisk, take off the froth with a spoon, and put into
glasses.

A Trifle.
Fill a dish with biscuit finely broken, rusk and spiced cake, wet with wine,
then pour a good boiled custard, (not too thick) over the rusk, and put a
syllabub over that; garnish with jelley and flowers.

CAKE.
Plumb Cake.
Mix one pound currants, one dram nutmeg, mace and cinnamon each, a little
salt, one pound of citron, orange peal candied* and almonds bleach'd, 6 pound
of flour, (well dried) beat 21 eggs, and add with 1 quart new ale yeast, half
pint of wine, 3 half pints of cream and raisins, q: s:

Plain Cake.
Nine pound of flour, 3 pound of sugar, 3 pound of butter, 1 quart emptins, 1
quart milk, 9 eggs, 1 ounce of spice, 1 gill of rose water, 1 gill of wine.

Another.
Three quarters of a pound of sugar, 1 pound of butter, and 6 eggs worked into
1 pound of flour.

A rich Cake.
Rub 2 pound of butter into 5 pound of flour, add 15 eggs (not much beaten) 1
pint of emptins, 1 pint of wine, kneed up stiff like biscuit, cover well and
put by and let rise over night.

To 2 and a half pound raisins, add 1 gill brandy, to soak over night, or if
new half an hour in the morning, add them with 1 gill rose water and 2 and half
pound of loaf sugar, 1 ounce cinnamon, work well and bake as loaf cake, No. 1.

Potatoe Cake.
Boil potatoes, peal and pound them, add yolks of eggs, wine and melted butter
work with flour into paste, shape as you please, bake and pour over them melted
butter, wine and sugar.

Johny Cake, or Hoe Cake.
Scald 1 pint of milk and put to 3 pints of indian meal, and half pint of
flower -- bake before the fire. Or scald with milk two thirds of the indian
meal, or wet two thirds with boiling water, add salt, molasses and shortening,
work up with cold water pretty stiff, and bake as above.

Indian Slapjack.
One quart of milk, 1 pint of indian meal, 4 eggs, 4 spoons of flour, little
salt, beat together, baked on gridles, or fry in a dry pan, or baked in a pan
which has been rubbed with suet, lard or butter.

Loaf Cakes.
No. 1. Rub 6 pound of sugar, 2 pound of lard, 3 pound of butter into 12 pound
of flour, add 18 eggs, 1 quart of milk, 2 ounces of cinnamon, 2 small nutmegs,
a tea cup of coriander seed, each pounded fine and sifted, add one pint of
brandy, half a pint of wine, 6 pound of stoned raisins, 1 pint of emptins,
first having dried your flour in the oven, dry and roll the sugar fine, rub
your shortning and sugar half an hour, it will render the cake much whiter and
lighter, heat the oven with dry wood, for 1 and a half hours, if large pans be
used, it will then require 2 hours baking, and in proportion for smaller
loaves. To frost it. Whip 6 whites, during the baking, add 3 pound of sifted
loaf sugar and put on thick, as it comes hot from the oven. Some return the
frosted loaf into the oven, it injures and yellows it, if the frosting be put
on immediately it does best without being returned into the oven.

Another.
No. 2. Rub 4 pound of sugar, 3 and a half pound of shortning, (half butter and
half lard) into 9 pound of flour, 1 dozen of eggs, 2 ounces of cinnamon, 1 pint
of milk, 3 spoonfuls coriander seed, 3 gills of brandy, 1 gill of wine, 3 gills
of emptins, 4 pounds of raisins.

Another.
No. 3. Six pound of flour, 3 of sugar, 2 and a half pound of shortning, (half
butter, half lard) 6 eggs, 1 nutmeg, 1 ounce of cinnamon and 1 ounce of
coriander seed, 1 pint of emptins, 2 gills brandy, 1 pint of milk and 3 pound
of raisins.

Another.
No. 4. Five pound of flour, 2 pound of butter, 2 and a half pounds of loaf
sugar, 2 and a half pounds of raisins, 15 eggs, 1 pint of wine, 1 pint of
emptins, 1 ounce of cinnamon, 1 gill rose water, 1 gill of brandy -- baked like
No. 1.

Another Plain cake.
No. 5. Two quarts milk, 3 pound of sugar, 3 pound of shortning, warmed hot,
add a quart of sweet cider, this curdle, add 18 eggs, allspice and orange to
your taste, or fennel, carroway or coriander seeds; put to 9 pounds of flour, 3
pints emptins, and bake well.

Cookies.
One pound sugar boiled slowly in half pint water, scum well and cool, add two
tea spoons pearl ash dissolved in milk, then two and half pounds flour, rub in
4 ounces butter, and two large spoons of finely powdered coriander seed, wet
with above; make roles half an inch thick and cut to the shape you please; bake
fifteen or twenty minutes in a slack oven -- good three weeks.

Another Christmas Cookey.
To three pound flour, sprinkle a tea cup of fine powdered coriander seed, rub
in one pound butter, and one and half pound sugar, dissolve three tea spoonfuls
of pearl ash in a tea cup of milk, kneed all together well, roll three quarters
of an inch thick, and cut or stamp into shape and size you please, bake slowly
fifteen or twenty minutes; though hard and dry at first, if put into an earthern
pot, and dry cellar, or damp room, they will be finer, softer and better when
six months old.

Molasses Gingerbread.
One table spoon of cinnamon, some coriander or allspice, put to four tea
spoons pearl ash, dissolved in half pint water, four pound flour, one quart
molasses, four ounces butter, (if in summer rub in the butter, if in winter,
warm the butter and molasses and pour to the spiced flour,) knead well 'till
stiff, the more the better, the lighter and whiter it will be; bake brisk
fifteen minutes; don't scorch; before it is put in, wash it with whites and
sugar beat together.

Gingerbread Cakes, or butter and sugar Gingerbread.
No. 1. Three pounds of flour, a grated nutmeg, two ounces ginger, one pound
sugar, three small spoons pearl ash dissolved in cream, one pound butter, four
eggs, knead it stiff, shape it to your fancy, bake 15 minutes.

Soft Gingerbread to be baked in pans.
No. 2. Rub three pounds of sugar, two pounds of butter, into four pounds of
flour, add 20 eggs, 4 ounces ginger, 4 spoons rose water, bake as No. 1.

Butter drop do.
No. 3. Rub one quarter of a pound butter, one pound sugar, sprinkled with
mace, into one pound and a quarter flour, add four eggs, one glass rose water,
bake as No. 1.

Gingerbread.
No. 4. Three pound sugar, half pound butter, quarter of a pound of ginger, one
doz. eggs, one glass rose water, rub into three pounds flour, bake as No. 1.

A cheap seed Cake.
Rub one pound sugar, half an ounce allspice into four quarts flour, into which
pour one pound butter, melted in one pint milk, nine eggs, one gill emptins,
(carroway seed and currants, or raisins if you please) make into two loaves,
bake one and half hour.

Queens Cake.
Whip half pound butter to a cream, add 1 pound sugar, ten eggs, one glass
wine, half gill rose water, and spices to your taste, all worked into one and a
quarter pound flour, put into pans, cover with paper, and bake in a quick well
heat oven, 12 or 16 minutes.

Pound Cake.
One pound sugar, one pound butter, one pound flour, one pound or ten eggs,
rose water one gill, spices to your taste; watch it well, it will bake in a
slow oven in 15 minutes.

Another (called) Pound Cake.
Work three quarters of a pound butter, one pound of good sugar, 'till very
white, whip ten whites to a foam, add the yolks and beat together, add one
spoon rose water, 2 of brandy, and put the whole to one and and a quarter of a
pound flour, if yet too soft add flour and bake slowly.

Soft Cakes in little pans.
One and half pound sugar, half pound butter, rubbed into two pounds flour, add
one glass wine, one do. rose water, 18 eggs and a nutmeg.

A light Cake to bake in small cups.
Half a pound sugar, half a pound butter, rubbed into two pounds flour, one
glass wine, one do* rose water, two do. emptins, a nutmeg, cinnamon and
currants.

Sbrewshury Cake.
One pound butter, three quarters of a pound sugar, a little mace, four eggs
mixed and beat with your hand, till very light, put the composition to one
pound flour, roll into small cakes -- bake with a light oven.

N. B. In all cases where spices are named, it is supposed that they be pounded
fine and sifted; sugar must be dried and rolled fine; flour, dried in an oven;
eggs well beat or whipped into a raging foam.

Diet Bread.
One pound sugar, 9 eggs, beat for an hour, add to 14 ounces flour, spoonful
rose water, one do. cinnamon or coriander, bake quick.

RUSK. -- To make.
No. 1. Rub in half pound sugar, half pound butter, to four pound flour, add
pint milk, pint emptins; when risen well, bake in pans ten minutes, fast.

No. 2. One pound sugar, one pound butter, six eggs, rubbed into 5 pounds
flour, one quart emptins and wet with milk, sufficient to bake, as above.

No. 3. One pound sugar, one pound butter, rubbed into 6 or 8 pounds of flour,
12 eggs, one pint emptins, wet soft with milk, and bake.

No. 4. P. C. rusk. Put fifteen eggs to 4 pounds flour and make into large
biscuit; and bake double, or one top of another.

No. 5. One pint milk, one pint emptins, to be laid over night in sponge, in
morning, melt three quarters of a pound butter, one pound sugar, in another
pint of milk, add luke warm, and beat till it rise well.

No. 6 Three quarters of a pound butter, one pound sugar, 12 eggs, one quart
milk, put as much flour as they will wet, a spoon of cinnamon, gill emptins,
let it stand till very puffy or light; roll into small cakes and let it stand
on oiled tins while the oven is heating, bake 15 minutes in a quick oven, then
wash the top with sugar and whites, while hot.

Biscuit.
One pound flour, one ounce butter, one egg, wet with milk and break while oven
is heating, and in the same proportion.

Butter Biscuit.
One pint each milk and emptins, laid into flour, in sponge; next morning add
one pound butter melted, not hot, and knead into as much flower as will with
another pint of warmed milk, be of a sufficient consistance to make soft --
some melt the butter in the milk.

A Butter Drop.
Four yolks, two whites, one pound flour, a quarter of a pound butter, one
pound sugar, two spoons rose water, a little mace, baked in tin pans.

PRESERVES.
For preserving Quinces.
Take a peck of Quinces, pare them, take out the core with a sharp knife, if
you wish to have them whole; boil parings and cores with two pound frost
grapes, in 3 quarts water, boil the liquor an hour and an half, or till it is
thick, strain it through a coarse hair sieve, add one and a quarter pound sugar
to every pound of quince; put the sugar into the sirrup, scald and scim it till
it is clear, put the quinces into the sirrup, cut up two oranges and mix with
the quince, hang them over a gentle fire for five hours, then put them in a
stone pot for use, set them in a dry cool place.

For preserving Quinces in Loaf Sugar.
Take a peck of Quinces, put them into a kettle of cold water, hang them over
the fire, boil them till they are soft, then take them out with a fork, when
cold, pair them, quarter or halve them, if you like; take their weight of loaf
sugar, put into a bell-metal kettle or sauce pan, with one quart of water,
scald and skim it till it is very clear, then put in your Quinces, let them
boil in the sirrup for half an hour, add oranges as before if you like, then
put them in stone pots for use.

For preserving Strawberries.
Take two quarts of Strawberries, squeeze them through a cloth, add half a pint
of water and two pound of sugar, put it into a sauce pan, scald and skim it,
take two pound of Strawberries with stems on, set your sauce pan on a chaffing
dish, put as many Strawberries into the dish as you can with the stems up
without bruizing them, let them boil for about ten minutes, then take them out
gently with a fork and put them into a stone pot for use; when you have done
the whole turn the sirrup into the pot, when hot; set them in a cool place for
use.

Currants and Cherries may be done in the same way, by adding a little more
sugar.

The American Citron.
Take the rine of a large watermelon not too ripe, cut it into small pieces,
take two pound of loaf sugar, one pint of water, put it all into a kettle, let
it boil gently for four hours, then put it into pots for use.

To keep White Bullace, Pears, Plumbs, or Damsons, etc. for tarts or pies.
Gather them when full grown, and just as they begin to turn, pick all the
largest out, save about two thirds of the fruit, to the other third put as much
water as you think will cover them, boil and skim them; when the fruit is
boiled very soft, strain it through a coarse hair sieve; and to every quart of
this liquor put a pound and a half of sugar, boil it, and skim it very well;
then throw in your fruit, just give them a scald; take them off the fire, and
when cold, put them into bottles with wide mouths, pour your sirrup over them,
lay a piece of white paper over them, and cover them with oil.

To make Marmalade.
To two pounds of quinces, put three quarters of a pound of sugar and a pint of
springwater; then put them over the fire, and boil them till they are tender;
then take them up and bruize them; then put them into the liquor, let it boil
three quarters of an hour, and then put it into your pots or saucers.

To preserve Mulberries whole.
Set some mulberries over the fire in a skillet or preserving pan; draw from
them a pint of juice when it is strained; then take three pounds of sugar
beaten very fine, wet the sugar with the pint of juice, boil up your sugar and
skim it, put in two pounds of ripe mulberries, and let them stand in the sirrup
till they are thoroughly warm, then set them on the fire, and let them boil
very gently; do them but half enough, so put them by in the sirrup till next
day, then boil them gently again: when the sirrup is pretty thick, and will
stand in round drops when it is cold, they are done enough, so put all into a
gallipot for use.

To preserve Goosberries, Damsons, or Plumbs.
Gather them when dry, full grown, and not ripe; pick them one by one, put them
into glass bottles that are very clean and dry, and cork them close with new
corks; then put a kettle of water on the fire, and put in the bottles with
care; wet not the corks, but let the water come up to the necks; make a gentle
fire till they are a little codled and turn white; do not take them up till
cold, then pitch the corks all over, or wax them close and thick; then set them
in a cool dry cellar.

To preserve Peaches.
Put your peaches in boiling water, just give them a scald, but don't let them
boil, take them out, and put them in cold water, then dry them in a sieve, and
put them in long wide mouthed bottles: to half a dozen peaches take a quarter
of a pound of sugar, clarify it, pour it over your peaches, and fill the
bottles with brandy, stop them close, and keep them in a close place.

To preserve Apricots.
Take your apricots and pare them, then stone what you can whole; give them a
light boiling in a pint of water, or according to your quantity of fruit; then
take the weight of your apricots in sugar, and take the liquor which you boil
them in, and your sugar, and boil it till it comes to a sirrup, and give them a
light boiling, taking of the scum as it rises; when the sirrup jellies, it is
enough; then take up the apricots, and cover them with the jelly, and put cut
paper over them, and lay them down when cold. Or, take you plumbs before they
have stones in them, which you may know by putting a pin through them, then
codle them in many waters, till they are as green as grass; peel them and codle
them again; you must take the weight of them in sugar and make a sirrup; put to
your sugar a pint of water; then put them in, set them on the fire to boil
slowly, till they be clear, skimming them often, and they will be very green.
Put them up in glasses, and keep them for use,

To preserve Cherries.
Take two pounds of cherries, one pound and a half of sugar, half a pint of
fair water, melt some sugar in it; when it is melted, put in your other sugar
and your cherries; then boil them softly, till all the sugar be melted; then
boil them fast, and skim them; take them off two or three times and shake them,
and put them on again, and let them boil fast; and when they are of a good
color, and the sirrup will stand, they are boiled enough.

To preserve Raspberries.
Choose raspberries that are not too ripe, and take the weight of them in sugar,
wet your sugar with a little water, and put in your berries, and let them boil
softly; take heed of breaking them; when they are clear, take them up, and boil
the sirrup till it be thick enough, then put them in again; and when they are
cold, put them up in glasses.

To preserve Currants.
Take the weight of the currants in sugar, pick out the seeds; take to a pound
of sugar, half a pint of water, let it melt; then put in your currants and let
them do very leisurely, skim them, and take them up, let the sirrup boil; then
put them on again; and when they are clear, and the sirrup thick enough, take
them off; and when they are cold, put them up in glasses.

To preserve Plumbs.
Take your plumbs before they have stones in them, which you may know by
putting a pin through them, then codle them in many waters till they are as
green as grass, peel them and coddle them again; you must take the weight of
them in sugar, a pint of water, then put them in, set them on the fire, to boil
slowly till they be clear, skiming them often, and they will be very green; put
them up in glasses and keep them for use.

To keep Damsons.
Take damsons when they are first ripe, pick them off carefully, wipe them
clean, put them into snuff bottles, stop them up tight so that no air can get
to them, nor water; put nothing into the bottles but plumbs, put the bottles
into cold water, hang them over the fire, let them heat slowly, let the water
boil slowly for half an hour, when the water is cold take out the bottles, set
the bottles into a cold place, they will keep twelve months if the bottles are
stopped tight, so as no air nor water can get to them. They will not keep long
after the bottles are opened; the plumbs must be hard.

Current Jelly.
Having stripped the currants from the stalks, put them in a stone jar, stop it
close, set it in a kettle of boiling water, half way the jar, let it boil half
an hour, take it out and strain the juice through a coarse hair sieve, to a
pint of juice put a pound of sugar, set it over a fine quick fire in a
preserving pan, or a bell-metal skillet, keep stiring it all the time till the
sugar be melted, then skim the skum off as fast as it rises. When the jelly is
very clear and fine, pour it into earthern or china cups, when cold, cut white
papers just the bigness of the top of the pot, and lay on the jelly, dip those
papers in brandy, then cover the top of the pot and prick it full of holes, set
it in a dry place; you may put some into glasses for present use.

To dry Peaches.
Take the fairest and ripest peaches, pare them into fair water; take their
weight in double refined sugar; of one half make a very thin sirrup; then put
in your peaches, boiling them till they look clear, then split and stone them,
boil them till they are very tender, lay them a draining, take the other half
of the sugar, and boil it almost to a candy; then put in your peaches, and let
them lie all night then lay them on a glass, and set them in a stove, till they
are dry, if they are sugared too much, wipe them with a wet cloth a little; let
the first sirrup be very thin, a quart of water to a pound of sugar.

To pickle or make Mangoes of Melons.
Take green melons, as many as you please, and make a brine strong enough to
bear an egg; then pour it boiling hot on the melons, keeping them down under
the brine; let them stand five or six days; then take them out, slit them down
on one side, take out all the seeds, scrape them well in the inside, and wash
them clean with cold water; then take a clove of a garlic, a little ginger and
nutmeg sliced, and a little whole pepper; put all these proportionably into the
melons, filling them up with mustardseeds; then lay them in an earthern pot
with the slit upwards, and take one part of mustard and two parts of vinegar,
enough to cover them, pouring it upon them scalding hot, and keep them close
stopped.

To pickle Barberries.
Take of white wine vinegar and water, of each an equal quantity; to every
quart of this liquor, put in half a pound of cheap sugar, then pick the worst
of your barberries and put into this liquor, and the best into glasses; then
boil your pickle with the worst of your barberries, and skim it very clean,
boil it till it looks of a fine color, then let it stand to be cold, before
you strain it; then strain it through a cloth, wringing it to get all the
color you can from the barberries; let it stand to cool and settle, then pour
it clear into the glasses; in a little of the pickle, boil a little fennel;
when cold, put a little bit at the top of the pot or glass, and cover it close
with a bladder or leather. To every half pound of sugar, put a quarter of a
pound of white salt.

To pickle Cucumbers.
Let your cucumbers be small, fresh gathered, and free from spots; then make a
pickle of salt and water, strong enough to bear an egg; boil the pickle and
skim it well, and then pour it upon your cucumbers, and stive them down for
twenty four hours; then strain them out into a cullender, and dry them well
with a cloth, and take the best white wine vinegar, with cloves, sliced mace,
nutmeg, white pepper corns, long pepper, and races of ginger, (as much as you
please) boil them up together, and then clap the cucumbers in, with a few vine
leaves, and a little salt, and as soon as they begin to turn their color, put
them into jars, stive them down close, and when cold, tie on a bladder and
leather.

Alamode Beef.
Take a round of beef, and stuff it with half pound pork, half pound of butter,
the soft of half a loaf of wheat bread, boil four eggs very hard, chop them up;
add sweet majoram, sage, parsley, summersavory, and one ounce of cloves
pounded, chop them all together, with two eggs very fine, and add a jill of
wine, season very high with salt and pepper, cut holes in your beef, to put
your stuffing in, then stick whole cloves into the beef, then put it into a two
pail pot, with sticks at the bottom, if you wish to have the beef round when
done, put it into a cloth and bind it tight with 20 or 30 yards of twine, put
it into your pot with two or three quarts of water, and one jill of wine, if
the round be large it will take three or four hours to bake it.

For dressing Codfish.
Put the fish first into cold water and wash it, then hang it over the fire and
soak it six hours in scalding water, then shift it into clean warm water, and
let it scald for one hour, it will be much better than to boil.

To boil all kinds of Garden Stuff.
In dressing all sorts of kitchen garden herbs, take care they are clean
washed; that there be no small snails, or caterpillars between the leaves; and
that all the coarse outer leaves, and the tops that have received any injury by
the weather, be taken off; next wash them in a good deal of water, and put them
into a cullender to drain, care must likewise be taken, that your pot or sauce
pan be clean, well tinned, and free from sand, or grease.

To keep Green Peace till Christmas.
Take young peace, shell them, put them in a cullender to drain, then lay a
cloth four or five times double on a table, then spread them on, dry them very
well, and have your bottles ready, fill them, cover them with mutton suet fat
when it is a little soft* fill the necks almost to the top, cork them, tie a
bladder and a leather over them and set them in a dry cool place.

To boil French Beans.
Take your beans and string them, cut in two and then across, when you have
done them all, sprinkle them over with salt, stir them together, as soon as
your water boils put them in and make them boil up quick, they will be soon
done and they will look of a better green than when growing in the garden if;
they are very young, only break off the ends, them break in two and dress them
in the same manner.

To boil broad Beans.
Beans require a great deal of water and it is not best to shell them till just
before they are ready to go into the pot, when the water boils put them in with
some picked parsley and some salt, make them boil up quick, when you see them
begin to fall, they are done enough, strain them off, garnish the dish with
boiled parsley and send plain butter in a cup or boat.

To boil green Peace.
When your peace are shelled and the water boils which should not be much more
than will cover them, put them in with a few leaves of mint, as soon as they
boil put in a piece of butter as big as a walnut, and stir them about, when
they are done enough, strain them off, and sprinkle in a little salt, shake
them till the water drains off, send them hot to the table with melted butter
in a cup or boat.

To boil Asparagus.
First cut the white ends off about six inches from the head, and scrape them
from the green part downward very clean, as you scrape them, throw them into a
pan of clear water, and after a little soaking, tie them up in small even
bundles, when your water boils, put them in, and boil them up quick; but by
over boiling they will lose their heads; cut a slice of bread for a toast, and
toast it brown on both sides; when your asparagus is done, take it up
carefully; dip the toast in the asparagus water, and lay it in the bottom of
your dish; then lay the heads of the asparagus on it, with the white ends
outward; pour a little melted butter over the heads; cut an orange into small
pieces, and stick them between for garnish.

To boil Cabbage.
If your cabbage is large, cut it into quarters; if small, cut it in halves;
let your water boil, then put in a little salt, and next your cabbage with a
little more salt upon it; make your water boil as soon as possible, and when
the stalk is tender, take up your cabbage into a cullender, or sieve, that the
water may drain off, and send it to table as hot as you can. Savoys are dressed
in the same manner.

For brewing Spruce Beer.
Take four ounces of hops, let them boil half an hour in one gallon of water,
strain the hop water then add sixteen gallons of warm water, two gallons of
molasses, eight ounces of essence of spruce, dissolved in one quart of water,
put it in a clean cask, then shake it well together, add half a pint of
emptins, then let it stand and work one week, if very warm weather less time
will do, when it is drawn off to bottle, add one spoonful of molasses to every
bottle.

Emptins.
Take a handful of hops and about three quarts of water, let it boil about
fifteen minutes, then make a thickening as you do for starch, strain the
liquor, when cold put a little emptins to work them, they will keep well cork'd
in a bottle five or six weeks.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE author of the American Cookery, not having an education sufficient to
prepare the work for the press, the person that was employed by her, and
entrusted with the receipts, to prepare them for publication, (with a design to
impose on her, and injure the sale of the book) did omit several articles very
essential in some of the receipts, and placed others in their stead, which were
highly injurious to them, without her consent -- which was unknown to her, till
after publication; but she has removed them as far as possible, by the following

ERRATA.
Page 25. Rice pudding, No. 2; for one pound butter, read half pound -- for 14
eggs read 8. No. 5; after half pint rice, add 6 ounces sugar.

Page 26. A nice Indian pudding, No. 3; boil only 6 hours. -- A flour pudding;
read 9 spoons of flour, put in scalding milk; bake an hour and half. -- A
boiled flour pudding; 9 spoons of flour, boil an hour and half.

Page 27. A cream almond pudding; for 8 yolks and 3 whites, read 8 eggs; for 1
spoon flour, read 8 -- boil an hour and half.

Potatoe pudding, No. 1, No. 2. add a pint flour to each.

Page 29. Puff pastes for tarts, No, 3; for 12 eggs read 6.

Page 33. Plain cake; for 1 quart of emptins, read 1 pint.

Page 35. Another plain cake, No. 5; for 9 pounds of flour, read 18 pounds.

In all Puddings, where cream is mentioned, milk may be used.

In Pastes, the white of eggs only are to be used.


