VIDE AUDE TACE. 5776


JACHIN AND BOAZ; OR, AN AUTHENTIC KEY TO THE DOOR OF FREE-MASONRY, Both
ANCIENT and MODERN. Calculated not only for the Instruction of every New made
MASON; but also for the Information of all who intend to become BRETHREN.

CONTAINING,
I. A circumstantial Account of all the Proceedings in making a Mason, with the
several Obligations of an ENTERED APPRENTICE, FELLOW-CRAFT, and MASTER; the
Prayers, and also the Sign, Grip, and Pass-Word of each Degree, with the
Ceremony of the Mop and Pail. II. The manner of opening a Lodge, and setting
the Craft to work. III. The Entered Apprentice, Fellow-Craft, and Master's
Lectures, verbatim, as delivered in all Lodges; with the Song at the Conclusion
of each Part. IV. The Origin of Masonry; Description of Solomon's Temple;
History of the Murder of the Grand Master Hiram by the three Fellow-Crafts;
their Discovery and Punishment; the Burial of Hiram by King Solomon's Order;
with the Five Points of Fellowship, etc. V. The Ceremony of the Instalment of
the Masters of diff^^ent Lodges on St. John's Day. -- Description of the
Regalia, etc. VI. Ceremonies used at the Funeral of a Mason. VII. A safe and
easy Method proposed, by which a Man may obtain Admittance into any Lodge,
without passing through the Form required, and thereby save a guinea or two in
his pocket. VIII. Anthems, Odes, Songs, Toasts, etc.
ILLUSTRATED WITH A Beautiful FRONTISPIECE of the REGALIA, JEWELS, and
Emblematical ORNAMENTS belonging to MASONRY. AND An Accurate Plan of the
DRAWING on the Floor of a Lodge, Interspersed with a Variety of NOTES and
REMARKS, Necessary to explain and render the Whole clear to the meanest
Capacity.

By a GENTLEMAN belonging to the Jerusalem Lodge; a frequent Visitor at the
Queen's Arms, St. Paul's Churchyard; the Horn, in Fleet Street; Crown and
Anchor, Strand; and the Salutation, Newgate-street.

Try me -- prove me. A NEW EDITION, GREATLY ENLARGED AND IMPROVED.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY TIEBOUT and O'BRIEN, FOR EVERT DUYCKINCK and Co.
BOOKSELLERS AND STATIONERS, NO. 110, PEARL-STREET. M, DCC, XCVI.

TO ALL FREE-MASONS.
THE Author of the following pages has the honor of being well respected in
most of the Lodges of reputation in this metropolis, and has been a frequent
visitor at the Queen's Arms, St. Paul's Churchyard; the Globe, in
Fleet Street; the Jerusalem, at Clerkenwell; Half Moon, Cheapside; Crown and
Anchor, in the Strand; Salutation, Grey-Friars; and several others of less note.

An earnest desire of becoming a perfect master of MASONRY, and the success he
met with in his first attempt, has rendered him capable of revealing those
mysteries to the world, which, till now, have been kept secret as the grave.

He acquired his knowledge at first from some loose papers belonging to a
merchant to whom he was nearly related, who had been a member of the Queen's
Arms, St. Paul's Churchyard. This relation dying about ten years ago, the
Editor became possessed of his effects; and on looking over his papers, among
others he found some memorandums or remarks on MASONRY, which excited his
curiosity so far, that he resolved on accomplishing his scheme, without going
through the ceremonies required by the society.

The remarks of his friend abovementioned furnished hints sufficient to make a
trial on an intimate acquaintance, a FREE MASON, who readily gave him the Sign
in the manner he expected. After a more narrow inspection on the part of his
friend, such as, where he was made, and when, etc. etc. (to all which he
answered with great readiness) he received an invitation to spend an evening at
a tavern in the Strand, with several acquaintances. Elated by this success, he
boldly advanced with his company; all of whom belonged to the Lodge, and were
well known by the TYLER at the door. After the usual ceremony, in which he gave
full satisfaction, he was admitted and took his seat. That night he saw two
MAKINGS MAKING, the term used in the circular letters to the members of the
Ledge, acquainting them that new members are to be admitted the next Ledge
night.
, and came off full of spirits.

Soon after he went to another Lodge, where he distinguished himself greatly in
answering the questions proposed by the Master, which he acquired from his
friend's manuscripts of the ENTERED APPRENTICE, and FELLOW-CRAFT's Lectures.

His regard to the society, and respect to the public, is the only inducement
to this publication, which is intended not only to assist those who have been
lately made, and still remain ignorant of the true foundation of the Art, but
also to give all that have an inclination to become Masons an opportunity of
considering the advantages and disadvantages of the engagements and oaths by
which they are bound. -- Such is the intention of this undertaking; and the
Editor flatters himself the Brotherhood will not condemn his officiousness in
this respect, as it will rather strengthen than hurt the interest of the
society; the fear of going through the ceremony, which hitherto has been
represented in such frightful shapes, being the greatest obstacle to its future
welfare and increase.

The Editor's ambition is to please; and the work is submitted to the only
proper judges, viz. his Brethren the FREE MASONS; to whom he begs leave to
declare, that no private or public quarrel, the view of gain, nor any other
motive than the public good could ever have induced him to write upon this
subject; and he declares to the world, that the following is the whole of true
MASONRY in all its branches.

SINCE the former edition of this pamphlet was put to press the author has
received from his publisher several annonymous letters, containing the lowest
abuse and scurrilous invectives; nay, some have proceeded so far as to threaten
his person. He requests the favor of all enraged brethren, who shall choose to
display their talents for the future, that they will be so kind as to pay the
postage of their letters, for there can be no reason why he should put up with
their ill treatment, and pay the piper into the bargain. Surely there must be
something in this book very extraordinary; a something they cannot digest, thus
to excite the wrath and ire of those hot brained Mason-bit gentry! But however
unwiling the Editor may be to publish all the letters and messages he has
received on this occasion, yet he cannot be so deficient in returning the
compliment, as to conceal one, which notwithstanding the threatenings contained
in it, appears to be wrote with very little meaning, and he has (sans
ceremony) ventured to publish it verbatim.

For R. S. at Mr. Wm. Nicholls at the Paper Mill St. Paul's Churchyard, London.
R. S. London.
Try thee prove thee Alluding to the Motto in the Title Page, taken from the
Fellow Craft's Lecture.
I shall find thee a scandalous stinking powcatt, thou pretends to have
declared the truth of Masonry to the world. And has imposed a lie on the public
not in one part but in all parts thou mentions, I shall meet thee in a few days
and will give the^ the satisfaction such a pike thonk scandalous villain
deserves.


The original of this spirited letter, with the post-mark to authenticate it,
is left in the hands of Mr. NICOLL, bookseller, in St. Paul's Churchyard, who
has the Editor's leave to show it to any gentleman desirous to peruse so pretty
an epistle; and strict orders are given the publisher to receive none, for the
future, that are not post-paid.

* Those gentlemen who so often send for JACHIN AND BOAZ, and desire the
publisher to tie it up and seal it carefully, to hide it from the messenger,
may safely continue their commissions, and the publisher will carefully observe
their order.

R. S.

DESCRIPTION of the REGALIA and EMBLEMATICAL FIGURES used in MASONRY,
represented in the FRONTISPIECE.
1. THE two Pillars called JACHIN and BOAZ, the first signifying strength, the
second to establish in the Lord. 2. The Holy Bible opened, as an emblem that it
should be the rule of our faith. 3. The Compass and Square, to square our
actions, and keep them within bounds, the Master's emblem or jewel, which is
suspended with a ribbon round the neck, and always worn when the Lodge is
opened, and on public days of meeting, funerals, etc. 4. The Level, the Senior
Warden's emblem or jewel. 5. The 24 Inch Gauge, to measure Mason's work. 6. The
Key, the Treasurer's emblem. 7. The Sword, presented to the naked left breast
of the Apprentice. 8. The Cable, or Rope, put round the neck of every new-made
Mason at the time of making. 9. The Trowel, an instrument of great use among
Masons. 10. The Gavel, or setting Maul, used in building Solomon's Temple, the
first grand work of Masonry. 11. The Plumb, Level, Compass, and Plumb Rule, the
Junior Warden's emblem. 12. The small Hammer, to knock off superfluous pieces.
13. The Cross Pens, the Secretary's emblem. 14. A Coffin, with a figure of the
maimed body of Hiram (the first Grand Master) painted on it. He was murdered by
three Fellow-Crafts, for refusing to reveal the Secret. See. p. 31. 15. The
Hand Plummet, for taking perpendiculars. 16. The Sun rising in the east,
emblematical of the Master-Mason, standing in the east, and setting the men to
work. 17. The Seven Stars, an astronomical emblem, frequently engraved on the
medals worn by Masons. 18. The Moon, that rules the night. See p. 14. 19. The
Candlesticks, placed in a triangular form. 20. The Columns, used by the Senior
and Junior Wardens in the Lodge. See p. 37. 21. Two black Rods, carried by the
Senior and Junior Deacons. 22. The Three Steps and Pavement. 23. Entrance or
Porch to Solomon's Temple. 24. The Terrestrial and Celestial Globes,
representing the works of creation. 25. A Machine used by Masons for forming
Triangles. 26. The large Rule for measuring the work. 27. The three Step Ladder
used in Masonry. 28. Hiram's Tent. 29. The White Aprons and Gloves, emblems of
innocence. 30. Eye of Providence, the great superintendent of all the works of
the Universe, and Masonry represented as under its immediate influence.
The Frontispiece is a Medallion, in imitation of those medals, or plates that
are common among the brotherhood. These medals are usually of silver, and some
of them highly finished and ornamented, so as to be worth ten or twenty
guineas. They are suspended round the neck with Ribbons of various colors, and
worn on their public days of meeting, at funeral processions, etc. in honor of
the Craft. On the reverse of these medals it is usual to put the owner's coat
of arms, or cipher, or any other device that the owner fancies, and some even
add to the emblems other fancy things that bear some analogy to Masonry.

The Candlesticks, etc. in many Lodges are curiously wrought, the Chair in
which the Grand Master sits, as well as those of the Masters of inferior
Lodges, are richly carved with emblematical figures; their apions are bound
with ribbons of various colors; and, in short, every thing belonging to them
is finished in the most elegant test.

AN AUTHENTIC KEY TO THE DOOR OF FREE-MASONRY.
THE origin The rife of this science (says a^ original record) was before the
flood in the 4th chapter of Genesis it is said, there was a man named Lamech
who had two wives named Adah and Zillah; by Adah he begat two sons. Jubal and
Jubal: by Zillah be begat one son. called Tubal Cain, and a daughter named
Naamah. These children found out the beginning of all the Crafts in the world;
Jubal found out Geometry; he divided flocks of sheep, and built the first house
of timber and stone. Jubal found out the art of Music, and was the father of
all those who handled the harp. Tubal Cain was the instructor of all artificers
in iron and brass; and his daughter discovered the Craft of Weaving.
of the society called Free-Masons is said by some to have been a certain
number of persons who formed a resolution to rebuild the Temple of Solomon By
an old record it appears, that king Solomon confirmed all the charges which
king David had given to Masons in Jerusalem; and that the Temple was finished
A. M. 3000. In the year 43. after Christ, Masons first came into England and
built the Monastery of Glastonbury in Somersetshire.
. This appears from the lecture, or rather history, of the Order, at the making
or raising of a member to the degree of Master, which is fully described in the
following work. But I am inclined to think that the chief design of the
establishment is to rectify the heart, inform the mind, and promote the moral
and social virtues of humanity, decency, and good order, as much (...) possible
in the world: and some of the emblems of Free-Masons confirm this opinion, such
as the Compass, Rule, Square, etc.

In all countries where Masonry is practiced, or established at this time,
there is a Grand Master; but formerly there was only one Grand Master, and he
was an Englishman. HIS ROYAL HICHNESS GEORCE PRINCE OF WALES is the person on
whom the dignity is now bestowed, who governs all the Lodges in Great Britain,
and has the power of delivering the constitutions and laws of the society to
the Masters who preside over the subordinate assemblies: which constitutions
must always be signed by the Grand Secretary of the Order. -- The Grand Master
can hold a Meeting or Lodge when he thinks proper, which is generally the
second Saturday in every month in the summer, but oftener in the winter.

The other Lodges meet regularly twice a month in the winter half-year, and
once a month in the summer; and the members of each Lodge pay quarterly, from 3
s. 6 d. to 5 s. into the hands of the Treasurer; and this generally defrays the
expense of their meetings.

There are also quarterly communications or meetings, held, at which are
present the Master and Wardens of every regular constitution in and near
London, where the several Lodges send, by the said Wardens, different sums of
money to be paid into the hands of the Treasurer-General, and appropriated to
such charitable uses as the Grand Master, and the Masters of the different
Lodges under him, think proper; but these charities are chiefly confined to
Masons only. Such as have good recommendations as to their behavior and
character, will be assisted with five, ten, or twenty pounds; and lefs sums are
distributed to the indigent brethren, in proportion to their wants, and the
number of years they have been members. At these quarterly communications,
large sums are likewise sent from Lodges in the most remote parts of the world,
viz. in the East and West Indies. and accounts transmitted of the growth of
Masonry there. The state of the funds of the society are likewise communicated
to the company, and the deliberations of the meeting taken down by the
Secretary, who lays them before the Grand Master at the yearly meeting.

The number of members which compose a Lodge is indeterminate: but it is no
Lodge except there are present one Master, three Fellow Crafts, and two
Apprentices.

When a Lodge is met, there are two principal officers under the Master, called
Senior and Junior Wardens, whose business it is to see the laws of the society
strictly adhered to, and the word of command given by the Grand Master,
regularly followed.

It must be remarked, that the authority of a Master, though chief of the
Lodge, reach (...) no farther than he is himself an observer of the laws;
should he infringe them, the brethren never fail to censure him; and if this
has no effect, they have a power of doposing him, and appealing to the Grand
Master, and giving their reasons for it; but they seldom proceed to this
extremity.

As no doubt the reader chooses to be made acquainted with every circumstance of
the ceremony of making a Mason, I shall begin with the following directions,
and proceed regularly in the description of what further concerns Masonry.

A man desirous of becoming a Free-Mason, should endeavor to get acquainted
with a member of some good Lodge, who will propose him as a candidate for
admission the next Lodge-night. The Brother who proposes a new member, is
likewise obliged to inform the Brethren of the qualifications of the candidate
For the good of this, and all other societies, it were to be wished a more
strict regard was paid, on the part of the proposers, to the character and
morals of every candidate.
. Upon this it is debated whether or not he shall be admitted; and it being
carried in the affirmative, the next step is to go with the proposer the
ensuing Lodge-night.

The evening being come when a Lodge is to be held, which generally begins
about seven in the winter, and nine in the summer, as previous notices are sent
to the members for this purpose; the Masons are punctual to time, and it
frequently happens, that, in half an hour, the whole Lodge, to the number of
fifty or sixty, are assembled.

The Master, the two Assistants, Secretary, and Treasurer, begin with putting
over their necks a blue ribbon of a triangular shape; to the Master's ribbon
hangs a Rule and Compass, which is in some Lodges made of gold, though in
others only gilt: the Assistants, Senior Wardens, and the other officers, carry
the Compass alone.

The candles are placed upon the table in the form of a triangle; and in the
best Lodges the candlesticks are finely carved with emblematical figures. Every
Brother has an apron made of white skin, and the strings are also of skin;
though some of them choose to ornament them with ribbons of various colors. On
the grand days, such as quarterly communications, or general meetings, the
grand officers aprons are finely decorated, and they carry the Rule and
Compass, the emblems of the Order.

When they sit down to the table, the Master's place is on the east side, the
bible being opened before him, with the Compass laid thereon, and the points of
them covered with a lignum vitae or box Square; and the Senior and Junior
Wardens opposite to him on the west and south. On the table is likewise wine,
punch, etc. to regale the Brethren, who take their places according to their
seniority. Being thus seated, after a few minutes, the Master proceeds to To
open a Lodge, in Masonry, signifies that it is allowed to speak freely among
one another of the mysteries of the Order
open the Lodge in the following manner:

Manner of opening a Lodge, and setting the men to work. Master to the Junior
Deacon. What is the chief care of a Mason?


Ans. To see that the Lodge is tyled.


Mas. Pray do your duty.


[The Junior Deacon gives three knocks at the door; and the A Tyler is properly
no more than a guard or sentinel placed at the Lodge door, to give the sign
when any one craves admittance, that the Wardens may come out and examine him;
but he is always one of the Brethren.
Tyler on the other side of the door answers, by giving three knocks. Then
the Junior Deacon tells the Master, saying] Ans. Worshipful, the Lodge is tyled.


Master to the Junior Deacon. Pray where is the Junior Deacon's place in the
Lodge?


Deacon's Ans. At the back of the Senior Wardens; or at his right hand, if he
permits him.


Mas. Your business there?


Ans. To carry messages from the Senior to the Junior Warden, so that they may
be dispersed round the Lodge.


Master to the Senior Deacon. Pray where is the Senior Deacon's place in the
Lodge?


Senior Deacon's Ans. At the back of the Master; or at his right hand if he
permits.


Mas. Your business there?


Ans. To carry messages from the Master to the Senior Warden.


Mas. The Junior Warden's place in the Lodge.


Deacon's Answer. In the south.


Master to the Junior Warden. Why in the south?


Junior Warden's Ans. The better to observe the sun at high meridian, to call
the men off from work to refreshment, and to see that they come on in due time,
that the Master may have pleasure and profit thereby.


Mas. Where is the Senior Warden's place in the Lodge?


Junior Warden's Ans. In the west.


Master to the Senior Warden. Your business there, Brother?


Senior Warden's Ans. As the sun sets in the west to close the day, so the
Senior. Warden stands in the west to close the Lodge, to pay the men their
wages, and dismiss them from their labor.


Mas. The Master's place in the Lodge?


Senior Warden's Ans. In the east.


Mas. His business there?


Senior Warden's Ans. As the sun rises in the east to open the day, so the
Master stands in the east to open his Lodge, and s^^ the men to work.

[Then the Master takes off his hat, and declares the Lodge open as follows]
Master. This Lodge is open, in the name of holy St. John, forbidding all
oursing, swearing, or whispering, and all profane discourse whatever, under no
less penalty than what the majority shall think proper.


The Master gives three knocks upon the table with a wooden hammer, and puts on
his hat, the Brethren being uncovered; he then asks, if the gentleman proposed
last Lodge-night is ready to be made? and on being answered in the affimative,
he orders the Wardens to go out and prepare the person, who is generally
waiting in a room at some distance from the Lodge room by himself, being left
there by his friend who proposed him. He is conducted into another room, which
is totally dark; and then asked, Whether he is conscious of having the vocation
necessary to be received? On answering yes, he is asked his name, surname, and
profession. When he has answered these questions, whatever he has about him
made of metal is taken away, as buckles, buttons, rings, etc. and even the
money in his pocket. In some Lodges they are so particular, that the
candidate's clothes are taken off, if there be lace on them.
Then they uncover his right knee, and put his left foot with his shoe on into
a slipper; This is not practiced in every Lodge; some only slipping the heel of
the shoe down.
hoodwink him with a handkerchief, and leave him to his reflection for about
half an hour. The chamber is also guarded within and without by some of the
Brethren who have drawn swords in their hands. The person who proposed the
candidate stays in the room with him: but they are not permitted to converse
together.

During this silence, and while the candidate is preparing, the Brethren in the
Lodge are putting ^very thing in order for his reception there; such as drawing
the annexed figure on the floor at the upper part of the room; which is
generally done with chalk and charcoal intermixed; though some Lodges use tape
and little nails to form it; which prevents any mark or stain on the floor. It
is drawn cast and west. The Master stands in the east, with the Square hanging
at his breast, the holy bible opened at the gospel of St. John, and three
lighted tapers are placed in the form of a triangle in the midst of the drawing
on the floor.

The proposer then goes and knocks three times at the door of the grand
apartment, in which the ceremony is to be performed. The Master answers within
by three strokes with the hammer, and the Junior Warden asks, who comes there?
The candidate answers (after another who prompts him) One who begs to receive
part of the benefit of this Right Worshipful Lodge, dedicated to St. John, as
many Brothers and Fellows have done before me. The doors are then opened, and
the Senior and Junior Wardens, or their Assistants, receive him, one on the
right, and the other on the left, and conduct him blindfolded three times In
some Lodges the candidates are led nine times round; but as this is very
tiresome to the person who is to undergo the operation, his patience being
pretty well tired by being blinded so long beforehand, it is very justly
omitted.
round the drawing on the floor, and bring him up to the foot of it, with his
face to the Master, Many Lodges throw a fine powder, or rosin on the floor,
which with the illumination of the room, has a pretty effect.
the Brethren ranging themselves on each side, and making a confused noise, by
striking on the attributes of the Order, which they carry in their hands. This
custom is not observed in all Lodges.


(...) of a MASON.
Third Degree, or Master's Step, Kneel with both Knees.

Second Degree, or Fellow-Craft's Step, Kneel with the Right Knee.

First Degree, or Entered Apprentice's Step, Kneel with the Left Knee.



EXPLANATION.
A Senior Deacon, with a black Rod. B Past-Master, with the Sun and Compasses,
and a String of Cords. C Senior Warden, with the Level, and a Column in his
Hand. D Junior Deacon, with a black Rod. E Junior Warden, with a Column in his
Hand. F the Secretary, with Cross Pens. G H I Candles. Masons standing round at
the Ceremony

When this part of the ceremony is ended, the Master, who stands at the upper
end, facing the foot or steps of the drawing on the floor, behind a low
arm-chair, asks the following question, Whether you have a desire to become a
Mason? and if it is of your own free will and choice? Upon which the candidate
answers, Yes. "Let him see the Light." says the Master: They then take the
handkerchief from his eyes, and whilst they are so doing, the Brethren form a
circle round him, with their swords drawn in their hands, the points of which
are presented to his breast. The ornaments borne by the officers, the
glittering of the swords, and fantastic appearance of the Brethren in white
aprons, creates great surprise, especially to a person, who for above an hour
has been fatigued with the bandage over his eyes; and his uncertainty
concerning what is further to be done for his reception, must, no doubt, throw
his mind into great perplexity. The ancient Masons made use of a prayer
inserted in the Apprentice's Lecture; but the moderns leave it out when they
make a Brother.


The candidate is then directed to advance three times to a stool at the foot
of the arm-chair; he is taught to step in a proper manner by one of the
assistants. Upon the stool are placed the rule and compass; and one of the
Brethren says to the candidate to this effect: You are now entering into a
respectable society, which is more serious and important than you imagine. It
admits of nothing contrary to law, religion, or morality; nor does it allow any
thing inconsistent with the allegiance due to his Majesty; the Worshipful Grand
Master will inform you of the rest It is here to be understood, that in
different Lodges this speech varies; as also do the forms of making, in some
respects, which may be seen in the Entered Apprentice's Lecture; where the only
proper and ancient method a clearly pounted out.
.

As soon as the speaker has ended his speech, he is desired to put his right
knee upon the stool, which is bare, as mentioned above The ancient custom was
thus: The candidate, though kneeling on his right knee, should have his left
foot in the air; but this position being fatiguing, it is omitted in most
Lodges.
, and his left foot is put into a slipper, with the shoe on, or the shoe
slipped at the heel, to represent a slipper.

The candidate being in this posture, the Worshipful Grand Master addresses him
to the following effect: Do you promise never to tell, write, or disclose, in
any manner whatever, the secrets of Free Masonry and Free Masons, except to a
Brother at the Lodge, and in the presence of the Worshipful Grand Master? On
which the person says, "I do." His waistcoat is then unbuttoned This is done
left a woman should offer herself. If we believe the Irish. there is a lady at
this time in Ireland, who has gone through the whole ceremony, and is as good a
Mason as any of them.
, and the point of a pair of compasses The ancients used a sword or spear
instead of a compass.
placed upon his naked left breast, and he himself holds it with his left hand,
his right being laid upon the gospel opened at St. John; when the following
oath is administered to him, he repeating it after the Master:

THE OATH.
I -- A.B. of my own free will and accord, and in the presence of Almighty God
The form of the oath differs in many Lodges, though this is the strictest in
use; and in some societies instead of saying, In the presence of Almighty
mighty God, it runs thus, I promise before the Grant Architect of the Universe,
etc.
, and this Right Worshipful Lodge, dedicated to St. John, do hereby, and herein
most solemnly and sincerely swear, that I will always hale, conceal, and never
reveal any of tho secrets or mysteries of Free-Masonry, that shall be delivered
to me now, or at any time hereafter, except it be to a true and lawful Brother,
or in a just and lawful Lodge of Brothers and Fellows, him or them whom I shall
find to be such, after just trial and due examination. I furthermore do swear
that I will not write it, print it, cut it, paint it, stint it, mark it, stain
or engrave it, or cause it so to be done, upon any thing moveable or immovable
under the canopy of heaven, whereby it may become legible or intelligible, or
the least appearance of the character of a letter, whereby the secret art may
be unlawfully obtained. All this I swear, with a strong and steady resolution
to perform the same, without any hesitation, mental reservation, or
self-evasion of mind in me whatsoever; under no less penalty than to have my
throat cut across, my tongue torn out by the root, and that it be buried in the
sands of the sea, at low water mark, a cable's length from the shore, where the
tide ebbs and flows twice in twenty-four hours. So help me God, and keep me
steadfast in this my Entered Apprentice's Obligation.

[He kisses the book.]

The new made member is then taught the Sign, Grip, and Pass-word of the
Entered Apprentice, which will be seen more clearly in the following lecture
belonging to that part of Masonry.

He is also learnt the step, or how to advance to the Master upon the drawing
on the floor, which in some Lodges resembles the grand building, termed a
Mosaic Palace, and is described with the utmost exactness. They also draw other
figures, one of which is called the Laced Tuft, and the other, the Throne beset
with Stars. There is also represented a perpendicular line in the form of a
Masons' instrument, commonly called the Plumb-Line; and another figure which
represents the Tomb of Hiram, the first Grand Master, who has been dead almost
three thousand years. These are all explained to him in the most accurate
manner, and the ornaments or emblems of the Order are described with great
facility. The ceremony being now ended, the new made member is obliged to take
a mop out of a pail of water brought for that purpose, and rub out the drawing
on the floor, if it is done with chalk and charcoal. Then he is conducted back,
and every thing that he was d^^csted of is restored, and he takes his seat on
the right hand of the Master. He also receives an apron, which he puts on, and
the list of the Lodges is likewise given him.

The Brethren now congratulate the new-made member, and all return to the table
to regale themselves; when the Master proposes a health to the young Brother,
which is drank with the greatest applause by the whole body, the new Mason
sitting all the while. After which he, instructed by a Brother, takes a bumper,
and drinks To the Worshipful Grand Master, the Senior and Junior Wardens, the
rest of the Officers and Members of the Lodge, wishing them success in all
their public and private undertakings, to Masonry in general, and that Lodge in
particular, craving their assistance. To which they answer, "they will assist
him." And after he has drank, the throws his glass from him, and brings it back
three times, and then sets it down on the table, the rest doing the same in
exact order. This they call firing: then they clap their hands nine times
divided into three, and stop between each, keeping true time.

The reader having been led thus far, it is high time to introduce the
Apprentice's Lecture, which is intended not only to amuse, but likewise to
instruct him in the part he is entered into. The readiness of many of the
Brethren in answering the questions, adds a luster to the Order, the members
vying with each other who shall most contribute to the edification of their new
Brother.

The Entered Apprentice's Lecture The Reader is desired to observe, that here I
gave the (...) of the Lectures, as delivered in the primitive time, but the
(...) out at least one-half.
. Mas. BROTHER, is their any thing between you and me?


Ans. There is, Right Worshipful.


Mas. What is it Brother, pray?


Ans. A Secret.


Mas. What is that Secret, Brother?


Ans. Masonry.


Mas. Then I presume you are a Mason?


Ans. I am so taken and excepted amongst Brothers and fellows.


Mas. Pray what sort of a man ought a Mason to be?


Ans. A man that is born of a free woman.


Mas. Where was you first prepared to be made a Mason?


Ans. In my heart.


Mas. Where was you next prepared?


Ans. In a room adjoining to the Lodge?


Mas. How was you prepared, Brother?


Ans. I was neither naked, nor clothed, barefoot, nor shod; deprived of all
Metal; bood-winked, with a cable tow about my neck, where I was led to the door
of the Lodge, in a halting moving posture, by the hand of a friend, whom I
afterward found to be a Brother.


Mas. How do you know it to be a door, you being blinded?


Ans. By finding a stoppage, and afterward an entrance, or admittance.


Mas. How got you admittance?


Ans. By three knocks.


Mas. What was said to you within?


Ans. Who comes there?


Mas. Your answer, Brother?


Ans. One who begs to have and receive part of the benefit of this Right
Worshipful Lodge, dedicated to St. John, as many Brothers and Fellows have done
before me.


Mas. How do you expect to obtain it?


Ans. By being free born, and well reported.


Mas. What was said to you then;


Ans. Enter.


Mas. How did you enter, and upon what?


Ans. Upon the point of a sword or spear, or some warlike instrument presented
to my naked lest breast.


Mas. What was said to you then?


Ans. I was asked if I felt my thing.


Mas. What was your answer?


Ans. I did, but I could see nothing.


Mas. You have told me how you was received; pray who received you?


Ans. The Junior Warden.


Mas. How did he dispose of you?


Ans. He delivered me to the Master, who ordered me to kneel down and receive
the benefit of a prayer.


Brethren, let us pray. O LORD God, thou great and universal Mason of the
World, and first builder of man, as it were a temple; be with us, O Lord, as
thou has promised, when two or three are gathered together in thy name, thou will be in the midst of them: be with, O Lord, and bless all our undertakings,
and grant that this our friend may become a faithful Brother. Let grace and
peace be multiplied unto him, through the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ;
and grant, O Lord, as he puts forth his hand to thy Holy Word, that he may
also put forth his Hand to serve a Brother, but not to hurt himself or his
Family; that wereby may be given to us great and precious Promises, that by
this we may be Partakers of thy divine nature, having escaped the corruption
that this is in the world through lust.

O Lord God, add to our faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge
temperance, and to temperance prudence, and to prudence patience, and to
patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly love, and to brotherly love
charity; and grant, O Lord, that Masonry may be blessed throughout the world,
and thy peace be upon us, O Lord, and grant that we may be all united as one,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.

Mas. After this prayer, what was said to you?


Ans. I was asked who I put my trust in?


Mas. Your answer, Brother?


Ans. In God.


Mas. What was the next thing said to you?


Ans. I was taken by the right hand, and a Brother said, rise up, and follow
your leader, and fear no danger.


Mas. After all this, how was you disposed of?


Ans. I was led three times round the Lodge.


Mas. Where did you meet with the first opposition?


Ans. At the back of Junior Warden in the South, where I gave the same three
knocks as at the Door?


Mas. What answer did he give you?


Ans. He said, Who comes there?


Mas. Your answer?


Ans. The same as at the door, one who begs to have and receive. etc.


Mas. Where did you meet with the second opposition?


Ans. At the back of the Senior Warden in the west, where I made the same
repetition as at the door. He said, who comes here? One who begs to have and
receive, etc.


Mas. Where did you meet with the third opposition?


Ans. At the back of the Master in the East, where I made the repetition as
before.


Mas. What did the Master do with you?


Ans. He ordered me back to the Senior Warden in the West to receive
instructions.


Mas. What where the instructions he gave you.


Ans. He taught me to take one step upon the first step of a right angle oblong
square, with my left knee bare bent, my body upright, my right foot forming a
square, my naked right hand upon the holy bible, with the square and compass
thereon; my left hand supporting the same; where I took that solemn obligation
or oath of a Mason.


Mas. Brother, can you repeat that obligation?


Ans. I will do my endeavor, with your assistance, Worshipful.


Mas. Stand up and begin.


[Here the oath is repeated, as mentioned before. After repeating this
obligation, they drink a toast to the heart that conceals, and to the tongue
that never reveals. The Master in the chair gives it, and they all say ditto,
and draw the glasses across their throats, as aforesaid.] Mas. Now, Brother,
after you received the obligation, what was said to you?


Ans. I was asked what I most desired.


Mas. What was your answer?


Ans. To be brought to light.


Mas. Who brought you to light?


Ans. The Master and the rest of the Brethren.


Mas. When you was thus brought to light, what were the first things you saw?


Ans. The bible, square and compass.


Mas. What was it they told you they signified?


Ans. Three great lights in Masonry.


Mas. Explain them, Brother?


Ans. The bible to rule and govern our Faith; the square to square our actions;
the compass to keep us within bounds with all men, particularly with a Brother.


Mas. What were the next things that were shown to you?


Ans. Three candles, which I was told were three lesser lights in Masonry.


Mas. What do they represent?


Ans. The sun moon and Master-Mason.


Mas. Why so, Brother?


Ans. There is the sun to rule the day, the moon to rule the night, and the
Master-Mason his Lodge, or at least ought so to do.


Mas. What was then done to you?


Ans. The Master took me by the right hand, and gave me the grip and word of an
Entered Apprentice, and said, ri^e, my Brother JACHIN.


[Sometimes they show you the sign before the grip and word is given, which is
JACHIN: It is the Entered Apprentice's word, and the grip thereto belonging is
to pinch with your right thumb nail upon the first joint of your Brother's
right hand.] Mas. Have you got this grip and word, Brother?


Ans. I have, Right Worshipful.


Mas. Give it to your Brother.

[Then he takes his next Brother by the right hand, and gives him the grip and
word, as before described.]
The 1st Brother gives him the grip.


The 2d Brother says, what is this?


1st Bro. The grip of an Entered Apprentice.


2d Bro. Has it got a name?


1st Bro. It has.


2d Bro. Will you give it me?


1st Bro. I Will letter it with you, or halve it,


2d Bro. I Will halve it with you.


1st Bro. Begin.


2d Bro. No. You begin first.


1st Bro. JA.


2d Bro. CHIN.


1st Bro. JACHIN.


2d Bro. It is right, Worshipful Master.


Mas. What was the next thing that was shown to you?


Ans. The guard or sign of an Entered Apprentice The guard or sign as they call
it, is by drawing your right hand across your throat edgeways; which is to
remind you of the penalty of your obligation, that you would sooner have your
throat cut across than discover the secrets of Masonry.
.


Mas. Have you got the guard or sign of an Entered Apprentice?

[He draws his right hand across his throat (as as aforesaid) to show the
Master that he has.]
Mas. After this, what was said to you?


Ans. I was ordered to be taken back, and invested with what I had been
divested of; and to be brought again to retu^^ thanks, and to receive the
benefit of a lecture, if time would permit.


Mas. After what you had been divested of was restored, what was next done to
you?


Ans. I was brought to the north west corner of the Lodge, in order to return
thanks.


Mas. How did you return thanks?


Ans. I stood in the north west corner of the Lodge, and, with the instruction
of a Brother, I said, Master, Senior and Junior Wardens, Senior and Junior
Deacons, and the rest of the Brethren of this Lodge, I return you thanks for
the honor you have done me in making me a Mason, and admitting me a member of
this worthy society.


Mas. What was then said to you?


Ans. The Master called me up to the north east corner of the Lodge at his
right hand.


Mas. Did he present you with any thing?


Ans. He presented me with an Apron, which he put on me: He told me it was a
badge of innocence, more ancient than the Golden Fleece, or the Roman Eagle;
more honouraed than than the Star and Garter, or any other order under the Sun,
that could be conferred upon me at that time, or any time hereafter.


Mas. What were the next things that were shown you?


Ans. I was set down by the Master's right hand, who showed me the working
tools of an entered apprentice.


Mas. What were they?


Ans. The 24 Inch Guage, the Square, and common Gavel or Setting Maul.


Mas. What are their uses?


Ans. The Square to square my work, the 24 Inch Guage to measure my work, the
common Gaval to knock off all superfluous matter, whereby the Square may fit
easy and just.


Mas. Brother, as we are not all working Masons, we apply them to our morals,
which we call spiritualizing: Explain them.


Ans. The 24 Inch Guage represents the 24 hours of the day.


Mas. How do you spend them, Brother?


Ans. Six hours to work in, six hours to serve God, and six to serve a friend
or a brother, as far as lies in my power, without being detrimental to myself
or family.


I come now to the entered apprentice's reasons; but as the ceremony of
drinking healths among the Masons takes up much of their time, we must stop a
little, in order to introduce some of them. The first is, To the Heart that
conceals, and the tongue that never reveals;" Then "the King and Royal Family;"
and, "To all Brethren wheresoever dispersed These toasts or healths are all
drank with three times three, which is performed in a most regular manner, and
an HUZZA at the end of each, as before described.
. The pleasures they enjoy, purity of their sentiments, and the uniformity that
always reign in their Assemblies, is far from being tiresome or insipid. I next
proceed to the

Entered Apprentice's Reasons This in fact is only a continuation of the
lecture.
. Mas. WHY was you neither naked nor clothed, barefooted nor shod, with a
cable-tow (or halter) about your neck?


Ans. If I had recanted, and ran out in the street, the people would have said
I was mad; but if a brother had seen me, he would have brought me back, and
seen me done justice by.


Mas. Why was you hood-winked?


Ans. That my heart may conceal before my eyes did discover.


Mas. The second reason, Brother?


Ans. As I was in darkness at that time, I should keep all the world in
darkness.


Mas. Why was you deprived of all metal?


Ans. That I should bring nothing offensive or defensive in the Lodge.


Mas. Give me the second season brother?


Ans. As I was poor and pennyless when I was made a Mason, it informed me that
I should assist all poor and pennyless, brethren as far as lay in my power.


Mas. Brother, you told me you gave three distinct knocks at the door: Pray
what do they signify?


Ans. A certain text in scripture.


Mas. What is that text?


Ans. "Ask and you shall have; seek, and you shall find; "knock, and it shall
be opened unto you."


Mas. How do you apply this text in Masonry?


Ans. I sought in my mind; I asked of my friend; I knocked and the door of
Masonry became open unto me.


Mas. Why had you a sword, spear, or some other warlike instrument presented to
your naked left breast particularly?


Ans. Because the left breast is the nearest the heart, that it might be the
more a prick to my conscience, as it pricked my flesh at that time.


Mas. Why was you led three times round the Lodge?


Ans. That all the Brethern might see I was duly prepared.


Mas. When you was made an Apprentice, why was your left knee bare bent?


Ans. Because the left knee is the weakest part of my body, and an Entered
Apprentice is the weakest part of Masonry, into which degree I was then
entering.


[Here the Brethern resume their glasses, and drink a health sometimes to the
Grand Master; at other times to the Wardens, or other officers, and then
proceed.] The form of a Lodge. Mas. BROTHER, pray what makes a Lodge?


Ans. Right Worshipful, a certain number of Masons met together to work.


Mas. Pray what number makes a Lodge?


Ans. Three, five, seven, or eleven.


Mas. Why do three make a Lodge?


Ans. Because there were three Grand Masons in the building of the world, and
also that noble piece of Architecture, man; which are so complete in
proportion, that the Ancients began their Architecture by the same Rules.


Mas. The second reason, Brother?


Ans. There were three Grand Masons at the building of Solomon's Temple.


Mas. Why do five make a Lodge?


Ans. Because every man is endowed with five senses.


Mas. What are the five senses?


Ans. Hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, and feeling.


Mas. What use are those five senses to you in Masonry?


Ans. Three are of great use to me, viz. hearing, seeing, and feeling.


Mas. What use are they, Brother?


Ans. Hearing is to hear the word; seeing is to see the sign; feeling is to
feel thee grip, that I may know a Brother as well in the dark as in the light.


Mas. Why should seven make a Lodge?


Ans. Because there are seven Liberal Sciences.


Mas. Will you name them, Brother?


Ans. Grammar, rhetoric, logic, arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy.


Mas. Brother, what do these Sciences teach you?


Ans. Grammar teaches me the art of writing and speaking the Language tught me
according to the first, second, and third Concord.


Mas. What does rhetoric teach you?


Ans. The art of speaking upon any topic whatsoever.


Mas. What does logic teach you?


Ans. The art of reasoning well, whereby you may find out truth from falschood.


Mas. What does arithmetic teach you?


Ans. The use of numbers.


Mas. What does geometry teach you?


Ans. The art of measuring, whereby the Egyptians found out their own land, or
the lame quantity which they had before the overflowing of the River Nile, that
frequently used to water their country, at which time they fled to the
mountains till it went off again, and this made them have continual quarrels
about their lands.


Mas. What does music teach you, Brother?


Ans. The virtue of sounds,


Mas. What does astronomy teach you?


Ans. The knowledge of the heavenly bodies.


Mas. Why should eleven make a Lodge, Brother?


Ans. There were eleven Patriarchs when Joseph was fold into Egypt, and
supposed to be loft.


Mas. The second reason, Brother?


Ans. There were but eleven apostles when Judas betrayed Christ.


Mas. What form is your Lodge?


Ans. An oblong square.


Mas. How long, Brother?


Ans. From east to west.


Mas. How wide, Brother?


Ans. Between north and south?


Mas. How high, Brother?


Ans. From the earth to the heavens.


Mas. How deep, Brother?


Ans. From the surface of the earth to the center.


Mas. Why is your Lodge said to be from the surface to the center of the earth?


Ans. Because that Masonry is universal.


Mas. Why is your Lodge situate east and West?


Ans. Because all churches or chapels are or ought to be so.


Mas. Why so, Brother?


Ans. Because the gospel was first preached in the east, and extended itself to
the west.


Mas. What supports your Lodge?


Ans. Three great pillars.


Mas. What are their names?


Ans. Wisdom, strength, and Beauty.


Mas. Who does the pillar of wisdom represent?


Ans. The Master in the east.


Mas. Who does the Pillar of beauty represent?


Ans. The Junior Warden in the South.


Mas. Why should the Master represent the Pillar of Wisdom?


Ans. Because he gives Instructions to the Crafts to carry on their work in a
proper manner, with good harmony.


Mas. Why should the Senior Warden represent the Pillar of Strength?


Ans. As the sun sets to finish the day, so the Senior Warden stands in the
west to pay the hirelings their wages, which is the strength and support of all
business.


Mas. Why should the Junior Warden represent the Pillar of Beauty?


Ans. Because he stands in the south at high twelve at noon, which is the
beauty of the day, to call the men off from work to refreshment, and to see
that they come on again in due time, that the Master may have pleasure and
profit therein.


Mas. Why is it said that your Lodge is supported by those three great Pillars,
Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty?


Ans. Because Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty is the Finisher of all Works, and
nothing can be carried on without them.


Mas. Why so, Brother?


Ans. Because there is wisdom to contrive, strength to support, and beauty to
adorn.


Mas. Had you any covering to your Lodge?


Ans. Yes, a clouded canopy of diverse colors.


Mas. How blows a Mason's wind, Brother?


Ans. Due east and west.


Mas. What is it o'Clock, Brother?


Ans. High Twelve.


Mas. Call the men off from work to refreshment, and see that they come on
again in due time.

[The Entered Apprentice's Lecture being finished, it is customary for the
Master to call upon one of the Brethren, who can best acquit himself, for the
following song, which is always readily complied with.]
SONG, at the Conclusion of the Entered Apprentice's LECTURE. COME, let us
prepare,
We Brothers that are,
Assembled on every Occasion;
Let us drink, laugh, and sing,
Our Wine has a Spring;
Here Is a Health to an Accepted Mason.
Chorus. Let Us drink, etc. The World is in Pain,
Our Secrets to gain,
And still let them wonder and gaze on!
They never can divine,
The Word or the Sign
Of a free and an Accepted Mason,
It Is this, and it is that,
They cannot tell what,
Why so many great men of the nation,
Should aprons put on,
To make themselves one,
With a free and an Accepted Mason.
Great kings, dukes, and lords,
Have laid by their swords,
Our Mystery to put a good grace on;
And never been ashamed
To hear themselves named,
With a free and an Accepted Mason.
Antiquity's pride,
We have on our side,
And it makes men just in their station;
There Is naught but what is good,
To be understood,
By a free and an Accepted Mason.
We Are true and sincere,
And just to the fair,
Who will trust us on every occasion;
No mortal can more
The ladies adore,
Than a free and an Accepted Mason.
Then join hand and hand,
T'each other firm stand,
Let Us be merry, and put a bright face on;
What mortal can boast,
So noble a toast,
As a free and an Accepted Mason?
While this song is singing, they all stand round the table, and when they come
to the last verse they join hands crossways in the following manner: the right
hand man takes hold of the left hand of his neighbor with his right hand: and
the left hand man takes hold of the right hand of his next Brother with his
left hand, so as to form a chain by so many links, and all join in the chorus,
jumping violently with their feet on the floor, and shaking their hands up and
down, linked together as above, keeping exact time with both.

Every one now talks of what he pleases; and as it is generally half an hour
before they proceed to business, those who perhaps have ordered a supper retire
into another room; but before they are permited, the Master proceeds to call
the (...) off from work, as it is termed, which is done in this manner: the
Master whispers to the Senior Deacon, who sits on his right hand, and says, "It
is high time to call the men from work to refresh themselves:" The Senior
Deacon whispers it to the Senior Warden; and it is communicated from him to the
Junior Deacon, who carries it to the Junior Warden; he preclaims it openly to
the Lodge, and sets his column upright The Senior and Junior Warden's Columns
are about twenty-five inches long, and represent the Columns that support the
Porch of Solomon's Temple; The Senior's is called JACHIN, and signifies
Strength; the Junior's ^OAZ, and signifies, ^o (...) in the Lord. (...) the
First (...) of King's, Chap. VII.
, and the Senior Warden lays his down, which signifies that the Junior Warden
is entrusted with the care of the Lodge, while the Brethren refresh themselves.

In this place it will be necessary to acquaint the reader how he may discover
an Entered Apprentice by drinking with him in company. Take the glass with your
right hand, and draw it across your throat, either before or after you drink;
and if an Apprentice is present, he will immediately take notice of it, by
asking you some question in Masonry, which you will readily answer from this
book. If he asks you the meaning of your doing that, you may whisper to him,
that it is the penalty of the Obligation of an Entered Apprentice. From this
answer he will proceed farther in his Inquiry.

The Brethern having now regaled themselves, they take their seats, and the
master proceeds to set them on again, which is performed in the same manner as
the calling off; with this difference, the Warden proclaims, It is our
Worshipful Master's pleasure that this Lodge is called from refreshment to
work. The Junior Warden lays down his Column, and the Senior sets his up. But
as it often happens, that the time will not permit for the Fellow-Craft's
Lecture, they close the Lodge, which is done after the same manner as that of
opening. The Senior Warden declares it in the following words: It is our
Master's will and pleasure, that this Lodge stand closed till the first or
third Wednesday in the next month, according to the night the Lodge is held.
Then the Master, Wardens, Deacons, Secretary, etc. take off the Ensigns and
Ornaments from their necks, and every one is at liberty to depart or stay
longer; every thing of Masonry is excluded; they talk of what they please, and
sing various songs for their amusement.

I shall now proceed to the second degree of Masonry, called the
Fellow-Craft's: that is, one who has served his time justly and lawfully as an
Entered Apprentice, and desires to (...) perfect in Masonry, by being admitted
a Fellow-Craft. But in most Lodges at this time, they are made entered
apprentices and Fellow-Craft the same evening. The ceremony is the same, though
they have different lectures, password, and grip belonging to each.

The Fellow-Craft's Lecture. Mas. BROTHER, are you a Fellow-Craft?


Ans. I am. Try me, prove me.


Mas. Where was you made a Fellow-Craft?


Ans. In a just and lawful Lodge.


Mas. How was you prepared to be made a Fellow-Craft?


Ans. I was neither naked nor clothed, barefoot, nor shod; in a halting
moving posture; deprived of all metal, I was led to the door of the Lodge by
the hand of a brother.


Mas. How got you Admittance?


Ans. By three distinct knocks.


Mas. What was said to you within?


Ans. Who comes there?


Mas. Your answer, Brother?


Ans. One who has served his time justly and lawfully as an Entered Apprentice,
and now begs to become more perfect in Masonry by being admitted a Fellow-Craft.


Mas. How do you expect to attain to this degree?


Ans. By the benefit of a pass-word?


Mas. Have you got that pass-word?


Ans. I have.


Mas. Give it me, Brother?


Ans. SHIBBOLETH SHIBBOLETH, the Pass-word of a Fellow-Craft, signifies Plenty.
See the xiith Chapter of Book of Judges.
.


Mas. What did he then say to you?


Ans. Pass, Shibboleth.


Mas. What became of you then?


Ans. I was led twice round the Lodge.


Mas. Where did you meet with the first Opposition?


Ans. At the back of the Senior Warden.


Mas. Where did you meet with the second Opposition?


Ans. At the back of the Master, where I repeated the same as before.


Mas. What did he do with you?


Ans. He ordered me back to the Senior Warden to receive instructions.


Mas. What instructions did he give you?


Ans. He taught me to show the Master my due guard, and to take two steps upon
the second step of a right angled oblong square, with my right knee bent bare,
my left foot forming a square, my body upright, my right hand on the Holy
Bible, my let arm supported by the points or the compasses, forming a square,
where I took the obligation of a Fellow-Craft.


Mas. Have you got that obligation, Brother?


Ans. I have, Right Worshipful.


Mas. Can you repeat it.


Ans. I Will do my endeavor, Right Worshipful, with your Assistance.


Mas. Pray stand up, and let the Brethren hear it.


The Obligation of a Fellow-Craft.

I -- A. B. of my own free will and accord, and in the presence of Almighty
God, and this Right Worshipful Lodge, dedicated to St. John, do hereby swear,
that I will always hale, conceal, and never reveal, that part of a Fellow-Craft
to an Entered Apprentice, or either of them, except it be in a true and lawful
Lodge of Crafts, him or them whom I shall find to be such, after just trial and
examination. I do furthermore swear, that I will answer all signs and summonses
sent to me from a Lodge of Crafts, within the length of a cable-tow A Cable Tow
is three miles in length: so that if a Fellow-Craft is at that distance from
his Lodge, he is not culpable on account of his Non-Attendance.
. I also swear, that I will not wrong a Brother, nor see him wronged, but give
him timely notice of all approaching dangers whatsoever, as far as in me is. I
will also serve a Brother as much as lies in my power, without being
detrimental to myself or family: and I will keep all my Brother's secrets as my
own, that shall be delivered to me as such, murder and treason excepted. All
this I swear, with a firm and steady resolution to perform the same, without
any equivocation or hesitation in me whatsoever, under no less penalty than to
have my heart torn from my naked left breast, and given to the vultures of the
air as a prey. So help me God, and keep me steadfast in this my Fellow-Craft's
obligation. [Kisses the Book.]

Mas. Thank you, Brother. -- After you received this obligation, pray what was
shown to you?


Ans. The sign of a Fellow-Craft.


Mas. Pray give it me.


Ans. I will, Right Worshipful.

[He stands up, and puts his right hand to his left breast, keeping his thumb
square; and his left hand raised up, so as to form a square.]
Mas. What was the next thing done to you?


Ans. He took me by the right hand, and gave me the grip and word of a
Fellow-Craft, and the pass grip The Pass Grip is thus Performed: You must put
your thumb-nail between the first and second joint of the right hand, and
whisper the word SHIBBOLETH. The grip of a Fellow-Craft is by putting the
thumb-nail on the second joint of the right hand, and the word is BOAZ.
.


Mas. What did they then to you?


Ans. He took me by the right hand, and said, rise, Brother Boaz.


Mas. What followed after that. Brother?


Ans. He ordered me back, when every thing I had been divested of was restored,
and I was brought in again in order to return thanks The ceremony of returning
thanks is the same as the entered apprentice's, excepting for admitting me a
fellow-craft.



Mas. Being thus admitted, Brother, did you ever work as a Craft?


Ans. Yes, Right Worshipful, in building the Temple.


Mas. Where did you receive your wages?


Ans. In the Middle Chamber.


Mas. When you came to the door of the Middle Chamber, pray who did see you?


Ans. A Warden.


Mas. What did he demand of you?


Ans. The pass-word of a Fellow-Craft.


Mas. Did you give it him?


Ans. I did, Right Worshipful.


Mas. Pray what is it?


Ans. SHIBBOLETH.


Mas. How got you to the Middle Chamber?


Ans. Through the porch.


Mas. Did you see any thing worth your notice?


Ans. I did, Right Worshipful.


Mas. What was it?


Ans. Two fine brass pillars.


Mas. What are their names?


Ans. JACHIN and BOAZ.


Mas. How high were these pillars?


Ans. Thirty-five Cubits, with a Chapter Five Cubits The reader is here to
understand that there are three sorts of cubits; the King's cubit, three
English feet; the holy cubit, one foot six inches; and the common cubit,
twenty-one inches. The cubit mentioned in the Old Testament is the holy cubit,
which is one foot six inches.
, which made it forty in the whole.


[This is described more clearly in the Third Chapter of the second book of
Chronicles, verse 15th.] Mas. What were they ornamented with, Brother?


Ans. Two chapiters, each five cubits in height.


Mas. What were they adorned with besides?


Ans. Lilly-work, Network, and Pomegranates.


Mas. Were they hollow, Brother?


Ans. Yes, Right Worshipful.


Mas. How thick was the outside coat?


Ans. Four Inches


Mas. Where were they cast?


Ans. On the plain of J^^don. between (...) in a clay ground, where all S.
L^mon^, holy vessels were cast.


Mas. Who cast them. Brother?


Ans. H^ra^ A^^st, the ^idow's son.


This generally finishes the Fellow-Craft's lecture, and very few Lodges go so
far in their questions and answers: therefore, in order to enliven the company,
the Master asks some good singer to favor them with the following song, which
I have heard sung with great energy and rapture throughout the Lodge; every
Brother bearing a part in the chorus.

THE FELLOW-CRAFT's SONG.
HALL, Masonry! thou Craft divine!
Glory of earth from heaven revealed,
Which does with jewels precious shine,
From all but Mason's eyes concealed.
Chorus.
Thy praises due who can rehearse,
In nervous prose, or flowing verse?
As men from brutes distinguished are,
A Mason other men excels,
For what is in knowledge choice or rare
But in his breast securely dwells.
Chorus.
His silent breast and faithful heart
Preserve the secrets of the art.
From scorching heat and piercing cold,
From beasts whose roar the Forest rends;
From the assaults of Warriors bold,
The Mason's art mankind defends,
Chorus.
Be to this art due honor paid,
From which mankind receives such aid.
Ensigns of state that feed our pride,
Distinctions troublesome and vain,
By Masons true are laid aside:
Art's freeborn sons such toys disdain.
Chorus.
Ennobled by the name they bear,
Distinguished by the badge Here the whole Lodge strike their right hands all
at once on their Aprons, keeping as regular time as the soldiers in St. James's
Park, when (...) their C^^iou^h Bo^es
they wear.
Sweet fellowship, from envy free,
Friendly converse of Brotherhood!
The Lodge's lasting cement be,
Which has for ages firmly stood.
Chorus.
A Lodge thus built for ages past.
Has lasted, and will ever last.
Then in our songs be Justice done,
To those who have enriched the art,
From Jabal down to Aberdour Lord Aberdour was formerly Grand Master; at
present Lord Petre fills that station; and they make use of his name
accordingly. For the entertainment of our readers, the editor obtained a
complete lift of all the Grand Masters, since the year 1722, viz. Fr^ncis
Scott* Earl of Dalkeith, ^^^^^ies Lenox. Duke of Richmond Lenox and Auhigny, J.
Hamilton* Lord Pusley, Wra. O^^rien, Earl of Inchiquia, H^^ry H^re, Lord
Colraine, James King, Lord Kingston, Tho. Howard, Duke of Norfolk, T Coke. Lord
Lov^ll* A^^ Brown. Ld. Vise. Montacute, James Lion, Earl of Strathmore, John
Lindsey, Earl of Craufurd, Thomas Thy^^^, Lord Viscount Weymouth, John
Campbell, Earl of London, Edward Rligh, Earl of Darnley, H. Bridges, Marq. of
Caernarvon, Rob Raymond, Lord Raymond, John Keith, Earl of Kintore, J. Douglas,
Earl of Morton, John Ward, Lord Ward, Tho. Lion, Earl of Strathmore. James
Cranstoun, Lord Cranstoun, William Byron, Lord Byron, John Proby, Lord
Carvalort, James Brydges, E. of Caernarvon, Shoito Chapter Douglas, Lord Aberdour,
W. Shirley, Lord Forrers, and the present Lord Petre.
By the above noble list of Grand Masters, such as no age, society, or kin^dom
could ever boast to have ruled them, Masonry has been fixed on the so^^ Brias
it now stands.


:
And let each Brother bear a part.
Chorus.
Let noble Mason's healths go round,
Their praise in lofty Lodge resound.
In company the Fellow-Craft takes the pot or glass, and d^^ws it across his
left breast, and touches it; the penalty being this, that he would sooner have
his heart torn from his left breast, and given to the fowls of the air, than
discover the secrets of Masonry. Sometimes this is done with the right hand
only, as it is less taken Notice of by Strangers.

Having given the Entered Apprentice and Fellow-Craft's part, I now proceed to
the third and last degree of Masonry, which is termed the Master's part, it
being performed in the same manner as the other two, viz. by way of question
and answer, and is as follows:

Mas. BROTHER, where have you been?


Aus. In the west.


Mas. And where are you going?


Ans. To the east.


Mas. Why do you leave the west, and go to the east?


Ans. Because the Light of the gospel was first shown in the east?


Mas. What are you going to do in the east?


Ans. To seek for a Lodge of Masters.


Mas. Then you are a Master Mason, I presume?


Ans. I am so taken and accepted among Masters?


Mas. Where was you made Master?


Ans. In a Lodge of Masters.


Mas. How was you prepared to be made Master?


Ans. My s^^es were taken off my feet, my arms and breast were naked, and I was
deprived of all metal. In this manner I was led to the door of the Lodge The
difference between the manner of preparing the person for the degree of Master
and the Entered Apprentice and Fellow-Craft, is this: that the Entered
Apprentice's left arm and left breast is naked, with the left shoe off; and the
Fellow-Crafts right breast is naked, with the right shoe off.
.


Mas. How got you addmittance?


Ans. By three distinct knocks.


Mas. What was then said to you from within?


Ans. Who comes there?


Mas. Your answer, Brother?


Ans. One who has lawfully and truly served his time as an Entered Apprentice
and Fellow-Craft, and now begs to attain the last and most honorable degree of
Masonry, by being admitted a Master.


Mas. How do you expect to attain it?


Ans. By the benefit of a pass-word.


Mas. Can you give me that word, Brother?


Ans. I can and will, Right Worshipful.


Mas. Pray give it me then.


Ans. TUBAL CAIN TUBAL CAIN was the first person who made use of brass, iron,
and other metals, and is said to be the inventer of music. His descent was from
the fifth generation of Cain. In scripture it is said he became famous in
working metals, which Hiram afterward greatly improved.
.


Mas. What was then said to you?


Ans. Enter TUBAL CAIN.


Mas. How was you disposed of?


Ans. I was led round the Lodge.


Mas. Where did you meet with the first opposition?


Ans. At the back of the Master.


Mas. What did he demand of you?


Ans. The same as at the door.


Mas. How did he dispose of you?


Ans. He ordered me back to the Senior Warden in the west, to receive proper
instructions.


Mas. What were those instructions, Brother?


Ans. He instructed me as I stood in the west, first, To show the Master in the
east the due guard or sign of an Entered Apprentice, and take one step upon the
first step of the right angle of an oblong square, with my left foot forming a
square. S^ (...), to make two steps upon the ^one oblong square, and to show
the sign of a Fellow-Craft. (...). I was taught to take two steps upon the fame
oblong square, with both my knees bent, and bare; my body upright, my right
hand upon the holy bible, both points of a pai^ of compasses being pointed to
my right and left breast, where I took the solemn oath of obligation of a
Master-Mason.


Mas. Brother, can you remember the obligation you speak of?


Ans. I Will do my endeavor, Right Worshipful with your Assistance.


Mas. Pray stand up, and begin.


Ans. I A. B. of my own fice will and accord, and in the presence of Almighty
God and this Right Worshipful Lodge, dedicated to holy St. John, do hereby and
hereon most solemnly and sincerely swear, that I will always hale, conceal, and
never reveal, this part of a Master Mason to a Fellow-Craft, any more than that
of a Fellow-Craft to an Apprentice, or any of them to the rest of the world,
except in a true and lawful Lodge of Masters, him or them whom I shall find to
be such, after a just trial and examination. -- I furthermore do swear, that I
will attend all Summonses sent to me from a Lodge of Masters, if within the
length of a cable-tow. -- I will also keep all my Brothers secrets as my own,
treason and murder excepted, and that at my own free will. -- I will not wrong
a Brother, or see him wronged, but give him notice of all Danger, as far as in
my power lies. -- And I also swear, that I will confirm myself to all the laws
and institutions of this Lodge. -- All this I swear, with a firm and fixed
Resolution to perform the same, under no less penalty than to have my body
severed in two; the one part carried to the south, the other to the north; my
Bowels burn to ashes, and the ashes to be scattered to the four winds of the
heavens that no further remembrance of such a vile Wretch may exist among men
(and in particular Masons.) so help me God, and keep me steadfast in this my
Master's obligation.

[Kisses the Book.]
Mas. Thank you, Brother. -- Pray what was shown you after you had received
this obligation?


Ans. One of the Master's signs.


[This sign is given by drawing your right hand across your belly, which is the
penalty of the obligation. then he gives the Master the Grip of an Apprentice,
who says, What Is this? The person answers, the grip of an Entered Apprentice]
Mas. Has it got a name?


Ans. It has, Right Worshipful.


Mas. Will you give ^t me?


Ans. JACHIN.


Mas. Will you be of or from?


Ans. From.


Mas. From what Brother?


Ans. From an Entered Apprentice to a Fellow-Craft.


Mas. Pai^. Brother.

[He puts his thumb between the first and second joint which is the pass-grip,
and you pronounce the word S^I^^O^^^^.]
Mas. What was do^^ to you after that?


Ans. He took me by the grip of a Fellow-Craft, and said, What Is his?


Mas. Your answer. Brother?


Ans. The grip of a Fellow-Craft.


Mas. His it got a name?


Ans. It has.


Mas. Wi^^ you give it me?


Ans. BOAZ.


Mas. What was then said to you?


Ans. Rise up, Brother BOAZ.


Mas. Brother, what followed?


Ans. He told me I represented one of the greatest men in the world, viz. our
Grand Master Hiram, who was killed just at the finishing of the temple; and the
manner of his death is thus related:

"There were orginally fifteen Fellow-Crafts, who perceiving the temple almost
finished, and not having received the Master's word, they grew impatient, and
agreed to extort it from their Master Hiram the first opportunity they could
find of meeting him alone, that they might pass for Master's in other
countries, and receive the wages or profits of Masters; but before they could
accomplish their scheme, twelve of them recanted; the other three were
obstinate, and determined to have it by Force, if no other way could be found:
their names were, Jubela, Jubelo and Jubelum.

"It being always the Custom of Hiram, at twelve at noon, as soon as the men
were called off to refresh themselves, to go into the Sanctum Sanctorum, or
holy of holies, to pay his devotion to the true and living God, the three
assassins abovementioned placed themselves at the east, west, and south doors
of the temple. At the north there was no entrance, because the rays of the sun
never dart from that point.

" Hiram, having finished his prayer to the Lord, came to the east door, which
he found guarded by Jubela, who demanded the Master's grip in a resolute
manner; he received for answer from Hiram, that it was not customary ^a^k it in
such a strain: that he himself did not receive it so (...) ^dding, that he must
wait, and time and patience would bring it about. He told him farther, that it
was not in his power alone to reveal it, except in the presence of (...) king
of Israel, and Hiram king of Tire. Jubela being dissatisfied with this answer,
struck him a cross the (...) with a twenty-four inch gauge. Hiram upon this
(...) fl^w to the south door of the temple, where he was (...) who asked ^im
the Master's grip and word (...) Jubela had done before; and on receiving (...)
from his Master, he gave him a violent blow (...) a square upon his left breast,
which made him reel. upon recovering his strength, he ran to the west door, the
only w^^ left him of escaping; and on being interrogated by Jubelum to the same
purport, who guarded that passage, (^o whom he replied as at first) he received
a terrible fracture upon his head with a gavel When you come to this part of
the ceremony of making a Master, it occasions some Surprise; the Junior Warden
strikes you with a twenty-four inch guage across your throa^; the Senior Warden
follows the blow, by striking you with a square on the left breast; and almost
at the same instant the Master knocks you down with the Gavel. This is the
custom in most Lodges; and it requires no small share of courage, for the blows
are frequently so severe that the poor candidate falls backwards on the floor;
and the greater his terror at this usage, the more the Brethern are pleased.
This custom favors too much of barbarity; and many instances can be produced
of persons in this situation, who have requested on their knees to be set at
liberty, and others who have made their escape as fast as possible out of the
Lodge. The French and Natives of Swisserland have a more ^^iking and ^olemn way
of representing the death of Hiram. When a Brother comes into the Lodge, in
order to be raised to the degree of Master, one of the members lies flat on his
back, with his face disfigured, and besmeared with blood, on the spot where the
drawing on the floor is made. His natural surprise and confusion immediately
appears, and one of the Brethren generally addresses him to the purport
following: Brother, be not frightened; this is the unfortunate remains of a
worthy Master, that would not deliver the grip and word to three Fellow-Crafts,
who had no right to it; and from this example we learn our duty. viz. to die
before we deliver the Master's part of Masonry to those who have no claim
thereto. On kneeling to receive the obligation, the supposed dead Brother lies
behind you, and during the time of administering the oath, and reading the
history of his death, he gets up, and you are laid down in his place. This is
the most material Difference between the French and English method of making a
Master Mason: and that it is more agreeable to humanity th^^ giving a man a
violent blow on the forehead with a Gavel, must be obvious to every reader.
or setting Maul, which occasioned his death. After this they carried his body
out at the west door In this point the Masons themselves differ: some of them
say, he was not carried out at the west door, but buried on the spot where he
was killed in this manner: The three assassins took up part of the pavement,
made a hole, and covered him over with stones as soon as they had crammed him
in: after which they conveyed the rubbish out in their aprons, to prevent
suspicion.
, and hid it under some Rubbish till twelve o'Clock the new night, when they
met by agreement, and huned him on the side of a hill, in a grave six feet
perpendicular, dug due east and west.


Mas. After you was thus knocked down, what was said to you then?


Ans. I was told I represented one of the greatest men in the world lying dead,
viz. our grand master Hiram.


Mas. Thank you, brother. -- Pray go on.


Ans. As I lay on my back, the master informed me how Hiram was found; and by
what means the three ruffians were discovered, as follows:

"Our master Hiram not coming to view the workmen as usual, king Solomon caused
strict search to be made; but this proving ineffectual, he was supposed to be
dead. The twelve fellow-crafts who recanted, hearing the report, their
consciences priching them, went to Solomon with white aprons and gloves,
c^^^lems of their innocence, and informing him of every thing relative to the
affair, as far as they knew, and offered their assistance in order to discover
the three other Fellow-Crafts, who had absconded. They separated, and divided
themselves into four parties; three east, west, north and south, in quest of
the murderers. As one of the twelve was traveling on the seaside, near Joppa,
being fatigued, he sat down to refresh himself: but was soon alarmed by the
following hideous exclamations from the cliff of a rock: Oh! that my throat had
been cut across, my tongue torn out by the root, and buried in the sands of the
sea at low water mark, a cable's length from the shore, where the tide ebbs and
flows twice in twenty-four hours, ever I had consented to the death of our
Grand Master Hiram!" -- "Oh! (says another) that my heart had been torn from
under my naked left breast, and given a prey to the vultures of the air, rather
than I had been concerned in the death of so good a Master!" But (says a third)
I struck him harder than you both; 'twas I that killed him. Oh! that my body
had been severed in two, and scattered to the south and north; my bowels burnt
to ashes in the south, and scattered between the four winds of the earth, ere I
had been the cause of the death of our good Master Hiram! The Fellow-Craft
bearing this, went in quest of his two afs;sociates, and they entered the cliff
of the rock, took and bound them fast, and brought them to king Solomon, before
whom they voluntarily confessed their guilt, and begged to die. The sentence
passed on them was the same as they expressed in their lamentation in the
cliff; Jubela's throat was cut across; Jubela's heart was torn from under his
left breast; and Jubelam's body was severed in two, and scattered in the south
and north.

"When the execution was over, king Solomon sent for the twelve Crafts, and
desired them to take the body of Hiram up, in order that it might be interred
in a solemn manner in the Sanctum Sanctorum; he also told them, that if they
could not find a key-word about him, it was lost; for there were only three in
the world to whom it was known; and unless they were present it could not be
delivered, Hiram being dead it consequently was lost. However, as Solomon
ordered, they went and cleared the rubbish, and found their Master in a mangled
condition, having lain fifteen days; upon which they lifted up their hands
above their heads in astonishment, and said, O Lord, my God! This being the
first word and sign, king Solomon adopted it as the grand sign of a Master
Mason, and it is used at this day in all the Lodges of Masters.


Mas. Brother, when Hiram was thus found dead, how was he raised?


Ans. By the five points of fellowship.


Mas. What are these five points of fellowship?


Ans. He was taken by the Entered Apprentice's grip, and the skin slipped off.
Then he was taken by the Fellow-Craft's grip, which also slipped off; and
lastly, by the Master's grip. The Master's grip is thus performed: you take a
Brother with the four finger nails of your right hand, and press close into the
lower part of the ^^rill of his right hand, with all your strength; your right
foot to his right foot and his right knee to your right knee; the right breast
to that of your Brother, and your left hand supporting his back. In this
position you whisper in his ear MAHABONE, or, as in the modern Lodges, MAC
BANACH, which is the Master's word.



Mas. Brother, it appears you could not have been raised but by the five points
of fellowship. Pray explain them.


Ans. Hand in hand signifies that I will always put forth my hand to serve a
Brother as far as in my power lies. -- Foot to foot, that I never will be
afraid to go a foot out of my way to serve a Brother. -- Knee to knee, that
when I pray, I should never forget my Brother's welfare. -- Breast to breast,
to show I will keep my Brother's secrets as my own. -- The left hand supporting
the back, that I will always support a Brother, as far as I can, without being
detrimental to my own family.


Mas. Thank you Brother. -- But pray, why was you deprived of all metal?


Ans. Because there was neither axe, hammer, nor found of any metal tool heard
in the building the temple of Solomon.


Mas. Why so, Brother?


Ans. Because it should not be polluted.


Mas. How is it possible, Brother, that such a large building should be carried
on without the use or sound of some metal tool?


Ans. It was prepared in the forest of Lebanon. and brought down upon proper
carriages, and set up with wooden mauls made on purpose for the occasion.


Mas. Why were both your shoes taken off from your feet?


Ans. Because the place I stood on, when I was made a Mason, was holy ground.


Mas. What supports our Lodge?


Ans. Three Pillars.


Mas. Pray what are their names, Brother?


Ans. Wildom, strength and beauty.


Mas. What do they represent?


Ans. Three grand Masters; Solomon king of Isreal; Hiram, king of Tire; and
Hiram Abiff, who was killed by the three Fellow-Crafts.


Mas. Were these three Grand Masters concerned in the building of Solomon's
temple?


Ans. They were.


Mas. What was their business?


Ans. Solomon found provisions and money to pay the Workmen; Hiram, king of
Tire provided materials for the building; and Hiram Abiff performed or
superintended the work.

(End of the Master's Lecture.)
The form observed at the inftalment of a Master, and the other Officers, on
St. John's day.

THE year being expired, a proper person is fixed on by the Members of every
Lodge to preside over and govern the societies in the capacity of Master. The
Qualifications for this office are, 1st, that he must be regularly and lawfully
raised: 2dly, He ought to be a man of good character, and irreproachable in his
private conduct: 3dly, He must be well versed in the laws and constitutions of
the order, and ought to be temperate, cool, and quite perfect in going through
the beforementioned lectures, as all the questions are put by him, and he is
often obliged to assist the brethern in making the proper answers I have been
in a Lodge, where the Master was quite ignorant of the common rules of Grammar;
frequently making such egregious blanders, that the Brethern could scarce
refrain from bursling into Laughter; and often embellishing his Questions with,
Brether you have let a body know as how you cannot be raised but by the five
points of fellowship, etc tell us which they be.
; for every Mason sitting round the table answers in his turn, in the same
manner as boys at church saying the catechism. This is termed Working. For
Instance; Suppose a Brother meets another, and asks him if he was at his Lodge
last night? He says, yes. Well, replied the other, did you work? that is, did
you go through the several questions and answers in any of the lectures? -- If
any member cannot, or does not choose to work, when the question is put, and it
comes to his turn, he gets up, and clapping his hand on his breast, addresses
himself to the Master, and begs to be excused; then the left hand man answers
in his room.

The Brethren having chose a proper man for this office, and he being approved
of by the Grand Master, they proceed to the installing him as follows: he
kneels down in the south part of the Lodge, and the la^e Master gives him the
following obligation before he resigns the chair, which he repeats:

I -- A. B. of my own free will and consent, in the presence of Almighty God,
and this Right Worshipful Lodge, dedicated to St. John, do most solemnly and
sincerely swear, that I will not deliver the word and grip belonging to the
chair whilst I am Master, or at any time hereafter, except it be to a Master in
the chair, or a Past-Master, him or them whom I shall find to be such, after a
due trial and examination. -- (...) also swear, that I will act as Master of
this Lodge till n^^^ St. John's day, and fill the chair every Lodge, night, ^f
I am within the length of my table-tow. -- I likewise further promise, that I
will not wrong this Lodge, but act in every respect for the good of Masonry, by
behaving myself agreeable to the rest of the Brethren; and maintaining good
order and regularity in this Lodge, as far as lies in my power. All this I
swear, with a firm and steadfast resolution to perform the same, under no less
than the four following penalties: My throat cut across, my tongue torn out, my
heart torn from my left breast, and my body severed in two. So help me God, and
assist me in this my obligation belonging to the chair.. [Kisses the book.]

The Past Master raises him up, and takes off the jewels and ribbon from his
own neck, and puts it on the new Master, taking him at the same time by the
Master's grip, and whispering in his ear the word CHIBBELUM CHIBBELUM signifies
a worthy Mason. The origin of the words and signs among Free Masons was on this
account: Haram the chief architect of the temple, had so great a number of
workmen to pay, that he could not possibly know them all; he therefore gave
each degree or class, a particular sign and word, by which he could distinguish
them more readily in order to pay them their different salaries.
; after which he slips his hand from the Master's grip to the elbow, and
presses his nails in, as is done in the grip of the Master under the wrist.

The Senior and Junior Warden, Secretary, etc. receive the obligation as the
master, except the grip and word; there being none peculiar to them.

Having now gone through the several degrees and lectures belonging to the
Entered Apprentice, Fellow-Craft, Master, and the manner of instalment, I shall
close the work with a few general directions, dividing them under the following
heads:

I. A description of the ornaments worn by the different effects when assembled
in the Lodge, and their proper places of sitting.

The MASTER, who sits in the cast of the lodge, has the rule and compass, and
the square hanging to a ribbon round his neck, and a black rod in his hand,
when he opens the lodge, near seven feet high.

The SENIOR WARDEN, sits in the west, with a level hanging by a ribbon round
his neck, and a column placed on the table about twenty-nine inches long.

The JUNIOR WARDEN's place is in the south, with the plumb rule hanging by a
ribbon from his neck, and a column in his hand.

The SECRETARY wears the cross-pens, hanging in the same manner.

The Senior and Junior DEACONS have each a black rod, with the compass hanging
round their necks; the Senior sits at the back of the Master, or at his right
hand; the Junior at the Senior Warden's right hand.

The PAST-MASTER has the compasses and sun, with a line of cords about his neck.

The TREASURER has a key hanging from his neck.

II. The manner of giving the signs of each degree, and the word belonging to
it, with the Fellow-Craft and Master's Clap.

The Master's Sign, Grip, and Word, etc.

The sign. Draw the right hand edgeways across your belly, which is the penalty
of the obligation.

The Grip. Take hold of the right hand of your brother with your right hand,
and press the four finger nails hard under the wrist of his right hand; put
your right foot to his right foot: your right knee to his right knee; and his
right breast to yours, with your left hand supporting his back.

The word is MAHABONE; or, in some Lodges, MACBENACH.

The pass-word is TUBAL-CAIN.

(...) mayer's (...), is by holding bo^^ your na^^s above your head, and
striking them down at once upon your apron, both feet keeping time. They assign
two reasons for this sign, viz. when the twelve Fellow-Crafts saw there Master
he dead, they lifted up their hands in surprise, and said, O Lord our God! and
that when Solomon dedicated the temple to the Lord, he stood up, and lifting up
both his hands, exclaimed, O Lord my God, great art thou above all Gods.

The Fellow-Craft's sign, grip, word, and clap.

Sign. Put your right hand to your left breast, keeping your thumb square, and
your left hand upright, forming a square.

The pass-grip, is by putting the thumb nail of your right hand between the
first and second joint of a Brother's right hand.

The pass-word is SHIBBOLETH.

The grip is the same as the pass-grip, except pressing your thumb nail on the
second joint instead of between the first and second.

The word is BOAZ.

The Fellow-Craft's clap is by forming the sign of a Craft as above, holding
your left hand square and upright; then clap your right and left hands
together; and afterward strike your left breast with your right hand, and from
thence give a slap on your apron, your right foot going at the same time.

The Entered Apprentice's sign, grip, and word.

The sign. Draw your hand across your throat edgeways. the penalty of the
obligation being this, that an Appientice would sooner have his throat cut than
discover the secrets of Masonry.

The grip. Take a Brother with your right hand, and press hard with your thumb
nail upon the first joint of the forefinger of his right hand.

The word. Whisper in his ear JACHIN.

The Master kneels upon both knees in the ceremony of making.

The Craft kneels with the right knee.

The Apprentice with the left knee.

III. The form observed in drinking.

The table being plentifully stored with wine and punch, etc. every man his a
glass set before him, and fills it with what he chooses, and as often as he
pleases. But he (...) drink his glass in turn, or at least keep the motion with
the rest. When therefore a public health is given, the Master fills first, and
desires the Brethern to charge their glasses: and when this is supposed to be
done, the Master says, Brethern, are you all charged? The Senior and Junior
Wardens answer, We are all charged in the south and west. Then they all stand
up, and observing the Master's motion, (like the soldier his right hand man)
drink their glasses off; and if the Master proposes the heath or toast with
three times three claps, they throw the glasses with the right hand at full
length, bringing them across their throats three times, and making three
motions to put them down on the table; at the third they are set down, (though
perhaps fifty in number) as if it was but one: then raising their hands breast
high, they clap nine times against the right, divided into three divisions,
which is termed Drinking with three times three, and at the end they give a
huzza.

Having at length gone through my plan, I have nothing further to add than
this, that the following is the best method for a stranger to gain admittance,
being what I have often tried in many places, in order to be fully satisfied.

As soon as you come to the door of the Lodge, you will find the Tyler on the
outside, with a drawn sword in his hand, and a white apron on. Ask him if there
is a full Lodge? And tell him you should be glad of admittance as a visiting
member; taking care to provide yourself with a white leather apron, which you
may show him as if by accident. He will, perhaps, ask you what degree you are
of, and desire a sign, which you may show him with Readiness, and likewise
inform him what Lodge you belong to.

It being contrary to the Rules of the society that the Tyler should admit a
stranger, he will go in, and acquaint the Master, that such a person
(mentioning your name, and the Lodge you told him you belonged to) craves
admittance, upon which one of the Wardens will come out to examine you, draw
your right hand across your throat edgeways, and he will say, "What Is that?"
Your answer must be "The due guard of an Apprentice." Then he will take you by
the first joint of the thumb of your right hand, and press it hand with the
thumb-nail of the right hand, and ask, "What Is this?" -- You must immediately
answer, "The grip of an Entered Apprentice." -- If he is not fully satisfied
with this, he will go further on in this manner.

Ques. Has it got a name? -- You must answer, "It has." Then he will ask you to
give it him.

(...)

Mason. CHIN. Ans. JACHIN.

Ques. Will you be of or from? Ans From.

Ques. From what? Ans. From an Entered Apprentice to a Fellow-Craft. He will
then shift his thumb from the Apprentice's grip toward the Fellow-Craft's, and
ask. What Is this? Ans. The pass-word of a Fellow-Craft. Give it me, says he.
Whisper in his car SHIBBOLETH. On this he will pat his thumb to the second
joint, and say. What Is this? Ans. The grip of a Fellow-Craft. Has it a name?
says he. Ans. It has. Prav give it me. Ans. I will letter it or halve (...)
with you. Mason, I Will letter it with you. Ans. Begin. Mason. No. you begin.
Ans. B. Mason, O. Ans. A. Mason, (...) Ans. BOAZ.

What I have here offered being more than sufficient, you will be admitted, and
you must put your apron on, and take (...) sear. If there should be a making
that night, you will be perfect in the first principles, and know more than one
in ten who have been Malous many years, and have never read this book.

If you should, after this, choose to go to a Lodge of Masters, the ceremony is
the same as above; but you are interrogated as to the grip, pass-grip, and word
of a Master, which you cannot fail of answering by reading the Master's part
before mentioned. In all this you must take care not to betray any fear, but
put on an air of assurance.

The ceremony observed at the Free-Masons sunerals, according to ancient
custom.

No Mason can be interred with the formalities of the Order, unless by his own
especial request, communicated to the Master of the lodge of which he died a
member: nor unless he had been advanced to the third degree of Masonry.

The Master of the lodge, on receiving intelligence of his death, and being
made acquainted with the day and hour appointed for his funeral, is to issue
his commands for summoning the lodge; and immediately to make application, by
the grand Secretaty, to the deputary Grand Master, for a legal power and
authority to attend the procession, with his officers and such Brethern as he
may approve of, properly clothed.

The dispensation being obtained, the Master may invite as many Lodges as he
thinks proper, and the members of the said Lodges many accompany their officers
in form; but the whole ceremony must be under the direction of the Master of
the lodge to which the deceased belonged; and he, and his officers must be duly
honored and cheerfully obeyed on the occasion.

An the (...) who walk in procemon, (...), as much as possible, and uniformity
in their dress. Decent mourning, with white steekings, gloves, and aprons is
most sailable and becoming. No person ought to be distinguished with a jewel,
unless he is an officer of one of the Lodges united to attend in form, and the
officers of such Lodges should be ornamented with white fashes and ^^^bands: as
alto the officers of the Lodge to whom the dispensation is granted, who should
likewise be distinguished with white rods.

In the procession to the place of interment, the different Lodges rank
according to their semority; the junior ones preceding. Each Lodge forms one
division, and the following order is observed.

The Tyler with his sword; The Stewards with white rods; The Brethren out of
office, two and two; The Secretary with a roll; The Treasurer with his badge of
office; Senior and Junior Wardens, hand in hand; The Past-Master, The Master.
The Lodge to which the deceased Brother belonged, in the following order; all
the members having flowers or herbs in their hands. The Tyler; The Stewards;
The music [drums muffled, and trumpets covered;] The members of the Lodge; The
Secretary and Treasurer; The Senior and Junior Wardens; The Past-Master. The
bible and book of constitutions on a cushion, covered with black cloth, carried
by a member of the Lodge: The MASTER. The Choristers singing an anthem. The
Clergyman: Pall bearers, The BODY, with the regalia placed thereon, and two
swords crossed. Pall bearers, Chief Mourner; Assistant Mourners; Two Stewards;
A Tyler.

One or two Lodges ^^^ch, before the procession begans to the churchyard, to
prevent confusion, and make the necessary preparations. The Brethren are on no
account to desert then ranks or change their places, but keep in their
different departments. When the procession arrives at the g^^e of the
churchyard, the Lodge to which the deceased Brother belonged, and all the rest
of the Brethren, must na^^, till the members of the different Lodges have
formed a perfect cu^^e round the grave, when an opening is made to receive
them. They then march up to the grave; and the Clergyman, and the officers of
the acting Lodge, taking their station at the head of the grave: with the
Choristers on each side, and the Mourners at the foot, the service is
rehe^r^ed, an anthem sung, and that particular part of the ceremony is
conc^^ded with the usual forms. In returning from the funeral, the same order
of procession is to be observed.

This is the whole of Masonry in all its branches; and I defy any Mason to
prove the contrary, being ready to answer any question proposed, which must be
carefully sealed up, and directed for R. S. to be left with my publisher,
mentioning the name and residence of every person desiring any farther
information. And as to any annonymous letters or threatenings on account of this
publication, they will be treated with contempt, let them come from what
quarter they will. I also declare, that I will always attend and visit at the
Lodges mentioned in the introduction, or any others as I have done for some
years past.

ODES, ANTHEMS, and SONGS, sang in the best LODGES.
ODE I.
HAIL to the CRAFY! at whose serene command,
The gentle ARTS in glad obedience stand;
Hail, sacred MASONRY! of source divine,
Unerring sovereign of the unerring line,
Whose plumb of truth, with never-failing sway,
Makes the joined parts of symmetry obey:
Whose magic stroke makes all confusion cease,
And to the finished ORDERS gives a place:
Who rears vast structures from the womb of earth,
And gives imperial cities glorious birth.
To works of art HER merit not confined,
SHE regulates the morals, squares the mind;
Corrects with care the sallies of the soul,
And points the tide of passions where to roll:
On virtue's tablet marks her moral rule,
And forms her Lodge an universal school,
Where nature's mystic laws unfolded stand,
And sense and science joined, go hand in hand.
O may her social rules instructive spread,
Till Truth er^ct HER long neglected head!
Till through deceitful night she dart her ^ay,
And be^^ full glorious in the blare of day!
Till men by virtuous maxims learn to move.
Till all the peopled world HER laws approve,
And Adam's race are bound in Brother's love.
ODE II.
WAKE the lute and quivering strings,
Mystic truths Urania brings;
Friendly visitant, to thee
We owe the depths of MASONRY:
Fairest of the virgin choir,
Warbling to the golden lyre.
Welcome here thy ART prevail:
Hail! divine Urania, hail!
Here in friendship's facred bower,
The downy winged and smiling hour,
Mirth invites, and social song,
Nameless mysteries among:
Crown the bowl and fill the glass,
To every virtue, every grace,
To the BROTHERHOOD resound
Health, and let it thrice go round.
We restore the times of old,
The blooming glorious age of gold;
As the new creation free,
Blessed with gay Euphrosyne!
We with god-like Science talk,
And with fair Astraea walk;
Innocence adorn the day,
Brighter than the smiles of May.
Pour the rosy wine again,
Wake a louder, louder strain!
Rapid Zephyrs, as ye fly,
Waft our voices to the sky;
While we celebrate the NINE,
And the wonders of the trine,
While the ANGELS sing above,
As we below, of PEACE and LOVE.
ANTHEM I.
GRANT us kind Heaven what we request,
In Masonry let us be blessed;
Direct us to that happy place,
Where friendship smiles on every face,
Where Freedom and sweet innocence
Enlarge the mind and cheer the sense.
Where scep^er^d Reason from her throne,
Surveys the LODGE, and makes us one;
And Harmony's delightful sway
For ever sh^d^ ambro^^al day:
Where we blessed Eden's pleasure taste,
Whilst balmy joys are our repast.
No prving eye can view us here:
No fool or knave disturb our cheer:
Our well-form'd laws set mankind free,
And give relief to misery.
The poor oppressed with woe and grief,
Gain from our bountcous hands relief.
Our LODGE the social Virtues grace,
And Wisdom's rules we fondly trace;
All Nature open to our view,
Points out the paths we should pursue.
Let us subsist in lasting peace.
And may our happiness increase.
ANTHEM II.
BY Mason's Art the aspiring dome
On stately columns shall arise,
All climates have their native home,
Their god-like actions reach the skies.
Heroes and Kings revere their name,
While Poets sing their lasting fame.
Great. noble. generous. good. and brave;
All virtues they most justly claim;
Their deeds shall live beyond the grave,
And those unborn their praise proclaim.
Time shall their glorious acts enroll.
While love and friendship charm the soul.
SONG I.
[ Tune, Attic Fire.]
ARISE. and blow thy trumpet, Fame!
Free-Masonry aloud proclaim,
To realms and worlds unknown;
Tell them of mighty David's son,
The wise the matchless Solomon,
Prized far above ais (...).
The solemn Temple's cloud-capt Towers,
TO aspiring domes are works of ours,
By us those piles were raised:
Then bid mankind with songs advance,
And through the ethereal vast expanse,
Let Masonry be praised.
We help the poor in time of need,
The naked clothe, the hungry feed,
It Is our foundation stone:
We build upon the noblest plan;
For friendship rivets man to man;
And makes us all as one.
CHORUS. Three times. Still louder, fame, thy trumpet blow;
Let all the distant regions know
Free Masonry is this:
Almighty wisdom gave it birth,
And heaven has fixed it here on earth,
A type of future bliss.
SONG II.
[ Tune, Rule Britannia.]
WHEN earth's foundation first was laid,
By the Almighty artist's hand,
'Twas then our perfect, our perfect laws were made,
Established by his strict command.
Cho.
Hail, mysterious; hail glorious Masonry!
That makes us ever great and free.
As man throughout for shelter sought,
In vain from place to place did roam,
Until from heaven, from heaven he was taught,
To plan, to build, to fix his home.
Hail, mysterious, etc.
Hence illustrious rose our art,
And now in beauteous piles appear;
Which shall to endless, to endless time impart,
How worthy and how great we are.
Hail, mysterious, etc.
Nor we less famed, for every tie,
By which the human thought is bound;
Love, truth, and friendship, and friendship socially,
Join all our hearts and hands around.
Hail, mysterious, etc.
Our actions still by virtue blessed,
And to our precepts ever true,
The world admiring, admiring shall request
To learn, and our bright paths pursue.
Hail, mysterious, etc.
SONG III.
[ Tune, Goddess of Ease.]
GENIUS of Masonry descend,
And with thee bring thy spotless train;
Constant our sacred rites attend,
While we adore thy peaceful reign:
Bring with thee virtue, brightest maid,
Bring love, bring truth, and friendship here,
While social mirth shall lend her aid,
To smooth the wrinkled brow of care.
Come, charity, with goodness crowned,
Encircled in thy heavenly robe,
Diffuse thy blessings all around,
To every corner of the globe;
See where she comes with power to bless,
With open hand and tender heart,
Which wounded is at man's dist^^ss,
And bleeds at every human smart.
Envy may every ill devise,
And falsehood be thy deadliest foe,
Though friendship still shall towering rise,
And sink thy adversaries low;
Thy well built pile shall long endure,
Through rolling years preserve its prime,
Upon a rock it stands secure,
And braves the rude assaults of time.
Ye happy few, who here extend
In perfect lines from east to west,
With fervent zeal the Lodge defend,
And lock its secrets in each breast:
Since ye are met upon the square,
Bid love and friendship jointly reign,
Be peace and harmony your care,
Nor break the adamantine chain.
^
Yet keep due order as they run;
Then imitate the stars above,
And shine resplendant as the sun;
That future Mason's when they meet,
May all our glorious deeds rehearse,
And say their fathers were so great,
That they adorned the universe.
SONG IV.
[ Tune, In Infancy, etc.]
LET Masonry from pole to pole
Her sacred laws expand,
Far as the mighty waters roll,
To wash remoted land;
That virtue has not left mankind,
Her social maxims prove,
For stamped upon the Mason's mind,
Are unity and love.
Ascending to her native sky,
Let Masonry increase;
A glorious pillar raised on high,
Integrity its base.
Peace adds to olive bows, entwined,
An emblematic dove,
As stamped upon the Mason's mind
Are unity and love.
SONG V.
LET drunkards boast the power of wine,
And reel from side to side;
Let lovers kneel at beauty's shrine,
The sport of female pride:
Be ours the more exalted part,
To celebrate the Mason's art,
And spread its praises wide.
To dens and thickets dark and rude,
For shelter beasts repair;
With sticks and straws the feathered brood,
Suspend their nests in air:
And man untaught, as wild as these,
Binds up sad huts with boughs of trees,
And feeds on wretched fare.
^
The quarry he explores;
Industry and the arts combined,
Improved all nature's stores:
Thus walls were built and houses reared,
No storms nor tempests now are feared
Within his well-fram'd doors.
When stately palaces arise,
When columns grace the hall,
When towr's and spires salute the skies,
We owe to Masons all:
Nor buildings only do they give,
But teach men how within to live,
And yield to reasons's call.
All party quarrels they detest,
For virtue and the arts,
Lodged in each true Mason's breasts,
Unite and rule their hearts:
By these, while Mason's square their minds,
The state no better subjects find,
None act more upright parts.
When bucks and albions are forgot,
Free-Masons will remain;
Mushreoms, each day, spring up and rot,
While oaks stretch over the plain:
Let others quarrel, rant and roar;
Their noisy revels when no more,
Still Masonry shall reign.
Our leathern aprons may compare
With garters red or blue;
Princes and Kings our brothers are:
May they our rules pursue:
Then drink success and health to all
The Craft around this earthly ball,
May brethren still prove truo.
SONG VI.
KATE AND NED.
ONE night as Ned crept into bed,
Beyond his usual hour,
His loving Kate, his constant mate,
Began to scold and lower.
You naughty man, where have you been,
No longer I'il be slighted,
Nor thus at home will mope and moan,
While your abroad delighted?
I own, dear Kate, it is somewhat late,
But hear me out with patience,
All wives you know, are bound to show
Their husbands due obeisance;
In truth, dear Kate, it is somewhat late,
But put a smiling face on,
For I, this night, am made a bright,
Free, and accepted Mason.
If this be so, I pray now show
Some certain sign or token,
For Masons can erect a plan,
Or stop a breach that is open.
I have a breach, a huge wide breach,
That gives me much vexation,
This if you stop, you will over top,
All Masons in the nation.
Then Ned arose, pulled off his clothes,
Drew out his line and level,
He placed his plumb beneath her bomb,
And brought it to a bevil;
He took his guage, his nine-inch guage,
And placed it with a sloping,
He fixed his stones like Inigo Jones,
And left no crevice open.
Dear Ned, says Kate, you have done a feat,
A feat of mighty wonder,
And as for me, you painly see,
I fairly do knock under.
I Would pawn my gown, my robe and coat,
My Cardinal with lace on,
If you each night would be a bright,
Free, and accepted Mason.
SONG VII.
[ Tune, God save the King.]
LET Masons fame resound
Through all the nations round,
From pole to pole!
See what felicity,
Harmless simplicity,
Like electricity.
Runs through the whole.
Such sweet variety,
Never had Society
Ever before:
Faith, hope, and charity,
Love and sincerity,
Without temerity,
Charm more and more.
When in the Lodge we are me^,
And in due order set,
Happy are we:
Our works are glorious,
Deeds meritorious,
Never censorious,
But great and free.
When folly's sons arise,
Masonry to despise,
Scorn all their spite;
Laugh at their ignorance,
Pity their want of sense,
Never let them give offense,
Firmer unite.
Masons have long been free,
And may they ever be
Great as of yore:
For many ages past,
Masonry has stood fast,
And may its Glories last
Till Time's no more.
New ODE, written by a member of the ALFRED LODGE, at Oxford, and set to music
by Dr. Fisher, and performed at the dedication of Free-Masons Hall.
Sung by Messrs. Vernon, Reinhold, Norris, etc.
STROPHE.
AIR.
NORRIS. WHAT solemn sounds on holy Sinai rung,
When heavenly lyres, by angel-fingers strung,
According to immortal lay,
That hymn'd creation's natal day!

RECITATIVE, accompanied,
VERNON. 'Twas when the snouting sons of morn
Blessed the great omnific word: --
"Abashed, hoarse jarring atoms heard,
"Forgot their peating strife,
"And softly crowded into life,"
When order, law, and harmony were born.

CHORUS.
The mighty Master's Pencil warm
Traced out of each the shadowy form,
And bade each fair proportion grace
Smiling nature's modest face.
AIR.
VERNON. Heaven's rarest gifts were seen to join,
To deck a finished form divine,
And fill the sovereign artist's plan;
The Almighty image stamp's the glorious frame,
And sealed h^^ with the noblest name,
Archetype of beauty, man.

ANTISTROPHE.
SEMICHORUS and CHORUS.
Ye spirits pure, that roused the tuneful throg,
And roused to rapture each triumphant tongue;
Again, with quick instinctive fire,
Each harmonious lip inspire:
Again bid every vocal throat
Dissolve in tender votive strain!
AIR.
VERNON. Now while yonder white-rob'd-train
Before the mystic shrine,
In lowly adoration join,
Now sweep the living lyre, and swell the melting note,

RECITATIVE.
REINHOLD. Yet ere the holy rites begin
The conscious shrine within,
Did your magic song impart.

AIR.
REINHOLD. How within the wasted heart
Shook by passion's ruthless power,
Virtue trimmed her faded flower,
To op^^^ng buds of fairest fruit.
The lines in italic were omitted in the music.
How from majectic nature's glowing face
(...) ^^^gn^ each animating grace,
(...) planted there the immortal root.

EPODE.
RECITATIVE, accompanied.
NORRIS. (...) of God's, fair virtue, if to thee,
(...) bright sister, universal love,
(...) g^od, ever flowed the soothing harmony
(...) p^^^ g^^^lation -- from above:
(...) ^^^ous votaries, impart
(...) divine! --

AIR.
Mr. NORRIS. The sons of antique art. In high mysterous jubilee
With paean loud, solemn rite,
Thy holy step invite,
And court thy listening Ear,
To drink the cadence clear
That sweets the choral symphony.

CHORUS.
To thee, by foot profane untrod,
Their votive hands have reared the high abode.
RECITATIVE.
REINHOLD. Here shall your impulse kind
Inspire the tranced mind!

AIR.
REINHOLD. And lips of truth shall sweetly tell
What heavenly deeds befit,
The soul by wisdom's lessons smit:
What praise he claims, who nobly spurns
Gay vanities of life, and tinsel joys,
For which unpurged fancy burns.

CHORUS.
What pain he shuns who dares be wise
What glory wins, who dares excel!
SONG VIII. The Master's song.
THUS mighty Eastern kings, and some
Of Abraham's race, and monarchs good,
Of Egypt, Syria, Greece and Rome
True Architecture understood:
No wonder then if Masons join,
To celebrate those Masons kings,
With solemn note and flowing wine,
Whilst every Brother jointly sings.
CHORUS.
Who can unfold the royal art?
Or sing its Secrets in a song?
They'er safely kept in Mason's heart,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
SONG IX. The WARDEN's SONG: Or, History of MASONRY.
By Dr. ANDERSON.
To be sung at the Quarterly Communication.
WHENEVER we are alone,
And every stranger gone,
In summer, autumn, winter, spring,
Begin to play, begin to sing,
The mighty ge^^us of the lofty Lodge,
In every age
That did engage,
And well inspired the prince, the priest, the judge,
The noble and the wise to join
In rearing Mason's grand design.
The grand design to rear,
Was ever Mason's care,
From Adam down, before the flood,
Whose art old Noah understood,
And did impart to Japhet, Shem, and Ham,
Who taught their race
To build apace
Babel's town and tower, until it came
To be admired too much, and then
Dispersed were the sons of men.
But though their tongues confused
In distant climes they u^^d.
They brought from Shinah orders good,
To fear the art they understood:
Therefore sing first the princes of the isles;
Next B^lus great,
Who fixed his seat
In old Assyrian building stately piles;
And Mitzraim's pyramids among
The other subjects of our song.
And Sh^m, who did instill
The useful wondrous skill
Into the minds of nations great;
And Abram next who did relate
The Assyrian learning to his sons, that when
In Egypt's land,
By Pharaoh's hand,
Were roughly taught to be most skilful men;
'Till their grand master Moses rose,
And them delivered from their foes.
But who can sing his praise,
Who did the tent upraise?
Then sing his workmen true as steel,
Aholiah and Bezaleel;
Sing Tire and Sidon, and Phenecians old,
But Sampson's blot
Is never forgot:
He blabb'd his Secrets to his wife that sold
Her husband, who at last pulled down
The house on all in Gaza town.
But Solomon, the king,
With solemn note we sing,
Who reared at length the grand design,
By wealth, and power, and art divine;
Helped by the learned Hiram Tyrian prince,
By Craftsmen good,
That understood
Wise Hiram Abiff's charming influence:
He aided Jewish masters bright,
Whose curious works none can recite.
These glorious Mason kings,
Each thankful Brother sings,
The useful skill: for form the temple fine
To every land.
And foreign strand,
The Craftsmen much'd, and taught the grand design
Of which the kings, with mighty peers,
And learned men were overseers.
Diana's temple next,
In Lesser Asia fixed;
And Babylon's proud walls, the seat
Of Nebuchadnezzar the great;
The tomb of Mansolus the Carian king;
With many a pile
Of lofty style
In Africa and Greater Asia sing,
In Greece, in Sicily and Rome
That had those nations overcome.
Then sing Augustus too,
The general master true,
Who by Vitruvius did refine
And spread the Masons' grand design,
Through north and west; 'till ancient Britons chose,
The royal art
In every part,
And Roman Architecture could disclose;
Until the Saxons warlike rage,
Destroy the skill of many an age.
At length the Gothic style
Prevailed in Briton's Isle,
When Mason's grand design revived,
And in their well-form'd Lodges thrived,
Though not as formerly in Roman days;
Yet sing the Fanes
Of Saxons, D^^es,
Of Scotch, Welsh, Irish; but sing first the praise
Of Athelstan and Edwin prince,
Our master of great influence.
And eke the Norman kings
The British Mason sings;
Till Roman style revived there,
And British crowns united were
Fine heaps of stones
By Inigo Jowes,
That rivaled wise Palladio, justly praised
In Italy and Britain too,
For Architecture firm and true.
And thence in every reign
Did Masonry obtain,
With kings, the noble and the wise,
Whose fame resounding to the skies
Excites the present age in Lodge to join,
And aprons wear
With skill and care,
To raise the Mason's ancient grand design,
And to revive the Augustan style
In many an artful glorious pile.
From henceforth ever sing
The craftsman and the king,
With poetry and music sweet,
Resound their harmony complete;
And with Geometry in skilful hand,
Due homage pay
Without delay
To Byron, noble lord, our Master grand;
He rules the Freeborn sons of art,
By love and friendship, hand and heart.
CHORUS.
Who can rehearse the praise,
In soft poetic lays,
Or solid prose, of Masons true,
Whose art transcends the common view?
Their Secrets never to Strangers yet exposed,
Preserved shall be
By Masons free,
And only to the ancient Lodge disclosed;
Because they are kept in Masons heart,
By Brethren of the royal art.
FOR THE SOCIETY OF FREE MASONS.
TO the king and the Craft. To all the kings, princes and potentates who ever
propagated the royal art. To all the fraternity round the globe. To all the
noble lords, and Right Worshipful Brothers that have been Grand Masters. The
Grand Lodge of Scotland. The Grand Lodge of England. The Grand Lodge of
Ireland. To all well-disposed Masons. To the perpetual honor of Free Masons.
To the Master and Wardens of all regular Lodges. To all true and faithful
Brothers. To all freeborn sons of the ancient and honorable Craft. To the
memory of him who first planted the Vine. To Masons and to Masons' bairns, And
women with both wit and charms, That love to lie in Masous' arms. To all the
female friends of Free-Masons. To him that first the work began. To the memory
of the Tyrian artist. To the ancient sons of peace. To all upright and pure
Masons. Prosperity to the ancient and honorable Craft. To the secret and
silent. To all Masons who walk in the line. To him that did the Temple rear. To
every true and faithful heart, That still preserves the secret art. To all that
live within compass and square. To all social Free Masons, To all true Masons
and upright. Who saw the east where rose the light. To the increase of
perpetual friendship and peace among the ancient Craft. To each chuming fare
and faithful she, Who loves the craft of Masonry. To each faithful Brother both
ancient and young, Who govern, his passions and bridles his tongue. To all
thole who steer there course by the three great L -- s of Masonry. May every
Mason be enabled to act so as to have an approving monitor. May the Longes in
this place be distinguished for love, peace, and harmony. May all Free Masons
be enabled to act in a strict conformity to the rules of their order. May our
actions as Masons be properly squared. A proper application of the 24 inch
guage, so as that we may measure out, and husband our time to the best
purposes. To him who uses the malles in knocking off those superfluous passions
that in any manner degrade the man or the Mason. May the lives of all Free
Masons be spent in acts of true piety, highly seasoned with tranquillity. May
the Mason's conduct be so uniform as he may not be ashamed to take a
retrospective view of it. The absent Brethren of this Lodge. Every worthy
Brother who was at first duly prepared, and whole heart still retains an awful
regard to the three great lights of Masonry. Every Brother who maintains a
constancy in love, and sincerity in friendship. May the Brethern of our
glorious craft be ever distinguished in the world by their regular lives, more
than by their gloves and aprons. May the square, plum-line, and level, regulate
the conduct of every Brother. May virtue ever direct our actions with respect
to ourselves, justice to those with whom we deal; mercy, love and charity to
all mankind. May every worthy Brother who is willing to work and labor through
the day, as his condition requires, be happy at night with his friend, his
love, and a cheerful glass. Every brother who keeps the key of knowledge from
all intruders, but will cheerfully open it to a worthy Brother. May Masonry
flourish until nature expires, And its glo^es never fade 'till the world's on
sire. May every society instituted for the promotion of virtue flourish. May
concord, peace, and harmony subsist in all regular Lodges and always
distinguish the fraternity of Free Masons. (...) upon the square. May the
prospect of riches never have that effect upon a Mason, as to induce him to
that which is repugnant to virtue. May our conversation be such, as that youth
may therein find instruction, women modesty, the aged respect, and all men
civility. May peace harmony, and concord subsist among Free Masons; and may
every idle dispute and frivolous distinction be buried in oblivion. The Mason
that knows the true value and use of his tools. All true friends of the craft.
May every Brother who is lawfully and regularly entered into our society, which
is both ancient and honorable, be as duly instructed in the true morals
thereof. May Masorny prove as universal, as it is honorable and useful. The
memory of the distinguished three. May unity, friendship and brotherly love,
ever distinguish the Brethren of the ancient craft. All regular Lodges. May the
morning have no occasion to censure the night spent by Free Masons. May every
Brother have a heart to feel, and a hand to give. May no Free Mason wish for
more liberty than constitutes happiness, nor more freedom than tends to the
public good. May we never condemn that in a Brother, which we would pardon in
ourselves. May the cares which haunt the heart of the covetous, be unknown to a
Free Mason. May no Free Mason desire plenty, but with the benevolent view to
relieve the indigent. May the deformity of vice in other men, teach a Mason to
abbot his own. May we be more ready to correct our own faults, than to publish
the errors of the Brethren. May every Free Mason participate in the happinss of
a Brother. May we never rashly believe the report we hear, which is prejudicial
to a Brother. May discord, party-rage, and insolence, be for ever rooted out
from amongst Masons. May all Free Masons go hand in hand in the road of virtue.
May all Free Masons ever taste and relish the sweets of freedom. May the hearts
of Free Masons agree, although their heads should differ. May the Masons'
conduct be so uniform as to convince the natural world, that they dwell in
light. May honor and honesty distinguish the Brethren. The humble beggar. May
all Free Masons live in love, and die in peace. To Masonry, friendship, and
love. The heart which conceals, And the tongue that never reveals. May no Free
Mason taste the bitter apples of affliction. To the nation's wealth and glory.
To the innocent and faithful craft. To a happy meeting. May the gentle spirit
of love animate the heart of every Mason. May hypocrisy, faction, and strife be
for ever rooted from every Lodge. May every Free Mason be distinguished by the
internal ornament of an upright heart May the Brethern in this place be united
to one another by the bond of love. May every Free Mason have as much genuine
philosophy, as that he may neither be too much exaulted with the smiles of
prosperity, not too much dejected with the frowns of adversity. May Free Masons
ever taste and relish the sweets of domestic contentment. May the foundation of
every regular Lodge be solid, its building sure, and its members numerous and
happy. May every Free Mason have health, peace, and plenty. May every Free
Mason find constancy in love, and sincerity in friendship. May the Free Mason's
conscience be sound, though his fortune be rotten. May temptation never conquet
a Free Mason's virtue, Honor and influence to every public spirited Brother.
May every worthy Brother have a head to earn and a heart to spend. May all Free
Masons please, and be pleased. Peace and plenty to every Brother. Health, love,
and ready rhino to the whole fraternity. May the Mason's reward be equal to his
merit. May every Brother who has merit, never want encouragement.

