ART OF CONTENTMENT; WITH SEVERAL ENTERTAINING PIECES OF Poetry, DESCRIPTIVE OF
THE PRESENT TIMES, IN THE U. States of America.

By JOHN SEARSON, Formerly a Merchant of Philadelphia.

We to ourselves may all our wishes grant,
For nothing coveting, we nothing want:
They cannot want, who wish not to have more,
Contented minds may smile when counted poor.
DRYDEN. Phil, 4 th and 11 th -- For I have learned, in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content BALTIMORE Printed for the Author by W. PECHIN.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON.
SIR,
FROM the amiable character I have heard of you, both in this country (where I
have resided many years in the various spheres of life) and in Europe, I am
induced to dedicate to you this publication.

When I last returned to this country, I did myself the honor to wait upon your
Excellency, in September, 1796, before your resignation of the Presidency of
the United States, and presented to you a Poem I composed upon the "Rural and
Romantic Scenes of DOWN HILL," near Colerain, Ireland, the seat of the Earl of
Bristol, and Bishop of the Diocese of Londonderry -- for a copy of which, many
of the gentlemen of that country gave me a guinea.

Your Excellency was so humane and condescending, as to countenance my
intention of publishing by subscription, a Poem, suited to the then present
state of America, for which I obtained above 1200 subscribers. And your
Excellency's condescending and polite letter, for transmitting a Poem to you at
Mount Vernon, merits By most sincere gratitude.

The Book now published may be useful to all descriptions of both sexes, as the
times are indeed alarming, and the art of contentment rendered an essential
study of mankind, in pursuit of real happiness.

I should have done myself the pleasure of waiting on your Excellency, for
liberty of addressing the following Treatise to your patronage, but an
indisposition, and fear of transgressing on your delicacy prevented -- As it is
only to gentlemen of superior rank and noted abilities, we can look for
literary encouragement in any country for promoting learning and science. May
every encourager of this work join me in fervent prayer to Heaven, that every
real felicity may ever await your Excellency.

I have the honor to subscribe myself, with the most profound respect and
gratitude, Sir, Your Excellency's most devoted, and obedient humble Servant,

JOHN SEARSON.

THE Author's Address.
A PREFACE, or Introduction to a book, is generally looked for, as also some
account of the Author's life character, etc. -- but, as (...) is a more matter
of form, and of little consequence to the public, I shall limit myself in that
respect, trusting, that the production alone, will be a sufficient
recommendation.

I was born in the North of Ireland, of an English family, and educated in the
western part of that kingdom, chiefly in the city of Cork, by two of my uncles,
clergymen of the Church of England, and early were abroad an apprentice to a
merchant in the Island of Tortola, in the West Indies; but not enjoying my
health there, returned to Ireland, and from thence at an early period of my
life came over to America, where I remained about twenty-six years, in various
spheres of life; married reputably in the city of Philadelphia, and after the
decease of my wife, I returned to Ireland, where I was master of some
considerable schools of academics, but returned again to America (...) 1776, on
some business, ^ and descriptive, which were well received, and handsomely
enc^^^aged by several gentlemen of respectability in that country: -- and in
1797, published a book of Poems, for which I was equally (...) Philadelphia.

The prose part of the " ART OF CONTENTMENT," is chiefly selected from the
first European writers* Several of the pieces (those descriptive of America
particularly) are my own, with the Acrostic (...) President: when I quote from
another a^^^or, generally give credit.

The time^ indeed are alarming; and if ever composure to the dispensations of
Heaven were necessary it will in all probability be so* when the cloud bursts
that hangs over the Land. -- Contentment can only make it supportable. St. Paul
says, he had learnt contentment: so it is to be learned, and not immediately
obtained, as some other blessings are.

I most sincerely thank my subscribers for their benevolence toward me, and
am,

Their ever obliged, And de^o^ed hum. Servt, JOHN SEARSON.

THE ART of CONTENTMENT.
SECTION. I.
Of the necessary Connection between Happiness and Contentment.
GOD, who is essentially happy in himself, can receive no accession to his
felicity by the poor contributions of men. He cannot therefore be supposed to
have made them upon intuition of increasing, but communicating his happiness.
And this his original design is very visible in all the parts of his Economy
toward them. When lapsed man had counterplotted against himself, defeated the
purpose of the Divine goodness, and plunged his whole nature into the opposite
state of endless misery: he yet reinforced his first design, and by an
expedient as full of wonder as mercy, the death of his Son, recovers him to his
former capacity of bliss. And that it might not only be a bare capacity, he has
added all other methods proper to work upon a rational creature. He has shown
him his danger, set before him in perspective that eternal Tophet, which he is
advised to shun. On the other side, he has no less lively described the
heavenly Jerusalem, the celestial Country to which he is to aspire: Nay
farther, has levelled his road to it, leads him, not as he did the Israelites
through the wilderness, through intricate mazes to puzzle his understanding;
through a land of drought, wherein were fiery serpents and scorpions, Deuteronomy.
viii. 15. to discourage and affright him, but has in the Gospel chalked out a
plain, a safe, nay a pleasant path. as much superior both in the ease of the
way, and in the end to which it leads, as Heaven is to ^anaan.

2. By doing this, he has not only secured our grand and ultimate happiness,
but provided for our intermedial also.

Those Christian duties which are to carry us to heaven, are our refreshment,
our viaticum in our journey; his yoke is not to gall and fret us, but an engine
by which we may with ease (and almost insensibly) draw all the clogs and
encumbrances of human life. For whether we take Christianity in its whole
complex, or in its several and distinct branches, it is certainly the most
excellent, the most compendious art of happy living: Its very tasks are
rewards, and its precepts are nothing but a divine sort of alchymy, to sublime
at once our nature and our pleasures.

3. This may be evidenced in every particular of the evangelical law: But
having formerly made some attempt toward it in another Decay of Christian
Piety.
tract, I shall not here reassume the whole subject. I shall only single out one
particular precept, wherein happiness is not (as the others) only implied, and
must be catched at the rebound by consequence and event; but in literally
expressed, and is the very matter of the duty; I mean the precepts of
acquiescence and Contentment: Happiness and this true genuine Contentment,
being terms so convertible, that to bid (...) be content, is but another phrase
for bidding us be happy.

4. Temporal enjoyments, such as are pleasure, wealth, honor, and the rest,
though they make spacious pretenses to the measure of human happiness, are all of
them justly discarded by the Philosopher in his Ethics, upon this one
consideration, that coming from abroad they may be withheld or taken from us:
And our tenure being precarious we even for that reason are unhappy in our most
desirable possessions; because we still are liable to be so. And therefore he
concludes, that felicity must be pla^ed in the mind and soul; which stands
without the reach of fortune: and in the practice of virtue, which in its own
nature, and not in its contingent use, is truly good, and therefore certainly
renders the possessors such.

5. But this practice being diffused through the whole extent of moral duty.
Epictetim thought he had deserved w^ll of human nature, when he drew it up in
two short words, to sustain and (...): That is, to ^ear with constancy adverse
events, and with moderation en^^y those that are prosperous. Which complexu^^
of philosophy is yet more fully, as well as more compendiouslly expressed in
the single motion of Contentment: Which involves the patient bearing of all
misadventures, and generous contempt of sensual illectives. This state of mind
the Greeks express by calling its self-sufficiency, which, we know, properly
speaking, is one of the incommunicable attributes of the divine nature, and the
Stoics expressly pretend, that by it mortal men are enabled to rival their
gods; in (...) phrase, to make a controversy with Jupiter himself. But (...)
the insolent blasphemy of all independent felicity, christianity acknowledges a
material truth in the assertion: And St. Paul declares of himself, that having
learnt how to want and how to abound, and in whatever state he happens to be
in, therewith to be content^ he is able to do all things through Christ that
strengthens him Phil. iv. 11, 12, 13. And having nothing to possess all things,
2 Cor. vi. 10.

6. Which great event comet about not only because all good things are
eminently (...) the divine nature, and he who by virtue and religion possesses
Him, thereby is a full equivalence has every thing; but also upon human
measures, and principles of philosophy. The compensations address to wealth, as
(...) rightly observed, being not to increase possessions, but lessen desires.
And if so it will follow, that the contented (...) an must be abundantly
provided for, being so entirely satisfied with what he has, as to have no
desires at all. Indeed it is truly said of covetous men, and is equally verified
of all who have any desire to gratify that they want no less what they have
than what they have not; but the reverse of that paradox is really made good by
Contentment, which bestows on men the enjoyment of whatever they have, and also
whatever they have not; and by teaching to want nothing, abundantly secures not
to want happiness.

7. On the other side, this one grace being absent, it is not in the power of
any success or affluence to make life a tolerable thing. Let all the materials
of earthly happiness be amast together, and ^lung upon one man, they will
without Contentment be but like the fatal prize of (...) treason, who was pressed
to death with the weight of her booty. He that has the elements of felicity,
and yet cannot form them into satisfaction; is more desperately miserable than
he that wants them: For he who wants them has yet something to hope for, and
thinks if he had them he might be happy; but he who insignificantly possesses
them, has (...), has not so much as the flattery of an expectation; for he has
nothing ^e^t to desire, and yet can be as little said to enjoy.

8. He therefore that would have the extract, the quintessence of happiness,
must seek it in Content. All outward accessions are but the dross and earthly
part: this alone is the spirit, which when it is once separated, depends not
upon the fate of the other; but preserves its vigor when that is destroyed. St.
Paul, whom I before mentioned, is a ready instance of it, who professes to be
content in whatever state: Contentment being not so inseparately linked to
eternal things, but that they may subsist apart. That those are often without
it we are too sure, and that it may be without them is as certainly true;
though by our own default we have not so many examples of it. A heart that
rightly computes the difference between temporals and eternals, may resolve
with the prophet, Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit
be in the vides; the labor of the ^live shall fall, and the fields shall yield
no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall he no herd
in the stalks; yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation, Hab. iii. 17, 18. He that has God need not much deplore the want of
any thing else: Nor can he that considers the plenty and glory of his future
state, be much dejected with the want or abjectness of his present.

9. Yet so indulgent is God to our infirmities, that knowing how unapt our
impatient natures are to walk only by faith, and not at all by sight, (...)
Cor. v. 7. he is pleased to give us fair antepasts of satisfaction here,
dispenses his temporal blessings, though not equally, yet so universally, that he
that has least, has enough to oblige not only his acquiescence, but his
thankfulness. Though every man has not all his wishes, yet he has that which is
more valuable than that he complains to want: nay which he himself could worse
spare were it put to his option.

10. And now from such a disposure of things, who would not expect that mankind
should be the cheerfullest part of the creation? that the sun should not more
rejoice to run his course, Psalm. xix. 5. than man should to finish his: That a
journey which has so blessed an end, and such good accommodation by the way,
should be passed with all imaginable alacrity, and that we should live here
practicers and learners of the state of unmixed, interminable joys, to which we
aspire. But alas, if we look upon the universality of men, we shall find it
nothing so, but while all other creatures gladsomely follow the order of their
creation, take pleasure in those things God has assigned for them, we with a
sullen perverseness quarrel at what we should enjoy, and in every thing make it
our business, not to fit it for our use, but to find out some concealed quality
which may render it unfit. We look insidiously upon our blessings, like men
that designed only to pick a quarrel, and start a pretense for mutining. From
hence it is that man who was designed the lord of the world, to whose
satisfaction all inferior beings were to contribute, is now the unhappiest of
the creatures: Nay as if the whole order of the universe were inverted, he
becomes slave to his own vassals, courts all these little sublunary things with
such passion, that if they prove coy and fly his embraces, he is mad and
desperate; if they fling themselves into his arms, he is then glutted and
satiated; like Amnon, he hates more than he loved, 2 Samuel xiii. 15. and is
sicker of his possession, than he was of his desire.

11. And thus will it ever he, till we can keep our desires more at home, and
not suffer them to ramble after things without our reach. That honest Roman,
who from his extraordinary industry upon his little spot of ground, received
such an increase, as brought him under suspicion of witchcraft, is a good
example for us. God has placed none of us in so barren a soil, in so forlorn a
state, but there is something in it which may afford us comfort; let us husband
that to the utmost, and it is scarce imaginable what improvement, even he that
appears the most miserable, may make of his condition. But if in a sullen
humor we will not cultivate our own field, because we have perhaps more mind
to our neighbors, we may thank ourselves if we starve. The despising of what
God has already given us, is sure but cold invitation to farther bounty. Men
are indeed forced sometimes to reward the mutinous; but God is not so to be
attacked, nor is it that sort of violence which can ever force heaven. The
Heathen could say, that Jupiter sent his plagues among the poorer sort of men,
because they were always repining: And indeed there is so much of truth in the
observation, that our impatience and discontent at our present condition, is
the greatest provocation to God to make it worse.

12. It must therefore be resolved to be very contrary to our interest, and
surely it is no less to our duty. It is so if we do but own ourselves men, for
in that is implied a subordination and submission to that power which has made
us so; and to dispute his management of the world, to make other distributions
of it than what he has done, is to renounce our subjection, and set up for
dominion. But this is yet more intolerable as we are christians, it being a
special part of the evangelical discipline, cheerfully to conform to any
condition; know how to be abased, and how to abound, to be full, and to be
hungry, Phil. iv. 12. (...) careful for nothing, ver. 6. Nay, so little does
Christ give countenance to our peevish discontents, our wanton outcries when we
are not hurt, that he requires more than a contentment, an exultancy and
transport of joy under the heaviest pressures, under reproaches and
persecutions. Rejoice ye in that day, and (...) for joy, Luke vi. 23. And sure
nothing can be more contrary to this, than to be always whining and
complaining, crying in the Prophet's phrase, My leanness, my leanness, woe is
me, Isa. xxiv. 16. when perhaps Moses' simile does better fit our state.
Jesurun waxed fat and kicked, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 15.

13. And as this queruious humor is against our interest and duty, so is it
visibly against our ease. It is a sickness of the mind, a perpetual knawing and
craving of the appetite, without any possibility of satisfaction; and indeed is
the same in the heart which the Caninus appet^tus is in the stomach: to which
we may aptly enough apply that description we find in the prophet, He shall
snatch on the right hand and be hungry, and he shall eat on the left and not be
satisfied, Isa. ix. 20. Where this sharp, this fretting humor abounds, nothing
converts into nourishment: Every new accession does but excite some new desire;
and as it is observed of a trencher-fed dog, that he tastes not one bit for the
greedy expectation of the next; so a discontented mind is so intent upon his
pursuits, that he has no relish of his acquest. So that what the prophet speaks
of the covetous, is equally applicable to all other sorts of mal-contents; He
enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, Hab. ii.
5. And sure if the desire accomplished be, as Solomon says, sweet to the soul,
Prove. xiii. 19. it must be exceedingly bitter, to be thus condemned to endless
unaccomplished desires; and yet this is the torture which every repining
uncontented spirit provides for itself.

14. What a madness is it then for men to be so desperately bent against their
interest and duty, as to renounce even their case too for company? One would
think this age were sensual enough to be at defiance with the least shadow of
uneasiness. It is so I am sure where it ought not, every thing is laborious
when it is in compliance with their duty: A few minutes spent in prayer, Oh
what a weariness is it! Mal ii. 13. If they chance but to miss a meal, they are
ready to cry out, their knees are weak through fasting, Psalm, cix. 24. yet they
can without regret, or any self compassion, macerate and cruciate themselves
with anxious cares and vexations, and as the apostle speaks, 1 Timothy vi. 10,
Pierce themselves through with many sorrows. That proposal therefore which was
very rashly made by St. Peter to our Savior, Master, pity* thyself, Mat. xvi.
22. which we render he it far from thee, would here be an advised motion to the
generality of mankind, who are commonly made unhappy, not by any thing without
them, but by the restless impatience hat is within them.

15. It may therefore be a seasonable office to endeavor the appeasing those
storms, by recalling them to these sober rational considerations, which may
show as well the folly, as uneasiness of this repining unsatisfiable humor. It
is certain that in true reasoning we can find nothing whereon to found it, but
a great deal to enforce the contrary. Indeed it is so much against the dictate
of reasonable nature to affect damage, sin, and torment, that were there
nothing else to be said, but what I have already mentioned. it might
competently discover the great unreasonableness of this sin.

16. But we need not confine our appeal to reason, as it is only a judge of
utility and advantage: but enlarge it to another notion, as it is judge of
equity and right: in which respect also it gives a clear and peremptory
sentence against all murmuring impatience. To evince this, I shall insist upon
these particulars. First, That God is debtor to man, and therefore whatever he
affords to any, it is upon bounty, not of right, a benevolence not a due.
Secondly, That this bounty is not strait or narrow, confined to some few
particular persons, and wholly over-skipping the rest, but more or less
universally diffused to all. So that he who has the least, cannot justly say
but he has been liberally dealt with. Thirdly, That if we compare our blessings
with our allays, our good things with our evil, we will find our good far
surmounting. Fourthly, That we shall find them yet more so, if we compare them
with the good we have done; as on the contrary, we shall find our afflictions
scarce discernable if balanced with our sins. Fifthly, That as God is rector of
the universe, so it appertains to him to make such allotments, such
distributions as may best preserve the state of the whole, Sixthly, That God
notwithstanding that universal care, has also a peculiar aspect on every
particular person, and disposes to him what he discerns best for him in
special. Seventhly, If we compare our adversities with those of other men, we
shall always find something that equals, if nnot exceeds our own. All these are
certain irrefragable truths, and there is none of them single, but may, if well
pressed upon the mind, charm it into a calmness and resignation; but when there
is such a conspiration of arguments, it must be a very obstinate perverseness
that can resist them: Or should they sail to enforce a full conviction, will
yet introduce those subsidiary proofs, which I have to allege, so
advantageously, as will, being put altogether, amount unto perfect and
uncontrollable evidence.

If you will be happy, be content:
Nor let vain Cares disturb thy peace:
GOD, who is good and kind, has sent
This Message down to human Race.
SECT. II
Of God's Absolute Sovereignty.
THE first proposition that God is debtor to no man, is too clear and apparent
to require much of illustration: For as he is a free agent, and may act as he
pleases, so he is the sole proprietary, and can wrongfully detain from none,
because all original right is in himself. This has been so much acknowledged by
the blindest heathens, that none of them durst make insolent addresses to their
gods, challenge any thing of them as of debt, but by sacrifices and prayers
owned their dependence and wants, and implored supplies. And sure, christianity
teaches us not to be more saucy. If those deities who owed their very being to
their votaries, were yet acknowledged to be the spring and source of all, we
can with no pretense deny it to that suprense power, in whom we live, move, and
have our being, Acts xvii. 28. For if it were merely an act of his choice to
give us a being, all his subsequent bounties can have no other original than
his own good pleasure. We could put no obligation upon God before we were; and
when we began to be, we were his creatures, and so by the most indisputable
right owe ourselves to him, but can have no antecedent title on which to claim
any thing from him: So that the apostle might well make the challenge which he
does on God's behalf, Who has given any thing unto him, and it shall be
recompensed to him again? Romans xi. 35.

2. Now ordinary discretion teaches us, not to be too bold in our expectation
from one to whom we can plead no right. It has as little of prudence as
modesty, to press impudently upon the bounty of a patron, and does but give him
temptation (at least pretense) to deny. And if it be thus with men, who
possibly may sometimes have an interest, sometimes a vanity to oblige: it must
be much more so toward God, who cannot be in want of us, and therefore need
not buy us: Our good, as the Psalmist speaks, extends not to him, Psalm. xvi. 2.
He has fundamental right in that little we are, which will stand good though it
should never be corroborated by greater benefits. With what an humble
bashfulness should we then sue for any thing, who have no argument to invite
the least donation, being already so pre-engaged, that we cannot mortgage so
much as ourselves in consideration of any new favor? And surely, extravagant
hopes do very ill befit people in this condition. We see the modesty of good
Mephibosheth, though he was by a slanderous accusation outed of half the estate
David given him, yet upon a reflection that he derived it all from his good
pleasure, disputed not the sentence, but cheerfully resigned to the same
disposure, from which he received it, saying, Yea, let him take all, 2 Samuel,
xix. 30. A rare example, and fit for imitation, as being adapted to the present
case, not only in that one circumstance of his having received all from the
king, but also in that of the attainder of his blood: which he confesses in the
former part of the 28th verse, For all of my father's house were but dead men
before my Lord. And alas! may we not say the very same? Was not our whole race
tainted in our first parent? So that if God had not the primary title of
vassalage, he would in our fall have acquired that of confiscation and escheat.
And can we think ourselves then in terms to capitulate, and make our own
conditions, and expect God should humor us in all our wild demands?

3. This is indeed to keep up that old rebellion of our progenitor, for that
consisted in a discontent with that portion God had assigned him, and coveting
what he had restrained him. Nay indeed it comes up to the height of the devil's
proposal, the attempting to be as God, Genesis iii. 5. For it is an endeavor to
wrest the management out of his hands, to supercede his authority of dispensing
to us, and to carve for ourselves. This is so mad an insolence, that were it
posible to state a case exactly parallel between man and man, it would raise
the indignation of any that but pretended to ingenuity. Yet this is, without
hyperbole, the true meaning of every murmuring repining thought we entertain.

4. But as bad as it is, who is there of us, that can in this particular say,
We have made our hearts clean? Prove. xx. 9. It Is true we make some formal
acknowledgment sometimes that we receive all from God's gift: Custom teaches us
from our infancy, after every meal we eat, to give him thanks (though even that
is now thought too much respect, and begins to be discarded as unfashionable:)
yet sure he cannot be thought to do that in earnest, that has all the time of
his eating been grumbling that his table abounds not with such delicacies as
his neigbors. And yet at this rate God knows are most of our thanskgivings.
Indeed we have not so much ordinary civility to God, as we have to men. The
common proverb teaches us, not to pry too curiously into the blemishes of what
is given us; but on God's gifts we fit as censors, nicely examine every thing
which is in any way disagreeable to our fancies, and as if we dealt with him
under the notion of chapmen, disparage it, as Solomon says, buyers use to do,
It is naught, it is naught says the buyer, Prove. xx. 14. Nay we seem yet more
absurdly to change the scene, and as if God were to make oblations to us, we as
critically observe the detects of his benefactions, as the Levitical priests
were to do those of the sacrifice, and (like angry Deities) scornfully reject,
whatever does not perfectly answer our wanton appetites.

5. And now, should God take us at our words, withdraw all those blessings
which we so fastidiously despise, what a condition were we in? It Is sure we have
nothing to plead in reverse of that Judgment. There is nothing in it against
justice; for he takes but his own. This he intimates to Isreal, Hos. ii. 9. I
will return and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the
season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax; In which he asserts his
own property, My corn, my wine, etc. and recalls them to the remembrance that
they were but usufructuaries. And it is as evident that our tenure is but the
same. Nay this proceeding would not be repugnant even to mercy, for even that
is not obliged still to prostitute itself to our contempt. I am sure such a
toleration is beyond all the measures of human lenity. Should any of us offer
an alms to an indigent wretch, and he when he sees it is silver, should murmur
and exclaim that it is not gold, would we not draw back our hand, and reserve
our charity for a more worthy object? It Is true indeed, God's thoughts are not
as our thoughts, nor our narrow bowels equal measures for the devine
compassion; and we experimentally find that his long-suffering infinitely
exceeds ours; yet we know he does in the parable of the lord and the servant,
Matt. xxviii. declare, that he will proportion his mercy by ours, in that
instance; and we have no promise that he will not do it in this; nay we have
all reason to expect he should: For since his wisdom prompts him to do nothing
in vain, and all his bounty to us is designed to make us happy, when he sees
that end utterly frustrated by our discontents, to what purpose should he
continue that to which we will be never the better for?

6. Besides though he be exceedingly patient, yet he is not negligent or
insensible; he takes particular notice, not only with what diligence we employ,
but with what affections we resent every of his blessings. And as ingratitude
is a voice odious to man so it is extremely provoking to God; so that in this
sense also, the words of our Savior are most true, From him that has not (i.
e.) that has not a grateful sense and value, shall be taken away even that he
has Mat. xxv. 29. But we may find a threatening of this kind, more express to
Isreal. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with gladness, and with
joyfulness of heart, for the abundance of all things, therefore shall thou
serve thine enemies, whom the Lord God will send among thee, in hunger, and in
thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things, Deuteronomy. xxviii. 27. A sad
and dismal inversion, yet founded wholly in the want of that cheerful
recognition which God expected from them. And if Israel, the lot of his
inheritance, that people whom he had singled out from all the nations of the
world, could thus forfeit his favor by unthankfulness, sure none of us can
suppose we have any surer entail of it. In a word, as God loves a cheerful
giver, so he also loves a cheerful receiver; one that complies with his end in
bestowing, by taking a just complacence in his gifts. But the querulous and
unsatisfied, reproach his bounty; accuse him of ^illiberality and narrowness of
mind. So that he seems even in his honor engaged to bring them to a righter
apprehension of him, and by a deprivation teach them the value of those good
things which they could not learn by the enjoyment.

7. If therefore ingenuity and gratitude cannot, yet at least let prudence and
self-love engage us against this sin of Murmuring, which we see does abundantly
justify the character the wise man gives, when he tells us, ' it is unprofitable,
Wisd. i. 11, he might have said pernicious also; for so it evidently is in it is
effects. Let us then arm ourselves against it, and to that purpose impress
deeply upon our minds the present consideration. That God owes us nothing, and
that whatever we receive is an alms, and not a tribute. Diogenes being asked
what wine drank the most pleasant, answered, That which is drank at another's
cost. And this circumstance we can never miss of to recommend our good things
to us: For be they little or much, they come gratis. When therefore in a
pettish mood we find ourselves apt to charge God foolishly, and to think him
strait-handed toward us, let us imagine we hear God expostulating with us, as
the householder in the parable, ^riend I do thee no wrong: is it not lawful for
me to do what I will with my own? Mat. xx. 15. If God have not the right of
disp^^sing, let us find out those that have, and see how much better we shall
speed: But if he has let us take heed of disputing with him: We that subsist
merely by his favor, had need court and cherish it by all the arts of humble
observance. Every man is ready to say how ill beggary and pride do agree. The
first qualification we cannot put off. O let us not provide it of the other so
inconvenient, so odious an adjunct. Let us leave off prescribing to God (which
no ingenious man would do to an earthly benefactor) and set us betake ourselves
to a more holy and successful policy, the acknowledgment of past mercies, and
our own unworthiness. This was Jacob's method, I am not worthy of the least of
all the mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant:
for with my staff I passed over this Jordan and now I am become two bands; and
with this humble preface he introduces his petition for rescue in his present
distress, Deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my brother, etc. Genesis xxx.
10, 11. An excellent pattern of divine rhetoric, which the success demonstrates
to have been very prevalent. And we cannot transcribe better copy, to render
our desires as successful. Indeed we are so utterly destitute of all arguments
from ourselves, that we can make no reasonable form of address, if we found it
not in something of God; and there is nothing even in him adapted to our
purpose, but his mercy: nor can that be so advantageously urged by any thing,
as by the former instances it has given of itself: for as God only is fit to be
a precedent to himself, so he loves to be so. Thus we find, not only Moses, but
God often recollecting his miraculous favors toward Israel, as an argument to
do more: Let us therefore accost him in his own way, and by a frequent and
grateful recounting of his former mercies, engage him to future. Nor need we be
at a loss for matter of such recollection, if we will but seriously consider
what we have already received, which is the subject of the next section.

Since God does rule, the sovereign King,
Let all his creatures here below,
With grateful hearts his praises sing,
For every Good he does bestow.
SECT. III.
Of God's unlimited Beauty.
IT is the kown character of an unworthy nature, to write injuries in marble,
and benefits in dust; and however some (as Senaca well observes) may acquit
themselves of this imputation as to man, yet scarce any do so in relation to
God. It Is true indeed the charge must be a little varied; for God neither will
nor can do us injury: Yet we receive any thing that is adverse with such a
resentment as if it were, and engrave that in our memories with indelible
characters, whilst his great and real benefits are either not at all observed,
or with so transient an advertence, that the comparison of dust is beyond our
pitch, and we may be more properly said to write them in water. Nay so far are
we from keeping records and registers of his favors, that even those standing
and fit ones which sense can prompt us to, (without the aid of our memories)
cannot obtain our notice.

2. Were it not thus, it were impossible for men to be so perpetually in the
complaining key, as if their voices were capable of no other sound. One wants
this, and another that, and a third something beyond them both, and so (...)
when all this while every one of them enjoys a multitude of good things without
any remark. That very breath wherewith they utter their complaints, is a
blessing, and a fundamental one too: for, if God should withdraw that, they
were incapable of whatsoever else they either have, or desire. It Is true that
some men's impatience has risen so high, as to cast away life, because it was
not clothed with all the circumstances, they wished. Yet these are rare
instances, and do only show such men's depraved judgment of things. A rich
jewel is not the less valuable, because a mad man in his raving sit flings it
into the fire: But as to the generality of men, the Devil (though a liar) gave
a true account of their sense, when he said, Skin for skin, and that a man
has, will he give for his life, Job. II. 4. And though perhaps in an angry fit
many men have with Jonas, Chap. iv. 3. wished to die, yet ten to one, should
death then come, they would be as willing to divert it, as was the man in the
Apologue, who wearied with his burden of sticks, flung it down and called for
death; but when he came, owned no other occasion for him, but to be helped up
again with his bundle. I dare in this appeal to the experience of those, who
have seemed very weary of life, whether when any sudden danger has surprised
them, it has not as suddenly altered their mind, (...) and made them have a
greater desire for life, than before they abhorred it. It Is the common saying,
as long as there is life there is hope: it is so, as to secular concerns, for
what strange revolutions do we often see in the age of man? From what
despicable beginnings have many arrived to the most splendid conditions? Of
which we have diverse modern as well as ancient instances.

Indeed it is admirable to see what time etc. industry will (with God's
blessing) effect. But there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom
in the grave, EC. ix. 10. we can improve no more when we are once transplanted
thither.

3. But this is yet much more considerable in respect of our spiritual state.
Our life is the day wherein we are to work, John ix. (yea to work out
Salvation:) but when the night comes (when death overtakes) no man can work.
Now alas when it is considered how much of this day the most of us have stood
idle till the sixth or ninth hour, it will be our concern not to have our day
close before the eleventh. Nay alas it is yet worse with us: We have not only
been idle, but very often ill busied: so that we have a great part of our time
to unravel, and that is not to be done in a moment. For though our works may
fitly enough be represented by the Prophet's comparison of a spider's web, Isa.
lix. 5. yet they want the best property even of that; they cannot be so soon
undone. Vices that are radicated by time and custom, lie too deep to be lightly
swept away. It is no easy thing to persuade ourselves to the will of parting
with them. Many violences we must offer to ourselves, a long and strict course
of mortification must be gone through, ever we can find in our hearts to bid
them begone: And yet when we do so, they are not so tractible us the Centurions
servants. They will indeed come when ever we bid them, but they will scarce go
so: they must be expelled by force and by slow degrees; we must sight for every
inch of ground we gain from them: And as God would not assist the Israelites to
subdue the Canaanites at once, Deuteronomy. vii. 22. so neither ordinarily does he, us
to master perfectly our corruptions. Now a process of this difficulty is not to
be dispatched on a sudden. And yet this is not all our task, for we have not
only ill habits to extirpate, but we have also good ones to acquire: It is not
a mere negative virtue will serve our turns, nor will empty lamps enter us into
the marriage-chamber, Mat. xxv. 10. He must add to our faith virtue, and to
virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, etc. ^ Pet. i. 15.

4. And now I would desire the Reader seriously to consider, whether he can
upon good grounds tell himself that this so difficult, (and yet so necessary) a
work is effectually wrought in him. If it be, he is a happy man, and can with
no pretense complain of any external want: (he that is fed with Manna, must be
strangely perverse if he murmur for a belly-full of leeks and onions, Number. xi.
15.) But on the contrary, he owes infinite thanks to God, that has spared him
time for this important business, and did not put a period to his natural life,
before he had begun a spiritual. For I fear there are among the best of us few
of so entire an innocence, but they may remember some, either habits or acts of
fin, in which it would have been dreadful for them to have been snatched away.
And then how comprehensive, how prolific a mercy has life been to them, when it
has carried eternity in its womb, and their continuance on earth has qualified
them for heaven? Neither are such persons only to look on it as a blessing in
the retrospect, as it relates to the past, but also in the present and future;
which if they continue to employ well, does not only confirm, but advance their
reward. Besides God may please by them to glorify himself, make them
instrumental to his service; which as it is the greatest honor, so it is also
the greatest satisfaction to a good heart. He shows himself too mercenary that
so longs for his reward, as to grow impatient of his attendance: He that loves
God, thinks himself blessed in the opportunity of doing work, as well as in
receiving wages. Thus we see how life is under all these aspects, a mercy to a
pious man, and such as not only obliges him to contentment, but gratitude.

5. But supposing a man cannot give this comfortable account of his life, but
is conscious that he has spent it to a very different purpose, yet does not
that at all lessen his obligations to God, who meant he should have employed it
better, and that he has not done so is merely his own fault. Nay indeed the
worse his state is, the greater mercy it is, that God has not made it
irreversible, that he has not cut him off at once from the earth, and the
possibility of Heaven too, but affords him yet a longer day, if yet be will
hear his voice, Psalm. xcv. 7. This long-suffering is one of the most
transcendant acts of divine goodness, and therefore the Apostle rightly styles
it the the riches of his goodness, and long suffering, and forbearance, Romans
ii. 4. And so at last we commonly acknowledge it, when we have worn it out, and
can no longer receive advantage by it. What a value does a gasping despairing
soul put upon a small parcel of that time, which before he knew not how fast
enough to squander? Oh that men would set the same estimate on it before: and
then certainly as it would make them better husbands of it, so it would also
render them more thankful for it, Accounting that the long-suffering of our
Lord is salvation, 2. Pet. iii. 15.

6. Indeed did men but rightly compute the benefit of life upon this score, all
secular encumbrances and uneasinesses of it would be overwhelmed, and stand
only as ciphers in the account. What a shame is it then that we should spend
our breath in sighs and outcries? which if we would employ to those nobler
ends for which it was given, would supersede our complaints, and make us
confess we were well dealt with: that on life (though bare and stripped of all
outward accessaries) is gives us for a prey, Jer. xlv. 5. And indeed he that
has yet the great work of life to do, can very ill spare time or sorrow to
bestow upon the regretting any temporal distress, since his whole stock is
little enough to bewail and repair his neglects of his eternal concerns. Were
our lives therefore destitute of all outward comfort, nay were they nothing but
a scene of perpetual disasters, yet this one advantage of life would infinitely
outweigh them all, and render our murmuring very inexcusable.

7. But God has not put this to the utmost trial, has never placed any man in
such a state of unmixed calamity, but that he still affords many and great
comforts: he finds it fit sometimes to diminish some of our outward comforts,
and perhaps imbitter others, but he never takes all way. This must be
acknowledged, it we do but consider how many things there are in which the
whole race of mankind do in common partake. The four elements, fire and water,
air and earth, do not more make up every man's composition, that they supply
his needs: the whole host of heaven, the sun, moon, and stars, Moses, will tell
us, are by God divided to all nations under the whole heaven, Deuteronomy. iv. 19.
Those resplendent bodies, equally afford their light and influence to all. The
sun shines as bright on the poor cottage, as on the most magnificent palace;
and the stars have their benign aspects, as well for him that is behind the
mill, as for him that sits on the throne, Exodus xi. 5. Property (the great
incendiary below) breeds no confusion in those celestial orbs, but they are
every man's treasure, yet no man's peculiar, (as if they meant to teach us,
that our love of appropriation descends not from above, James iii. 15, is no
heavenly quality.)

8. And as they make no distinction of the ranks and degrees of men, so neither
do they of their virtues. Our Savior tells us, God causes his sun to rise on
the just and on the unjust, Mat. v. 45. If now we descend lower to the
sublunary creatures, they equally pay their homage to man, do not disdain the
dominion of the poor, and submit to that of the rich, but show us that their
instinct extends to the whole nature. An horse draws the poor man's plough, as
tamely as the prince's chariot, and the beggar's hungry cur follows him with
as much obsequiosness and affection, as the pampered lap-dogs of the nicest
ladies. The sheep obey a poor mercenary shepherd as well as they did the
daughter's of the wealthy Laban, Genesis xxix. 9. or of Jethro a prince, Exodus ii.
26. and as willingly yield their fleece to clothe Lazarus, as to make purple
for (...). And as animals, so vegetables are as communicative of their
qualities to one man as another. The corn nourishes, the fruits refresh, the
flowers delight, the simples cure the poor man as well as the rich.

9. But I foresee it will be objected, that these natural privileges are
insignificant because they are evacuated by those positive laws which bound
propriety, and that therefore though one man could use the creatures as well as
another, yet every man have them not to use. I answer, that for some of the
things I have mentioned, they are still in their native latitude, cannot be
enclosed or monopolized. The most ravenous oppressor could never yet lock up
the sun in his chest: He that lays house to house, and land to land, till there
be no place, Isa. v. 8. cannot enclose the common air; and the like may be said
of diverse of the rest: So that there are some (and those no mean blessings)
which continue still the indefeasible right of mankind in general.

10. As for those other things which are liable to the restrictive terms of
meum and (...), it is not the dispensing them; as great as Nathan's parable
describes, when he speaks of the numerous flocks of the rich man, and the
single ewe lamb of the poor, a Sam. xii. 2, yet there is scarce any so
deplorably indigent, but by one means or other, he has or may have the
necessary supports of life. Perhaps they fall not into his lap by birthright
and inheritance, yet they are acquirable by labor and industry, which is
perhaps the better tenure. They cannot, it may be, arrive to Sodom's fullness of
bread, yet if they have not her abundance of idleness, Ezekiel. xvi. 40. they
commonly need not want that, which was the height of Augur's wish, food
convenient, Prove. xxx. 8. It Is true indeed, if they will sold their hands in
their bosom, if with Solomon's sluggard, they will not plough by reason of the
cold, they must take his fate in the summer, as they have his ease in the
winter, they may beg in harvest, and have nothing, Prove. xx. 4. But then it is
visible they are the authors of their own necessities. And indeed to men of
such lazy careless natures, it is hard to say, what degree of God's bounty can
keep them from want, since we often see the fairest fortune's dissipated, as
well by the supine negligence, as the riotous prodigality of the owners. And
therefore if men will be idle, they are not to accuse God, but themselves, if
they be indigent.

11. But then there is one case wherein men seem more inevitably exposed, and
that is, when by age, sickness, or decrepidness, they are disabled from work,
or when their family is too numerous for their work to maintain. And this
indeed seems that most forlorn state of poverty; yet God has provided for them
also, by assigning such persons to the care of the rich: Nay, he has put an
extraordinary mark of favor on them, given them the honor of being his
proxies representatives, made them letters of attorney (as it were) to demand
relief in his name, and upon his account. And though it is too true, that even
that authority will not prevail with many of the rich to open their purses, yet
even in this age of frozen charity, there are still some who remember upon what
terms they received their wealth, and employ it accordingly. And though the
number of them is not so great as it were to be wished, yet there are in all
parts, some scattered here and there, like cities of refuge in the land, Deuteronomy.
xix. 2. to which these poor distressed creatures may flee for succor. And I
think I may say, that between the legal provisions that are made in this case,
and voluntary contributions, there are not very many that want the things that
are of absolute necessity: and we know St. Paul comprises those in a small
compass, food and raiment, and proposes them as sufficient materials of
content, 1 Timothy vi. 8. I say not this, to contract any man's bowels, or lessen
his compassion for such poor wretches. For howmuchsoever they lend, I wish as
Joab did in another case to David, the Lord increase it an hundred fold, 2 Samuel
xxiv. 3. I only urge it as an evidence of the assertion I am to prove, that no
man is so pretermitted by God, or his disposal of temporals, but that even he
that seems the most abandoned, has a share in his providence, and consequently
cannot justly murmur, since even this state which is the highest instance of
human indigence, is not without its receivings from God.

12. But the number in this form are but few, compared to those in a higher;
for between this and the highest affluence, how many intermediate degrees are
there, in which men partake not only of the necessaries, but comforts of life;
that have not only food and raiment, but their distinction of holy day and
working-day, fare and appaerel? He that is but one step advanced from beggary
has so much, he that has got to a second has more than is necessary; and so
every degree rises in plenty till it comes to vanity and excess: And even there
too, there are gradual risings, some having so much fuel for luxury, that they
are at as great a loss for invention, as others can be for materials, and
complain that there are no further riots left for them to essay. How many are
there who have so cloyed and glutted their senses, that they want some other
inlets for pleasure, and with the rich man in the gospel, are in distress where
to bestow their abundance!

13. And sure such as these cannot deny that they have received good things,
yet generally there are none less contented; which is a clear demonstration
that our repinings proceed not from any defect of bounty in God, but from the
malignant temper of our own hearts. And as it is an easier thing to satisfy the
cravings of an hungry, than to curethe nauseous recoilings of a surfeited
stomach: so certainly the discontents of the poor are much easier allayed than
those of the rich. The indigence of the one has contracted his desires, and has
taught him not to look further than a little beyond bare necessaries, so that a
moderate alms satisfies, and a liberal, transports him: But he who by a
perpetual repletion has his desires stretched and extended, is capable of no
such satisfaction. When his enjoyments forestall all particular pursuits, and
he knows not upon what to fasten his next wish; yet even then he has some
confused, uninformed appetites, and thinks himself miserable because he cannot
tell what would make him more happy. And yet, this is that envied state which
men with so ^uch greediness aspire to. Every man looks on it as the top of
felicity, to have nothing more to wish in the world. And yet alas, even that
when attained, would be their torment. Let men never think then that
contentment is to be caught by long and foreign pursuits; he is likeliest to
find it who sits at home, and duly contemplates those blessings which God has
brought within his reach, of which every man has a fair proportion, if he will
advert to it.

14. For besides these external accessions (of which the meanest have some, the
middle sort a great deal, and the uppermost rather too much) man is a
principality within himself, and has in his composure so many excellent
impresses of his Maker's power and goodness, that he need not ask leave of any
exterior thing to be happy, if he knew but right how to value himself: The very
meanest part of him, his body, is a piece of admirable workmanship, of a most
incomprehensible contrivance, as the Psalmist says, He is fearfully and
wonderfully made; and it is astonishing to think of what a symetry of parts this
beautiful fabric is made up. Nor are they only for show, but use; every member,
every limb is endowed with a particular faculty to make it serviceable to the
whole; and in that admirable contexture of veins and arteries, sinews and
muscles, nerves and tendons, none are superfluous, but some way or other
contribute (...) vegetation, sense, or motion. Nay, the most noble and most
useful parts are all of them double, not only as a reserve in case of
misadventure of one part; but also as an instance of the bounty of the donor.
And indeed it is observable of Ga^e^ in his writings, that after he had taken
great care to exempt himself and all of his profession from taking notice of
the Deity, by saying, That to discourse concerning the Gods, was the task of
speculative philosophers; yet coming to write (...) pertium, and considering
the frame of human bodies, (...) therein discovering the wonderful (...) of
every part in reference (...) also so the whole; their strength, agility, and
various movement (...) the powers of (...) had the fate we read of Saul in holy
scripture and against his genius and purpose, to become a prophet, breaking
frequently out into hymns and sacred raptures, saying, These mysteries are more
divine than the Samothracian or Eleusinian; and confessing they both strictly
require, and infinitely excel the low returns of human praise. But beyond the
fabric of parts as organic, what an extract of wonder are our senses, those
five operations of the Lord, as the son of Sirach rightly (and by way of
eminence) styles them Eccl. xvii. 5? By these we draw all outward objects to
ourselves. What were the beauties of the universe to us, if we had not sight to
behold them, or the most melodious sounds, if we had not hearing? and so of the
rest. And yet these are not only generally given. but also preserved to the
greater part of men; and perhaps would be to more, did not our base
undervaluing of common mercies, force God sometimes to instruct us in their
worth, by making us feel what it is to want them.

15. Multitudes of refreshments God also has provided for our bodies,
particularly that of sleep, of which he has been so considerate, as in his
distributions of time, to make a solemn allotment for it: Yet who almost, when
he lies down, considers the mercy, or when he rises refreshed, rises thankful
also? But if our rest at any time be interrupted by the cares of our mind, or
pains of our bodies, then and only then, we consider, that is God who gives his
beloved sleep, Psalm. cxxvii. 2. and think it a blessing worth our esteem. Thus
it is with health, strength, and every thing else, we despise it while we have
it, and impatiently desire it whilst we have it not, but in the mean time sure
we cannot complain, that God's hand is shortened toward us, when in the
ordinary course of his providence we commonly enjoy these mercies many years,
which we find so much want of, if they be withdrawn but for a few hours. And
indeed, there is not a greater instance of human corruption than our senseless
contempt of blessings, merely because they are customary; which in true reason
is an argument why we should prize them the more. When we deal with men, we
discern it well enough, he that gives me once an hundred pounds, I account not
so much my benefactor, as if he made it my annual revenue; yet God must lose
his thanks, by multiplying his favors; and his benefits grow more invisible by
their being always before us.

16. But the body (with its enjoyment) is but the lowest instance of God's
bounty, it is but a decent case for that inestimable jewel he has put in it: The
soul, like the ark, is the thing for which this whole tabernacle was framed,
and that is a spark of divinity in which alone it is that God accomplished his
design of making man in his own image, Genesis 1. 26. It would be too long to
attempt an exact survey of its particular excellencies. The mere intellectual
powers wherewith it is endued, have exercised the curiosity, and raised the
admiration of the great contemplations of nature in all ages; yet after all, of
so subtle composure is the soul, that it is inscratable even to itself: And
though the simplest man knows he has the faculties of imagination,
apprehension, memory, reflection; yet the most learned cannot assign where they
are seated, or by what means they operate. It is enough to us that we have
them, and many excellent uses for them; one whereof (and a most necessary one)
is a thankful reflection on the goodness of God who gave them. He might have
made us in the very lowest form of creatures, insensible stocks or stones; or
if he had advanced us a step higher, he might have fixed us among mere animals,
made us perhaps of the noxious, at best of the tamer sort of beasts; but he has
placed us in the highest rank of visible creatures, and not only given us
dominion over the works of his hands, Psalm. viii. 6. but has given reason
wherewith to manage that sovereignty, without which we had only been the more
masterly sort of brutes.

17. Yet still the soul is to be considered in a higher notion, than of its
immortality and capacity of endless bliss: And here indeed it owns its
extraction, and is an image of the first Being, whose felicity is co-existent
with himself; this, as it is the most transcendent accomplishment of nature, so
it is most universal. Whatever disparity there may be between man and man in
other respects, yet in this all are equal. The poor beggar at the gate has a
soul as capacious of eternal happiness as his whose crumbs he begs for, (nay
sometimes better prepared for it, as that parable shows, Luke xvi. 11.) And
though the dignities of earth are the prize of the rich and noble, the subtle and
designing, yet heaven is as easily mounted from the dunghill as the throne: and
an honest simplicity will sooner bring us thither than the Machiavelian policy.
Nay God has not only designed us to so glorious an end, but has done all on his
part to secure us of it, sent his Son to lead us the way, his Spirit to quicken
us in it. We need not dispute how universal this is; it is sure it concerns all
to whom I am now speaking, those that are within the pale of the church: And if
it should prove confined only to them, the more peculiar is their obligation,
and are thus singled from the rest of the world, and the greater ought to be
their thankfulness. The heathen Philosopher made it matter of his solemn
acknowledgment to fortune, that he was born a Grecian and not a Barbarian: And
sure the advantages of our Christianity are of a much higher strain, and ought
to be infinitely more celebrated. The Apostle we find often applauding this
glorious privilege, as that which makes us fellow-citizens with the saints, and
of the household of God, Ephesians. iii. 19. Nay, which elevates us to a higher
state, the adoption of sons, Gal. iv. 5. Not only sons, but heirs also with
God, and joint heirs of Christ, Romans viii. 17. And what ambition is there so
greedy which this will not satisfy? Yet this is our common state, the
birthright of our regeneration, if we not degrade our-ourselves, and with Esau
fell our title.

18. And now methinks every man may interrogate himself in the same form
wherein Jonadab did Amnon, 2 Samuel xiii. 4. Why art thou, being the king's son,
thus ^^an from day to day? Why should a person adopted by the King of kings,
thus languish and pine? What is there below the sun worthy his notice, much
less desires, that has a kingdom above it? Certainly did we but know how to
(...) ourselves upon this account, it were impossible for us, with such sordid
condescensions, to court every petty worldly interest, and so impatiently vex
ourselves when we cannot attain it. Alas! how unworthily do we bear the names
of Christians, when that which carried the forefathers of our faith through the
most fiery trials, cannot support us under the disappointment of any
exrtavagant desire? They had such respect to the recompense of the reward, Heb.
xi. 26. as made them cheerfully expose their fame to ignominy, their goods to
rapine, their bodies to the most exquisite tortures, and their lives to death.
Yet the same hopes cannot work us to any tolerable degree of patience, when we
suffer the smallest diminution of any of these. What shall we say? Is heaven
grown less valuable, or earth more than it was then? No surely, but we are more
infatuated in our estimates, we have so long abetted the rivalry of the
handmaid, that the mistress, like Sarah, appears despicable. Like Jonah we sit
down sullen upon the withering of a gourd, never considering that God has
provided us a better shelter, a building of God eternal i^ the heavens, (...)
Cor. v. I. Indeed, there can be no temporal destitution so great, which such an
expectation cannot make supportable. Were we in Job's condition, sitting upon a
dunghill, and scraping ourselves with a potsheard, yet as long as we can say
with him, Our Redeemer lives, Job xix. 25. we have all reason to say with him
also, Blessed be the name of the LORD, Job, i. 21. What a madness is it then
for us to expose ourselves to be pierced and wounded by every temporal
adversity, who have so impenetrable an armor? Nay, what an ungrateful reproach
is it to that goodness of God, to show that we cannot make him a counterpoise
to the most trivial secular satisfaction? on which account sure he may again
take up that exprobating complaint we find in the Prophet, A goodly price that
I was valued at of them, Zac. xi. 13.

19. But how mean soever he is in our eyes, though Christ seem the same to us
in his glory which he did in his abasement, to have no beauty that we should
desire him; yet he puts another rate upon himself, and tells us, That he that
loves father or mother, son or daughter, more than me, is not worthy of me,
Matthew. x. 37. Now our love and our joy are passions coincident and therefore
whatever we joy more in than we do in him, we may be presumed to love better;
and if he cannot endure the competition of those more ingenuous objects of our
love, he there mentions, how will he suffer that of our vanities, or childish
wanton appetites? and yet those are the things after which we so impatiently
rave. For I believe I may truly affirm, that if there were a scrutiny made into
all the discontents of mankind, for one that were fastened upon any great
considerable calamity, there are many that are founded only in the irregularity
of our own desires.

20. By what has been said we may justly conclude in the Prophet's phrase, God
has not been to us a wilderness, a land of darkness, Jer. ii. 31. but has
graciously dispensed to us in all our interests. Yet the instances here given
are only common, such as relate to all, or at least the far greater part of
mankind; But what volumes might be made, should every man set down his own
particular experiences of mercy? In that case it would be no extravagant
hyperbole we find, John xxii. 25. That even the world itself could not contain
the books which should be written, God knows our memories are very frail, and
our observations slight in this point; yet abstracting from all the forgotten
or neglected favors, what vast catalogues may every man make to himself, if he
would but recollect, what effects he has had of God's bounty in giving, of his
providence in protecting, of his grace in restraining and exciting of his
patience in forbearing? And certainly all these productions of the divine
goodness were never designed to die in the birth. The Psalmist will tell us,
The Lord has so done his mavelous works, that they ought to be had in
remembrance, Psalm. cxi. 3. Let every man then make it his daily care to recount
to himself the wonders God has done, as for the children of men in general, so
for himself in particular. When the Israelites murmured under the bondage,
Pharao^ imputes it to their idleness and prescribed them more work, as the
readiest cure: (...) piece indeed of inhuman tyranny in h^^, but may with
equity and success be practiced by us upon ourselves. When we find our
appetites mutinous, complaining of our present condition, let us set ourselves
to recollect the many instances of God's mercies. And surely if we do it
sincerely, and with intention, we cannot have past through half our stages,
before our sullen murmurs will be beat out of countenance, and retire with
shame, when they are confronted with such a cloud of witnesses, such signal
testimonies of God's goodness to us: For when we have mustered up all our
little grievances, most critically examined all our wants, we shall find them
very unproportionable to our comforts, and to our receivings; in which
comparative notion, the next section is to consider them.

God's bounty's great, his mercy sure;
Let none repine however oppressed,
His truth for ever will endure,
His Saints in him may surely rest.
Great God give me my daily bread,
And what thou see good for me:
For by JEHOVAH we are fed,
Let all the world sing praise to thee.
SECT. IV.
Of the Surplusage of our Enjoyments above our Sufferings.
TO regulate our estimate of those things which we either enjoy or suffer,
there are three precedent queries to be made: The first of their number of
plenty, the second of their weight, the third of their constancy and
continuance; for according as they partake more of these properties, every good
is more good, and every evil is more evil. It will therefore be our best method
of trial in the present case, to compare our blessings and our calamities in
these three respects.

2. And first in part of plenty, the mercies of God are the source of all our
good, are set out to us in holy scripture in the most supurlative strain. They
are multitude, Psalm. cii. 20. Plentious redemption, Psalm. cxxx. 7. As high as
the heaven, Psalm. ciii. 11. He fills all things living with plenteousness,
Psalm. cxlv. 16. His mercies indeed are such as come not within the compass of
number, but stretch themselves to infinity; and are best represented by such a
calculation as God made to Abraham, when he showed him the numerousness of his
posterity by the (...) of the stars, Genesis (...). 5. Were there but a single
mercy (...) to each minute of our lives the sum world arise very high; But how
is our arithmetic confounded, when every minute has more than we can distinctly
number? for besides the original stock mentioned in the last section, and the
accession of new bounty, the giving us somewhat which we had not before; what
an accumulative mercy is it, the preserving what we have? we are made up of so
many pieces, we have such variety of interests, spiritual, temporal, public and
private; for ourselves, our friends, and dependants, that it is not a confused
general regard that will keep all these in security one moment. We are like a
vast building, which costs as much to maintain as to erect. And indeed
considering the corruptibleness of our materials, our preservation is no less a
work of omnipotence, than our first forming: Nay perhaps it is rather a
greater. Our original clay though it had no aptness, yet it had no aversion to
the receiving a human form; but was in the hand of the potter to make it what
he pleased: But we now have principles of decay within us, which vehemently
tend to dissolution; we want the supplies of several things without us, the
failing whereof return us again to our dust. Nay we do not only need the aid,
but we fear the hostility of outward things. That every air which sometimes
refreshes us, may at another starve and freeze us; that which warms and
comforts, has also a power of consuming us. Yea that very meat which nourishes,
may choke and stiflle us. In a word, there is no creature so despicable, so
inconsiderable, which may not sometimes serve, and which may not at any time
(if God permit) ruin us. Now, whence is it that we so constantly, so frequently
find the good, the benign efficacy of these things, and so seldom, so rarely
the evil? Whence I say is it, but from the active unwearied providence, which
draws forth the better properties of the creatures for our use, and restrains
the worser for our security? which with a particular advertence watches not
only over every person, but every several concern of that person. And how
astonishing a contemplation is this? If the mere ebbing and flowing of the sea,
put the Philosopher into such an ecstacy, that he flung himself into it,
because he could not comprehend the inscrutable cause of it; in what perpetual
raptures of admiration may we be, who have every minute within us, and about us
more and greater wonders, and those too in our favor, when we deserve rather
the divine power should exert itself into our destruction?

3. But alas! our danger from the visible creature, is little compared with
those from the spirits of darkness. We wrestle not only with flesh and blood,
but with principalities and powers, with spiritual wickedness, etc. Ephesians. vi.
12. So inveterate is the enmity between the serpent and the seed of the woman
in general, that he watches all advantages against us, not only in our souls,
but even our bodies, our goods, and in every part of our concerns. Thus we see
he not only assaulted Job's soul, by the wicked insinuations of his wise, (with
more effect) his body with boils and sores, his possessions by the Chaldeans
and Sabeans, and the images of himself, his dearest children, by a wind from
the wilderness, Job i. And can we think his malice is now worm out? No surely,
he still wishes as ill to mankind as ever, and we should soon see the woeful
effects of it, did not the same power which let loose for Job's trial, restrain
him for our safety. Nay, had he but power to affright, though not to hurt us,
even that would make our lives very uncomfortable. We cannot hear the relation
of sprights or apparitions, but our blood chills upon it, and a horror runs
through our reins: What should we then do if he should make his night-walks
through our chamber, and with his illusory terrors disturb our rest? Yet all
this and much more he would do, if God did not chain up this old dragon, Rev.
xx. Nay, if he were not at the expense of a guard about us, and those no less
than angels. I shall not dispute whether every person has not his peculiar
guardian: For though many have not improbably asserted it. we have ground
enough of acquiescence in the general affirmation of the Apostle. That they are
all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of
salvation, Heb. i. 14. And now if the reader please to sum up how many are his
concerns, and how many are the dangers await him in them all, he cannot sure
render the account of those mercies which preserve the one, and divert the
other, in any other phrase tahn that of the psalmist, They are more than I am
able to express, Psalm. xi. 5.

4. We may now challenge the most miserable or the most querelous man living,
to produce causes of complaint, proportionable to those of thansgiving. He that
has the greatest stock of calamities, can never vie with the heaps of benefits;
the disproportion is greater than that of the armies of Ahab and Benhadad, 1
Kings, xx, 27. whereof the one was like two little (...) of kids, the other
filled the country, God has told us that he afflicts not willingly, nor grieves
the children of men, Lam. iii, 33. whereas on the contrary, he delights in
mercy, Micah vii. 18. We may judge by ourselves which he is likeliest often to
repeat, those acts which he does with regret and reluctance, or those which he
does with pleasure and delight. But we need no inferences where we have the
attestation of experience. Let every man therefore make this his judge in this
case, let him every night recollect, how many things within and about him he is
concerned in, and consider how many of those have been preserved entire to him,
still accounting every thing so continued as a new donation. If he begin with
his Spiritual state, it is too possible he may sometimes find he has lost his
innocence, committed some, perhaps many sins: But even in these he will find
cause to justify God, If he do but recollect with what inward checks and
admonitions, and outward restraints, God has endeavored to bridle him. If he
will break through those fences, that does not at all derogate from the mercy
of God which so guarded him, but it rather illustrates his goodness, that after
so many quenchings of his spirit, does yet continue its influence. So that even
he that has the most deplorably violated his integrity, is yet to confess that
God's purpose was to have preserved it entire; and he might really so have kept
it, had he complied with those aids which were afforded him. But in temporal
concerns we are not so apt to undermine ourselves, and therefore shall much
more rarely find we have suffered detriment in them, that in our spiritual; but
are there ordinarily like to meet with a better account. Let a man therefore
consider what is lacking to him of all the secular good things he had in the
morning, and tell me whether for the most part he may not give such an account,
as the Israelitish officers did of their men, after the slaughter of the
Midinnites, That he has not lost one, Numb. xxxi. 39. Or if sometimes he do
suffer a diminution, yet at the worst he will find that many more good things
have been preserved to him, than have been taken from him. A man may perhaps
meet with some damage in his estate, yet it is manifold odds that that damage in
but partial, and that he has still more left than is lost. Or if it be more
entire, yet if he have his health, his limbs, his senses, his friends, and all
things beside his estate left him, so that for one thing he has lost, he still
retains a multitude, he may say of it as the disciples of the few loaves, What
is this among so many, Matthew. xiv. 17. Aristippus being bemoaned for the lose
of a farm, replied with some sharpness upon his condoler, You have but one
field, and I have yet three left, why should I not rather grieve for you?
Intimating that a man is not so much to estimate what ha has lost, as what he
has left. A piece of wisdom which if he would transcribe, we might quickly
convince ourselves, that even in our most adverse estate there are as Elijah
speaks, More with us than against us, 2 ^ings vi. 16. that our enjoyments are
more than our sufferings, and God's acts of grace do far out-number those of
his severity.

5. And as they do out-number, so also do they outweigh them. The mercies we
receive from God are (as the last section has showed) of the greatest
importance; the most substantial solid goods; and the greatest of all, I mean
those which concern our eternal state, are so firmly fixed on us, that unless
we will voluntarily quit our claim, it is not in the power of men or devils to
defeat us. Light bodies are easily blown away by every gust of wind, but this
weight of glory, as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. iv. 17. continues firm and
stable, is proof against all storms, like the shadow of a great rock in a weary
land, Isa. xxxii. 2. Those dark sketches we have of it, might have served to
refresh and deceive the tediousness of our pilgrimage, and therefore the most
formidable calamities of this life are below all measures of comparison with
this hope of our calling, this riches of the glory of our inheritance, Ephesians.
iii. 16. The heaviest and most pressing of our afflictions are to that, but
like the small dust of the balance, Isa. xl. 15. so that it we should here stop
our inquisition, we have a sufficient resolution of the present question, and
must conclude, that God has given us an abundant counterpoise of all, we either
do or can suffer here.

6. If therefore th^^ be any so forlorn as to temporal^, that he can fetch
hence no evidence of God's fatherly care of him, yet this one consideration may
solve his doubts, and convince him that he is not abdicated by him. We read of
no gifts Abraham gave Isaac, yet to the sons of the concubines it is said he
did, Genesis xxv. 6. It had been a very fallacious inference, if Isaac should have
concluded himself neglected, because his far great por^rtion was but in
reversions. And it will the same in any of us, if we argue an unkindness from
any temporal wants who have the entail of an eternal inheritance. But surely
God does not leave himself without witness, Acts xiv. 17. even in secular
things; there is no man breathing but has some blessings of his left hand, as
well as his right, as I have already mentioned: and unless it be some few
prodigies of calamity, in whose punishment or patience God designs signally to
glorify himself, there are none who enjoy not greater comforts of life than
those they want, I mean such as are really greater, though perhaps, to their
prejudicate fancies they do not appear so. Thus in point of health, if a man be
disaffected in one part, yet all the rest of his body may be (and often is)
well; or if he have a complication, and have more than one disease, yet there
is no man that has all, or half so many as are incident to human bodies, so
that he is comparatively more healthy than sick. So again it is not very common
for a man to lose a limb, or sense; the generality of them keep them to their
last; and they who do, have in that an overbalance to most outward adversities;
and even they who are so unhappy to lost one, yet commonly keep the rest, at
least the major part: or if at any time any man is left a mere breathing trunk,
yet it is by such stupifying diseases as deaden the senses, or such mortal ones
as soon take them away; and so the remedy overtakes the malady. Besides it
pleases God very often to make compensation for the want of one member or
faculty by improving the use of another. We have seen feel supply all the
necessary uses of hands, to those that have had none; and it is a thing of
daily observation that men that are blind, have their intellects more vigorous
and active, by their abstractions from visible objects.

7. Thus also it is in the matter of wealth; he that is forced to get his bread
by the sweat of his brows, it is true he cannot have those delicacies wherewith
rich men abound, yet his labor helps him to a more poignant, more savoury sauce
than a whole college of epicures can compound. His hunger gives a higher gust
to his dry crust, than the surfeited stomach can find in the most costly, most
elaborate mixture; So verifying the observation of Solomon, The full soul
loatheth the honeycomb, but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet,
Prove. xxvii. 7. He cannot indeed stretch himself upon his bed of ivory, Amos
vi. 4. yet his sleeps are founder than those that can. The wiseman tells us,
and experience does so too, that the sleep of a laboring man is sweet, Eccles.
v. 12. He is not clothed gorgeously, has not the splendour of glittering
apparel, so neither has he the care of contriving it, the ^^ars of being
forestalled in a new invention, or any of those unmanly solicitudes which
attend that vanity. He has the proper gennine use of clothing, the preventing
shame and cold, and is happily determined to that which the wiser men of the
world have voluntarily chosen. To conclude, he has one advantage beyond all
these; his necessities rescue him from idleness, and all its consequent
temptations; which is so great a benefit, that if rich men be not their own
taskmasters, as his wants are his, if they do not provide themselves of
business, that one want of theirs is infinitely more deplorable than all his;
and he is not only happy comparatively with himself, in having better things
than he wants, but with them also.

8. If we come now to reputation and same, the account will be much the same,
he that is eminent in the world for some great achievement, is set up as an
object of every man's remark; when as his excellencies on one hand are visible,
so his faults and blemishes are on the other. And as human frailty makes it too
probable, these latter will be really more, so human envy makes it sure that
they shall be more precisely, more curiously observed, and more loudly
blazoned. So that upon the whole, a good quiet security, though it be not the
road to glory, yet is the likeliest fence against infamy. And indeed, he that
can keep up the repute of a sober integrity within his own private sphere, need
not envy the triumphant sallies of others, which often meet with a fatal turn
at the latter end of the day. But it will be said that even that more moderate
sort of reputation is not every man's portion, but that many lie under great
ignominy and scandal. I shall here ask whether these be just or unjust? If they
be just they belong not to our present subject, which relates only to those
inflictions which are the effects of God's immediate providence, not of our own
crimes: For I never doubted but that by those we may divest ourselves of any,
nay of all the good things God has designed us. But if the obloquy be unjust,
it is probable that it is taken up only by ill men, and that the good pass a more
equitable sentence; and then surely the attestation of a few such, is able to
outweigh a multitude of the others. And in this case a man may only find
patience but pleasure in reproaches. Socrates looked with trouble and jealousy
on himself when ill men commended him. saying, what ill have I done? and sure a
Christian has a farther reason to be pleased with their revilings, they being
his security against the w^ pronounced to those whom all men speak well of,
Luke vi. 26. But sometimes it happens, that even good men are seduced and
either by the artifices of the wicked, or their own too hasty credulity, give
credit to unjust reports. And this I confess is a sharp trial to the injured
person, yet even this cannot often be universal; there can scarce be any
innocence so forlorn but that there may be opportunities of clearing it to some
or other, and by them propagating it to more, and if the cloud ever come to be
dispersed, their same will appear with the brighter luster. But if none of this
happen, they have yet a certain and more blessed retreat, even an appeal to the
unerring Judge, who never beholds us with more approbation, that when we are
under the unjust condemnation of men. Indeed we have then a double tie upon
him, not only his justice but his pity is concerned in our cause. God
particularly owns himself as the refuge of the oppressed, and there is scarce a
sharper and more sensible oppression than this of calumny: Yet even this proves
an advantage, whilst it procures God's immediate patronage, makes us the
objects of his more peculiar care and compassion, who can make our
righteousness as clear as the light, Psalm. xxxvii. 6. if he see it fit; but if
in his wisdom he choose not that for us, it is comfort enough for (...) th^s we
have approved it to him. It was Elkanab's question to Hannah in her
disconsolation, Am not I better to thee than ten sods? 1 Samuel i. 8. And sure we
say the like of God's approbation, that it is better to us, I say not than ten,
but ten thousand encomiums of men. They very echo of it in the testimony of a
good conscience is an unspeakable comfort, and this voice sounds more audibly,
more sweetly, among the loudest, the hars^esh accusations of men. So that we
see even this assault too is not without its guard, and these waters of Mara^,
Exodus xv. 23. may be rendered not only wholesome, but pleasant.

I have now instanced in the three most general concerns of human life, the
body, goods, and fame, to which heads may be reduced most of the afflictions
incident to our outward state, as far as immediately concern ourselves. But
their is no man stands so single in the world, but has some relations or
friends, in which he thinks himself intererested, and many times those oblique
strokes which wound us through them, are as painful as the more direct; yet
here also God is ordinarily pleased to provide some allays, if we would but
take notice of them. He who has had one friend die, has ordinarily diverse
others surviving; or if he have not that, usually God raises him up others.
It Is true we cannot have a succession of fathers and mothers, yet we often have
of other friends that are no less helpful to us: And indeed there are scarce in
any thing more remarkable evidences of Providence, than in this particular. He
that is able out of stones to raise up children to Abraham, Matthew. iii. 9. does
many times by as unexpected a production supply friends to the desolate. But we
do sometimes lose our friends while they are living, they withdraw their
kindness which is the soul of friendship: And if this happen by our own
demerit, we can accuse neither God nor them for it* nor can we rationally
expect that God will provide supplies, when we wilfully despoil ourselves. But
when they are unkind without provocation, then is the season for his
interposition, who uses to take up those whom father and mother forsake, Psalm.
xxvii. 10. And we frequently see signal proofs of his care in exciting the
compassions of other friends and relatives, or perhaps of mere strangers. Nay
sometimes God makes the inhumanity of a man's relations, the occasion of his
advantage. Thus the barbarous malice of Joseph's brethren was the fist step to
his dominion over Egypt. And it is a common observation in families, that the
most discountenanced child often makes better proof, than the darling.

10. We are yet liable to a third affliction by the calamity of our friends,
which by the sympathy of kindness presses us no less (perhaps more) sensibly
than our own: But then it is to be considered, that theirs are capable of the
same allaying circumstances that ours are, and God has the same arts of
alleviating their burdens; so that we have the same arguments for acquiescence
in their sufferings that we have in our own, and shall do a more friendly
office in impressing those upon them, than in the most passionate adopting
their sorrows.

11. The last and greatest discomfort from friends, is that of that of their
own: And if ever we may be allowed that disconsolate strain of the Prophet,
Isa. xxii. 4. Look away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort
me; this seems to be the time: Yet even this valley of Achor is not without a
door of hope, Hos. ii. 15. A vicious person may be recalled, multitudes have
been; so that as long as God continues life, we ought no more to deposite our
hope than to quit our endeavor. Besides there are few that make this complaint
that have not something to balance, or at least to lighten it. I shall instance
in that relation which is the nearest and most tender, that of a parent. He
that has one bad child may have diverse good. If he have but one virtuous it is
a very great mercy, and it is another that he may be the better taught to value
it by the opposition of the contrary. But if any be so unhappy as to have many
children, and all to consume his eyes and grieve his heart. 2 Samuel ii. 33. it
may be a seasonable reflection for him to examine how far he has contributed to
it, either by Eli's fond indulgence, or by a remiss and careless education; or
which is worst of all, by his most impious example. If any, or all of those be
found the cause, he is not so much to seek for allays to his grief, as for
pardon of his sin: And when he has penitently retracted his own fault, he may
then have better ground of hope that God may reform those of his children. In
the mean time he may look on his own affliction in them as God's discipline on
him, and gather at least this comfort from it, that his heavenly Father has
more care of him, than he had of his, and does not leave him uncorrected.

12. Thus we see in all the concerns (which are the most common and important
of human life, and wherein the justest of our complaints are usually founded)
there is such a temperature and mixture, that the good does more than equal the
ill, and not only in the grosser bulk, when our whole state is weighed
together, but in every single branch of it; God having herein dealt with this
little world man, as he has done with the greater, wherein he is observed to
have furnished every country with specific remedies for their peculiar
diseases. I have only given these short hints by way of essay and pattern for
the Reader's contemplation, which when he shall have extended to all those
minute particulars wherein he is especially concerned, more curiously compared
his sufferings with his allays and comforts, I cannot doubt but he will own
himself an instance of the truth of the present thesis, and confess, that he
has much more cause of thankfulness than complaint.

13. This I say, supposing his afflictions to be of those more solid and
considerable sorts I have before mentioned. But how many are there who have few
or none of such, who seem to be seated in the land of Goshen, in a place exempt
from all the plagues that infect their neighbors? And those, one would think,
should give a ready vote to this conclusion, as having no temptation to resist
it; yet I doubt it is far otherwise, that such men are of all the most
unsatisfied. For though they have no crosses of God's imposing, they usually
create a multitude to themselves. And here we may say with David, It is better
to full into the hand of God, than into the hand of man. 2 Samuel xxiv. 14. It is
easier to bear the afflictions God sends, than those we make to ourselves. His
are limited both for quantity and quality, but our own are as boundless as
those extravagant desires from which they spring.

14. And this is the true cause why Contentment is so much a stranger to those
who have all the outward causes of it, they have not definite measure of their
desires; it is not the supply of all their real wants will serve their turn,
their appetites are precarious, and depend upon contingencies. They hunger not
because they are empty, but because others are full. Many a man could have
liked his own portion well enough, had he not seen another have something he
liked better. Nay even the most inconsiderable things acquire a value by being
another, when we despise much greater of our own. Ahab might well have
satisfied himself with the kingdom of Israel, had not Naboth's poor plot lain
in his eye. But so raving were his desires after it, that he disrelishes all
the pomps of a crown, yea the ordinary refreshment of nature, c^n cat no bread.
till he have that to furnish him with sallads, I Kings xxi. 2. And how many are
there now at this day whose clothes fit uneasy, if they see another have had
but the luck to be a little more ingeniously vain; whose meat is unsavory if
they have seen but a greater rarity, a newer cookery at another's table; in a
word, who make other peoples excesses the standard of their own felicities.

15. Nor are our appetites only excited thus by our outward objects, but
precipitated and hurried on by our inward lusts. The proud man so longs for
homage and adoration, that nothing can please him if that be wanting. Human can
find no gust in all the sensualities of the Persian court, because a poor
despicable Jew denies his obeisance, Esth. v. 13. The lustful so impatiently
pursues his impure designs, that any difficulty he meets in them, makes him
pine and languish like Amnon, who could no way recover his own health but by
violating his sister's honor, 2 Samuel xiii. 14. The revengeful labors under an
hydropic thirst till he have the blood of his enemy: All the liquor of
Absalom's sheep-sheering could not quench his, without the slaughter of his
brother, 2 Samuel xiii. 29. And thus every one of our passions keeps us upon the
rack till they have obtained their designs. Nay when they have, the very
emptiness of those acquisitions is a new torment, and puts us upon fresh
pursuits. Thus between the impetuousness of our desires, and the emptiness of
our enjoyments, we still disquiet ourselves in vain, Psalm. xxxix. 6. And whilst
we have such cruel taskmasters, it is not strange to find us groaning under
our burdens. If we will indulge all our vicious or foolish appetites, think our
lives bound up with them, and solicit the satisfaction of them with as
impatient a vehemence, as Rachel did for children, Gen, xxx. 4. Give me them or
I die; no wonder that we are always complaining of disappointments, since in
these the very success is a defeat, and is but the exchanging the pain of a
craving ravenous stomach, for that of a cloyed and nauseated. Indeed men of
this temper condemn themselves to a perpetual restlessness, they are like
phantastic mutineers, who when their superiors send them blanks to write their
own conditions, know not what will please them: And even Omnipotence itself
cannot satisfy these till it have new molded them, and reduced their desires
to a certainty.

16. But in the mean time how unjustly do they accuse God of illiberality,
because every thing answers not their humor? He has made them reasonable
creatures, and has provided them satisfactions proportionable to their nature;
but if they will have wild irrational expectations, neither his wisdom, nor his
goodness is concerned to satisfy those. His supplies are real and solid, and
therefore have no correspondence to imaginary wants. If we will create such to
ourselves, why do we not create an imaginary satisfaction to them? It were the
merrier frenzy of the two, to be like the mad Athenian, that thought all the
ships that came into the harbor his own: And it were better, Ixion like, to
have our arms filled with a cloud, than to have them perpetually beating our
own breasts, and be still tormenting ourselves with insatiable desires. Yet
this is the state to which men voluntarily subject themselves, and then quarrel
at God because they will not let themselves be happy. But sure their very
complaints justify God, and argue that he has dealt very kindly with them, and
afforded them all the necessary accommodations of life: For did they want them,
they would not be so sensible of the want of the other. He that is at perfect
ease may feel with some vexation the biting of flea or gnat, which would not be
at all observable if he were upon the rack. And should God change the scene,
and make these nice people feel the destitution of necessaries; all these
regrets about superfluities would be overwhelmed. In the mean time how
deplorable a thing is it, that we are still the poorer for God's bounty, that
those to whom he has opened his hand widest, should open their mouth so too, in
outcries and murmurs? For I think I may say, that generally, those that are ^he
farthest removed from want, are so from content too; they take no notice of all
the real substantial blessings they enjoy, leave these (like the ninety-nine
sheep in the wilderness) forgotten and neglected, to go in quest after some
fugitive satisfaction, which like a shadow flies still faster in proportion to
their pursuit.

17. And now would God they could be recalled from this unprofitable chase, and
instead of the horseleaches note, Give, give, Prove. xxx. 14. take up that of
the Psalmist, What shall I render to the Lord for all the benefits he has done
unto me? Psalm. cxvi. 12. Let them count how many valuable or rather inestimable
things they have received from his mercy, and then confront them with those
corrections they have found from his justice; and if they do this impartially,
I doubt not they will find wherewithal to check their highest mutinies; and
will join with me in confessing, that their good things abundantly outweigh
their ill.

18. If now we carry on the comparison to the last circumstance, and consider
the constancy, we shall find as wide as difference. Let us take the Psalmist's
testimony, and there will appear a very distant date of his mercies and
punishments. His mercies endure for ever, Psalm. cxxxvi. 1. whereas his wrath
endures but the twinkling of an eye, Psalm. xxx. 5. And accordingly God owns his
acts of severity as his strange work, Isr. xxvii. 21. that which he resorts to
only upon special emergencies; but this mercies are renewed every morning, Lam.
iii. 23. and doubtless we may all upon trial affirm the ^ame. There are many of
the most necessary comforts of life which do not only sometimes visit us as
guests, but dwell with us as inmates and domestics. How many are there who have
lived in a perpetual affluence from their cradles to their graves, have never
known what it is to want? And though the goods of fortune are perhaps less
constant to some, yet the refreshments of nature are usually so to all. We eat
and drink, we sleep, we recreate, we converse in a continued circle, and go our
round as constantly as the sun does. Or if God does sometimes a little
interrupt us in it, put some short restraint upon our refreshments, yet that
comparatively to the time we enjoy them, is but proportionable to the stop he
has sometimes made of the son, Josh. x. 13, 2 Kings xx. 9. or of the sea, Exodus
xiv. 21. which as they were no subversions to the course of nature, so neither
are those short pauses he sometimes makes, a repeal of those fixed and
customary benefits his providence usually allots us. But who is there can say
that any one of his afflictions has been of equal continuance, (...) has
pressed him with so few intermissions? Perhaps be may have missed some few
nights sleep; but what is that to a twelve-month's, or perhaps a whole life's
enjoying it? It is possible his stomach and his meat have not always been ready
together; but how much oftener have they met to his delight and generally those
things that are most useful, are but rarely interrupted. Nay, to a great many
even the delicacies of life are no less constant, and their luxuries are as
daily as their bread: whereas unless their vices or their fancies create
uneasinesses to them, those that come immediately from God's hand, make long
intermissions and short stays. Yet for all this they that should measure by the
incessantness of men's complaints, would judge that the scene was quite
reversed, and that our good things are as Job speaks, swifter than a weaver's
shuttle, Job vii. 6. whilst our ill, like Ge^azy's leprosy ^^eaus inseparably
to (...) 2 Kings v. 27.

19. The truth is, we will not ourselves enjoy those intervals God allows us,
but when a calamity does retire, we will still keep it in fiction and
imagination; revolve it in our minds, and because it is possible it may return,
look upon it as not gone. Like anguish, patients, we count ourselves sick on
our (...) day, because we expect a fit the next. A strange stupid folly thus to
court vexation, and be miserable in chimera. Does any man, or indeed any beast,
desire to keep a distasteful relish in his mouth, to chew the cud upon gall and
wormwood? Yet certainly there a are multitude of people whose live are
embittered to them merely by these fantastic imaginary sufferings. Nor do we
only fright ourselves with images and ideas of past calamities, but we dress up
new bugbears and false terrors, are poetic and aerial in our inventions, and
lay romantic scenes of distresses. This is a thing very incident to jealous
natures, who are always raising alarms to themselves. A suspicious man looks on
every body with dread. One man he fears has designs upon his fortune, another
on his reputation: perhaps a third upon his life; whilst in the mean time, the
only ill design against him is managed by himself; his own causeless fears and
jealousies, which put him in a state of hostility with all the world, and do
often betray him to the very things he groundlesly suspected. For it is not
seldom seen than men have incurred real mischiefs by a fond solicitude of
avoiding imaginary ones. I do not question but this is a state calamitous
enough, and shall acknowledge it very likely that such persons shall have
little or no truce from their troubles, who have such an unexhausted spring
within themselves; yet we may say to them as the Prophet did to the house of
Jacob, Is the spirit of the Lord straightened? are these his doings? Micah ii.
7. Such men must not cry out that God's hand lies heavy upon them, but their
own; and so can be no impeachment to the truth of our observation, that God's
(...) are of a longer duration, keep a more fixed steady course than his
punishments. The result of all is, that the generality of mankind have good
(things even as to temporals) which do in the three respects forementioned
exceed the ill. I mean the true and real ills which God sends, though not those
fanciful ones they raise to themselves.

20. And now why should it not appear a reasonable proposition that men should
entertain themselves with the pleasanter parts of God^^ dispensations to them,
and not always pore upon the harsher; especially since the former are so much a
fairer object and perpetually in their eye, why should we look on the more
sadning and distressing spectacles of human frailty or misfortune, through all
the magnifying optics our fancies can supply, and perversely turn away our eyes
from the chearfuller? Yet this God knows is too much the case with the most of
us, How nicely and critically do we observe every little adverse accident of
our lives? When alas! a whole current of prosperity glides by without our
notice. Like little children our fingers are never off the sore place, till we
have picked every light scratch into an ulcer. Hay, like the lewder sort of
beggars, we make artificial sores to give us a pretense of complaint. And can
we then expect God should concern himself in the cure? Indeed in the course of
his ordinary providence there is no cure for such people, unless it be by
revulsion, the making them feel the smart of some very great and pressing
affliction. They therefore put themselves under an unhappy dilemma, either to
continue their own tormentors, or to endure the severest course of God's
discipline. It Is true the last is the most eligible, but I am sure the best way
is to prevent both by a just and grateful sense of God's mercies, which will be
yet further illustrated, if we compare them with our own demerits.

When with our sufferings we compare
The enjoyments we possess,
Great God! how great thy mercies are,
Thy justice we confess.
SECT. V.
Of our Demerit toward God.
(...) IT is the common fault of our nature that we are very apt to be partial
to ourselves, and to square our expectations more by that wish, than by what we
deserve. Something of this is visible in our dealings with men. We often look to
reap where we have not sowed. Matthew. xxv. 24. expect benefits where we do none:
Yet in civil transactions there are still remaining such footsteps of natural
justice, that we are not universally so unreasonable; all traffic and commerce
subsisting upon the principle of equal retribution, giving one good thing for
another equivalent; so that no man expects to buy corn with chaff, or gold with
dross. But in our dealings with God, we put off even this common equity; are
vast in our expectations, but penurious and base in our returns; and as if God
were our steward not our Lord, we require of him with a confidence proper only
to those who ask their own; whilst in the interim, what we offer to him is with
such a disdainful slightness, as if we meant it rather an alms than an homage.

2. God indeed is so munificent, that he prevents us with his blessings, Psalm.
xxi. 3. gives us many things before we ask; had he not done so we could not
have been so much as in a capacity of asking. But though the first and
fundamental mercies are absolute and free, yet the subsequent are conditional*
And accordingly we find in scripture, (...) makes no promise either concern^^
his life or a better, but on condition of obedience. The Jews who had much
larger proposals of temporal happiness than Christians have, yet never had them
upon other terms. God expressly articled for the performance of his commands,
and made all their enjoyments forfeitable upon the failure, as we may see at
large in the book of Deuteronomy. And under the Gospel, St. Paul appropriates
the promises as well of this life as of that to come unto godliness, 1 Timothy iv.
8. It will therefore be a material inquiry for every man, whether he have kept
his title entire, and have not by breach of the condition forfeited his claim
even to the most common ordinary blessings; for if he have, common reason will
tell him he can challenge none; and that the utmost he can hope for, must be
only upon a new score of unmerited favor.

3. And here certainly every mouth must be stopped, and all the world become
guilty before God, Romans iii. 19. For alas! who is there can say his obedience
has been in any degree proportionable to his obligation? It is manifest we have
all received abundantly from God's hand, but what has he had from ours? I may
challenge the best man, to cast up the account of his best day, and tell me
whether his receivings have not infinitely exceeded his disbursements; whether
for any one good thing he has done, he has not received many. Nor is the
disparity only in number, but much more in value. God's works are perfect, all
he does for us, like the first six days productions, all are very good, Genesis i.
but alas! our very righteousness is as filthy rags, Isa. lxiv. 6. We offer him
the blind and the lame, Mal. i. 8. a few yawning drowsy prayers perhaps,
wherein he has the least share; the fuller current of our thoughts, running
toward our secular or sinful concerns. We drop it may be a scanty alms,
wherein it is odds our vainglory scrambles for a share with him, if it do not
wholly ingross it. We sit an hour at a sermon, but it is rather to hear the wit
or eloquence of the preacher, than the word of God. Like the duller sort of
animals, we like well to have our itching ears scratched, but grow sturdy and
restive when we should do what we are there taught. In a word, all our services
at the best are miserable, maimed and imperfect; and too often corrupt and
unfound. So that God may well upbraid us as he did Israel, Offer it new to thy
governor, will he be pleased with it? Mal. i. 8. These very iniquities of our
holy things, are enough to defeat all our pretense to any good from God's hand.
Yet God knows this is much the best side of us: It is not every one that can
make so fair an appearance as this amounts to. With many, there is no place to
complain of the blemishes of their sacrifices, for they offer none; of whom we
may say in the words of the Psalmist, God is not in all their thoughts, Psalm.
x. 4. I fear there want not those who drive away the day, the week, nay the
year, without remembering in whose hand their time is, Psalm. xxxi. 16. or paying
him any solemn tribute of it; who enjoy the services of all inferior creatures,
without considering that theirs are more due to the supreme Lord: In a word,
who live as if they were absolutely independent; had their existence purely
from themselves, and had no Creator to whom they owed their being, or any
consequent duty. And sure men who thus discard themselves from God's family,
have very little reason to expect the provisions of it: Yet even such as these
have the impudence to complain, if any things be wanting to their needs (shall
I say) or to their lusts; can ravingly profane God's name in their
impatiencies, which they know not how to use in their prayers; as if the Deity
were considerable in no other notion, than that of their caterer or steward.

4. If now we seriously reflect, what can be more admirable than that infinite
patience of God, who notwithstanding the miserable infirmities of the pious,
and the lewd contempt of the impious, still goes on resolutely in his bounty,
and continues to all mankind some, and to some all his temporal blessings? He
has no obligation of justice to do so, for it is no part of his compact; he has
none of gratitude, for he is perpetually affronted and disobliged. Surely we
may well say with David, Is this after the manner of men, O Lord, I Chron.
xvii. 17. Can the highest human indulgence bear any proportion with this divine
clemency? No certainly, no finite patience but would be exhausted with the
thousandth part of our provocations.

5. But is not our dealing too as little after the manner of men; I mean of
reasonable creatures? For us who have forfeited our right to all, and yet by
mere favor are still kept in the possession of many great blessings; for us to
grow mutinous, because there is perhaps something more trifling which is denied
us, is such a stupid ingratitude, as one would think impossible to human
nature. Should a tenant with us have at once forfeited his lease, and
maliciously affronted his landlord, he would sure think himself very gently
dealt with, if he were suffered to enjoy but a part of his first estate; but we
should think him not only insolent, but mad, who when the whole were left him,
should quarrel and clamor if he might not have his cottage adorned with marble
floors, and gilded roofs. Yet at this wild rate we behave ourselves to our
great Landlord, grow pettish and angry if we have not every thing we can fancy,
though we enjoy many more useful, merely by his indulgence. And can there be
any thing imagined more unreasonable? Let us therefore, if not for piety, yet
at least to justify our claim to rationality, be more ingenuous; let us not
consult only with our fond appetites, and be thus perpetually soliciting this
satisfaction; but rather reflect on what tenure we hold what we already have,
even that of superabundant mercy; and fear, least like insolent beggars, by the
impudence of our demands, we divert even that charity which was designed us. In
short, let every man, when he computes what he wants of his desires, reckon as
exactly how much he is short of his duty; and when he has duly pondered both,
he will think it a very gentle composition to have the one unsupplied, so he
may have the other remitted: and will see cause contentedly to sit down and say
with honest Mephibosheth, What right have I to cry any more unto the king? 2 Samuel xix. 28. But if it be thus with us upon the mere score of our
imperfections or omissions, what an obnoxious state do our innumerable actual
sins put us in? If the spots of our sacrifices are provoking, what are our
sacrileges and bold profanations? If those who neglect or forget God are listed
among his enemies, what are those who avowedly defy him? Indeed he who soberly
considers the world, and sees how daringly the divine Majesty is daily
affronted, cannot but wonder that the perversions of our manners, those
prodigies in morality, should not be answered with as great prodigies in
calamity too; that we should either have other ruin than that of Sodom, or the
earth serve us for any other purpose than to be, as it was to Korah, Numb. xvi.
32. our living sepulcher.

6. Nor is this forbearance of God observable only toward the mass and
collective body of mankind, but to every man in particular. Who is there that
if he ransack his conscience, shall not find guilts enough to justify God in
the utmost severities toward him? So that how much soever his punishments are
short of that, so much he evidently owes to the ^enity and compassion of God.
And who is there that suffers in this world the utmost that God can inflict? We
have a great many suffering capacities, and if those were all filled up to the
height, our condition would scarce differ from that of the damned in any thing
but duration. But God is more merciful, and never inflicts at that rate on us
here. Every man's experience can tell him, that God discharges not his whole
quiver at once upon him, but exempts him in many more particulars than he
afflicts him; and yet the same experience will probably tell most of us, that
we are not so modest in our assaults upon God; we attack him in all his
concerns (as far as our feeble malice can reach) in his sovereignty, in his
honor, in his relatives, nay sometimes in his very essence and being. And as
they are universal in respect of him, so also in regard of ourselves: we engage
all our powers in this war, do not only yield (as the Apostle speaks) our
members instruments of unrighteousness, Romans vi. 19. but we press them upon the
service of sensual and vile lusts, even beyond our native propensions. Nor are
only the members of our body, but the faculties of our souls thus employed; our
understandings are busied first in contriving sins, and then excuses and
disguises for them; our wills are yet more sturdy rebels, and when the
understanding is beat out of all its outworks, yet sullenly keep their hold in
spite of all conviction; and our affections madly rush on like the horse into
the battle, Jer. viii. 6. deterred by nothing of danger, so there be but sin
enough in the attempt.

7. And now with what face can people that thus pursue an hostility, expect
that it should not be returned to them? Does any man denounce war, and yet
expect from his adversary all the caresses, the obligements of friendship?
Self-defence will prompt even the meekest nature to despoil his enemy at least
of those things which he uses, to his annoyance; and if God should give way
even to that lowest degree of anger, where or what were we? For since we employ
our whole selves against him, nothing but destruction can avert our injuries.
But it is happy for us we have to do with one who cannot fear us, who knows the
impotence of our wild attempts, and so allays his resentment of our insolence,
with his pity of our follies. Were it not for this, we should not be rest in a
possibility so often to iterate our provocations; every wicked imagination and
black design, would be at once defeated and punished by infatuation and frenzy:
every blasphemous atheistical speech would wither the tongue, like that arm of
Jeroboam which he stretched against the prophet, 1 Kings xiii. 4. and every
impious act would, like the prohibited retrospect of Let Us wife, fix us
perpetual monuments of divine vengeance.

8. And then how much do we owe to the mercy and commiseration of our God, that
he suffers not his whole displeasure to arise, Psalm. lxxviii. 38. that he
abates any thing of that just severity he might use toward us? He that is
condemned to the gallows, would think it a mercy to escape with any inferior
penalty. Why have we then such mean thoughts of God's clemency, when he
descends to such low compositions with us? corrects us so lightly as if 'twere
only matter of ceremony and punctilio, the regard of his honor, rather than
the execution of his wrath. For alas let him among us that is the most
innocent, and undeservedly afflicted, (...) up his sins and sufferings, and he
will see a vast inequality: and (had he not other grounds of assurance) would
be almost tempted to think those were not the provoking causes, they are so
unproportionably answered. He sins in innumerable instances, and is punished in
few; he sins habitually and perpetually, and suffers rarely and seldom; nay
perhaps he has sometimes sinned with greediness, and yet God has punished with
regret and reluctance. How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? Hos. xi. 8. And
when all the disparities are considered, we must certainly join heartily in
Ezra's confession, Thou, O God, has punished tis' less than our iniquities
deserve, Ezra ix. 13.

9. Nay besides all our antecedent, we have after guilts no less provoking, I
mean our ungracious repinings at the light chastisements of our former sins,
our outcries upon every little uneasiness, which may justly cause God to turn
our whips into scorpions; and according as he threatened Israel, Lev. xxvi. 18.
to punish us yet seven times more. And yet even this does not immediately
exasperate him. The ^ews were an instance how long he could hear with a
murmuring generation; but certainly we of this nation are a greater; Yet let us
not be high minded but fear, Romans xi. 20. for we see at last the doom fell
heavy though it was protracted; a succession of miraculous judgments pursued
those murmurers, so that not one of them entered Canaan. And it is very
observable, that whereas to others sins God's denunciations are in scripture
conditional and reversible; this was absolute and bound with an oath, He swear
in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest, Psalm. xcv. 11. And yet
if we compare the hardships of the Israelites in the wilderness with most of
our sufferings, we shall be forced to confess our mutinies have less
temptation, and consequently less excuse; from whence it is very reasonable to
infer, as the greatness of our danger if we persist, so the greatness of God's
long-suffering toward us, who yet allows us space to reform; and sure new
complaints found very ill from us, who are liable to so severe an account for
our old ones. I fear the most resigned persons of us will upon recollection
find, they have upon one occasion of other outvied the numbers of the
Israelites' murmurs, therefore unless we will emulate them in their plagues,
let us fear to add one more, left that make up the fatal sum, and render our
destruction irrevocable.

10. Upon all these considerations it appears how little reason any of us have
to repine at our heaviest pressures. But there is yet farther circumstance to
be adverted to, and is too applicable to many of us, that is, that out sins are
not only the constant meritorious cause of our sufferings, but they are also
very often the instrumental cause also; and produce them not only by way of
retaliation from God, but by a natural efficacy. Solomon tells us, he that
loves pleasure. shall be a poor man, and that a whorish woman shall bring a man
to a piece of bread, Prove. vi. 26. that he that sits long at the wine, shall
have redness of eyes, Chap. xxiii. 29, 30. that the slothful soul shall suffer
hunger, Chap. xix. 15. and all these not by immediate supernatural infliction
from God, but as the proper genuine effects of those respective vices. Indeed
God in his original establishment of things, has made so close a connection
between sin and punishment, that he is not often put to exert his power in any
extraordinary way, but may trust us to be our own beadles, our own backslidings
reprove us, Jer. ii. 19. and our iniquities are of themselves enough to become
our ruin.

11. It may therefore be a seasonable question for every man to put to himself,
whether the troubles he labors under be not of this sort; whether the poverty
he complains of, be not the effect of his riot and (...), his sloth and
negligence? whether when he cries out that his comeliness is turned into
corruption, Dan. x. 8. he may not answer himself, that they are his visits to
the harlot's house, which have thus made rottenness enter into his bones, Hab.
iii. 16. whether when he is beset with contentions, and has wounds without
cause, he has not ^arried long at the wine; when he has lost a friend, whether
he has not by some treacherous wound, Eccl. xxii. 22. forced him to depart: or
when he lives under infamy, whether it be not only the echo of his own
scandalous crimes. If he find it thus with him, certainly his mouth is s^opt,
and he cannot without the most disingenuine impudence complain of any but
himself. He could not be ignorant that such effects did naturally attend such
causes, and therefore if he would take the one, he must take the other also. No
man sure can be so mad, as to think God should work miracles (disunite those
things which nature has conjoined) only that he may sin at ease, and have none
of the consequent smart. We read indeed God divided the sea, but it was to make
the way for the ransomed of the Lord to pass over, Isa. ll. those who were his
own people, and went, in at his command; but when they were secured, we find
the waters immediately returned to their channel, and overwhelmed the
Egyptians, who ventured without the same warrant. And sure the case is alike
here, when any man can produce God's mandate to run into all excess of riot; to
desecrate the temple of the Holy Ghost, and make his body member of an harlot,1
Cor. vi. 15. In a word, when God bids him do any of those things, which God and
good men a^hor, then and not before he may hope he may ^ever such (...) from
their native penal effects: for (...) then (how profuse soever some legendary
stories represent him) he will certainly never so bestow his miracles.

But I fear upon scrutiny there will appear a yet farther circumstance upon
which to arraign our mutinies; for though it be unreasonable enough to charge
God with the ill effect of our own leudness, yet it is a higher step to murmur
because we have not materials to be wicked enough. And this I fear is the case
with too many of us, who though they are not so despoiled by their sins, but
that they can keep up their round of vicious pleasures, yet are discontented
because they think some others have them more exquisite, think their vices are
not gentle enough, unless they be very expensive, and are covetous only that
they may be more luxurious. These are such as St. James speaks of, who ask
amiss, that they ^ay consume if upon their lusts, Jam. iv. ^. and sure to be
mutinous on this account is one of the highest pieces of frenzy. Would any man
in his wits tell another he will cut his throat, and then expect he should
furnish him with a knife for it? And yet to this amount our murmurs against
God, for his not giving us those things wherewith we only design to wage war
with him. For surely if the discontents of mankind were closely inspected, I
doubt a great many would be found of this kind. It concerns the render
therefore, to make the inquisition in his own breast, both in this and all the
former particulars, and I doubt not, if he do it with any ingenuity and
uprightness, he will be abundantly convinced that for his few mites of
obedience he pays to God, he receives talents of mercies (even temporal) from
him: And that on the other side, that God as much underpays his s^ns, as he
overpays his services: By which God does sufficiently attest how little he
delights i^ our affliction; how gladly he takes any light occasion of caressing
and cherishing, and overskips those of punishing us. Which sure ought to make
us convert all our displeasures against our sins, which extort those acts of
severity from him, to which his nature is most averse. And here indeed our
resentments cannot be too sharp, but toward God our fittest address will be in
the penitential form of the Prophet Daniel, O Lord, to us belongs confusion
of face, but to the Lord our God belong mercies and forgiveness, though we have
rebelled against him, Dan. ix. 8, 9. And as his justice is to be revered in his
inflictions, so is his wisdom also, in so disposing of events to particular
persons as may best consist with the universal economy and management of the
world, the consideration whereof is the design of the next section.

When our demerits we compare
With God's forgiving grace,
No sufferings woe ever can hear
For complaint to have place.
When our great failings we compare
With God's forbearing love,
Our sufferings then will light appear,
As they come from above.
SECT. VI.
Of God's general Providence.
WHEN God made the universe, he intended not only to glorify himself in one
transient act of his power, and then leave this great and wonderful production
of his, as the ostrich her eggs in the wilderness, Lam. iv. 3. but having drawn
it out of its first chaos, he secured it from returning thither again, by
establishing as a due symmetry of parts, so also a regular order of motion:
Hence it is that the heavens have their constant revolutions, the earth its
succession of determinate seasons, animals their alternate course of generation
and corruption; and by this wise economy, the world after so many thousand
years, seems still in its spring and first beauty. But it had been in vain to
have thus secured the defection of the creatures, if man for whose sake they
were made had been excluded from this care. His faculty of reason would have
made him but the more fatal instrument of confusion, and taught him the more
compendious ways of disturbing the world. Job compares him to the wild asses
colt, Job xi. 12. which takes its range without adverting to any thing of the
common good. God has therefore doubly hedged in this unruly creature, made a
fence of laws about him (both natural and positive) and besides has taken him
into the common circle of his providence, so that he, as well as the rest of
the creation, has his particular station assigned him; and that not only in
reference to other creatures, but himself; has put a difference between one man
and another, ordained several ranks and classes of men, and endowed them with
special and appropriate qualifications for those: stations wherein he has set
them.

This, as it is a work of infinite wisdom in God, so it is of unspeakable
advantage to men. Without this regular disposure, the world would have been in
the same confusion which we read of in the host of the M^^^ianlles, every man's
sword against his fellow. Judge. vii. 22. Nothing but force could determine who
should do^ or enjoy any thing; and even that decision also would have been
repealable by a greater forces: So that we have all reason to confess the
utility of that order God has set among men; and even he that bears the lowest
and most despicable place (...), is certainly infinitely more happy by
contributing to that general harmony than he could be in any state of discord.

Were this now well considered, methinks it should silence all our complaints,
and men should not be so vehemently concerned in what part of the structure it
pleases the great Architect to put them; for every man is to look on himself
only as a small parcel of those materials which God is to put into form. Every
stone is not fit for the corner, not every little rafter for the main beam: The
wisdom of the Master Builder is alone to determine that. And sure there cannot
be a more vile contempt of the divine wisdom than to dispute his choice. Had
God wisdom enough to contrive this vast and beautiful fabric, and may he not be
trusted with one of us poor worms? Did he by his wisdom make the heavens, and
by his understanding stretch out the clouds; Prove. iii. 19. and shall he not
know where to place a little lump of figured earth? This is certainly the most
absurd distrust imaginable, and yet this is really the true meaning of our
repining at the condition he has placed us in.

The truth is, we are so full of ourselves, that we can see nothing beyond it:
Every man expects God should place him where he has a mind to be, though by it
he discompose the whole scheme of his providence. But though we are are so
senselessly partial, yet God is not so: He that comprehends at once that whole
concern of mankind, applies himself to the accommodating those, not the
humouring any particular person. He that has made the great and the small, and
cares for all alike, Wisd. vi. 7. He is the common Father of mankind, and
disposes things for the public advantage of this great family, and it is not
all the impatient cravings of a froward child that shall make him recede from
his designed method. We are apt enough, I am sure, to tax it not only as a
weakness, but injustice too in a prince, when he indulges any thing to a
private favorite to the public disadvantage; yet so unequal are we, that we
murmur at God for not doing that which we murmur at men for doing.

Besides a man is to consider, that other men have the same appetites with
himself. If he dislike an inferior state, why should he not think others do so
too? and then as the wise man speaks, Whose voice shall the Lord hear? Ecclus.
xxxiv. 24. It is sure great insolence in me to expect that God should be more
concerned to humor me, than those multitudes of others who have the same
desires. And the more impatient my longings are, the l^ss in reason should be
my hopes; for mutiny is no such endearing quality as to render any man a
darling to God. But if all men should have equal satisfactions, we should
puzzle even Omnipotence itself. Every man would be above and superior, yet
those are comparative terms; and if no man were below, no man could be above.
So in wealth, most men desire more, but every man does at least desire to keep
what he has; how then shall one part of the world be supplied without the
diminution of the other, unless there should be as miraculous a multiplication
of treasure for a man's avarice, as there was of loaves for their hunger,
Matthew. xvi. 9. It was a good answer which the ambassadors of an oppressed
province made to Anthony, If, O emperor, thou will have double taxes from us,
thou must help us to double springs and harvests. And sure God must be at the
expense of a new creation, make us a double world, if he should oblige himself
to satisfy all the unreasonable appetites of men: And if he satisfy not all,
why should any particular person look that his alone should be indulged to him?

6. Yet as unreasonable at it is, the most of us do betray such a persuasion.
No man is discontented that there are lower, as well as higher degrees in the
world, that there are poor as well as rich, but all sensible men assent to the
fitness of it; yet if themselves happen to be set in the lower form, they
exclaim as if the whole order of the world were subverted; which is a palpable
indication that they think that Providence which governs others should serve
them, and distribute to them not what it, but themselves think good. This
immoderate self-love is the spring and root of most of our complaints, makes us
such unequal judges in our own concerns, and prompts us to put in caveats and
exceptions on our own behalf, as David did on his son's, See that thou hurt not
the young man Absalom, 2 Samuel xviii. 5. as if God were to manage the government
of the world with a particular regard to our liking, and were like the angels
at Sodom, Genesis xix. 22. to do nothing till we had got into Zoar, had all our
demands secured to us.

It would indeed astonish a considering man to see, that although the concerns
of men are all disposed by an unerring Wisdom, and acknowledged by themselves
to be so, yet that scarce any man is pleased. The truth is, we have generally
in us the worser part of the Leveler's principle, and tho we can very
contentedly behold multitudes below us, yet are impatient to see any above us;
not only the foot (to use the Apostle's simile) complains that it is not the
hand, but the ear because it is not the eye, 1 Cor. xii. 15, 16. Not only the
lowermost, but the higher ranks of men are uneasy, if there be any one step
above them. Nay so importunate is this aspiring humor, that we see men are
forced to seed it, though but with air and shadows. He that cannot make any
real advance in his quality, will yet do it in effigies, in all little gayeties
and pageantries of it. Every degree in these respects not only emulates, but
imitates its superior, till at last by that impatience of their proper distance
they make it greater, and sink even below their first state by their ridiculous
profusion. Indeed the world seems to be so overrun with this vanity, that
there is little visible distinction of the degrees, and one had need go to the
herald's office to know men's qualities, for neither their habit nor equipage
do nowadays inform us with any certainty.

But by all this it appears, that men look on themselves only as single
persons, without reference to the community whereof they are members. For did
they consider that, they would endeavor rather to become the places wherein
they were set, by doing the duties belonging to them, than be perpetually
projecting for a change. A tree that is every year transplanted, will never
bear fruit, and a mind that is always hurried from its proper station, will
scarce ever do good in any. This is excellently expressed to us by Solomon, As
a bird that wandereth from his nest, so is a man that wandereth from his place,
Prove. xxvii. 8. It Is easy to divine the fate of those young ones from whom the
dam wanders, and it is easy to guess how the duties of that place will be
performed, whose owner is always upon the wing, and making toward another. I
wish we had not too costly experiments both in church and state, of the truth
of this observation. Alas! we forget that we are all servants to the same
Master, and that he is to appoint in what office we shall serve him. How should
we like it in any of our own families, to have an inferior officer leave his
work undone, because he has more mind to be a superior officer? Yet this
insolence we every day repeat toward God, sullenly dispute his order, and
unless we may choose our own employments, will do nothing.

It is evident, this perverse temper of mankind breeds a great deal of mischief
and disturbance in the world, but would breed arrant confusion and subversion,
if it were suffered to have its full range. If God permit but one ambitious
spirit to break loose in an age, as the instrument of his wrath, what
destruction does it often times make? How does it cause the whole earth to
tremble, and shake kingdoms, as is said of Nebuchadnezzar, Isa. xiv. 16. and
may be said of many others of those wholesale robbers who have dignified the
trade? But if every aspiring humor should be as prosperous, where would it
find fuel to maintain the flame? No doubt every age produces men of as
unbounded desires as Alexander or Caesar, but God gives them not the same
opportunity to trouble the world. And accordingly in the more petty ambitions
of private men he often orders it so, that those soaring minds can find no
benign gale to help there mounting. He that sets bounds to the sea, saying
Hitherto shall thou come and no farther; and though the waves thereof toss
themselves, yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they not pass
over. Jer. v. 22. does also depress the swelling pride of men, hangs clogs and
weights upon them, that they cannot rise to their affected height. For though we
are all willing to forget it, yet God remembers that he is the Ruler of the
universe, and will assort his dominion. The subtilest contrivance cannot
circumvent him, the most daring pretender cannot wrest any thing out of his
hand; the Lord will still be king, be the people never so impo^^nt, Psalm. xcix.
1. It will therefore sure be as well our prudence as our duty, to be still and
know that he is God, Psalm. xlvi. 10. with an humble forsaking of our own wills,
acquiesce in his, and not by ineffective strugglings provoke, whom we are sure
never to subdue. We may, like unmanaged horses, foam and fret, but still God
has the bridle in our jaws, and we cannot advance a step further than he
permits us. Why should we then create torment to ourselves by our repinings,
which only sets us further from our aims. It is God's declared method to exalt
the lowly, and it is observable in the two first kings of Israel, who were of
God's immediate election, that he surprised them with that dignity, when they
were about mean and humble employments, the one searching his father's asses,
the other keeping his father's sheep: And would men honestly and diligently
exercise themselves in the business of their proper calling, they might perhaps
find it a more direct road to advancement, than all the sinister arts by which
ambitious men endeavor to climb. Solomon sets it down as an example, See thou
a man diligent in his business, he shall s^ond before kings, he shall not stand
before mean men, Prove. xxii. 29. But whether it happen to have that effect or
no, it will have a better, for it will sweaten his present condition, divert
his mind from mutinous reflections on other men's height, and his own
lowliness; for it is commonly men who mind not their work that are at so much
leisure to gaze. He that carefully plies his own business, will have his
thoughts more concentrated; and doubtless it is no small happiness to have them
so, for it is their gadding too much abroad, looking on other men's conditions
that sends them back (like Dinah deflowered) to put all in all in an uproar at
home. The son of Syrach speaks with transportation of the state even of him
that labors and is content, and calls it a sweet life, Ecclus. xl. 18. And
certainly it is infinitely more so than that of the greatest Prince, whose mind
swells beyond his territories.

Upon all these considerations, it cannot but appear very reasonable, that we
should leave God to govern the world; not be putting in like the sons of
Zebedee, for the highest seats, but continually rest ourselves where he has
placed us, till his Providence (not our own designs) advance us. We can no
where be so obscure as to be hid from his eyes, who as he valued the widow's
(...) above the great oblations of the rich, so he will no less graciously
accept the humble endeavors of the mean, than the more eminent services of the
mighty; himself having declared, That he accepts, according to what a man path,
and not according to what he has not, 2 Cor. viii. 12. So that in what rank
soever a man is set, he has still the opportunity of approving himself to God;
and though in the eye of the world he be a vessel of dishonor, yet in the day
that God comes to make up his jewels, Mal. iii. 17. there will be another
estimate made of him who regularly moves in his own sphere. And sure he that
sits down in this acquiescence is a happier man, than he that enjoys the
greatest worldly splendour; but infinitely more so than he who impatiently
covets but cannot attain them: For such a man puts himself upon a perpetual
rack, keeps his appetites at the utmost stretch, and yet has nothing wherewith
to satisfy them. Let therefore our ease, if not our duty prompt us to
acquiescence, and a ready submission to God's disposals; to which we have yet a
further inducement from that distinct care he has over every man's peculiar,
by which he proportions to him what is really best for him; of which we are
further to consider in the next Section.

The Lord is God, and he alone
With universal sway commands;
His Power let every Creature own,
Submitting all Things to his Hands.
SECT. VII.
Of God's particular Providence.
IT is the imperfection of our finite nature that we cannot at once attend to
diverse things, but the more vehement our intention is upon one, (...) greater
is our neglect of the rest. But God's infinity cannot be so bounded; his eyes
at once see, and his providence at once orders all the most distant and
desperate things in the world. He is not such an epicurean deity, as to
sequester himself wholly to the enjoyment of his own felicity, and to despise
the concerns of poor mortals; but though he have his dwelling so high, yet he
humbles himself to behold the ^^ings in heaven and (...) Psalm. cxiii. 5, 6.
Nor does his providence confine itself to the more splendid and greater parts
of management, the conduct of empires and states, but it descends to the lowest
part of his creatition, to the fowls of the air, to the lilies of the field;
and then sure our Savior's inference as to mankind is incontestable, Are ye
not much better than they? Matthew. 26. If a sparrow (as he elsewhere tells his
disciples) cannot fall to the ground without God's particular notice, surely no
human creature is less considerable to him; nay, if our very hairs are
numbered, we cannot think ths excrescence is of more value than the stoke, but
must conclude that God with a particular advertence, watches over the concerns
of every man.

Now God being infinitely good, cannot thus attend us upon any insidious design
of doing us mischief: He watches over us as a guardian, not as a spy; and
directs his observation to the more seasonable adapting his benefits. And as he
is thus gracious in designing our advantage, so he is no less wise in
contriving it. All things, says the wise man, are not profitable for all men,
Ecclas. xxxvii. 28. Indeed nothing is absolutely good but God: all created
things are good or ill reference to that to which they are applied. Meat is
good, but to a surfeited stomach it is not only nauseous, but dangerous. Fire
is good, but if put in our bosoms, not only burns our clothes but flesh. And as
human wisdom directs the right application of these and the like, so the
supreme and divine, orders events according to the disposition of the person
concerned; he knows our frame, Psalm. ciii. 14. and discerns what operation such
or such things will have upon us, while we who know neither ourselves nor them,
can make but random guesses, and worse choices. And sure he that does but thus
in the general, acknowledge God's providence, goodess and wisdom (which he is
no christian that does not) has a sufficient cure against all his solicitudes,
much more his repinings. He cannot think he suffers unawares to him who sees
all things. He cannot think his sufferings are designed for ill to him, because
they are disposed by him who intends and projects his good. Nor can he fear
those intentions can miscarry, which are guided by an infinite and unerring
wisdom, and backed by an uncontrolable power. And sure this is as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. vi. 18. strong consolation, if we would duly apply it.

Yet because general notions do often make but light impressions on us, it may
not be amiss to make a little more inspection, and to observe how applicable
they are to to the several kinds of our discontents. Now those may be reduced
to two; for either we are troubled at the want of something we desire, or at
the suffering of something we would avert; so that the two notions of privative
and positive, divide between them all our affliction.

The first of these is usually the most comprehensive, for there are few who
have not more torment from the apprehension of somewhat they want, than from
the smart of any thing they feel. And indeed while our desires are so vagrant
and exorbitant, they will be sure to furnish matter enough for our discontents.
But certainly there is not in the world such a charm for them, as the
consideration that God is more wise to discern, and more careful to provide
what is really good for us than we ourselves. We poor shortsighted creatures
look only on the surface of things, and if we see a beautiful appearance,
somewhat that invites our senses, we court it with the utmost earnestness: but
God penetrates deeper, he sees to the bottom both of us and those things we
desire, and find often though they may please our appetite, they will hurt our
health; and will no more give them to us, than a careful father will to his
child those gilded poisons he cries for. Perhaps this man is taken with the
enchanting music of fame, likes not his own obscure station, but would fain
present himself upon a more public. Theater, come into the eve and could of the
world; but how little does he know how he shall act his part there; whether he
shall come off with an applause or a hiss? He may render himself but the more
public spectacle of scorn; or if he do not that, he may by a better success,
feed up his vain glory to such a bulk, as may render him too great weight for
that tottering pinnacle whereon he stands: and so after he has made a towering
circle, he may fall back with more ignominy to his first point. Another it may
be, no less eagerly desires wealth, thinks (as once Croesus did) that he that
abounds in treasure cannot be empty of felicity; but alas how knows he how he
shall employ it? There are two contrary temptations that attend riches, riots,
and covetousness; and he is sure a little too confident, that dares promise
himself that when there is such odds against him, he shall certainly choose the
one just mean; and if he do not, he does only inflame his account at the great
audit. Besides the more wealth he has, the fairer booty he is to the avarice of
others; and it has been often seen, that many a man had not died so poor, if he
had lived less rich. Another perhaps thinks not himself so much to want wealth
as children to heir it, and complains with Abraham, Lord, what wi^^ thou give
me, seeing I go childless? Genesis xv. 2. yet how knows he whether that child he
so much desires, shall be a wise man or a fool, Eccl. ii. 19. a comfort or a
vexation to himself if he live to see his proof? and if he do not, be does but
project for an access to his dying cares in what hands to leave him. Rachel
solicited this satisfaction with the greatest impatience, give me children, or
I die, Genesis xxx. I. and it is observable that the grant of her wish proved the
loss of her life.

Thus in these and innumerable other instances we drive on blindfold, and very
often impetuously pursue that which would ruin us: and were God as
short-sighted as we, into what precipices should we minutely hurry ourselves?
or were he so unkind as to consider our importunity more than our interest, we
should quickly sink under the weight of our own wishes; and as Juvenal in his
tenth satire excellently observes, become pettish by the successes and grant of
our prayers. I suppose there is no man that soberly recollects the events of
his life, but can experimentally say, he has sometimes desired things which
would have been to his mischief had he had them, and that himself has after
looked on the denial as a mercy: as on the other side when he has prospered in
his aims, and had what his soul lusted after, it has been but like the quails
to the Israelites, a conviction and punishment, rather than a satisfaction. And
now surely God may complain of us as he did of Israel, How long will it be ^^er
you believe me? Number. ^iv. II. After all the attestations he has given of his
care and Providence over us, after all the experiments we have had of the folly
of our own elections, we cannot yet be brought either to distrust ourselves, or
rely upon him. We will still be choosing, and look on him as no farther
concerned, than as the executioner of our designs.

This is certainly a strange perverseness, and such as no sensible man would be
guilty of in any other instance. In all our secular affairs we trust those whom
we have cause to think understand them better than ourselves, and rely upon men
in their own faculty. We put our estates into the lawyer's hand, our bodies
into the physician's, and submit to their advice though it be against our
humor, merely because we account them more competent judges. Yet this
submission we cannot be persuaded to pay to God, but will still be prescribing
to him, and are very angry it his dispensations do not exactly answer our
fancies. And can we offer him a greater affront than thus to limit him? What is
it but interpretatively to deny either his wisdom, or his goodness, or both?
and so derogate from him in two of his essential attributes. For there can be
no rational account given by any who believe those, why they should not remit
their whole concerns to him. So that the short account is, that in our
distrust, we either deny him to be God, or ourselves to be men, by resisting
the most evident dictates of that reason which distinguishes us from brutes.
For certainly there is not in human discourse a more irrefragable maxim, than
that we ought for our own sakes to resign ourselves to him, who, we are
infallibly sure, can, and will choose better for us than we for ourselves.

This was so apparent by mere natural light, that Socrates advised men to pray
only for blessings in general, and leave the particular kind of them to God's
election, who best knows what is good for us. And sure this is such a piece of
divinity, as extremely reproaches us Christians, who cannot match a Heathen in
his implicit faith to God. Nay indeed it is the vilest defamation upon God
himself, that we who pretend to know him more, should trust him less. So that
we see our repinings do not terminate in their own proper guilt, but do in
their consequences swell higher, and our discontents propagate themselves into
blasphemy. For while we impatiently complain of our wants, we do tacitly ^ax
God to want either that wisdom, power or love, whereby he should supply us. And
sure he must be very atheistical to whom this will not give a competent
prejudice against this sin.

And this very consideration will equally prejudge the other branch of our
discontents, I mean those which repine at the ills we suffer. And not only our
privative, but our positive afflictions may by it have their bitterness taken
off: for the same goodness and wisdom which denies those things we like,
because they are hurtful for us, does upon the very same reason give us those
distasteful things which he sees profitable. A wise physician does not only
diet, but if occasion be, purge his patient also. And surely there is not such
a purifier, such a cleanser of the soul as are afflictions, if we do not (like
disorderly patients) frustrate their efficacy by the irregular management of
ourselves under them.

The Lord from Heaven, his highest throne,
Looks down to Earth below,
The creatures he does call his own,
On all his goodness flow.
SECT. VIII.
Of the Advantage of Afflictions.
IT were the work of a volume to give an exact and minute account of the
benefit of afflictions. I shall only point at some of the more general and
obvious. And first, it is one of the most awakening calls to repentance; and to
this end it is that God most usually designs it. We see the whole scene of it.
Hos. v. 15. I will go and return to not pla^^, till they acknowledge their
off^^^^, and (...) in their affliction they will seek me early: and in the very
next verse we find this voice of God echoed forth by a penitential note, Come,
and let us return unto the Lord, for he has turn, and he will heal us; he has
smitten, and he will bind us up. Thus we find the brethren of Joseph, though
there had a long interval passed betwixt their barbarous usage of him, and his
feigned rigor to them, yet when they saw themselves distressed by the one, then
they began to recollect the other, saying, We are very guilty concerning our
brother, Genesis xlii-21. Prosperity is an intoxicating thing, and there are few
brains strong enough to bear it; it lays us asleep, and amuses us with pleasant
dreams, whilst in the mean time Satan rifles our treasures, and spoils us, by
the deceitful charms of sins, of our innocence and real happiness. And can
there be a more friendly office done for a man in this condition, than to rouse
him, and bring him to apprehend the designs that are said against him? and this
is the errand on which afflictions are sent: so that we have reason to look on
them as our friends and confederates, that intend our rescue, and to take the
alarm they give us, and diligently seek out those intestine enemies of which
they warn us. And he that instead of this, quarrels at their interposing,
thinks them his enemies, (...) they tell bin^^th, truth, Gal. iv. 10. does
miserably pervert the counsel of God against himself, Luke vii. 30. and may at
last verify his own jealousies, and by so provoking an ingratitude, convert
those into the wounds of an enemy, which were originally meant as the
corrections of a father.

And as afflictions do in general admonish us of sins, so it pleases God most
frequently so to model and frame them, that they bear the very image and
impress of those particular guilts they are to chastise, and are the dark
shadows that attend our gay delights, or fragrant insolence. The wise man
observes, that the turning the Egyptian waters into blood, was manifest reproof
of that cruel commandment for murdering of the Hebrew infants Wisd. xii. 5. And
surely we might in most, if not all our sufferings, see some such corresponding
circumstances, as may lead us to the immediate provoking cause of it. God who
does all things in number, weight and measure, does in punishments also observe
a symmetry and proportion, and adapts them not only to the heinousness, but
even the very specific kind of our crimes. The only fixed immutable rule he has
given for his Vicegerents on earth to punish by, is that in the case of murder,
which is we see grounded on this rule of proportion, He (...), by (...) blood
be shod Genesis ix. 6. And though he has now cut off the inferior retaliations of
the eye for the eye, the tooth for the teeth, Exodus xxi. 24. (probably for the
hardness of our hearts, because he saw our revengeful natures would be too much
pleased with it) yet he has not precluded himself from acting by those
measures, but we see it does very often signally make men feel the smart of
those violences, or injustice they have used to others. Of this the sacred
story affords several examples (as Adonibezek, Judge. i. 6. and A^a^, 1 King.
xxi 19.)and profane many more, and daily experience and observation most of
all. And though this method of retaliation is not always so evident and
apparent to the world, because men's sins are not always so, yet I believe if
men would duly recollect, it would be for the most part discernable to their
own conscience, and they would apparently see, that their calamities did but
trace the footsteps of their sins.

Now if we rightly weigh this, we cannot but think it a very advantageous
circumstance. We are naturally blind, when we look inward, and if we have not
some adventitious light to clear the object, will be very apt to overlook it.
Therefore since the end of all our afflictions ^^s our repentance, it is a wise
and gracious disposal that they do thus point to us those particular sins of
which we are to repent. The body of sin will not be destroyed in the whole
entire bulk, but must be dismembered, pulled to pieces limb by limb. He that
attacks it otherwise, will be like Sertorius's, soldier, who ineffectively
tugged at the horse's tail to get it off at once, when he that pulled it hair
by hair quickly did it. Therefore as it a great part of our spiritual wisdom to
know in what especial parts the Sampson like strength of our corruptions lie,
so it is a great instance of God's care of us, thus by his corrections to
discipline and instruct us in it.

In all our afflictions therefore it is our concern, nicely and critically to
observe them. I mean not to enhance our murmurs and complaints, but to learn by
them what is God's peculiar controversy against us. This is indeed to bear the
rod, and who has appointed it, Mic. vi. 9. Let him therefore that suffers in
any of his concerns, examine whether he have not some guilt which answers to
it, as face answers face, Provi xxvii. 19. He that is impoverished in his
estate, let him consider first how he acquired it* whether there were not
something of fraud or injustice, which like a canorous humor, mixed in its very
elements and constitution, and eat out its bowels: Or whether some sacrilegious
prize, some coal from the altar have not fired his nest. Or if nothing can be
charged upon the thing gained, let him consider how he has used it; whether he
has not made it the fuel of his lusts, in riot and excesses, or the object of
his adoration in an inordinate value of it. In like manner he who is afflicted
in his body, groans under the torment of some grievous disease, may very
seasonably interrogate himself, whether it has not been contracted by his vice,
whether his bones be not (in a more literal sense than Job meant it) full of
the sins of his youth, Job xx. 11. and his surfeiting and drunkenness be not
the cause, that his soul, as the Psalmist speaks, abhors all manner of next,
and is even hard at death's door, Psalm. evii. 18. or at least whether the not
employing his health and strength to those purposes for which it was given, is
not the reason of its being withdrawn. He also that is invaded in his
reputation, that lies under some great infamy, is to consider whether it be not
deserved; whether some part, if not the whole guilt of which he is accused,
stick not to him: Or if he be clear in that particular instance, whether some
concealed sin of his would not if it were known, incur as great scandal. For in
that case he has in right forfeited his reputation, and God may make the
seizure as well by an unjust, as a just accusation. Or if his heart accuse him
not here, yet let him further reflect, whether; his vainglorious pursuits of
praise and high conceits of himself, have not made this an apt and necessary
humiliation for him. Or lastly, let him recollect how he has behaved himself
toward others in this kind: Whether he has had a just tenderness of his
neighbor's fame, or has not rather exposed and prostituted it. In these and
many other instances such a particular scrutiny would (in all probability,
discover the affinity and cognation between our guilts and our punishments, and
by marking out the spring and fountainhead, direct us how to stop or divert
the current. And he that would diligently employ himself in this inquisition,
would find little leisure, and less cause to condole his afflictions, but would
divert all his complaints upon himself, accept of the punishment of his
iniquity, and thank the Lord for thus giving him warning, Psalm. xvi 7.

A second benefit which God designs us in our afflictions, is the weaning us
from the world, to disentangle us from its setters and charms, and draw us to
himself. We read in the story of the deluge that so long as the earth was
covered with waters, the very raven was contented to take shelter in the ark,
but when all was fair and dry, even the dove finally forsook it, Genesis viii. 12.
And it is much so with us: The worst of men will commonly in distresses have
recourse to God (the very heathen mariners in a storm could rebuke Jonah for
not calling upon his God, Jon. i. 6.) when yet the very best of us are apt to
forget him amidst the blandishments and insinuations of prosperity. The kind
aspects of the world are very enchanting, apt to inveigle and besot us; and
therefore it is God's care over us, to let us sometimes see her more averting
countenance in her frowns and storms; that, as children frighted by some ugly
appearance, we may run into the arms of our Father. Alas! were all things
exactly sitted to our humors here, when should we think of a remove? and had
not death some harbingers to prepare us for him, what a surprising guest would
he be to us? It Is storied of Antigonus, that seeing a soldier in his camp of so
daring a courage, that he always courted the most hazardous attempts, and
observing him also of a very infirm sickly habit, he took a particular care of
him, and by medicines and good attendance recovered him; which no sooner had he
done, but the man grew more cautious, and would no longer expose himself as
formerly, and gave this reason for it, that now he was healthy, his life was of
some value to him, and not to be hazarded at that same rate, as when it was
only a burden; and should God cure all our complaints, render us perfectly at
ease, I fear too many of us would be of the soldier's mind, think our lives to
good to resign to him, much more to hazard for him, as our Christianity in many
cases obliges us. The son of Syrach observes, how dreadful death is to a man
that is at rest in his possessions, that has abundance of all things, and has
nothing to vex him; nay he descends much lower, and puts in him who is yet able
to receive meat, Ecclus. xiv. 1. The truth is, we do so passionately dote upon
the world, that like besotted lovers we can bear a great deal of ill usage,
before we quit our pursuit. Any little slight favor atones us after multiplied
affronts, and we must be disciplined by repeated disappointments, ever we can
withdraw our confidence. But how fatally secure should we be, if God should
permit this siren always to entertain us with her music, and should not by some
discordant grating notes, interrupt our raptures, and recall us to sober
thoughts?

Indeed it is one of the highest instances of God's love, and of his clemency
also, thus to project our reducement. We were all in our baptism affianced to
him, with a particular abrenunciation of the world, so that we cannot without
the greatest disloyalty cast ourselves into its embraces; and yet when we have
thus broken the covenant of our God, God, Prove. ii. 17. he does not pursue us
with a jealous rage, with the severity which an abused rivalled kindness would
suggest; does not give us a bill of divorce and disclaim his relation; but
contrives how he may reclaim and bring us back to himself. The transcendency of
this lenity God excellently describes by the prophet in the case of Israel,
They say, if a man put away his wife, and she become another man's, shall he
return unto her again? but thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet
return unto me says the Lord? Jer. iii. 1. And this, though a great height of
indulgence, is no more than he daily repeats to us. After we have basely
adulterated with the world, converted our affections from God to it, he does
not give us over, abandon us to our lewd course, and consequent ruin; but still
invites our return: and lest that may not serve, he does with a great deal of
holy artifice essay to break that accursed league into which we are entered,
pulls off the disguise in which the world courted us, and makes us see it as it
is in itself, a scene of vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. i. 14.

And as he does this in general, so also with a particular application to those
temporal satisfactions wherewith we were most transported. The things to which
we are more indifferent do not so much endanger us; it is those upon which we
have more vehemently set our hearts, which become our snares, and awake his
jealousy; and accordingly we frequently see that it is in those he chooses to
cross us. How often does it happen that those which are enamoured of
themselves, dote upon their own features, do meet with some disease or accident
which blasts their beauty, withers that fair flower, and makes their winter
overtake their spring? So in our friends and relations it is usually seen, we
soonest loose those for whom we have the greatest, the most immoderate passion.
If there be one fondling among our children, it is odds but that is taken away,
or made as much the object of our grief and sorrow, as ever it was of our joy
and love. When God sees our hearts so excessively cleave to any transitory
thing, he knows it is necessary to sever them, for whilst we have such clogs
upon us, our souls will cleave to the dust, will not be able to soar up to the
highest Region for which they are designed.

In a word, God so loves us, that he removes whatever he sees will obstruct
that intimate union which he desires with us; and sure this is so obliging,
that though he should bid us to our loss, though he could not recompense us for
what he takes from us, yet we must be very ill-natured if we can be angry at so
much kindness. But when to this is added, that all this is principally, nay,
solely designed for our advantage, that God takes from us all these empty
delusory contentments, merely that he may instate us in solid and durable joys;
we betray as much ignorance of our interest, as insensibleness of our
obligation, if we repine that God makes us so much his care. It is true indeed,
the things to which we have so inordinately adhered, do stick so close, that
they cannot be pulled away without some pain: yet for our corporal security we
can endure the sundering of parts that do not only cleave, but grow ^o us. He
that has a gangrened member, suffers it to be cut off to save his whole body,
and does not revile, but thank and reward the surgeon. Yet where our souls are
concerned, and where the things have no native union with us, but are only
cemented by our passions, we are impatient of the method, and think God deals
very hardly with us, not to to let us perish with what we love. The sum of all
is this, God, though he be abundantly condescending, yet he will never stoop so
low as to share his interest in us with the world: If we will devote ourselves
to it, it is not all our empty forms of service will satisfy him; if we cannot
divorce our hearts from it, he will divorce himself eternally from us. And the
case being thus, we are surely very ill advised if we do not contentedly resign
ourselves to his methods, and cheerfully endure them how sharp soever. The only
expedient we have for our own case, is to shorten the cure by giving our
assistance, and not by struggling to render it more difficult and painful. Let
us entirely surrender our wills to him, and when we have done that, we may
without much pain let him take any thing else. But the more difficult we find
it to be disentangled from the world, the greater should our caution be against
all future engagements to it. If our escape has been as the apostle says, so
as by sire, Jude 23. with much smart and hazard, let us at least have so much
wit, as the common proverb allows children, and not again expose ourselves; let
us never glue our hearts to any external thing, but let all the concerns of the
world hang loose about us: By that means we shall be able to put them off
insensibly when over God calls for them, or perhaps we shall prevent his
calling for them at all, it being for the most part our too close adherence to
them which prompts sum to it.

A third advantage of affliction is, that it is a mark and signature of our
adoption, witness of our legitimation. What son is he (faith the apostle) whom
the Father chastises not? but if (...) be without chastisement, whereof all
are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons, Heb. xii. 7, 8. Jacob clad
his darling Joseph in a party-colored coat, and God's favorites do here wear
a livery interwoven with a mixture of dark and gloomy colors; their long white
robes are laid up for them against they come to the marriage of the Lamb, Rev.
xix. 7. Indeed we much mistake the design of Christianity, if we think it calls
us to a condition of ease and security. It might suit well enough with the
votaries of the golden calf, to sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play,
Exodus xxxii. 6. but the disciples of the crucified Savior are trained to
another discipline, our profession enters us into a state of warfare, and
accordingly our very baptismal engagement runs all in military terms, and we
are not only servants of Christ's family, but soldiers of his camp. Now we know
in a war men must not expect to pass their time in ease and softness, but
besides all the dangers and difficulties of the combat, have many other
hardships to endure; hunger and thirst, heat and cold, hard lodgings and weary
marches: and he that is too nice for those, will not long stick to his colors.
And it is the same in our spiritual warfare; many pressures and sufferings are
annexed to it, and our passive valor is no less tried than our active. In
respect of this it is that our Savior admonishes his proselytes to compute
first the difficulties incident to their profession, and that he may not
ensnare us by proposing too easy terms, he bids us reckon upon the worst, and
tells us, that he that forsakes not all that he has, shall not be his disciple
Luke xiv. 26. and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom
of God. Acts xiv. 22. Indeed, it were very absurd for us to expect, easier
conditions, when th^se are the same to which our Leader has submitted. The
Captain of our salvation was perfected by sufferings, Heb. ii. 10. and if it
behoved Christ to suffer before he entered into his glory, Luke xxiv. 46. it
were insolent madness for us to look to be carried thither upon our beds of
ivory, or from the noise of our harps and viols, be immediately rapt into the
choir of angels.

This has been so much considered by pious men, that they have looked upon
their secular prosperities with fear and jealousy, and many have solemnly
petitioned for crosses, as thinking them the necessary attestation of their
sonship, and means of assimulation to their elder brother. Why then should that
which is so desirable to them, appear so formidable to us? or why should we so
vehemently deprecate what they so earnestly invited? If we indeed think it a
privilege to be the sons of God, and fellow heirs with Christ, why do we grudge
at the condition? The Roman captain tells St. Paul, that he obtained the
immunities of a Roman with a great sum, Acts xxii. ^8. and shall we expect so
much a nobler and more advantageous adoption perfectly gratis? Lock that God
should change his whole economy for our ease, give us an eternal inheritance,
discharged of those temporal encumbrances himself has annexed to it? This were
sure as unjust a hope, as it would be a vain one. When David had that ensnared
proposal made him, of being the king's son-in-law, 1 Samuel xviii. 11. he set
such a value upon the dignity, that he despised the difficulty of the
condition: And sure we must have very low abject souls, if when so infinitely a
higher advancement is sincerely offered us, we can suffer any apprehension of
hardship to divert us. In a word, let us remember that of the apostle, if we
suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy ii. 12. And though our afflictions
be in themselves not joyous but grievous, yet when they are considered as the
earnest of our future inheritance, they put on another face, and may rather
enamour that frighten us.

A fourth advantage of afflictions is, that they excite our compassions toward
others: There is nothing qualifies us so rightly to estimate the suffering of
others, as the having ourselves felt them; without this our apprehensions of
them are as dull and confused, as a blind man is of colors, or a deaf man of
sounds. They that stretch themselves upon their couches, that cat the lambs out
of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall; that chaunt to the
sound of the vis^, drink wine in bowls, and (...) themselves with the chief
ointments, will not much be grieved with the afflictions of Joseph, Amos vi. 4,
5, 6. Nay so necessary is our experience toward our commiseration, that we see
it was thought a requisite accomplishment of our high priest (that highest
example of unbounded compassion) and therefore says the apostle, It behoved
him in all things to be made like his brethren, that he might be a merciful and
faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people, for in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he
is able also to succor them that are tempted, Heb. ii. 17, 18. But if he whose
mere sense of our miseries brought him down to us, chose this expedient to
advance his pity, how necessary is it to our petrified bowels? And since God
has assigned our mercies to our brethren as the standard by which he will
proportion his to us, it is more ours than their advantage to have them
enlarged; so that when by making us taste of their cup, acquainting us with the
bitter relish of their sufferings; he prepares us to a christian sympathy with
them, it is but a remoter way of obliging and qualifying us for a more ample
portion of his mercy. Nay besides the profit, there is honor accrues to us by
it. Compassion is one of the best properties of our nature, and we unman
ourselves when we put it off; nay more, it is an attribute of the divinity, and
the more we advance in it, the closer approaches we make to him. And therefore
we have all reason to bless him for that discipline by which he promotes us in
to excellent, so necessary a grace.

A fifth benefit of affliction, is, that it is an improvement of devotion, sets
us with more heartiness to our prayers. Whilst prosperity flows in upon us, we
bathe ourselves in its streams, but are very apt to forget its source; so that
God is fain to stop the current, leave us dry and parched, that our needs may
make us do what our gratitude would not, trace our blessings up to the original
spring, and both acknowledge and invoke him as the author of all our good. This
effect of afflictions is observed by the Prophet, Lord, in trouble have they
visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them, Isa.
xxvi. 16. And I believe I may appeal to every man's experience, whether his
prayers be not more frequent and more hearty too, when he is under some
distress. They how importunate are we in our petitions? how profuse in our vows
and promises? saying with Israel, Deliver us only we pray thee this day: and
they put away the strange gods from among them, and served the Lord, Jud. x.
15, 16. I confess, it is no good indication of our temper, that we need thus to
be put in the press e're we will yield any thing; yet since we are so
disingenuous, it is a mercy in God to adapt his methods to us, to extort when
we will not give; and if he can have no free-will-offerings, yet at least to
exact his tribute. Nor does he design the effect of this should cease with the
calamity that raised it, but expects our compelled addresses should bring us
into the way of voluntary ones, and happily ensnare us into piety. And indeed
herein we are worse than brutish if it do not. We think it a barbarous rudeness
to engage a man in our affairs, and as soon as we have served our own turns,
never take farther notice of him. Nay indeed the very beasts may lecture us in
this piece of morality, many of them paying a signal gratitude, where they have
received benefits; and shall we not come up at least to their pitch! shall not
the endearment of our deliverance bring our Deliverer into some repute and
consideration with us, and make us desire to keep up an acquaintance and
intercourse with him? Yet if ingenuity work not with us, let interest at least
prevail, and the remembrance how soon we may need him again, admonish us not to
make ourselves strangers to him. God complains of Israel, Wherefore say my
people, we are Lord we will come no more at thee, Jer. ii. 31. A very insolent
folly to renounce that dependence by which alone they subsisted, and no less
will it be in any of us if we stop our recourse to him because we have had
advantage by it. We have no assurance that the same occasion shall not occur,
but with what face can we (...) that intercourse which in the interval we
despised? So that if we have but any ordinary providence we shall still so
celebrate past rescues, as to continue in a capacity of begging more, and then
we cannot but also confess the benefit of those first calamities which
inspirited our devotion, and taught us to pray in earnest, and will be ashamed
that our thanks should be uttered in a fainter accent than our petitions; or
our daily spiritual concerns should be more coldly solicited than our temporal
accidental ones.

Nor is it only our devotion that is thus improved by our distresses, but many
other graces; our faith, our hope, our patience, our Christian sufferance and
fortitude. It is no triumph of faith to trust God for those good things which
he gives us in hand, this is rather to walk by sens^ than faith; but to rely on
him in the greatest destitution, and against hope to believe in hope, this is
the says of a true child of Abraham, and will be imputed to us (as it was to
him) for righteousness, Romans iv. 23, 24. So also our patience owes all its
opportunities of exercise to our afflictions, and consequently owes also a
great part of its being to them, for we know desuetude will lose habits. What
imaginable use is there of patience, where there is nothing to suffer? In our
prosperous state we may indeed employ our temperance, our humility, our
caution; but patience seems then an useless virtue: Nay indeed, for ought we
know, may be counterfeit, till adversity bring it to the test. And yet this is
the most glorious accomplishment of a Christian, that which most eminently
conforms him to the image of his Savior, whose whole life was a perpetual
exercise of this grace; and therefore we love our ease too well if we are
unwilling to buy this pearl at any price.

Lastly, Our thankfulness is (at least ought to be) increased by our
distresses. It is very natural for us to reflect with value and esteem upon
those blessings we have lost, and we too often do it to aggravate our
discontent: But sure, the most rational use of it is to raise our thankfulness
for the time wherein we enjoyed them. Nay not only our former enjoyments, but
even our present deprivations deserve our gratitude, if we consider the happy
advantages we may reap from them. If we will perversely cast them away, that
unworthy contempt pays no scores, for we still stand answerable in God's
account for the good he designed, and we might have had by it, and we become
liable to a new charge for our ingratitude in thus despising the chastisement
of the Lord, Heb. xii. 5.

And now if all these benefits of afflictions (which are yet but imperfectly
recited) may be thought worth considering, it cannot but reconcile us to the
sharpest of God's methods; unless we will own ourselves such mere animals, as
to have no other apprehensions than what our bodily senses convey to us. For
sure, he that has reason enough to understand that he has an immortal soul,
cannot but assent that its interests should be served, though with displacency
of his flesh. Yet even in regard of that, our murmurings are often very unjust,
for we do many times ignorantly prejudge God's designs toward us even in
temporals, who frequently makes a little transient uneasiness, the passage to
secular felicities. Moses when he fled our of Egypt, probably little thought
that he should return thither a God unto Pharaoh, Exodus iv. 16. and as little
did Joseph when he was brought thither a slave, that he was to be a ruler
there; yet as distant as those states were, the divine Providence has so
connected them, that the one depends upon the other. And certainly we may often
observe the like overruling hand in our own distresses, that those events
which we have entertained with the greatest regret, have in the consequences
been very beneficial to us.

To conclude, we have certainly both from speculation and experience, abundant
matter to calm all our disquiets, to satisfy our distrusts, and to fix in us an
entire resignation to God's disposals, who has designs which we cannot
penetrate, but none which we need fear, unless we ourselves pervert them. We
have our Savior's word for it, that he will not give us a stone when we ask
bread, nor a scorpion when we ask a fish, Matthew. vii. 9. Nay his love secures
us yet farther from the errors of our own wild choice, and does not give us
those stones and scorpions which we importune for. Let us then leave our
concerns to him who best knows them, and make it our sole care to entertain his
dispensations with as much submission and duty, as he dispenses them with love
and wisdom. And if we can but do so, we may dare all the power of earth and
hell too, to make us miserable: For be our afflictions what they can, we are
sure they are but what we in some respect or other need; be they privative or
positive, the want of what we wish, or the suffering of what we wish not, they
are the disposals of him who cannot e^^, and we shall finally have cause to say
with the Psalmist, It is good for me that I have been afflicted, Psalm. cxix. 71.

Be not displeased when the great God
Does his afflictions send,
For he always consults our good,
And shows himself our friend.
SECT. IX.
Of our Misfortunes compared with other Men's.
WE come now to impress an equally just and useful consideration, the comparing
of our misfortunes with those of other men: and he that does that, will
certainly see so little cause to think himself singular, that he will not find
himself superlative in calamity; for there is no man living, that can with
reason affirm himself to be the very unhappiest man, there being innumerable
distresses of others which he knows not of, and consequently cannot bring them
in balance with his own. A multitude of men there are, whose persons he knows
not, and even of those he does, he may be much a stranger to their distresses;
many sorrows may lie at the heart of him who carries a smiling face, and many a
man has been an object of envy to those who look but on the surface of his
state, who yet to those who know his private griefs appears more worthy of
compassion. And sure this confused uncertain estimate of other men's
afflictions, may divert us from all loud outcries of our own. Solon seeing a
friend much oppressed with grief, carried him up to a town that overlooked the
city of Athens, and showing him all the buildings, said to him, Consider how
many sorrows have, do, and shall in future ages inhabit under all those roofs,
and do not vex thyself with those inconveniences which are common to
mortality, as if they were only yours. And sure it was good advice, for
suffering is almost as inseparable and adjunct of our nature, as dying is; yet
we do not see men very apt to embitter their whole lives by the foresight that
they must die, but seeing it a thing as universal as inevitable, they are more
forward to take up the epicure's resolution, Let us eat and drink, for
tomorrow we die, 1 Cor. xv. 32. And why should we not look upon afflictions
also as the common lot of humanity, and as we take the advantages, so be
content to bear the encumbrances of that state?

But besides that allowance that is thus to be made for the unknown calamities
of others, if we survey but those that lie open and visible to us, the most of
us shall find enough to discountenance our complaints. Who is there that when
he most studiously recollected his miseries, may not find some or other that
^apparently equals, if not exceeds him? He that grieves at his being contemned
and slighted, may see another persecuted and oppressed. He that groans under
some sharp pain, may see another afflicted with sharper; and even he that has
the most acute torments in his body, may see another more sadly cruciated by
the agonies of his mind. So that if we would but look about us, we should see
so many foreign occasions of our pity, that we should be ashamed to confine it
wholly to ourselves.

It will perhaps be said, that this cannot be universally true, for that there
must in comparative degrees be some lowest state of misery; I grant it, but
still that state consists not in such an indivisible point, that any one person
can have the enclosure; or if it do, it will be so hard (...) any to discern
who that one person is, that I need to desire no fairer a composition, than to
have every man suspend his repinings, 'till he can evince his title. But alas!
there are but few that can make any approaches to such a pretense: For though
if we advert to men's complaints, we should think all degrees of comparison
were confounded, and every man were equally the greatest sufferer; yet
certainly in the truth of things it is nothing so; for (not to repeat what was
before mentioned, that probably no man is miserable in any proportion to the
utmost degree of possibility) the remarkably unhappy are very (...) the less
number. And how passionately soever man exaggerate their calamities, yet
perhaps in their sober mood, they will scarce change states with those whom
they profess to think happier than themselves. It was the saying of Socrates,
that if there were a common bank made of all men's troubles, most men would
rather choose to take those they brought, that to venture upon a new dividend.
And indeed he had reason for his supposition; for considering how great a part
of many man's afflictions are of their own making, fictitious and imaginary,
they may justly fear least they should exchange feathers for lead, their own
empty shadows for their real and pressing calamities of others, and cannot but
think it best to sit down with their own, which serves their declamation as
well, and their ease much better. (...) see men at a little misshaping of a
garment, a scarce discernable error in their cook, or their shortest
interruption in their sports, in such transports of trouble, as if they were
the most unfortunate men in the world; yet for all that, you shall hardly
persuade them to change with him whose course clothing supersedes all care of
the fashion, whose appetite was never disappointed for want of sauce, and whose
perpetual toil makes him insensible what the defeat of sport signifies.

Nay even where the exchange seems more equal, where the afflictions are on
both sides solid and substantial, yet a prudent man would scarce venture upon
the barter. It is no small advantage to know what we have to contest with, to
have experienced the worst of its attacks, by which we become better able to
guard ourselves: But a new evil comes with the force of a surprise, and finds
us open and disarmed. It is indeed almost a miraculous power that custom has in
reconciling us to things otherwise displeasing; all our senses are taught to
remit of their adversion by familiarity with ungrateful objects; that ugly form
which at first makes us start, by use divests its terror, and we reconcile
ourselves to harsh sounds and ill relishes by long custom. And sure it has the
very same effect upon our minds, the most fierce calamities do by acquaintance
grow more tractable, so that he that exchanges an old one for a new, does but
bring a wild lion into his house instead of a tame: It may for ought he knows
immediately tear him in pieces, but at least must cost him a great deal of
pains to render it gentle and familiar, and certainly no wise man would wish to
make such a bargain.

By all this it appears that how extravagantly soever we aggravate our own
calamities and extenuate other men's* we dare not upon recollection stand to
our own estimate, and what can be said more in prejudice of our discontents? It
is a granted maxim, that every man must have afflictions, Man that is born of a
woman, says Job, is of few years, and full of trouble, Job xiv. 1. And we must
reverse God's fundamental law, before we can hope for a total exemption. All
that any man can aspire to, is to have but an equal share with others, and the
generality of men have so, at least none can prove he has not so; and till he
can, his murmurs will surely be very unjustifiable, especially when they have
this convincing circumstance against them, that he dares not upon sober
thoughts change his afflictions with most of his neighbors. He is an ill
member of a commnnity, who in public assessments would shuffle off all
payments; and he is no better, who in this common tax God has laid upon our
nature, is not content to bear his share.

And truly would we but consider that in all our sufferings nothing befalls us
but what is common to our kind, nay, which is extremely exceeded by many within
the verge of our own observation, we must be senselesly partial to be
impatient. The Apostle thought it a competent consolation for the first
christians, that there had no temptation befallen them but what was common to
men, 1 Cor. x. 13. and we betray very extravagant opinions of ourselves if it
be not so to us. Indeed it is scarce possible for us to be so unsatisfied as
the greatest part of us are, did we in the comparing ourselves with others,
proceed with any tolerable ingenuity.

But alas we are very fallacious and deceitful in the point, we do not compare
the good of others with our good, nor their evil with our evil; but with an
envious curiosity we amass together all the desirable circumstances of our
neighbors condition, and with as prying discontent we ransack all our
grievances, and confront to them. This is so insincere a way of proceeding, as
the most ordinary understanding can detect. If I should wager that my arm were
longer than another man's, and for trial measure my arm with his finger, he
must be stupidly silly, that should award me for it: and yet this were not a
grosser cheat, than that which we put upon ourselves, in our comparisons with
others. And it is a little strange to observe unto what various purposes we can
apply this one thin piece of sophistry, for when we compare our neighbors and
ourselves in point of morality, we do but reverse the fallacy, and presently
make his vices as much exceed ours, as our calamities did his in the other
instance. They are indeed both great violences to reason and justice, yet the
latter is sure the pleasanter kind of deceit. A man has some joy in thinking
himself less wicked than his neighbor, but what imaginable comfort can he take
in thinking himself more miserable? Certainly he that would submit to a
cousenage, had much better shift the scene, and think his sufferings less than
they are, rather than more: for since opinion is the thing that usually sets an
edge upon our calamities, it might be a profitable deceit that could steal that
from us.

But we need not blindfold ourselves if we would but use our eyes aright, and
see things in their true shapes; and if we did thus, what a strange turn would
there be in the common estimates of the world? How many of the gilded troubles
of greatness, which men at a distance look on with so much admiration and
desire, would then be as much contemned as now they are courted? A competency
would then get the better of abundance, and the now envied pomp of princes,
when balanced with (...) cares and hazards annexed would be to far from a bait,
that men like S^al 1 Samuel x. 22. would (...) themselves from the pr^t^rment;
and he that understood the weight, would rather choose to wield a slail than a
scepter: Yet so childishly are (...) besotted with the glittering appearance of
things, that we conclude felicity must needs dwell where there is a magnificent
portico, and being possessed with this fancy we overlook her in our own humbler
cottages, where she would more constantly reside, if she could but find us at
home; but we are commonly engaged in a rambling pursuit of her where she is
most seldom to be found, and in the interim, miss of her at her own doors.

Indeed there is scarce a greater folly or unhappiness incident to man's
nature, than this fond admiration of other men's enjoyments, and contempt of
our own. And whilst we have that humor, it will supplant not only our present,
but all possibilities of our future content: For though we could draw to
ourselves all those things for which we envy others, we should no sooner have
made them our own, than they will grow despicable and nauseous to us. This is a
speculation which has been attested by innumerable (...) being nothing more
frequent, than to see men with impatient eagerness, nay often with extreme
hazards, pursue those acquests, which when they have them, they are immediately
sick of. There is scarce any man that may not give himself instances of this in
his own particular; and yet so fatally stupid are we, that no defeats will
discipline us, or take us off from the false estimates of other men's
happiness. And truly while we state our comparisons so unequally, they are as
mischievous as the common proverb states them odious: But if we would begin at
the right end, and look with as much compassion on the adversities of our
brethren, as we do with envy on their prosperities, every man would find cause
to sit down contentedly with his own burden, and confess that he bears but the
proportionable share of his common nature, unless perhaps it be where some
extraordinary demerits of his own have added to the weight; and in that case he
has more reason to admire his afflictions are so few, than so many. And
certainly every man knows so many more ills by himself, than it is possible for
him to do by another, that he that really sees himself exceed others in his
sufferings, will find cause enough to think he does in sin also.

But if we stretch the comparison beyond our cotemporaries, and look back to
the generations of old, we shall have yet farther cause to acknowledge God's
great indulgence to us. Abraham though the friend of God, was not exempted from
severe trials; he was first made to wander from his country, and betake himself
to a kind of vagrant life, was a long time suspended from the blessings of his
desired offspring, and when at last his beloved Isaac was obtained, it caused a
domestic jar, which he was fain to compose by the expulsion of Ishmael, though
his son also. But what a contest may we think there was in his own bowels, when
that rigorous task was imposed on him of sacrificing his Isaac? and though his
faith gloriously triumphed over it, yet sure there could not be a greater
pressure upon human nature. David the man after God's own heart, is no less
signal for his afflictions than for his piety, he was for a great while an
exile from his country, and (which he most bewailed) form the sanctuary, by the
persecutions of Saul: and after he was settled in that throne to which God's
immediate assignation had entitled him, what a succession of calamities had he
in his own family? the incestuous rape of his daughter, the retaliation of that
by the unnatural murder of Amnon, and that seconded by another no less
barbarous conspiracy of Absalom against himself, his expulsion from Jerusalem,
the base revilings of Shi^^i, and finally the loss of that darling son in the
act of his sin. A cluster of afflictions, in comparison whereof the most of
ours are but like the gleanings (as the prophet speaks) after the vintage is
done. It were indeed endless to instance in all the several forefathers of our
faith before Christ's incarnation, the apostle gives us a brief, but very
comprehensive compendium of their sufferings, They had trial of cruel mockings
and scourgings; yea, moreover, of bonds and imprisonments: they were stoned,
were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about
in sheepskins, and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented: they
wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and in caves of the earth,
Heb. xi. 36, 37, 38. And if we look on the primitive Christians, we shall see
them perfectly the counterpart to them, their privileges consisted not in any
immunities from calamities; for their whole lives were scenes of sufferings.
St. Paul gives us an account of his own, In labors more abundant, in stripes
above measure, in prisons more frequent, is deaths often: of the Jews (...) times
received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I
stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have I been in the deep,
in journeying often, etc. 2. Cor. xi. 23. And if his single hardships rose thus
high, what may we think the whole sum of all his fellow laborers amounted to
together, with that noble army of martyrs who sealed their faith with their
blood; of whole sufferings ecclesiastic history gives us such astonishing
relations.

And flow being compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, the
apostle's inference is very irrefragable, let us run with patience the race
which is set before us, Heb. xii. 1, 2. But yet it is more so, if we proceed on
to that consideration he adjoins, Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of
our says, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross,
despising the shame, verse 3. Indeed if we contemplate him in the whole course
of his life, we shall find him rightly s^iled by the prophet a man of sorrows,
Isai. iii. 3. And as if he had charged himself with all our griefs as well as
our sins, there is scarce any human calamity which we may not find exemplified
in him. Does any complain of the lowness and poverty of his condition? alas!
his whole life was a state of indigence. He was forced to be an inmate with the
beasts, he laid in a stable at his birth, and after himself professes that he
had not where to lay his head, Luke ix. 58. Is any oppressed with infamy and
reproach? he may see his savior accused as a glutton and a wine-bibber, Luke
vii. 34. a blasphemer, John x. 33. a sorcerer, Mat. xii. 24. a perverter of the
nation, Luke xxiii. 2. Yea, to such a sordid lowness had they sunk his repute,
that a seditious thief and murderer was thought the more eligible person, not
this man but Barabbus, John xviii. 40. And finally all this scene of
indignities closed with the spiteful pageantry of mockery acted by the soldiers
Mat. xxvii. 28. and the yet more barbarous insultings of priests and scribes,
verse 41. Is any man despised or deserted by his friends? he was contemned by
his countrymen, thought frantic by his friends, betrayed by one of his
disciples, abandoned by all, unless that one who followed him longest, to
renounce him the more shamefully by a threefold abjuration. Nay what is
infinitely more than this, he seemed deserted by God also, as is witnessed by
that doleful exclamation, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat.
xxvii. 46. Is any dissatisfied with his hardships or laboriousness of his life?
let him remember his savior's was not a life of delicacy or ease: He was never
entered in those academies of luxury, where men are gorgeously appareled and
live delicately, Luke vii. 25. but he was brought up under the mean roof of a
carpenter, and consequently subjected to all the lowness of such an education.
His initiation to his prophetic office was with the miraculous severity of a
forty days fast, and in his discharge of it, we find him in perpetual labors,
going about doing good, Acts x. 38. and that not in triumph, like a prince
bestowing his gifts, but in wearisome travels; never riding but once, and that
only upon a borrowed beast, and to fulfill a prophecy, Mat, xxi. 4. 5. Does any
man groan under sharp and acute pains? let him consider what his redeemer
endured, how in his infancy, at his circumcision he offered the first fruits,
as an earnest of that bloody vintage when he trod the wine press alone, Isai,
lxiii. 3. Let him attend him through all the stages of direful passion, and
behold his arms pinioned with rough cords, his head smote with a reed, and torn
with his crown of thorns, his back ploughed with those long furrows, (Psalm.
cxx. 3.) the scourges had made; his macerated feeble body oppressed with the
weight of his cross, and ^t last racked and extended on it: his hands and feet,
th^se nervous and consequently most sensible parts tran^sfixed with ^ails, his
whole body fastened to that accursed tree, and exposed naked to the air in a
cold season; his throat parched with thirst and yet more afflicted with that
vinegar and gall wherewith they pretended to relieve him: and finally his life
expiring amidst the full sense of these accurate torments. Lastly, does any man
labor under the bitterest of all sorrows, importunate temptations to, or a
wounded spirit for sin? even here also he may find that he has an high priest
who has been touched with the sense of his infirmities, Heb. iv. 15. He was
violently assaulted with a succession of temptations, Mat. iv. and we cannot
doubt but Satan would on him employ the utmost of hi^ skill. Nor was he less
oppressed with the burden of his sin, (ours I mean) though not his own. What
may we think were his apprehensions in the garden, when he so earnestly
deprecated that which was his whole errand into the world? What a dreadful
pressure was that, wrung from him that bloody sweat, and cast him into that
inexplicable agony, the ^^orrow whereof was beyond the comprehension of any but
his who felt it? and finally how amazing was the sense of divine wrath, which
extorted that stupendous complaint, that strong cry on the cross, Heb. (...).
7. the sharp accent whereof, (...) do aright sound on our hearts, must
certainly quite overwelm our loudest groans? and now certainly I may say with
Pilate, Ecce homo, behold the man, or rather with a more divine author, Behold
If ever there were sorrows like unto his sorrow, Lam. i. 12.

And sure it were but a reasonable inference, that which we find made by Christ
himself, If these things be done in a green tree, what shall be done in the
dry? Luke xxiii. 31. if an imputative guilt could nourish so scorching a flame,
pull down so severe a wrath, what can we expect who are merely made up of
combustible matter, whose proper personal sins cry for vengeance? Sure were we
to judge by human measures, we should reckon to have more than a double portion
of our Savior's sufferings entailed upon us: yet such is the efficacy of his,
that they have commuted for ours, and have left us only such a share, as may
evidence our relation to our crucified Lord; such as may serve only for badges
and cognizances to whom we pertain. For alas! let the most afflicted of us
weigh our sorrows with his, how absurdly unequal will the comparison appear?
And therefore as the best expedient to (...) our mutinies, to shame us out of
our repinings, let us often draw this uneven parallel, confront our petty
uneasiness with his unspeakable torments; and sure it is impossible but our
admiration and gratitude must supplant our impatience.

This is indeed the method to which the Apostle directs us, Consider him that
endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be weary and
saint in your minds, ye have not yet resisted unto blood, Heb. xii. 3. Was he
contradicted, and shall we expect to be humoured and complied with? Did he
resist to blood, and shall we think those pressures intolerable, with force
only a few tears from us? This is such an unmanly niceness, as utterly makes us
unfit to follow the captain of our salvation. What a soldier is he like to
make, that will take no share of the hazards and hardships of his general?
Honest Uriah would not take the lawful solaces of his own house, upon the
consideration that his lord Joab though but his fellow subject) lay encamped in
the open fields, 2 Samuel xi. 11 (...) yea though he was sent by him from the
camp. And shall we basely forsake ours in pursuit of our case? He is of a
dangerous spirit, whom the example of his superior will not animate. Plutarch
tells us, (...) Cato marching through the deserts, was so distressed for water,
that a small quantity was brought to him in a helmet as a great prize, which he
refusing because he could not help his soldiers to the like, they were so
transported with that generosity, that it extinguished the sense of their
thirst, and they were ashamed to complain of what their leader voluntarily
endured for their sakes. And surely we extremely discredit our institution, if
we cannot equal their ingenuity; and follow ours with as great alacrity through
all the difficulties he has traced before us, and for us.

Nor let us think to excuse ourselves upon the impotency of our flesh, which
wants the assistance which his divinity gave him: For that plea is superseded
by the forementioned examples of the saints, men of like passions with us, who
not only patiently, but joyfully endured all tribulations; by which it appears
it is not impossible to our nature, with those aids of grace which are common
to us with them: for certainly the difference between them and us, is not so
much in the degrees of the aids, as in the diligence of employing them. Let us
therefore, as the apostle advises, lift up the hands which hang (...) and the
feeble knees, Heb. xii. 12. and with a noble emulation follow those heroic
^^^terns they have set us. And since we (...) that even those favorites of
heaven, have smarted so severely, let us never dream of an immunity; but when
ever we find ourselves inclining to any such flattering hope, let every one of
us upbraid ourselves in those terms the Jews did our Savior, Art thou greater
than Abraham, and the Prophets, whom make thou thyself? John viii. 53. Nay we
may descend ^ower and take in not only all the inferior saints of former times,
but all those our contemporaries in sufferings, which are the most within our
view, and may ask the apostles question, what then? are we better than they?
Romans iii. 9. If we think we are, it is certain we are so much worse by that
insolence; and if we confess we are not, upon what score can we pretend to be
better treated? To conclude, let us not pore only upon our peculiar evils, but
attentively look about us, and consider what others endure: and since in
frolics we can sport ourselves with many uneasinesses for company sake, let us
not be more pusillanimous in our soberer moods, but every man cheerfully take
his turn in bearing the common burden of mortality, till we put off both it and
its appendages together, when this mortal shall put on immortality, 1 Cor. xv.
54.

Compare your troubles with the Saints,
In ages long before,
All murmuring with fly away,
You Will the good God adore.
Compare your troubles with your Lord,
And Saints of old renowned,
Your murmurings will then soon cease,
'Till youwith them are crowned.
SECT. X.
Of Particular Aids for the gaining of Contentment.
WE have now passed through all those considerations we at first proposed, and
may trust the considering reader to make his own collections: yet because
impatience is the vice that has been all this while arraigned, I am to foresee
if possible, that those who have the greatest degree of that, may be the least
willing to attend the whole process; and therefore I think it may not be amiss,
for their ease to suit and reduce all into some short directions and rules for
the acquiring contentment.

The first and most fundamental is, the mortifying our pride, which as it is
the seminary of most sins, so especially this of repining. Men that are highly
opinioned of themselves are commonly unsatisfiable: For how well soever they
are treated, they still think it short of their merits. Princes have often
experimented this in those who have done them signal services; but God finds it
in those who have done him none, and we expect he shall dispense to us
according to those false estimates we put upon ourselves. Therefore he that
aspires to content, must first take truer measures of himself, and consider
that as he was nothing till God gave him a being, so all that he can produce
from that being, is God's by original right, and therefore can pretend to
nothing of reward; so that whatever he receives, is still upon the account of a
new bounty; and to complain that he has no more, is like the murmurs of an
unthankful debtor, who would still increase those scores which he knows he can
never pay.

In the second place, let every man consider how many blessings
(notwithstanding his having no claim to any) he daily enjoys; and whether those
he so impatiently raves after, be not much inferior to them. Nay let him ask
his own heart whether he would quit all those he has, for them he wants; and if
he would not (as I suppose no man in his wits would, those wits being part of
the parter) let him then judge how unreasonable his repinings are, when himself
confesses he has the better part of worldly happiness, and never any man living
had all.

In the third place therefore let him secure his duty of thankfulness for those
good things he has, and that will insensibly undermine his impatiencies for
the rest, it being impossible to be at once thankful and murmuring. To this
purpose it were very well, if he would keep a solemn catalogue of all the
bounties, protections, and deliverances he has received from God's hand, and
every night examine what accessions that day has brought to the sum: And he
that did this, would undoubtedly find so many incitations to gratitude, that
all those to discontent would be stifled in the crowd. And since
acknowledgement of God's mercies is all the tribute he exacts for them, we must
certainly look on that as an indispensable duty: And therefore he that finds
that God shortens his hand, stops the efflux of his bounty toward him, should
reflect on himself whether he be not behind in that homage by which he holds,
and have not by his unthankfulness turned away good things from him, Isai. lix.
1. And if he find it so (as who alas is there that may not!) he cannot sure for
shame complain, but must in prudence reinforce his gratitude for what is left,
as the best means to recover what he has lost.

But his murmurs will yet be more amazingly silenced, if in the fourth place he
compares the good things he enjoys with the ill he has done. Certainly this is
a most infallible cure for our impatiencies, the holiest man living being able
to accuse himself of such sins, as would according to all human measures of
equity forfeit all blessings, and pull down a greater weight of judgment than
the most miserable groan under. Therefore as before I advised to keep a
catalogue of benefits received, so here it would be of use to draw up one of
sins committed. And doubtless he that confronts the one with the other, cannot
but be astonished to find them both so numerous, equally wondering at God's
mercy in continuing his blessings, in despite of all his provocations, and at
his own baseness in continuing his provocations in despite of all those
blessings. Indeed it is nothing but our affected ignorance of our demerits,
that makes it possible for us to repine under the severest of God's
dispensations. Would we but ransack our hearts, and see all the abominations
that lie there, nay would the most of us but recollect those barefaced crimes
which even the world can witness against us, we should find more than enough to
balance the heaviest of our pressures. When therefore by our impatient
strugglings we fret and gall ourselves under our burdens, let us interrogate
our souls in the words of the prophet, Why does a living man complain, a man
for the punishment of his sin? Let us not spend our breath in murmurs and
outcries, which will only serve to provoke more stripes: But let us search and
try our ways, and turn again to the Lord, Lam. iii. 39, 43. diligently seek out
that accursed thing which has caused our discomfiture, and by the removal of
that, prepare the way for the access of mercy. But alas how preposterous a
method do we take in our afflictions! We accuse every thing but what we ought,
furiously fly at all the second causes of our calamity, nay too often at the
first, by impious disputes of providence, and in the mean time, as Job speaks,
the root of the matter is ^ound in us, Job xix. 28. We shelter and protect in
our bosoms the real author of our miseries. The true way then to allay the
sense of our sufferings, is to sharpen that of our sins. The prodigal thought
the meanest condition in his father's family a preferment, Make me one of thy
hired servants, Luke xv. 19. And if we have his penitence, we shall have his
submission also, and calmly attend God's disposals of us.

As every man in his afflictions is to look inward on his own heart, so also
upward and consider by whose providence all events are ordered. Is there any
evil (i. e. of punishment) in the city, and the Lord has not done it? Amos
iii. 6. and what are we worms that we should dispate with him? Shall a man
contend with his maker? Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the
earth, Isa. xlv. 9. And as his power is not to be controlled, so neither is his
justice to be impeached, Shall not the judge of all the earth do right? Genesis
xviii. 25. And where we can neither resist nor appeal, what have we to do but
humbly to submit? Nor are we only compelled to it by necessity, but induced and
invited by interest, since his dispensations are directed not barely to assert
his, dominion, but to evidence his paternal care over us. He discerns our
(...), and accordingly, applies to us. The benignity of his nature permits him
not to take delight in our distresses, he does not afflict willingly, nor
grieve the children of men, Lam. iii. 33. and therefore whenever he administers
to us a bitter cup, we may be sure the ingredients are medicinal, and such as
our infirmities require. He dares not trust our intemperate appetites with
unmixed prosperities, the lusciousness whereof, though it may please our
palates, yet like St. John's book, Rev. x. 9. that honey in the mouth may prove
gall in the bowels, engender the most fatal diseases. Let us therefore in our
calamaties not consult with flesh and blood, Gal. i. 16. (which the more it is
bemoaned, the more it complains) but look to the hand that strikes; and assure
ourselves, that the stripes are not more severe, than he sees necessary to our
good: And since they are so, they ought in reason to be our choice as well as
his; and not only religion, but self-love will prompt us to say, with old Ely,
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. 1 Samuel iii. 18. But alas! we
do not understand what is our interest; because we do not rightly understand
what we are ourselves. We consider ourselves merely in our animal being, our
bodies and those sensitive faculties vested in them, and when we are invaded
there, we think we are undone, though that breach he only to relieve that
diviner part (...) us, besieged and oppressed with the flesh about it. (for so
God knows it too often is) or if we do not consider it in that notion of an
enemy, yet at the utmost estimate, the body is to the soul but as the garment
to the body, a decent case to cover: Now what man (not stark frantic) would
rather have his clothes cut than his flesh? and then by the rate of proportion,
we may well question our own sobriety, when we repine that our souls are
secured at the cost of our bodies, and that is certainly the worst, the
unkindest design; and our impatient resistances serve only to frustrate the
kind, and medicinal part of affliction, but will not at all rescue us from the
severe. Our murmurings may ruin our souls, but will never avert any of our
outward calamaties.

A seventh help to contentment is to have a right estimate of the world, and
the common state of humanity: To consider the world but as a stage and
ourselves but as actors, and to resolve that it is very little material, what
part we play so we do it well. A comedian may get as much applause by acting
the slave as the conqueror, and he that acts the one to day, may tomorrow
reverse the part, and personate the other. So great are the vicissitudes of the
world, that there is no building any firm hopes upon it. All the certainty we
have of it, is, that in every condition is has its uneasiness; so that when we
court a change we rather seek to vary than end our miseries. And certainly he
that has well impressed upon his mind the vanity and vexation of the world,
cannot be much surprised at any thing that befalls him in it. We expect no more
of any thing but to do its kind, and we may as well be angry tkat we cannot
bring the lions to our cribs, or fix the wind to a certain point, as that we
cannot secure ourselves from dangers and disappointments, in this rough and
mutable world. We are therefore to lay it as an infallible maxim, that in this
vale of tears every man must meet with sorrows and disasters: And then sure we
may take our peculiar with evenness of temper, as being but the natural
consequent of our being men. And though possibly we may every one think himself
to have a double portion, yet that is usually from the deceitful comparison we
make of ourselves with others. We take the magnifying glasses of discontent and
envy, when we view our own miseries and others felicities, but look on our
enjoyments and their sufferings through the contracting (...) of ingratitude
and incomparison: And whilst we do thus, it is impossible but we must foment
our own diss^^^^actions. He that will compare to good purpose must do it
honestly and sincerely, and view his neighbors calamaties with the same
attention he does his own, and his own comforts with the same he does his
neighbors; and then many of the great seeming inequalities would come pretty
near a level.

But even where they do not, it in the eighth place deserves however to be
considered how illnatured a thing it is, for any man to think himself more
miserable because another is happy; and yet this is the very thing, by which
alone many men have made themselves wretched: For many have created wants,
merely from the envious contemplation of other men's abundance. And indeed
there is nothing more disingenuous, or (to go higher) more diabolical. Lucifer
was happy enough in his original state, yet could not think himself so, because
he was not like the most high, Isa. xiv. 14. And when by that insolent ambition
he had forfeited bliss, it has ever since been an aggravation of his torment,
that mankind is assumed to a capacity of it; and accordingly he makes it the
design of his envious industry to defeat him. Now how perfectly are the two
first parts of this copy transcribed, by those who first cannot be satisfied
with any inferior degree of prosperity, and then whet their impatience with
other men's enjoyments of what they cannot attain? And it is much to be doubted,
that they who go thus far may complete their parallel, and endeavor when they
have opportunity to undermine that happiness they envy. Therefore since Satan
is so apt to impress his whole image, where he has drawn any lineament, it
concerns us warily to guard ourselves, and by a christian sympathy with our
brethren, rejoice with them that do rejoice, Romans xii. 15. make the comforts of
others an allay, not an improvement of our own miseries. Charity has a strange
magnetic power, and attracts the concerns of our brethren to us, and he that
has that in his breast can never want refreshment, whilst any about him are
happy; for by adopting their interest, he shares in their joys. Jethro, though
an alien, rejoiced for all the good God had done to Israel, Exodus xviii. 9. and
why should not we have as sensible a concurrence with our fellow christians?
And he that has so, will still find something to balance his own sufferings.

Let him that aspires to contentment set bounds to his desire. It is our common
fault in this affair, we usually be i^ at the wrong end, we enlarge our desires
as hell, and cannot be satisfied, Hab. ii. 5. and then think God uses us ill,
if he do not fill our insatiable appetites; Whereas if we would confine our
expectations to those things which we need, or he has promised, there are few
of us who would not find them abundantly answered. Alas! how few things are
there which our nature (if not stimulated by fancy and luxury) requires? And
how rare is it to find them who want those? Nay who have not many additionals
for delight and pleasure? And yet God's promise under the gospel extends only
to those necessaries; for when Christ assures his disciples that these things
shall be added unto them, Mat. vi. 33. the content apparently restrains these
things to meet and drink and clothing. Therefore take no thought (...) ^he life
what you shall eat, (...) you drink, nor yet for the body what you shall put
on, verse 25. now what pretense have we to claim more than our charter makes
us? God never articled with the ambitious to give him honors, or with the
covetous to fill his bags, or with the voluptuous to feed his luxuries. Let us
therefore, if we expect to be satisfied, modestly confine our desires within
the limits he has set us: And then every accession which he superadds will
appear (what it is) a mercy and bounty. But whilst our appetites are boundless,
and rather stretched than filled with our acquests, what possibility is there
of their satisfaction? And when we importune God for it, we do but assign him
such a task the poets made a representation of their hell, the filling a ^^eve
with water, or the rolling a stone up a precipice.

A great expedient for contentment, is to confine our thoughts to the present,
and not to let them loose to future events. Would we but do this, we might
shake off a great part of our burden: For we often heap fantastic loads upon
ourselves by anxious presages of things which perhaps will never happen, and
yet sink more under them, than under the real weight that is actually upon us;
and this is certainly one of the greatest follies imaginable; for either the
evil will come or it will not; if it will, it is sure no such desirable guest
that we should go out to meet it, we shall feel it time enough when it falls on
us, we not project to anticipate our sense of it; but if it will not, what
extreme madness is it for a man to torment himself with that which will never
be, to create engines of tortures, and by such aerial afflictions, make himself
as miserable as the most real ones could do? and truly this is all that we
usually get by our foresights. Provision is one of God's attributes, and he
mocks all our pretenses to it, by a frequent defeating of all our fore-casts.
He does it often in our hopes: some little cross circumstance many times
demolishes those goodly machines we raise to ourselves and he does it no less
in our fears: Those ills we solemnly expected often baulk us, and others from
an unexpected coast suddenly invade us. And since we are so blind, so
short-sighted, let us never take upon us to be scouts, to discover danger at a
distance (for it is manifold odds we shall only bring home false alarms) but
let us rest ourselves upon that most admirable maxim of our blessed Lord,
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, Mat. vi. 34. apply ourselves with
Christian courage to bear the present, and leave God either to augment or
diminish, as he sees fit, for the future. Or if he will needs be looking
forward, let it be in obedience not in contradiction to our duty; let us
entertain ourselves with those futurities which we are sure are not chimeras,
death and judgment, heaven and hell. The nearer we draw these things to our
view, the more insensible will all intermediate objects be; they will deceive
our sense of present, and much more forestall the apprehension of future evils:
For it is our neglect of things eternal, that leaves us thus at leisure for the
transitory.

In the last place, let us in all our distresses supersede our anxieties and
solicitudes by that most effectual remedy the apostle prescribes, Is any man
afflicted let him pray, Jam. v. 13. And this sure is a most rational
prescription: For alas! what else can we do toward the redress of our griefs.
We who are so impotent, that we have not power over the most despicable
excrescence of our own body, cannot make one hair white or black, Matthew. v. 36.
what can we do toward the new moulding our condition, or modelling things
without us? Our solicitudes serve only to bind our burdens faster upon us, but
this expedient of prayer will certainly relieve us, Call upon me, says God, in
the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall praise me, Psalm. 1.
15. Whenever therefore we are sinking in the floods of affliction, let us thus
support ourselves by representing our wants unto our gracious Lord, cry unto
him a St. Peter did, Lord save me, Matt. xiv. 30. and he will take us by the
hand, and be the winds never so boisterous or contrary, preserve us from
sinking: The waves and billows of this troublesome world will serve but to toss
us closer into his arms, who can with a word appease the roughest tempest, or
rescue us from it. Oh let us not then be so unkind to ourselves, as to neglect
this infallible means of our deliverance! but with the psalmist take our refuge
under the shadow of the divine wings till the calamity be over past, Psalm.
lvii. 1. And as this is a sure expedient in all our real important afflictions,
so is it a good test by which to try what are so. We are often peevish and
disquieted at trifles, nay we take up the quarrels of our lusts and vice, and
are discontented when they want their wished supplies. Now in either of these
cases, no man that at all considers who he prays to, will dare to insert these
in his prayers, it being a contempt of God to invoke him in things so slight as
the one, or impious as the other. It will therefore be good for every man when
he goes to address for relief, to consider what of his pressures they are that
are worthy of that solemn deprecation: and when he has singled those out, let
him reflect, and he will find he has in that prejudged all his other
discontents as frivolous or wicked. And then sure he cannot think fit to
harbor them, but must for shame dismiss them, since they are such as he dare
not avow to him from whom alone he can expect relief. God always pities our
real miseries, but our imaginary ones dare not demand it. Let us not then
create such diseases to ourselves, as we cannot declare to our physician: and
when those are excluded, for all the rest St. Paul's receipt is an universal
medicine, Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayers and
supplications, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God, Phil.
4. 6

If you would banish self-conceit,
And grudgings of whatever kind,
Then God would in his mercy great,
Bless you with a contented mind.
But if that you repine and grudge
At what misfortunes come your way,
Then God who is our righteous judge
Will add afflictions every day.
SECT. XI.
Of Resignation.
AND now amidst such a variety of receipts, it will be hard to instance any one
sort of calamity which can escape their efficacy, if they be but duly applied.
But indeed we have generally a compendious way of frustrating all remedies by
never making use of them: Like fantastic patients we are well enough content to
have our dis^ase discoursed, and medicines prescribed, but when the physic
comes, have still some pretense or other to protract the taking it. But I shall
beseech the reader to consider, that counsels are not charms, to work without
any cooperation of the concerned person: They must be adverted to, they must
be pondered and considered, and finally they must be practiced, or else the
utmost good, they can do us, is to give us a few hours divertisement in the
reading. But they do us a mischief that infinitely outweighs it, for they
improve our guilts by the ineffective tender they make of rescuing us from
them, and leave us accountable not only for the original crimes, but for our
obstinate adhesion to them in spite of admonition.

I say this because it is a little too notorious, that many take up books only
as they do cards or dice, as an instrument of diversion. It is a good
entertainment of their curiosity to see what can be said upon any subject, and
be it well or ill-handled, they can please themselves equally with the
ingenuity or rediculousness of the composure, and when they have done this,
they have done all they designed. This indeed may be tolerable in romances and
play-books, but sure it ill benefits divinity. And yet I fear it oftenest
happens there: for in the former some do project for some trivial improvements,
as the embellishing of their style, the inspiriting of their fancies; and some
men would scarce be able to drive their pedling trade of wit, did they not thus
sweep the stage: but alas! how many books of piety are read, of which one
cannot discern the least tincture in men's conversations, which sure does in a
great measure proceed from the want of a determinate design in their reading,
men's practice being not apt to be less rovers than their speculation. He that
takes a practical subject in hand, must do it with a design to conform his
practice to what he shall there be convinced to be his duty, and he that comes
not with this probity of mind, is not like to be much benefited by his reading.

But one would think this should be an unnecessary caution at this time, for
since the intent of this tract, is only to show man the way to contentment, it
is to be supposed the readers will be as much in earnest as the writer can be,
it being every man's proper and most important interest, the instating him in
the highest and most supreme felicity that this world can admit: yet for all
this fair probability, I doubt many will in this instance have the same
indifference they have in their other spiritual concerns.

It is true indeed that a quer^lous repining humor, is one of the most
pernicious, the most ugly habits incident to mankind; but yet as deformed
people are often the most in love with themselves, so this crooked piece of our
temper is of all others the most indulgent to itself. Melancholy, is the most
stubborn and untractable of all humors; and discontent being the offspring of
that, partakes of that inflexibility, and accordingly we see how impregnable it
often is, against all assaults of reason and religion too. Jonah in a fallen
mood would justify his discontent even to God himself, and in spite of that
calm reproof, Do thou well to be angry? declares, he did well to be angry
even to the death, Jonah iv. 9. And do we not frequently see m^n upon an
impatience of some disappointment, grow angry even at their comforts? Their
friends, their children, their meat, their drink, every thing grows nauseous to
them, and in a frantic discontent, they often sling away those things which
they most value. Besides, this peevish impatience is of so aerial a diet, that
it is scarce possible to starve it. It will nourish itself phantasms and
chimeras, suborn a thousand surmises and imaginary distresses to abet its
pretenses: and though every one of us can remonstrate to another, the
unreasonableness of this discontent; yet scarce any one of us will draw the
argument home, or suffer ourselves to be convinced by what we urge as
irrefragable to others. Nay, farther, this humor is impatient of any
diversion, loves to coverse only with itself. In bodily pains, men that despair
of cure are yet glad of allays and mitigations, and strive by all arts, to
divert and deceive the sense of their anguish; but in this disease of the mind,
men cherish and improve their torment, roll and chew the bitter pill in their
mouth^, that they may be sure to have its utmost flavor; and by devoting all
their thoughts to the subject of their grief, keep up an uninterrupted sense of
it: as if they had the same tyranny for themselves which Caligula had for
others, and loved to feel themselves die. Indeed, there is not a more absurd
contradiction in the world, than to hear men cry out, of the weight, the
intolerableness of their burden, and yet grasp it as fast as if their life were
bound up in it; will not deposit it, no not for the smallest breathing time. A
strange fascination sure, and yet so frequent, that it ought to be the
fundamental care of him that would cure men of their discontents, to bring them
to a herty willingness of being cured.

It may be, this will look like paradox, and every man will be apt to say he
wishes nothing more in earnest, that to be cured of his present discontent. He
that is poor would be cured by wealth, he that is low and obscure by honor and
greatness: But so an hydropic person may say he desires to have his thirst
cured by a perpetual supply of drink: yet all sober people know, that this is
the way only to increase it; but let the whole habit of the body be rectified,
and then the thirst will cease of itself. And certainly it is the very same in
the present case: No outward accessions will ever satisfy our cravings, our
appetites must be tamed and reduced, and then they will never be able to arise
tumults, or put us into mutiny or discontent; and he (and none but he) that
submits to this method, can truly be said to desire a cure.

But he that thus attests the reality of his desires, and seeks contentment in
its proper sphere, may surely arrive to some considerable degrees of it. We
find in all ages men that only by the direction of natural light have calmed
their disquiets, and reasoned themselves into contentment, even under great and
sensible pressures; men who amidst the acutest torments have still preserved a
serenity of mind, and have frustrated contempts and reproaches by disregarding
them: and sure we give a very ill account of our Christianity, if we cannot do
as much with it, as they did without it.

I do not here propose such a stoical insensibility as makes no distinction of
events, which, though it has been vainly pretended to by many, yet sure was
never attained by any upon the strength of discourse. Some natural dullness or
casual stupifaction must concur to that, and perhaps by doing so, has had the
luck to be canonized for virtue. I mean only such a superiority of mind as
raises us above our sufferings though it exempts us not from the sense of them.
We cannot purpose to ourselves a higher pattern in any virtue than our blessed
Lord: Yet we see he not only felt that load under which he lay, but had the
most pungent and quick sense of it, such as prompted those earnest
deprecations, Father, if it be possible let this cup pass: Yet all those
displacencies of his flesh were surmounted by the resignation of his spirit,
nevertheless not what I will but what thou will, Luke xii. 42. And certainly he
that in imitation of this pattern does in spite of all the reluctancies of his
sense, thus entirely submit his will however he may be sad, yet he is not
impatient; nor is he like to be sad long, for to him that is thus resigned,
light will spring up, Psalm. xcvii. 11. some good angel will be lent like that
to our Savior to relieve his disconsolation. God will send either some outward
allays, or give such interior comforts and supports, as shall counterpoise
those afflictions he takes not off.

Indeed the grand design of God in correcting us, is (the same with that of a
prudent parent toward his child) to break our wills. That stubborn faculty
will scarce bend with easy touches, and therefore does require some force: And
when by that rougher handling, he has brought it to a pl^antness, the work is
done. It is therefore our interest to cooperate with this design, to assist as
much as we are able toward the subjugating this unruly part of ourselves. This
is that Sheba, 2 Samuel xx. 22. the surrendering of whom is God's expectation in
all the close sieges he lays to us. Let us then be so wise, as by an early
resigning it to divert his further hostilities, and buy our peace with him.

And truly this is the way not only to gain peace with him, but ourselves too:
It is the usurpation of our will over our reason which breeds all the confusion
and tumults within our own breasts, and there is no possibility of curbing its
insolence, but by putting it into safe custody, committing it to him who (as
our church teaches us) alone can order the unruly wills of sinful men. Indeed
nothing but experience can fully inform us of the serenity and calm of that
soul who has resigned his will to God. All care of choosing for himself is
happily superseded, he is tempted to no anxious forecasts for future events,
for he knows nothing can happen in contradiction of that supreme wi^^ in which
he has sanctuary: Which will certainly choose for him with that tenderness and
regard, that a faithful guardian (...) for his pupil, or an indulgent father
for his child that casts itself into his arms. Certainly there is not in the
world such a holy sort of artifice, so divine a charm to tie our God to us, as
this of resigning ourselves to him. We find the Gibeonites by yielding
themselves vassals to the Israelites had their whole army at their back to
rescue them in their danger, Josh. (...). 6, 7. and can we think God is less
considerate of his homagers and dependants? No certainly, his honor as well as
his compassion is concerned in the relief of those who have surrendered
themselves to him.

Further yet, when by resignation we have united our wills to God, we have
quite changed the scene, and we who when our wills stood single, were liable to
perpetual defeats, in this blessed combination can never be crossed. When our
will is twisted and involved with God's, the same omnipotence which backs his
will, does also attend ours. God's will, we are sure, admits of no control,
can never be resisted, and we have the fame security for ours, so long as it
concurs with it. By this means all calamities are unfringed, and even those
things which are most repugnant to our sensitive natures, are yet very
agreeable to our spirits, when we consider they are implicitly our own choice,
since they are certainly his, whom we have deputed to elect for us. Indeed
there can be no face of adversity so averting and formidable, which set in this
light will not look amiable. We see daily how many uneasinesses and prejudices
men will contentedly suffer in pursuit of their wills: And if we have really
espoused God's, made his will ours, we shall with as great (nay far greater)
alacrity embrace its distributions, how uneasy soever to our sense; our souls
will more acquiesce in the accomplishment of the divine will, than our flesh
can reluct to any severe effects of it.

Here then is that footing of firm ground, on which whosoever can stand, may
indeed do that which Archimedes boasted, move the whole world. He may as to
himself subvert the whole course, of sublunary things, unvenom all those
calamities which are to others the gall of asps; and in a further sense verify
that evangelical prophecy, of beating swords into plowshares, and spears into
pruning books, Isai. ii. 4. the most hostile weapons, the most adverse events,
shall be by him converted into instruments of fertility, shall only advance his
spiritual growth.

And now who can choose but confess this a much more eligible state, th^^ to be
always harrassed with solicitudes and cares, perpetually either fearing future
defeats, or bewailing the past. And then what can we call it less than madness
or enchantment, for men to act so contrary to their own dictates, yea to their
very sense and experience, to see and acknowledge the inexplicable felicity of
a resigned will, and yet perversely to hold ou^ theirs, though they can get
nothing by it, but the fullen pleasure of opposing God, and tormenting
themselves? Let us therefore, if not for our duty or ease, yet at least for our
reputation, the asserting ourselves men of sobriety and common sense, do that
which upon all these interests we are obliged; let us but give up our wills,
and with them we shall certainly divest ourselves of all our fruitless
anxieties, and cast our burdens upon him who invites us to do so. He who bears
all our sins, will bear all our sorrows, our griefs (...): If we will but be
content to deposite them, he will relieve us from all those oppressing weights,
which make our souls cleave to the dust, Psalm, cxix. 25. and will in exchange
give us only his light, his pleasant burden, Mat. 11. 30. In a word, there will
be no care left for us, but that of keeping ourselves in a capacity of his: Let
us but secure our love to him, and we are ascertained that all things shall
work together for our good, Romans viii. 28.

To conclude, resignation and contentment are virtues not only of a near
cognation and resemblance, but they are linked as the cause and the effect. Let
us but make sure of resignation, and content will flow into us without our
further industry: As on the contrary, whilst our wills are at defiance with
God's, we shall always find things at as great defiance with ours. All our
subtilties or industries will never mould them to our satisfactions until we
have molded ourselves into that pliant temper that we can cordially say, It is
the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel iii. 18.

If soul and body, you resign
To God who rules the earth below,
He is in mercy plentious,
And (...) to anger very slow.
To him who made the green light shines
And of his foot stool made us Lord,
I say may we ourselves resign
To him who can content afford.
The CLOSE.
THIS short institution of the Art of Contentment, cannot more naturally or
more desirably draw to a conclusion, than in the resort we have given it, in
the bosom of Divine Providence. The Roman conquerors, as the last pitch of
their triumphs, went to the capitol, and laid their garlands in the lap of
Jupiter: But the Christian has an easier way to triumph, to put his crown of
thorns (for that is the trophy of his victories) within the arms of his
gracious God; there lodge his scars, his wants, his sorrows, and himself too,
as in the best repository.

The Gospel command of not caring for the morrow, Mat. vi. 34. and being
careful for nothing, Phil. iv. 6. nakedly proposed, might seem the abandoning
of us to all the calamities of life: But when we are directed to cast all our
care upon a gracious and all powerful parent, and are assured that he cares for
us, 1 Pet. v. 7. that though a woman may forget her sucking child, that she
should not have compassion of the son of her womb, yet will be not forget his
children, Isai. xlix. 15. this will abundantly supersede all cavil and
objection. Whilst worldly men trust in an arm of flesh, lay up treasure on
earth, a prey for rust and moth, Mat. vi. 19. and a torment to themselves, Jam.
v. 3. the Christian has Omnipotence for his support, and a treasure in heaven,
where no thief approaches, nor moth corrupts, Mat. vi. 20. Whilst bold
inquirers call in question God's secret will, oblige him to their sub or
supralapsarian schemes, their absolute or conditional decrees, their grace
foreseen or predetermined; the pious man with awful acquiescence submits to
that which is revealed, resolves for ever to obey, but never to dispute: as
knowing that the beloved disciple leaned on his Master's bosom; but it is the
thieves and traitors part to go about to rifle it.

It is surely a modest demand in the behalf of God almighty, that we should
allow him as much privilege in his world, as every peasant claims in his
cottage; to be master there, and dispose of his household as he thinks best: To
say to this man, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to
his servant, Do this, and he does it, Mat. viii. 9. And if we would afford him
this liberty, there would be an immediate and put to all clamor and complaint.

4. We make it our daily prayer that the will of God may be done on earth as it
is in heaven, with a ready, swift, and uninterrupted constancy. As it is
giant-like rebellion to set up our will against his, so is it mad perverseness
to set it up against our own; be displeased that our requests are granted, and
repine that his, and therewith our will is done. It were indeed not only good
manners, but good policy, to observe the direction of the heathen, and follow
God, not prejudge his determination by ours; but in a modest suspension of our
thoughts, bearken what the Lord God will say concerning us, for be will speak
peace unto his people, and to his saints that they turn not again.

5. Or however upon surprise we may indulge to a passionate affection, and dote
upon our illegitimate offspring, our darling guilts or follies, as David did
upon that child, who was the price of murder and (...): Yet when the brat is
taken from us, when the child is dead, it will become us to do as he did, rise
from our sullen posture on the earth, and worship in the house of the Lord, 2 Samuel xii. 20. It will behove us, as he says in another place, to lay our hand
upon our mouth, because it was his doing, and with holy Job chap. xl. 4, 5.
when charged with his murmurings. Behold I am vile, what shall I answer? once
have I spoken, but I will not answer: yea twice, but I will proceed no further.

6. Socrates rightly said of contentment, opposing it to the riches of fortune
and opinion, that it is the wealth of nature, for it gives every thing that we
have learnt to want, and really need: But resignation is the riches of grace,
bestowing all things that a christian not only needs, but can desire, even
almighty God himself. He indeed, as the schoolmen teach, is the objective
happiness of the creature: He who is the fountain of being, must be also of
blessedness; and though this be only communicable to us, when we have put off
that flesh which cannot enter into the kingdom of God, and laid aside that
corruption which cannot inherit corruption, 1 Cor. xv. 50. yet even in this
life, we may make approaches to that blessed state, by acts of resignation and
denial of ourselves. It was the generous saying of Socrates (...) about to die
unto his friend: O Crito, since it is the will of God, so let it be: Anytus and
Melytus may kill me, but cannot hurt me. But such a resignation as it is
infinitely a greater duty to a christian, so it is also a more firm security.
In that case it is not the martyr, but Jesus of Nazareth who is thus
persecuted, and he who attacks him will find it is hard to kick against the
pricks, Acts. ix. 5.

7. There could not be a greater instance of the profligate sensuality of the
Israelites, than that they murmured for want of leeks and onions, Numb. xi. 5.
when they are angels food, and had bread rained down from heaven. It is
impossible for the soul that is sensible of God almighty's favor, to repine at
any earthly pressure. The Lord is my shepherd, says David, therefore can I
^ack nothing, Psalm. xxiii. 1. And thou have put gladness into my heart, more
than when their corn, and wine, and oil increased, Psalm. iv. 7. and in
passionate raptures he cries out, Psalm. lxxiii. 25, 26, Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire in comparison of thee? my
flesh and my heart saileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion
for ever. And likewise Psalm. xlvi. 1, 2, 3, 5. God is our hope and strength, a
very present help in trouble. Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be
removed; and though the hills be carried into the midst of the sea. Though the
waters thereof rage and swell, and though the mountains shake at the tempest of
the same. If God be in the midst of us, we shall (...) be removed, he will help
us, and that right early. Let us therefore possess ourselves of this support,
and as the prophet advises, Isai. viii. 12, 13. neither fear, nor be afraid, in
any exigence how great soever; but he still and quiet, and sanctify the Lord of
hosts himself, and let him be our fear, and let him be our dread.

As God that gives us many Gifts,
That to us is not due,
May be bestow his Grace on all
That reads this Volumn through:
For they will find that it contains
What well deserves applause;
For nothing in it contradicts
God's just revealed Laws.
CONTENTMENT.
FORGET not that thy station on earth is appointed by the wisdom of the
eternal; who knows thy heart, who sees the vanity of all thy wishes, and who
often in mercy, denies thy requests.

Yet for all reasonable desires, for all honest endeavors, his benevolence
has established, in the nature of things, a probability of success.

The uneasiness thou feel, the misfortunes thou bewailest, behold the root
from whence they spring, even thine own solly, thine own pride, thine own
distempered fancy.

Murmur not therefore at the dispensation of God, but correct thine own heart:
neither say within thyself, If I had wealth, or power, or leisure, I should be
happy; for know, they all of them bring to their several possessors their
peculiar inconveniences.

The poor man sees not the vexations and anxieties of the rich, he feels not
the di^^ffilties and perplexities of power, neither knows he the wearisomness
of leisure; and therefore it is that he repineth at his own lot.

But envy not the appearance of happiness in any man, for thou know not his
secret griefs.

To be satisfied with a little, is the greatest wisdom; and he that increases
his riches, increases his cares: But a contented mind is a hidden treasure,
and trouble finds it not.

Yet if thou suffer not the allurements of fortune to rob thee of justice,
or temperance, or charity, or modesty, even riches themselves shall not make
thee unhappy.

But hence shall thou learn, that the cup of felicity, pure and unmixed, is by
no means a draught for mortal man.

Virtue is the race which God has set him to run, and happiness the goal;
which none can arrive at until he has finished his course, and received his
crown in the mansions of eternity.

After the theological and rational arguments that have been used for
Contentment, the author begs leave to conclude with a solemn Prayer for
resignation to the Providence of God in all situations of life.
O GOD most holy, O Lord most mighty, O thou supreme Governor of the universe,
who governs all things by thy almighty power, and who by thy wisdom have
ordered the several degrees, and different states and conditions of men in this
world; grant me full contentment of mind in that state thou have been pleased
to place me, and humillty to acquiesce in thy disposal of me, and grace
faithfully to discharge those duties it requires of me. Grant me patience under
all losses and disappointments, and remove all repining and envy far from me. O
God I am thy creature; my entire dependence is on thee; grant therefore that my
^aith, my hope, and my trust may always be in thee, and that my hope and my
trust may not be in vain. I will therefore take no anxious thought for my life,
what I shall eat, or what I shall drink, or wherewithal I shall be clothed,
seeing thou know I have need of all these things, and that if I seek thy
righteousness, all these things shall be added unto me, out of thy great
bounty; nor will I be dismayed at any calamity thou in thy wise Providence
shall order for me, seeing that all things shall work together for good to them
that love and ^ear thoe. O God grant that I may with a constant evenness of
spirit embrace all thy disposals, forasmuch as I know not what to ask, and
cannot desire absolutely one event rather than another, without presumption,
and making myself the judge of all that train of future things which thy wisdom
has so justly concealed from my view. O my God I commit my life, and the
dearest concerns that attend it to thy disposal, in the name of Jesus Christ my
Savior, beseeching thee for his sake, by such ways and means as thou see
sit, to bring me to eternal life. And grant, O most holy God, that whether I
live, I may live unto the Lord, or whether I die, I may die unto the Lord; so
that whether I live or die, I may be the Lord's; which I most humbly beg for
the sake of Jesus Christ our Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Grant, Lord, I ^'er may be content
In this thy world, to which I Am sent;
Great God be thou my portion here,
I Will be con^ent, and thee revere.
Poetic Compositions.
By J. SEARSON.
A Common Prayer for the present Times.
SINCE we are taught in scripture word
To pray for friends and foes,
Then let us pray for each one's good,
Even those who us oppose.
May heaven shower down its blessings soon
On this our rising state,
So we'll be happy night and noon --
Enjoy even blessings great.
When Providence our ways direct,
We soon shall happy be;
We'll love like brothers and respect,
And still may we be free.
Sins of the states are our worst foes,
Let this be in our creed;
For those who break God's holy laws
May punished be indeed.
May every morn and evening prayer,
Repeat this just petition;
Lord, may we from our sins forbear,
Thou Wilt pity our condition.
Just heaven to light all dark schemes bring,
That would divide the land;
And may the worthy ever sing,
May peace most purely stand.
Great God, who rules this world below;
Divert harm far away;
That we may to thy judgments bow,
Blessed in this land to stay.
Poetic Description of the present Times, they wearing an alarming appearance.
NOT long ago I passed along
To seek for themes for a new song,
And view the parties that is most strong
Now that the time's alarming.
Some cries up England, and some France,
That they may learn warhoop to dance,
Although they should in blood advance,
The times are so alarming.
Our ships and treasure are no more,
Our property close to our shore,
Must we lie down to France therefore,
Because the time's alarming?
There Is Tom, and Ned, and Richard too*
Our politics they will pursue,
As if naught else they had to do,
which shows the time's alarming.
I think the time will not be long,
Before proud France, in thousands strong,
Invade the land, to help our ^ong,
The times are so alarming.
O blood, confusion, and distress,
See on our country how they press,
A bloody war we ^ure may guess,
Makes this our time alarming.
France now despises all fair means,
For peace, although we use such pains;
So now distress we see, not gains,
Which makes the times alarming.
What says the fair American,
When thousands, strangers in our land,
She scarce knows where to give her hand,
The times are so alarming.
War, war, how dreadful is the cry!
Women and children now lie by,
In terror sure they are like to die,
The times are so alarming.
Hope now is almost at a stand,
While enemies surround the land,
Even merchants now cannot trade command
Because the time's alarming.
England again and states agree,
In politics as you may see,
To keep Our friends from bondage free,
Although the time's alarming.
Let Us look for mercy from above,
To re-instate our former love,
We'll then be happy as a dove,
And time then less alarming.
But if we peace cannot obtain,
Content with war, we'll strive to gain,
So as to mitigate our pain,
Although the time's alarming.
Great Washington is now retired,
Although by all the world admired;
His counsel yet may be required,
Because the time's alarming.
Farewell to those, wish poets well,
Because the truth I to you tell,
As in this land I now do dwell,
Although the time's alarming.
Having been some time confined by a severe indisposition in the hospital of
Philadelphia, during which I composed the following lines on that charitable
institution.
How many drink the cup of baleful grief,
Or eat the bitter bread of misery.
THOMSON'S S^ASON^
HOW hard their fate who drink afflictions cup,
And (...) to the dregs must sip it up,
Alas! these bodies here are made of clay,
And dire diseases often lie in their way.
The kind, beneficent and ^e^der hand,
In pity to their sufferings gives command;
Commands (...) from ^ea^ humanity,
To ease great pains, and set the afflicted free,
How blessed are they, who ever doing good,
Gives physic for their pains, as also food,
To sooth and give them comfort in distress,
Which will increase their wealth nor make it less.
Blessed are those (we are told) who help the poor,
Nor send the afflicted from their wealthy door,
We are assured by God himself above,
The good man acts from tenderness and love.
He lays up treasure, in you heavens high,
Where good men go when from this earth they fly*
What kind attention to the patient's paid,
By those who have their charge, it is truly said.
How clean and decent here is every thing,
Those who nurse, do comfort to the patients bring.
It Is very pleasing to the human mind,
To have such kind relief as here we find.
The house is spacious called the Hospital,
So elegant and near take it in all;
Blessed is the memory of the first founder,
And if in heaven he is found, it is no wonder.
The beneficent man, who does much good,
And helps the ^oor with physic and with food;
Has Cod above a sure reward,
Who will most surely all good acts regard.
^^^remely blessed are they who do much good,
Who heal the sick and give the hungry food:
Fair well dear Philadelphia, fare ye well,
Your praise in other climes I soon may (...).
An ACROSTIC.
HIS name throughout the states well known,
In Europe too his acts were shown,
Such were his greatness all will own.
Excee^ing all that tongue can tell,
Xerxes the king didn't act so well;
Could letters talk, as letters lead,
Excellency would great be made.
Let rich and poor, let young and old,
Learn wisdom which is pure as gold;
Even to walk in prudential ways,
Nor in this walk make short delays;
Convinced that wisdom ever will shine,
Yea, and all know it is divine.
Gracious, humane, continued good,
Exceeds all wisdom understood.
O fill my heart, eternal King,
Replete with every virtuous thing;
Greatness and goodness will agree,
Even in time and in eternity.
Where shall we find so great a (...)
And so much prudence and great fam^^
Such brav'ry great, with courage mixed,
His fame to future time has fixed;
In every part of the known land
None but has heard of his command.
Great actions are from heaven above,
To all who honor God and love.
O blessed is retirement,
None's happy but with pure content.
An ACROSTIC.
SUBLIMELY great, the philosophic mind
In Newton shines, unequalled, unconfined,
Regions and causes, in dark chaos lost,
In his solutions clearest luster boast.
Sunk in obscurity, of proof bereft,
Astronomy in error's maze was left:
At Newton's call, uncertainty withdrew;
Conviction spoke, and wisdom rose to view.
No more the mist of ignorance ass^^^ls,
Enlightened truth's pleasing form prevails,
With reverend wonder (...) delight,
The whole creation opens to our sight;
Orb upon orb, in awful order placed,
Newton explored, and all their motions traced.
The following remarkable Prophecy was written by that noted and prophetical
writer, in 1651, that it, 147 years since.
GREAT earthquakes and commotions by sea and land shall come in the year of God
1779. Great wars in Germany and America in 1780. The destruction of popery, or
Babylon's fall, in the year 1790. God will be known by many in the year 1795.
This will produce a great man. The stars will wander, and the moon turn as
blood in 1800. Africa, Asia, and America will tremble in 1803. A great
earthquake over all the world in 1805: God will be universally known by all;
then a general reformation and peace for ever, when the people shall (...) more.

On the STARRY HEAVENS.
The Composer of the following Hymn was the noted and justly admired Mr.
Addison, in his Spectator, Vol. 6. No. 465, and recommended by the reverend Mr.
(...) Hervey, in his Meditations.
THE spacious firmament on high,
With all the blue etherial sky,
And spangled heavens, a shining frame,
Their great original proclaim.
The unwearied sun, from day to day,
Does his Creator's power display,
And publishes to every land
The work of an almighty hand.
Soon as the evening shades prevail,
The moon takes up the wondrous tale,
And nightly to the listening earth
Repeats the story of her birth;
While all the stars that round her burn,
And all the planets in their turn,
Confirm the tidings as they roll,
And spread the truth from pole to pole.
What though in solemn silence all
Move round the dark terrestrial b^ll;
What though no real voice nor sound
Amidst their radie^t orbs be found.
In reason's ear they all rejoice,
And utter forth a glorious voice,
For ever singing, as they shine*
The hand that made us is Divine.
Poetic Description of August.
SEE blooming August, smiling kind,
Elates the careful farmer's mind!
Hear how the gentle swelling breeze,
In mildness whispers through the trees*
And wasting calmly over the plain,
Bends into waves the yellow grain:
The dog star now, with raging hea^,
Makes the reluctant hind retreat;
And rest his weary limbs a while,
That he again may work and toil.
The trees with juicy apples bend,
And pears from loaded boughs descend*
The peaches with a blushing dye,
Invite the taste, and glad the eye;
While balmy flowerets all around,
With richest honors cloathe the ground.
The sickles now the swains prepare,
And joyful to the fields repair,
Jocund to reap, with busy hands,
The produce of these states and lands:
Their work with plenty Ceres crowns,
And in rich crops their hardship drowns,
With hurry every farmer teems,
And all one scene of business seems,
While frugal mortals life employ,
in bustle, labor, care and joy:
Now see the youth of all our states,
Who all combine to enrich our gates:
May providence their way now guide,
So that we join and not divide;
May every one in this agree,
And monthly bring us harmony --
So shall we every good pursue,
Till mild September comes in view.
TRUST in GOD.
Job xiii. 15. Though he stay me, yet will I trust in him.
THOU God supreme, that orders all things well,
My wants, my pains, my griefs, I Will to thee tell,
And should thy care correct me in my way,
Still, O my gracious God, I Will on thee stay:
But should thou stay me, compassionate God,
Thy comforts thou can show even in thy rod.
O holy, holy, sovereign God above.
Through our Redeemer's blood I beg thy (...).
Correct me, then, whenever I go (...),
And through the maze of life lead (...) way
So that in bliss with thee I may be found:
The glory and praise will ever to thee redound,
To Father, Son, and Spirit blessings be,
Through every age, and to eternity.
Farewell, my candid Readers, fare ye well;
The Moses ^raths hereafter I may tell.
Lyric Poems.
Remember your Creator, etc. Eccl. xii.
CHILDREN, to your Creator, God,
Your early honors pay,
While vanity and youthful blood,
Would tempt your thoughts astray.
The memory of his mighty name,
Demands your first regard;
Nor dare indulge a meaner flame,
'Till you have loved the Lord.
Be wise, and make his favor sure,
Before the mournful days,
when youth and mirth are known no more,
And life and strength decays.
No more the blessings of a feast
Shall relish on the tongue.
The heavy ^ar forgets the taste
And pleasure of a song.
Old age, with all her dismal train,
Invades your golden years,
With sighs and groans, and raging pain,
And death that never spares.
What will you do when light departs,
And leaves your withering eyes,
Without one beam to cheer you hearts,
From the superior skies?
How will you meet God's frowning brow,
Or stand before his seat,
While nature's old supporters bow,
Nor bear their tottering weight?
Can you expect your feeble arms
Shall make a strong defense,
When death! with terrible alarms,
Summons the prisoner hence?
The silver bands of nature burst,
And let the building fall;
The flesh goes down to mix with dust,
Its vile original.
Laden with guilt, a heavy load!
Uncleans'd and unforgiv'n,
The soul returns to an angry God,
To be shut c^t from heaven.
The Welcome Messanger.
LORD, when we see a faint of thine
Lie gasping on his breath,
With longing eyes, and looks divine,
Smiling and pleased in death;
How we could even contend to lay
Our limbs upon that bed!
We ask thine envoy to convey
Our spirits in his stead.
Our souls are rising on the wing,
To venture in his place;
For when grim death has lost his sting,
He has an angel's face.
Jesus, then purge my crimes away,
It Is guilt creates my fears;
It Is guilt gives death his fierce array,
And all the arms it bears.
Oh! if my threatening sins were gone,
And death had lost his sting,
I could invite the angel on,
And ^hide his lazy wing.
Away these interposing days,
And let the lovers meet;
The angel has a cold embrace,
But kind, and soft and sweet.
I Would l^ap at once my seventy years,
I Would rush into his arms,
And lose my breath, and all my cares,
Amidst those heavenly charms.
Joyful I Would lay this body down,
And leave the lifeless clay,
Without a sigh, without a groan,
And stretch and soar away.
Sincere Praise.
ALMIGHTY Maker, God!
How wondrous is thy name!
Thy glories how diffused abroad
Through the creation's frame!
Nature in every dress,
Her humble homage pays,
And finds a thousand ways to express
Thine undisembled praise.
In native white and red
The rose and lily stand,
And free from pride, their beauties spread,
To show thy skilful hand.
The lark mounts up the sky,
With unambitious song,
And hears her maker's praise on high,
Upon her artless tongue.
My soul would rise and sing
To her Creator too;
Fain would my tongue adore my King,
And pay the worship due.
But pride, that busy sin,
Spoils all that I perform;
Cursed pride that creeps securely in,
And swells a haughty worm.
Thy glories I abate,
Or praise thee with design;
Some of thy favors I forget,
Or think the merit mine.
The very songs I frame,
Are faithless to thy cause,
And steal the honors of thy name
To build their own applause,
Create my soul anew,
Else all my worship's vain;
This wretched heart will never be true,
Until it is formed again.
Descend, celestial fire,
And seize me from above,
Melt me in flames of pure desire,
A sacrifice to love.
Let joy and worship spend
The remnant of my days,
And to my God, my soul, ascend,
In sweet perfumes of praise.
Advertisement.
THE Author though formerly possessed of a considerable fortune, and several
years a merchant in Philadelphia, being now reduced by a series of misfortunes,
would gladly accept of a Clerk's place in a Counting House or Public Office. --
He would engage as private tutor in a gentleman's family, or would become a
teacher in a public school or academy, having, in more youthful days been
reputably employed in those several spheres of life, and having certificates
and recommendations of the same. -- He will retain the most lively gratitude to
any of his subscribers for their friendship on this act of beneficence.

Enquire of the Printer hereof for the address of JOHN SEARSON.


