ACCOUNT OF THE EPIDEMIC YELLOW FEVER, AS IT APPEARED IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK
IN THE YEAR 1795. CONTAINING, BESIDES ITS HISTORY, etc. THE MOST PROBABLE MEANS
OF PREVENTING ITS RETURN, AND OF AVOIDING IT, IN CASE IT SHOULD AGAIN BECOME
EPIDEMIC.

BY VALENTINE SEAMAN, M. D. ONE OF THE PHYSICIANS OF THE HEALTH COMMITTEE OF
NEW YORK IN 1795.

-- And though the putrid South
Be shut; though no convulsive agony
Shake, from the deep foundations of the world,
The imprisoned plagues; a secret venom often
Corrupts the air, the water, and the land.
Even Albion, girt with less malignant skies,
Albion the poison of the Gods has drunk,
And felt the sting of monsters all her own.
ARMSTRONG. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY HOPKINS, WEBB and CO. No. 40, PINE-STREET. --
1796. -- [ENTERED ACCORDING TO LAW.]

To BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE INSTITUTES, AND OF CLINICAL MEDICINE,
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.
THY general liberality of sentiment, together with the unparalleled manner in
which thou durst, in the noble cause of humanity, to introduce innovations in
the treatment of the Epidemic Fever of Philadelphia in 1793, amidst the
persecuting shafts of thy opponents, point thee out as a most proper patron for
the free thoughts advanced in the following pages.

Besides this, I should consider myself greatly deficient, was I to neglect
this opportunity of acknowledging the high sense of gratitude I entertain for
the benefit received, not only from thy valuable public instructions, but also
from thy ever useful private conversations.

Wishing thy long continued and increasing usefulness, in thy profession and in
the diffusion of Medical knowledge,

I remain, With respect and esteem, Thy Friend, Valentine Seaman.

TO JOHN BROOM, GABRIEL FURMAN, ANDREW VAN TUYL, JOHN CAMPBELL, ROBERT LENOX,
THEOPH. BEEKMAN, ROBERT BOWNE, NICHOLAS CARMER, ISAAC STOUTENBURGH, SAMUEL
BARD, GEORGE JANEWAY, and NATH. HAZARD,
Surviving Members of the Committee of Health of New York for 1795 --
Whose undaunted attention to the objects of their appointment, and whose
persevering care for the relief of their afflicted Fellow-Citizens, must, no
doubt, have been followed by the gratifying sense of well done, in their own
bosoms: -- Blessed be their reward.

As the following observations were drawn up partly at their solicitations, and
as the ideas and opinions advanced in them, are considered as meriting their
serious attention, they are most respectfully submitted by

Their Friend and Fellow-Citizen, THE AUTHOR

PREFACE.
THE utility of accurate Histories of Epidemics to the improvement of medicine,
has never been doubted from the time of the early and valuable publications of
Hypocrates, to the late and no less judicious observations of Dr. Rush: but as
the Yellow Fever has been so accurately and fully described and treated of by
several physicians in the West Indies, in Philadelphia, etc. it may be thought
entirely superfluous to give any account of it as it appeared in this city.
Fully sensible of the force of this remark, I long declined attempting any
thing of the kind; but as several facts have occurred to me, a general
knowledge of which I consider as highly interesting to humanity and of
importance to the community at large, and especially to the inhabitants of this
city, I am finally induced to submit them to the consideration of the public,
particularly as the Medical Society, which had made some progress in the
business, have declined the prosecution of it.

THE many accounts and complete descriptions already given of this disease,
seem to render it unnecessary to enter into a minute detail of its several
symptoms in this place; I have therefore been very short upon that part of the
subject, referring the more nice inquirer to the beforementioned authors,
particularly to Dr. Rush's account of it, as it appeared in Philadelphia, in
1793, where he will find its various appearances very particularly and
accurately delineated.

As the following observations have originated almost entirely from facts and
circumstances of the disease, as it appeared in this city; the reader will find
himself much deceived, if he looks for references to long catalogues of eminent
authors, or for an elaborate account of the diseases of the West Indies,
pestilences of Europe, or plagues of Asia: and as my conclusions are drawn
chiefly from cases and occurances, that have come within my own personal
knowledge, (which favored by my local situation in the center of the Epidemic,
and my providential preservation from its influence, till it was nearly
extinguished, were considerably numerous) he will also find that my remarks
have not been much either influenced or supported by the uncertain
communication of my brother practitioners or other citizens; hence, if decided
and undoubted facts, shall hereafter appear which shall disprove them, my error
should be assigned only to my general skepticism respecting current medical
reports, and the limited nature that I have imposed upon my sources of
information.

As some thoughts which I have advanced, are decidedly opposed to the common
sense of the faculty in general, I wish it to be considered, that they are not
the offspring of any favorite theory, or influential hypothesis; for I had
heretofore been taught and believed very differently, till the stubborn
obtrusion of facts upon my mind, forced me to change my opinion.

I AM well aware of the loss of reputation that I may sustain, from attempting,
in the course of this essay, to support opinions which are very unpopular with
the inhabitants of this city; however, the importance of the subject, has
swallowed up all personal considerations, and determined me freely to
communicate what I consider as highly essential to their welfare; and I shall
be richly paid, if my temerity shall in the least degree, tend to the
prevention of a disease, which in its partial It being chiefly confined to a
particular part of the city.
operation, in less than three months, swept off upwards of seven hundred of
our fellow-citizens; which should be sufficiently alarming to put us upon our
guard in future, for should it again arise, in a season more favorable to its
spreading, perhaps its more universal devastation will not be checked till it
has numbered thousands in its mortal list.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE EPIDEMIC YELLOW FEVER, etc.
Of the State of the Air, and Diseases preceding and accompanying the Epidemic,
and a History of the Disease.
FROM the tables of Meteorological observations, inserted immediately before
the considerations on the cause of the disease, it appears, that in the
beginning of the sixth month (June) the weather was pretty warm, but became
more moderate on the seventh and eighth days, and that its temperature was
suddenly increased on the 9th of the month, raising the Mercury 12 degrees in
Fahrenheit's thermometer in the space of twenty-four hours; it was warm on the
tenth, then became cooler for four or five days, after which time it continued
very warm and sultry for several days; on the 19th the thermometer stood at 87,
and varied between that and 69 the remainder of this month -- we had rains on
the 2d, 11th, 20th, 24th, 25th, and 30th. The mean temperature of this month
was 73 These were the states of the thermometer at one o'clock, P. M.
.

It gradually became cooler for the first five days in the seventh month
(July); on the 6th the mercury rose to 83, which was 13* higher than it stood
the day before; the next day it fell to 72; after which, in the course of six
days, it rose to 89 without any material sudden change; the weather then
moderated in some degree, so that in the last nine days of this month it did
not rise above the 80 and in one of them it stood at 68 -- the mean temperature
of this month was 81: it rained on the 3d, 10th, 18th, 23d, 24th, 27th, 30th,
and 31st.

The thermometer stood near 90 most of the time during the first ten days of
the eighth month (August); on one day it was upwards of 93; in the remainder of
the month it varied between the 60th and 88th -- great part of this time it was
above 80, and there were but a few days wherein it was below 72; the medium
temperature of this month was 83; we had rains on the 3d, 9th, 10th, 11th,
12th, 13th, 20th, 21st, 23d, and 31st days, and several of them were very great.

The first week in the ninth month (September) the mercury remained between 70
and 75; in the second and third week it varied but little, one way or the
other, from 80; but we had some cool days in the latter part of the month, the
mercury being as low as 58 on the 22d and on the 30th; mean temperature about
73; we had five rainy days, viz. the 2d, 7th, 13th, 19th, and 20th.

In the tenth month (October) the temperature of the air was at no time above
75, but varied between that and 49 irregularly; the mean temperature was 62 the
latter part of this month we frequently had white frosts at night; it rained on
the 10th, 20th, and 31st.

Musquetoes were never before known, by the oldest inhabitants, to have been so
numerous as at this season, especially in the south-eastern part of the city;
they were particularly troublesome to foreigners, many of whom, had those parts
of their bodies that were exposed to them, covered with blisters from their
venomous operations.

Our summer fruits in general were no ways extraordinary; water-melons
particularly, from the wetness of the season, were very flashy and insipid.

It was remarked that many laborers employed at the different buildings, gave
out at their work, from the excessive heat of the weather.

An unusual number of persons suffered in the warm part of the seventh and
eighth months, from drinking cold water; and several fell down and died in the
streets, whose deaths were assigned to that cause, when it more probably was
induced by an apoplexy, brought on by the excessive heat of the sun; one case
came under my particular observation which was certainly of that kind, although
currently reported otherwise.

The cholera infantum, was very common in the early part of the sixth month,
and increased as the weather became warmer. Bilious cholics and dysenteries
became very prevalent in the seventh and eighth months. At this time also the
cholera morbus carried off a number of grown persons.

In the beginning of the ninth month, the measles made their appearance, but
they suddenly vanished with the above mentioned diseases, as soon as the yellow
fever had spread itself among us: I did not observe but a single case of it
during the dominion of this powerful epidemic.

The common remitting bilious fever, was no ways uncommon in the summer months,
but this also gave way, or rather perhaps, run into the yellow fever, as that
gained ground in the city.

As early as the sixth of the seventh month, I was called upon in conjunction
with Dr. Treat, then health-officer to our port, to visit Thomas Foster, a
patient brought into the almshouse, whom we found affected with all the full
marked and decided symptoms of an highly malignant yellow fever; the adnata of
his eyes and his skin were of a bright yellow, the latter covered with purple
spots, his mind deranged, his tongue covered with a dry black sordes, with
hemorrhages from his gums and nose, and a discharge of black and very offensive
matter from his stomach and bowels; he died on the ninth.

Dr. Treat was taken on the 22d of the seventh month, and died on the 30th.
Several other undoubted cases occurred, about this time, in the neighborhood of
Dover-street, but the first one that came under my particular observation, was
that of James Dalton on the 12th of the eighth month, then in the fifth day of
his illness, of which he died the day following as yellow as gold. From this
time the disease became more and more frequent; yet as we find by the accurate
accounts of the Health Committee, not above two a day upon an average died of
it, till the 24th of the month.

The increasing prevalence of the epidemic at the upper part of Water-street
and in Cherry-street, and in all the neighboring low ground between them and
Chatham and the lower part of George-streets, in the forepart of the ninth
month, became so alarming as to drive many of the most opulent of their
inhabitants to the country, while the less prudent and the more indigent
remained exposed to a disease, which, from this limited spot, in less than
three months, carried as many as five hundred to their graves.

The disease was not, however, confined entirely to this part of the city; for
in every other situation, favoring the accumulation of filth and stagnation of
putrefactive materials, there it was no stranger: it raged with peculiar
violence in the vicinity of a most intolerable pent up sink, to the west of
Peck-slip, which is the receptacle for all the refuse kitchen articles, and
yard wash of a number of lots fronting Pearl and Water-streets, that back upon
it; it was likewise very prevalent in the neighborhood of the Fly-market, also
in and about Skinner-street, as well as in some of the unregulated grounds on
the north side of the town.

If an account of the epidemic, as it pervaded the different parts of the town,
could be accurately ascertained, and depicted in colors, heightened in
proportion to the combined early time of attack, and the numbers affected,
blazoned by its comparative malignity, there can be no manner of doubt, but
that the low ground in the southeast of the city as above mentioned, would
appear as the grand center of the calamity, diffusing its effects, like
diverging rays, to the adjacent parts; aiding by its most powerful influence,
different secondary centers, already smoking hot, to flame out its pestiferous
operations. The many solitary cases of the disease that have occurred in
distant healthy situations, appear to have been kindled up by imprudent
individual exposures too near these sources of infection.

The black people appeared to be as subject to the disease as the whites, but
it was not so fatal to them; of eight that I prescribed for, only one died, and
with her, the complaint having stolen in under the deceitful form of a common
cynanche, was permitted to run on for some days, before medical aid was called
for. By report of Dr. S. L. Mitchell, in behalf of a committee of the
Manumitting Society of this city, it appears that not a single scholar of the
free black school, under their patronage, died with it.

Several circumstances tended to render the disease particularly fatal to the
more indigent part of the community: 1st. The higher prices of house-rent in
the other parts of the city, having concentered a great proportion of them in
the epidemic neighborhood, and crowded them in very small confined apartments;
a number of houses contained as many families as it had rooms in it. 2d. Their
poverty not permitting them to quit their place of residence when the disease
came around them. 3d. The great difficulty of getting nurses, and their
exorbitant prices preventing them from getting proper attendance before their
situation became known to the Committee of Health, oftentimes a whole family
being taken down about the same time, their panic struck fair-day friends
quitting them in their distress, from the fear of infection. 4th. The neglect
of obtaining early medical assistance, from a hope that their disease was not
the prevailing one: and 5th. The refusal of many, after they were taken ill,
thus miserably situated, to go to Belle Vue, "lest (to use their own
expression) they should catch the Yellow-Fever and die."

Foreigners who came from a more temperate climate, as the English, Irish,
Scotch, etc. and people from the country, who had not long resided in town,
were particularly obnoxious to this complaint.

The French from the West Indies, seemed proof against the influence of this
epidemic, a numerous family of them continued in the midst of it, and viewed
without danger the death of a great many, and the disease of nearly all their
neighbors who remained in town; not one of them suffered the least
indisposition: In another boarding house of them, containing at least thirty or
forty persons, not far from Peck-slip, not any of them took the complaint,
although numbers of the other inhabitants were droping away with it, on every
side of them.

The disease spared no age or sex, although it was most fatal to the young and
those in the prime of life.

Symptoms of the disease, as exhibited in the different parts and functions of
the body.
1st. The vital functions suffered extremely in the first attack of the
disease, it generally coming on with chillness, an anxious and interrupted
respiration, with a total absence of perspiration; this however, in some
instances, came on very copiously, after the great heat that generally followed
the chill, had existed for a time, but in most cases the skin continued dry and
parched, except a sweat was induced by artificial means.

The pulse was as variable as the hues of the cameleon; in most cases it was
frequent, and after the chill had subsided, it became somewhat hard: yet
instances occurred of a preternatural slowness. I met with one case in a black
man, where it beat only forty-two strokes in a minute; and in another person
there was a complete intermission of it in every twelfth or fifteenth
pulsation: and in other patients, particularly in the 3d or 4th day of their
complaints, were physicians to judge from the pulse alone, they would declare
them in a convalescent state, at the very time they were in the most imminent
danger and sometimes within a few hours of their end. Although I firmly believe
with my most eminent teacher Dr. Rush, that the pulse is our best guide in the
knowledge of diseases, yet in no complaint that has ever occurred to my
observation, have I found this most sure index of the state of the system, so
little to be depended on. Hemorrhages from the nose, gums, stomach, uterus,
etc. were very common at the commencement, as well as in the more advanced
periods of this disease.

2d. In the ANIMAL FUNCTIONS this disease in its first attack, produced
lassitude, and an aversion to all kind of bodily exertion with a sense of
general debility, attended with violent pains in the head and back, sometimes
shooting down the legs: these frequently preceded the chills, and in most cases
accompanied it and continued afterward, as a very distressing symptom of the
disease. The mind was oftentimes very much dejected, with imperfect vision and
memory, followed by delirium, subsultus, tendinum, etc. before death.

There was in many cases an evident, though slight, remission in the violence
of these symptoms sometimes in the course of twenty-four hours from the time of
the attack, as also at some other periods; but in the hurry of the raging
epidemic, I was unavoidably prevented from gaining an accurate knowledge of
them.

3d. No part of the body appeared to suffer more than the NATURAL FUNCTIONS,
which includes the alimentary canal and secretions. The stomach, as in all
fevers, was affected with a degree of nausea, and sometimes vomiting at the
first accession of this disease, which frequently subsided for a while, but is
succeeded about the third day, if proper means are not used to prevent it, by
an almost unconquerable irritability and retrograde movement of this organ,
throwing up large quantities of green or yellow bile, and rejecting immediately
every particle of medicine, food or drink, that was taken into it -- afterward
discharging an aquoeus fluid containing a number of light dun colored specks in
it; this, if not checked, was followed by a puking of a fluid exactly
resembling coffee, with its grounds floating in it, which by standing, would
settle to the bottom.

The vomiting which occurs about the third day, frequently, is the only
distressing symptom that the patient labors under, his pulse becoming natural,
skin cool and moist, with an entire freedom from pain, and a perfect clearness
in the mental operations, that insuperable circumstance standing alone, as it
were, to humble the pride of physic, and to warn, in cool blood, the unhappy
sufferer of his precarious existence.

A hiccoughing often was very troublesome in the different stages of this
complaint. The bowels were very uniformly and obstinately costive: there were
some ca,+ses it is true, that were attended with frequent evacuations, but
these generally seemed rather of a partial dysentery nature, and not free
discharges from the whole course of the intestines.

The secretion of bile was greatly increased, as appeared by its copious
discharge from the stomach in vomiting, as well as from the bowels when excited
by proper purgatives. The flow of saliva and excretions from the mouth and
sauces were not much impeded; in the beginning the tongue appearing moist and a
little white, after a few days it became more thickly furred and assumed a
deeper hue, but frequently in the latter stages it became quite dry and covered
with a black crust.

The appearances on the superficies were various, the skin oftentimes retained
its natural appearance, but frequently, though not uniformly, as the disease
advanced, it assumed a yellow tinge. Musquetoe bites, which before had entirely
disappeared, showed themselves in all the parts that had been exposed to them,
in small purpleish red spots; these were often taken for petechia, which
sometimes, but more rarely appeared.

Unseemly scabs, oftentimes in the latter stages, formed about the mouth,
which, on being scratched off, frequently were followed by troublesome little
hemorrhages. These eruptions did not in this fever as it does in others,
indicate any favorable event of the complaint.

The adnata of the eyes, in the beginning where the attack was severe,
generally were tinged and suffused with a reddish color, changing with the skin
to a yellow, as the disease advanced: there were many, however, even among
those who died, whose skin nor eyes showed the least appearance of this color.

DIAGNOSIS.
If it should be established, that this fever is as highly contagious as is,
perhaps, too generally believed, its diagnosis or peculiar symptoms
distinguishing it from others, would become a matter of the greatest
importance, both to individual safety and to the welfare of the community at
large.

This part of the study of medicine has, of late, been considered of less
consequence than formerly, since the fallacy and imprudence of prescribing for
the name of a disease, has been so fully exposed and justly condemned by the
generality of physicians; -- however, in this particular complaint, as the
hopes of a cure depend, almost entirely, upon the means used in the first two
or three days of its attack, it certainly must be of prime necessity to know it
in its early stage. We cannot be too careful in detecting the existence of this
disease, for in its commencement, its evident symptoms are oftentimes no way in
proportion to the danger. Hence, as Dr. Jackson observes, (in his treatise on
the fevers of Jamaica) persons unacquainted with the nature of the disease,
would be disposed to believe that the patient expressed sufferings that were
not real. And hence physicians are sometimes led to neglect them till it is too
late to save their patients.

In the first stage of this fever it is oftentimes with difficulty
distinguished from the common bilious remittent, its symptoms in general being
exactly similar, only aggravated in degree; the pain in the head and back are
more severe and constant, and the remissions, whenever they are observable, are
more obscure: Those who are well acquainted with the disease, may often
recognize it by a certain undescribeable appearance in the countenance of the
sick, the eye is often more red, and the face more flushed than the heat of the
body and the general action of the sanguiferous system, would lead us to expect.

The remarkable irritability of the stomach, that generally comes on (when the
disease is permitted to run an uninterrupted course) about the third or fourth
day, whereby a constant nausea and retchings to vomit, immediately brings up
every thing as soon as swallowed, seems to be a pretty distinguishing mark of
this disease at this stage of it.

The yellow skin, and coffee ground or black vomitings, as they sometimes occur
in the more advanced stage, may be looked upon as decided and unequivocal
evidences of this complaint; but they cannot be considered as pathognomic
symptoms, for although they are to be found in this fever only, yet in the
greatest proportion of cases they do not attend it.

The prevailing epidemic should always have a great influence in fixing our
judgment with respect to this, as well as other diseases. Whenever it is found,
from decided cases, that it really exists in any particular situation, I should
consider every fever, in that neighborhood, attended with aggravated symptoms
of a common bilious remittent, to be of this kind; for I should suppose the
powerful operation of its cause, would certainly predominate over the milder
causes of more moderate maladies.

PROGNOSIS.
The prognosis is to be drawn from the disposition and constitution of the
persons affected, as well as from the particular symptoms. Those who had been
much debilitated by previous disease, great anxiety of mind, drunkenness, etc.
most generally admitted of but an unfavorable prospect as to the event of this
disease, as likewise did the resolute and hardy, who would not early submit to
their complaints, but endeavored to shake them off as they would a common
catarrh. I used to warn such ones at my first visits, that I feared from their
dispositions, that they would undertake to wrestle with their disease, and that
if they did they would surely fall under it, and unfortunately their conduct
too often verified my fears and justified my prognostic.

In the early stages of the complaint, if it came on very moderately, without
much affection of the head, if the eyes and countenance were not much affected,
and the bowels were easily moved by the medicines hereafter to be mentioned,
we, in general, were warranted in pronouncing a favorable termination. But when
the face and eyes were suffused with a reddish tinge, or great distress and
anxiety were expressed in the countenance, with severe pain in the head and
back, we had great cause to fear the consequences, particularly if the bowels
were obstinately constipated; this last circumstance, in every instance,
portended the greatest danger; indeed, it seemed to me that the degree of
danger was, very generally, in proportion to the stubbornness of the
constriction of these viscera and their insensibility to the impression of
purgative medicines.

In the latter stages of the complaint, when the constant vomiting came on,
there was always great danger to be apprehended; yet some have recovered after
discharging the coffee ground like matter beforementioned, but these cases were
confessedly very rare.

The other symptoms of putrescency, as a black tongue, petichiae, etc. were
generally unfavorable, although I did not find hemorrhages such terrible
occurences as they are, by the generality of authors, stated to be. In the
ninth month (September) 24th, in a communication to the Committee of Health,
among other things, I observed, that in taking a retrospective view of my
different patients with the prevailing complaint, I found among them five who
had had hemorrhages, either from the nose, gums, stomach or uterus, and one who
had lost some blood from an accidental wound in his head; these were all the
patients that I had attended, who had been affected with any hemorrhage
whatever, neither of them had died, three had recovered, and the other three
were much better than they had been. -- These three also afterward recovered;
nevertheless, some patients afterward died, whose complaints were attended
with hemorrhages; still these facts prove that they do not indicate so much
danger as is commonly believed.

Having given a cursory account of the season immediately preceding and during
the continuance of the disease, and also a history of its most material
symptoms, together with the most essential circumstances respecting its
diagnosis and prognosis, I proceed to state some facts and free thoughts
relative to a question, in my opinion highly interesting to the cause of
humanity, and greatly important to the community, for on it depends the welfare
of the afflicted individual, as well as the method of preventing or eradicating
the disease in general, viz.

Is the yellow fever communicated by contagion By contagion I mean a matter or
effluvia arising directly or originally from the body of a man under a
particular disease, and exc^^ing the same kind of disease in the body of the
person to whom they are applied. Cullen's first lines.
or not?
Unshackled from all prejudice, I shall venture to mention several facts that
oppose the idea of the contagious nature of this disease, which, if they have
not determined me to quit the beaten path of that old established opinion, in
which I have been educated, they certainly have staggered me very much, I
therefore submit them to public consideration, conceiving that they merit the
most serious and candid attention.

1st. In several instances, persons have been taken with this disease, who had
avoided, with the utmost care, any communication with the sick, and some that
came to my knowledge, who had not been out of their houses for several weeks,
nor had any affected person been within eighty feet of them, were attacked and
severely handled by it; hence if it was induced by contagion, this complaint
must be the most highly contagious of any other; the contagion of the plague
itself, as appears by the report of physicians most conversant with it, does
not extend at farthest above ten paces from the infected body. (Howard on
Lacerettos.)

2d. Although many of the nurses and attendants on the sick, in the part of the
city where it raged, took the complaint, yet others, who lived in the same
neighborhood and cautiously avoided such employments, did not more generally
escape it. And notwithstanding many from New York died with this disease in
different parts of the country, on Long Island, in Jersey, Albany, etc. yet I
have not heard of a single well authenticated case of any nurse or attendant of
the sick, or any other persons taking it except they had lately been in the
city. It is true, popular reports have oftentimes spread the disease about the
country, yet upon close inquiry that I have made in several instances, to
ascertain their validity, I have found them to have originated from diseases of
an entire different nature, and sometimes from deaths that occurred about the
same time, and which would have happened, had the yellow fever never existed:
even should it appear that some persons were taken with a fever in consequence
of the anxious fatigue of nursing, and the distress from the loss of near and
dear relatives, which finally proved fatal to them, we are no way justified in
supposing that it was this complaint; for had like attention been paid to
persons with a pleurisy or rheumatism, like consequences might have followed:
further, should an instance be produced wherein a person who had had an
intercourse with one in the country affected by this disease, should afterward
be taken with a like complaint, it would not be a conclusive proof of its
contagious nature, since sporadic cases have occurred at many places where
there was not the least suspicion, or possibility of its having been produced
by effluvia arising from a person under a like disease; Few years pass, says
Dr. Rush (account of the bilious remittent yellow fever, as it appeared in
Philadelphia, in 1793, page 159) without producing them in Philadelphia. Dr.
Lird, (diseases incident to Europeans in hot climates) says sporadic cases of
yellow fever have even occured in England.
the communication with the sick, might in such an instance, be merely an
accidental and no ways an essential concurrence.

Dr. Lining in a letter to Dr. Whytt, (Essays and Observations Physical and
Literary, vol. 2d) mentions that, when this disease raged in Charleston
(South Carolina) If any from the country received it in town and sickened in
their return home, the infection spread no further, not even to one in the same
house.

In the year 1793, during the prevalence of this disease in Philadelphia,
several persons who had lately come from that place, sickened with it and died
in this city, yet in no instance did they communicate it to others, although,
they were carefully and constantly attended.

3d. At Bell-vue, the hospital appropriated for the reception of the poor, sick
with this complaint, there was not a single attendant who took the complaint
excepting such as had been but a few days from town; notwithstanding they were
constantly involved in the midst of the effluvia arising from the numerous sick
and dead surrounding them.

There was not a single instance of the complaint being communicated to any of
the physicians at the hospital at Bush-hill at the time it raged in
Philadelphia in 1793, and among the nurses for the sick two only died, and they
(as is observed by the chief physician of that institution) probably had the
seeds of the disease, previous to their going to the hospital; and which
appeared the more likely, as many of the other nurses were not at all
indisposed, although they eat and slept in the chambers of the sick. ( Deveze
Inquirie's on the epidemic disease of Philadelphia in 1793.)

At our city almshouse, two persons died of this disease, which they must have
taken from going into that part of the town where it prevailed, as they both
frequented that neighborhood, yet in neither case did they communicate the
complaint to a single one either of their attendants, or of their numerous
companions that were crowded in the same room.

4th. There were many patients sent to Bush-hill laboring under other
complaints, and were put in the same apartments with the patients afflicted
with this fever, and where they saw persons dying with it on all sides of them,
and were surrounded by an atmosphere, as highly impregnated as it was possible
to be, with every infectious discharge that could be emitted from the bodies of
those under that complaint, and breathing the same air, still warm, from the
lungs of their dying room mates: and what is very remarkable, there was not
seen one example of these patients having the epidemic, and never
notwithstanding these circumstances so favorable to contagion, did their
disease change its character, since they were all restored. (Deveze's
Inquiries, etc.) How different was this from what happened in the city; there
it obliged all diseases to partake of its nature, and to pay obeisance to the
ruling power: (Rush's account of the yellow fever) it seems as if those
patients had been protected for a time, by their diseases, from the influence
of the cause of the destructive epidemic, till they had gained a happy retreat
from the contaminated boundaries of the town.

5th. Some contagions are communicated by contact only, as syphilis, itch, etc.
others may operate at a certain distance through the medium of the air, as the
smallpox, measels, etc. yet all, that we have accurate knowledge of, are the
most certainly effective ceteris paribus in an inverse proportion to the
distance of the body from whence they arise, and vice versa. From this
consideration, we cannot conceive any thing more certain of producing the
disease in question, than the handling the bodies of those who have died with
it, that is, if we suppose it to be caused by effluvia arising from persons
already affected; yet we find dissections of such ones have been performed, by
Dr. Mitchel in Virginia, Dr. Mackrittrick in the West Indies, Drs. Fleming and
Jackson in Jamaica, Dr. Lining in Charleston, etc. and they all have lived
afterward to publish an account of them: in Philadelphia, Drs. Physic and
Cathrall did the same, and Dr. Annan attended the dissection of others, and
although it is very probable, that they, from living in the atmosphere of that
city, may have had the disease, yet we do not find that their hardy exposures
have augmented its violence so much in them, as to enroll their names in the
register of deaths. Dr. Baily dissected a person dead with this disease in this
city, and suffered no inconvenience from it: but what would seem still more
extraordinary, Dr. Deveze and all his surgical assistants entirely escaped the
disease, notwithstanding he opened a great number of bodies, and consequently
was under the necessity of dipping his hands in their black and corrupted
blood, and of breathing the infected vapor that exhaled from them. Who could
suppose it possible for any one who never had had the smallpox, to have such
close connection with persons in every stage of that complaint, and even to
handle their bodies after death, and escape being affected with it?

6th. Specific and acknowledged contagions, all seem to arise from themselves
only: hence it would be almost as hard for me to believe that the syphilis,
smallpox, or measles, could be produced from any other cause, than from their
proper virus, obtained from persons affected with the like disease, as it would
be for me to conceive of the formation of a plant, without having received its
seed or radical from one of the same nature. Contagions seem to fix in the soil
of our bodies, and there seed, and from thence spread themselves as naturally
and regularly as vegetables do on the earth. But the yellow fever has been
produced from other causes than contagion. Lind's essay on diseases incident to
Europeans in hot climates, has many facts in proof of this disease being
produced by other causes, and without the aid of contagion. Also note p. 16.
Does it not then admit of a doubt whether it can possess a power of
propagating itself? I confess I am almost ready to believe, that it either is
always produced by contagion, or never. It is very difficult to conceive, that
two such different causes, should produce exactly similar effects.

7th. It is an acknowledged fact with respect to contagions in general, that
they are no respectors of persons, but that all of every clime and color, under
like circumstances, are equally susceptible of their operations. But this is
not the case with the cause of the disease under our present consideration: I
have already observed, in the history of the complaint, that the French people
from the West Indies, although involved in the midst of the epidemic,
universally escaped it. The same remark was made with respect to them in
Philadelphia in 1793, (Rush's account of the yellow fever). Dr. Jackson
(Treatise on the fevers of Jamaica) observes, that this disease seldom
discovers itself among those people who have lived any length of time in a
tropical country, and that it has never been observed, that a negro immediately
from the coast of Africa, has been attacked with this disease; neither have
creoles who have lived constantly in their native country, ever been known to
suffer from it. These circumstances certainly should tend to make us hesitate
in pronouncing this fever contagious.

8th. It is generally observed of contagious diseases, that they have a
determinate period of invasion after an exposure to their cause: thus, if a
thousand persons under similar circumstances, should be exposed to and receive
the infection of the smallpox or the measles, at the same time, they would
generally be taken with the complaint within a few hours one of another; but in
this disease, this would be pinning the matter too close; the supporters of its
contagious nature, find their doctrine requires that it must be permitted to
act at any time, between that of the exposure and the sixteenth day, otherwise
it would not embrace cases enough to give it a currency. This seems to be
allowing themselves great latitude, as there are but few persons during the
prevalence of an epidemic in their neighborhood, that avoid every kind of
connection or near approach to the diseased for as much as sixteen days
together. Might not intermittents, when they occur generally in the vicinity of
mill-ponds and marshes, as well be considered contagious, since few, I
apprehend, could be found among such patients, but that had some time or other,
and generally within two or three weeks, been near them that had that
complaint, or to something that might have imbibed some effluvia from them? It
may be said, that although there are but few cases, still there are some who
have agues and fevers that never have been within the reach of febrile effluvia
from an affected person: I answer, so are there of the present complaint; few
physicians who have had an extensive practice in this city, can be strangers to
the occurrence of single instances of it without any other cases existing, that
could be suspected of having communicated it to them. (See page 19, note 16.)

9th. Co^^^gions act more or less at all places and seasons, simply of
themselves without the aid of any particular circumstance of air or climate;
but the supporters of the yellow fever being contagious, are obliged by the
force of the foregoing observations to acknowledge their imaginary fondling, at
best, but a half formed monster, and perfectly inactive without being assisted
by the concurrence of a predisposing constitution of the air. (Rush on yellow
fever) This fever exists only in warm weather; hence its cause in this city was
perfectly extinguished by the frosty nights in the 10th month. It is confined
mostly to low situations, in thick settled places; otherwise our almshouse and
the surrounding country would have sadly experienced its deleterious effects.

Let us examine a few cases which are supposed decidedly to have been caused by
contagion. Dr. Malachi Treat, is said to have taken the fever from a person in
a vessel that he was on board of the day before his indisposition; his
complaints might as well have been assigned to having visited a patient in the
Almshouse seventeen days before. But I cannot conceive why he should be
singled out as a fatal victim of the effluvia of this man's body, merely from a
moment's visit, while all his room-mates and continued attendants, universally
escaped any inconvenience: nor do I know any reason why Dr. Treat might not
have taken his complaints from the same cause as this patient did; and he was
sick and died several days before the arrival of any of the vessels, supposed
to have brought the seeds of the disorder to this city. Daniel Phoenix, the
city treasurer, is supposed without doubt, to have taken his complaints from
contagion: the corporation, some time past, having issued into circulation, for
the accommodation of the inhabitants, a great number of paper penny bills, it
has been concluded that he must have received contagion, through the medium of
some bundles of these bills, which he opened, that had been brought to him,
after having been soiled and nearly worn out, to be exchanged, and which he
opened and examined to ascertain their amount some days after he had received
them: the probability of those having conveyed contagion, Although it is very
possible, that he might have taken his complaint from the effluvia, that arose
from these bills, highly loaded with putrefactive materials that they had
collected from the hands through which they had circulated, rendered active by
their being packed up together in great numbers and confined for a time in a
close chest before they were opened, still it puts them only upon a par with
(and in my opinion corroborates the idea of the diseases being caused by)
putrefactive effluvia in general, and is far from proving them to have conveyed
contagious particles from persons laboring under such a particular disease. --
(See definition of contagion, p. 28.)
cannot be very striking, when we reflect, that he was one among the first of
those that were taken. Whence then could the bills have gathered the infection
to give to him? we cannot suppose them to have come from the West India
islands; but even if his indisposition and like circumstances should have
occured at a more advanced period of the epidemic, it would not to me, appear
to be a very likely method of communicating contagion; for persons in that
stage of the disease, which is believed to be the most infectious, seldom have
much to do with handling money, or even of wearing such clothes as have pockets
in them, that might possibly have contained some. It may be observed, he lived
in a part of the town that soon after suffered much by this complaint.

Dr. William M. Johnson's case, is published in proof of the fever being
communicated by contagion; (Daily Advertiser, Vol. 2, No. 3343) but I cannot
conceive whence the author derives his authority for asserting that his
complaints "have actually happened in consequence of intercourse with the
sick." It is true, he had previously been in company with persons that had the
disease, but he also resided in New York before he was stationed at Belle-Vue,
he consequently must have been exposed to the same general cause of the
epidemic, as his suffering neighbors were; and from inquiry, I find he had not
left town but a few days previous to his being taken ill.

Frederick Steymets, one of the Committee of Health, supposed his complaint to
be the effects of contagion, received by examining some papers that had
belonged to a patient that died at Belle-Vue hospital. Is it probable, that
these papers, which perhaps had not been within ten feet of the patient after
his disease had put on such a serious aspect, should imbibe and convey the
cause of his complaint three or four miles, while the effluvia arising directly
from his body, had no effect upon those who were constantly about him, and
performing the most menial and loathsome services for him? This valuable
citizen's activity and perseverance in the noble cause of humanity, often led
him in the most sickly parts of the city; whence, more probably, his complaints
must have originated.

The "positive facts" insisted on by Dr. Lind, (Diseases incident to Europeans
in hot climates, page 195) I consider as very exceptionable proofs of the
contagious nature of this fever, for although an infected person came on board
one of the sloops of war which lay in the river Gambia, two or three days
before the sickness began in them, yet it is very likely they would have been
sick at the same time had he not come on board, as they had not been but eight
or ten days in that river, for the same author observes that symptoms of
indisposition in some instances, do not occur till twelve days after having
received a taint from the land air. Robertson's case (p. 195) is by no means
conclusive; the little spasmodic shock that he sustained, being, no doubt, an
accidental occurance; which, had it happened at any other time, perhaps never
would have been noticed; his being taken with a fever soon after, proves
nothing but that the feeling the pulse of a person dying, did not prevent him
from getting a like complaint from the operation of causes that had been
previously applied. Nor is what occured on board the Merlin sloop (page 196)
more satisfactory: all the conclusion that I can draw from them, is, that
different classes of the men, were taken earlier or later with their
complaints, according as they had been more or less exposed to the noxious land
air.

To these remarks may be added the observation of the experienced Dr. Hunter,
(Diseases of the army in Jamaica) when speaking of the yellow fever, that "It
is a matter of some consolation in the history of so grievous a disease, to be
able to say with certainty, that it is not contagious."

It has been said, and I suspect with too much truth, that were all the
physicians in this city to assert, that our late autumnal epidemic was not
contagious, they would not be able to make the people in general believe them,
since so many think they are well acquainted with decided proofs of its being
so. This, however, will not carry a full conviction to the minds of the more
considerate and reasonable part of the community, since the most popular
opinions are not always the most just. I suppose were all the faculty in
America to unite, and declare their disbelief in the power of the imagination
to mark the foetus in utero, that they could not persuade the generality of
women, but that, crossed appetites, unsatisfied cravings, and frightful sights,
will patch their offspring with roast pig, plumb cakes, strawberries, etc. or
give them hare lips, stain them with bloody spots or something of the kind; for
most of them fancy they have facts enough within their own knowledge, fully to
support the opinion of that most influential operation of the mind.

Should it be asked, whence could the general idea of this disease being
contagious, have originated? I answer, perhaps from no better foundation than
the popular belief in witchcraft arose, in a part of Massachusetts about one
hundred years ago, as well as in different parts of Europe sometime before, i.
e. from the credulous fears of the people, worked upon by the erroneous
opinions and publications of influential personages Hutchenson's Essay
concerning Witchcraft.
. Nineteen persons were executed in and about Salem in 1692 from this
demoniacal delusion, and no doubt, but ten times that number have been
shamefully permitted to die of the yellow fever in Philadelphia See Carey's
Account of the Malignant Fever in Philadelphia, 1793.
and New York, in consequence of neglect from the fear of contagion, when
perhaps the unhappy sufferers, were as free from the power of afflicting their
friends, as the New England witches were.

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE BY GARDENER BAKER, AT THE EXCHANGE IN THE
CITY OF NEW YORK, IN 1795. Sixth Month (June)
Days of the Month. Thermometer observed at Prevailing winds. Observations on
the weather. 8 A. M. 1 P. M. 6 P. M. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. 8. 1. 6. A.
M. P. M. 1 57 69 65 N W clear 2 65 70 50 62 W S W N W rain 3 58 50 73 74 N W
clear 4 67 50 73 67 N S do. 5 68 76 50 76 50 S W do. 6 71 50 79 75 W S do. 7 74
72 50 67 N S E do. 8 64 67 65 N E do. cloudy 9 66 78 50 77 S W do. 10 71 50 79
74 S W do. 11 65 65 62 N E S E E rain do. 12 62 65 60 50 E clear 13 61 66 50 60
S E do. 14 58 60 50 59 N E S E cloudy clear 15 63 50 71 69 N W clear 16 72 78
50 76 N W S E cloudy clear 17 59 65 61 N W S E do. 18 67 79 77 50 S clear 19 75
87 79 50 S do. 20 66 74 50 68 S rain 21 71 76 76 S W clear 22 70 75 78 S W S W
cloudy 23 72 76 50 73 50 W S S E clear 24 69 74 50 70 N E do. rain 25 65 69 68
N N W N cloudy do. 26 63 73 72 N W do. clear 27 66 76 76 N W W clear 28 70 80
50 77 N W E do. 29 73 74 73 S E S do. 30 72 73 50 69 S do. rain

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK, IN 1795. Seventh
Month (July)
Days of the Month. Thermometer observed at Prevailing winds. Observations on
the weather. 8 A. M. 1 P. M. 6 P. M. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. 8. 1. 6. A.
M. P. M. 1 71 50 75 72 S S E cloudy lt. wind 2 68 70 66 50 S E E N E do. do. 3
66 71 50 68 E N E rain 4 65 69 67 50 N E E cloudy 5 67 69 50 68 S E S clear lt.
wind 6 68 83 82 S S W do. 7 65 71 69 50 N thund. and light. 8 68 50 79 77 N N W
clear hi. wind 9 71 50 84 80 S W W do. 10 76 86 78 50 W N W light. and rain 11
75 82 50 76 W S clear lt. wind 12 77 50 89 87 S do. 13 70 50 85 87 N E S W do.
14 71 82 81 50 N N E do. lt. wind 15 72 50 77 73 N S E do. 16 73 50 77 72 S E W
S W do. 17 74 78 50 76 S W S do. 18 74 82 76 50 S W S S W cloudy th. rain 19 79
84 87 S W clear lt. wind 20 77 87 50 82 W S do. 21 77 81 76 N E S do. lt. wind
22 76 85 88 S W cloudy 23 74 50 78 74 S N E S E do. th. and lig. 24 73 75 50 74
N E rain cloudy 25 78 80 74 N E cloudy lt. wind 26 71 76 50 73 E S E do. clear
27 70 50 73 50 69 50 S E N do. rain 28 69 75 79 50 78 50 N N W clear lt. wind
29 73 78 74 N E S W do. 30 69 50 67 50 66 E N do. rain 31 72 50 73 73 E N gt.
rain

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK, IN 1795. Eighth
Month (August)
Days of the Month. Thermometer observed at Prevailing winds. Observations on
the weather. 8 A. M. 1 P. M. 6 P. M. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. 8. 1. 6. 8.
1. 1 73 25 80 77 50 W S E S W cloudy 2 79 50 86 78 S W S clear 3 73 71 50 74 E
S E storm and rain 4 77 82 80 W N W cloudy lt. wind 5 80 88 50 83 W S W clear 6
80 89 50 86 W do. 7 82 93 50 84 W do. 8 82 75 87 78 W S E W do. 9 79 87 82 50 S
S W gt. rain 10 80 50 87 78 W S W clear rain 11 75 79 76 N E S E S cloudy lt.
wind 12 74 80 75 N W S E rain 13 69 75 50 75 N do. 14 69 71 75 72 50 N E S W
cloudy 15 71 73 50 73 N E S W clear 16 69 78 77 S W W do. 17 75 85 50 76 N W S
W do. 18 79 50 88 50 82 50 S W N W W do. lt. wind 19 77 86 82 W do. 20 79 50 88
63 W N do. rain 21 57 50 60 50 59 N N E rain lt. wind 22 61 50 66 67 50 N E
cloudy do. 23 66 50 68 50 68 N E S E E do. rain 24 69 71 70 E S E do. 25 73 81
77 S E S W clear lt. wind 26 76 84 77 N S S E do. calm 27 75 81 74 S E S S E
do. 28 72 79 76 S do. 29 73 75 82 80 50 S cloudy 30 76 85 79 S do. clear 31 78
75 74 72 S clear rain

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK, IN 1795. Ninth
Month (September)
Days of the Month. Thermometer observed at Prevailing winds Observations on
the weather. 8 A. M. 1 P. M. 6 P. M. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. 8. 1. 6. A.
M. P. M. 1 73 75 77 W N cloudy lt. wind 2 66 70 70 N E rain high do. 3 65 71 71
W clear 4 64 75 73 N W do. 5 67 74 50 72 N W cloudy 6 70 75 73 N W clear 7 68
50 74 N N E rain 8 71 50 78 77 S S W cloudy lt. wind 9 75 83 50 77 S W clear 10
75 82 76 S W do. 11 74 84 50 79 S W W N W do. 12 63 70 67 N N E E do. 13 68 66
70 S E S cloudy rain 14 72 50 81 80 S do. 15 75 50 85 50 82 50 S W S do. clear
16 76 87 83 S W do. do. 17 68 50 79 75 78 50 N E do. do. 18 77 78 76 S clear
lt. wind 19 60 65 50 64 N N W rain 20 60 68 50 68 W S W clear rain 21 53 50 61
57 N W do. hi. wind 22 48 58 57 N N W do. do. 23 53 68 66 W do. light do. 24 57
66 50 64 W S W S do. high do. 25 58 73 72 S W do. 26 62 50 72 65 S W N E S E
cloudy 27 66 68 75 67 E S E do. 28 66 73 25 68 50 S clear lt. wind 29 63 50 64
25 60 N W cloudy 30 50 58 75 60 N clear lt. wind

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK, IN 1795. Tenth
Month (October)
Days of the Month Thermometer observed at Prevailing winds. Observations on
the weather 8 A. M. 1 P. M. 6 P. M. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. 8. 1 6. A. M.
P. M. 1 56 70 66 N W N E S clear lt. wind 2 57 61 50 60 N E E cloudy 3 55 50 63
50 62 E S E clear 4 65 50 72 50 67 75 S S E do. 5 65 75 69 S S E cloudy 6 6z 67
50 66 W S W clear 7 57 50 67 65 W S W cloudy rain 8 54 54 55 N W do. 9 51 62 50
61 N W W clear 10 48 50 63 61 W S cloudy rain 11 60 69 65 N W W do. 12 55 50 66
66 W do. lt. wind 13 60 71 66 S S W do. do. 14 61 68 68 S W do. 15 65 66 71 S
do. dis. thu. 16 52 50 62 60 W clear lt. wind 17 58 49 52 S W W cloudy high do
18 42 54 50 W S W W clear 19 38 50 49 50 49 50 W S do. 20 55 62 50 55 50 S N W
rain 21 46 52 50 53 25 N N E clear 22 44 50 53 50 55 N E S E cloudy c. wind 23
55 61 59 50 N E rain 24 52 50 63 50 58 50 N W W clear 25 47 57 57 W do. 26 47
54 50 55 W N do. lt. wind 27 43 58 50 54 N S W do. do. 28 49 60 50 60 S W W do.
29 52 70 66 W do. 30 55 69 61 W S do. 31 52 50 55 54 50 S W foggy rain

The Cause of the Fever, and the most probable method of preventing its return:
likewise, the Precautions to be used to avoid an Attack, if it should again
become Epidemic.
On the sixth of August, 1795, I received a note from John Broom, Chairman of
the Committee of Health, earnestly soliciting me to give them every aid in my
power, by my prudent advice, etc. for the accomplishment of the important end
of their institution. In consequence of which, a few days after, I made him the
following communication.

That a malignant fever exists among us, is a melancholy certainty, well-known
to the Committee of Health; that this fever, in itself, is of a dangerous
nature, there can be no doubt; but whether it is contagious or not, is a
question yet undetermined. I have not known or heard of a single well attested
proof, of any person taking the complaint from another that was affected with
it.

My advice is, that the Committee, while they continue their unremitted and
benevolent exertions, in preventing the introduction of infectious diseases
from abroad, settle not in a false security, and neglect the causes of diseases
that may exist in the city. It is from the unguarded operations of these
inwalled enemies, that I conceive we have to apprehend the greatest danger.

If I have been rightly informed, a great proportion of the persons, that have
at this season been affected with fevers of a suspicious nature, has been
confined to those whose residence or occupation has obliged them to pass a
considerable part of their time between Peck-slip and the New-slip. If so, it
certainly is a matter of consequence, to know, whether in this part of the
city, there is not some local cause that may induce so fatal a malady.

That putrefying substances, after a continuation of very warm weather, will
give rise to such complaints; the fatal operation of the dock mud deposited at
Peck-slip in 1791, the putrid coffee in Philadelphia in 1793, and the noxious
exhalations from the creek in New Haven in 1794, sufficiently prove, without
the aid of many other equally certain, though more remote facts, that might be
adduced in its support if necessary.

On these principles I have been led to search into this part of the town, for
the cause of the present complaint, and I believe my inquiries have not been in
vain: I suspect that I have discovered a fruitful matrix generating the seeds
of this complaint, and which if not properly cared for, may possibly spread
mortality in its vicinity.

A few years ago the Corporation have had Water-street, between the two
beforementioned slips, filled up, without obliging the proprietors of the
property on the north side of the street and in Cherry-street, to fill up their
yards even to a level with it. Hence, the refuse water and offal substances,
from the families occupying these places, are left to stagnate and putrify; and
what renders it particularly distressing, is, that the healthful showers, that
in general wash away all such matters from other places, here only tend to
render them more active; for by the water not running off, it dissolves and
prepares them, thus pent up, for entering into their pestilential fermentation.
Our regular and heavy rains, perhaps have been one great remote cause of the
frequency of these distressing diseases, in this neighborhood at this season.

It may be worthy of remark, that many of these tenements contain several
families; hence an additional cause for putrefactive materials.

I make no apology for giving these hints to the Committee; the impression of
their importance on my mind, rendering it a duty: the hurry of an early
communication, amidst frequent professional interuptions, must answer for their
incorrectness.

'With a sense of respect and esteem, 'I remain thy friend and fellow-citizen,
'VALENTINE SEAMAN*'
New York, 8th month (August) 17th, 1795.

The cause of the disease as above suggested, not being removed, its effects,
in full support of my apprehensions, truly spread great mortality in the
vicinity, as is seen by its history in the foregoing observations.

This early idea of the origin of the epidemic, constantly gained confirmation
from the manner in which it increased: it appeared to be almost entirely
confined to the level south-eastern part of the town, and there it was the most
general and fatal, in the particular situations that mostly abounded with these
pools of putrefactive exhalations. Thus it first became the most general in and
about the lower end of Dover-street: this is what might reasonably be looked
for when we consider that besides all the lots fronting this street being sunk
beneath the common level of it, there are also on the docks at its lower end
several storehouses and granaries, built partly over the water on piles,
without having the space under them filled up; the foundation of some of them,
on the sides fronting the water are partitioned up so as to prevent the free
circulation of the tide from washing away any thing from under them; however,
these partitions were not so tight but that they let in water sufficient to
favor the fermentation of the putrefactive materials that such a common
receptacle will always collect, not only from exterior sources, but also from
the showers of grain that frequently would pour down through holes that the
rats sometimes would gnaw in the floor. Hence there can be no wonder, that the
seeds of this disease should ripen in such a hot bed of putrefaction, aided by
the effluvia emited from the great flats of mud in the several surrounding
impaired docks, left bare during the recess of every tide. It is remarkable
that several persons employed in a large grain storehouse, thus situated over
such a source of noxious miasmata, were among the first victims of this disease.

The disease soon increased; numbers were taken in every part of that quarter
of the town, lying between the upper part of Water, Pearl and Chatham-streets,
and across to the lower part of George-street. From an attention to the subject
not only during the hurry of the epidemic, but also since its extinction, I am
led to believe according to my best judgment, that four fifths of all the lots
in this affected part of the city, were situated below the level of the streets
they fronted, whence from our regular rains, they very generally became
stagnant, putrid mud puddles. I can hardly think it possible, was it not for
the obstruction of the houses preventing a free observation of these grounds,
that any candid person acquainted with the common causes of fevers, could
harbor the least doubt after walking through this part of the town, but that
the epidemic originated from this source, rendered active by the continued
excessive heat of the sun during the last summer. It raged with peculiar
violence in the parts that were near the docks; this is what might be expected
from the additional vapor of the dock mud as abovementioned. It also was very
fatal in a part of George-street, not less than sixty persons were buried out
of it within the small compass of twenty houses. This was probably owing to the
poisonous steams discharged from large quantities of street dirt and manure,
collected during the summer and deposited near the head of it, subjoined to the
common causes abovementioned. Its fatality to the West of Peck-slip was
induced, no doubt, by the noxious vapors from the putrid sink there. The reason
of its prevalence about the Fly-market, can seem no ways strange to any one
acquainted with the situation of that place, the market being built over an
offensive sewer, whose exhalations were confined only by an imperfect board
floor, to which may be added, the effluvia constantly arising from the
putrefying animal and vegetable matter all around, as well as from the slip
that puts in at it. Skinner-street is lowly situated, unpaved and very
imperfectly drained.

That putrefactive effluvia will give rise to, and are the common cause of such
diseases, is clearly proved by the accurate observations of the most judicious
writers on the diseases of hot climates. Lind's valuable book of interesting
facts (Essay on the Diseases of hot climates) abounds with proofs of this
disease being caused by the air from the low lands in the West Indies; he
particularly mentions, that it often raged in the Greenwich Hospital at
Jamaica; which, as he observes, was unfortunately built near a marsh, and that
it could not proceed from any source of infection in the hospital. Dr. Hunter
says (Diseases of the army in Jamaica) ships lying at Port Royal in Jamaica, on
moving and taking their station higher up the harbor, have in a few days become
sickly. The men, says he, have been seized with fevers owing to the low swampy
lands along shore, and at the head of the harbor, from which last the
exhalations are carried every morning toward the ships, when the regular sea
breeze sets in, as is perceived by the bad smell which accompanies it. He says
that there are examples, where out of sixty or seventy men, employed in filling
the water casks, not one has escaped a fever, from the watering place being wet
and swampy. The same author observes, that Fort Augusta, which was at other
times a salubrious situation, became sickly in 1783, the sea that year having
risen higher than usual, so that it overflowed the whole of the ground on which
the fort stands, near a foot above the surface in some places, and on ebbing
left much slime and ouze. A few days after this, many of the men were taken
with fevers. Dr. Jackson (Treatise on the Diseases of Jamaica) as well as a
host of other authors, might be brought if necessary, to prove that putrid
exhalations are the common causes of epidemics. The above facts, together with
the many others adduced by Dr. Rush (Account of the Yellow Fever etc.) in their
support, appear to me to be sufficient to establish that opinion with every
unprejudiced person -- which if allowed, no one acquainted with the situation
of the part of this city where the yellow fever raged as above stated, can have
the least doubt but that it was owing to like causes, without the necessity of
ransacking West India vessels or innocent bags of cotton, for that which is
within ourselves, and whose very essence perhaps, is such as proves it not to
be of a transportable nature It has been observed by Dr. Rush, in Vol. I. of
his Med. Observations, as well as by Dr. Lind, that musquetoes generally attend
a sickly season -- the same was observed here during the last summer: the cause
is very clear, for circumstances favoring the rise of putrid miasmata, equally
favor the generation of these insects.
.

Many of the strenuous supporters of the contagious nature of this disease,
compelled by the force of the foregoing circumstances, acknowledge, that the
disease may be caused by other means, however they cannot entirely, give up
this favorite opinion, but persist in asserting that contagion often does
induce the disease, when the foregoing state of the air favors its operations;
and they defy any one to prove that it does not. To prove a negative is always
difficult, such a one, perhaps impossible. But since the only proof we can have
of the existence of a cause, is the necessity of it for producing known
effects, and since we are to admit, (according to Newton's first philosophic
precept) no more causes than are sufficient to explain the appearances, and, as
has been observed, (Pemberton's view of Newton's philosophy) When one cause is
sufficient, if there really should in nature, be two, which is in the last
degree improbable, we can have no possible means of knowing it, and
consequently ought not to take the liberty of imagining, that there are more
than one. Now, therefore, as the above suggested cause of our epidemic seems
fully sufficient of itself to produce it, nothing can be more unphilosophic or
imprudent than to suppose, that contagion ever had any thing to do with it.

The most probable means of preventing a like calamity in future will be --
1st, To have all the lots, particularly in the low parts of the town, filled
up, so as to afford a sufficient descent to carry off the water into the
streets, and not permit any of it to stagnate in them. 2d, To have the dirt and
filth in the streets and yards more carefully and frequently cleared away. 3d,
To have the docks repaired and regulated in such a manner, as not to permit the
mud to gather and be exposed to the sun at the ebb of the tide. 4th, To have
the spaces under the granaries and storehouses on the docks, properly filled
up or walled in. 5th, To prevent great quantities of street-dirt and manure
from being collected in heaps, and left for any time on the vacant lots, in and
about the city. 6th, To have the streets properly paved with a sufficient
descent to prevent any water from standing in them; and 7th, To have the common
sewers, in good order and well covered. An attention to these circumstances, no
doubt, will prevent the return of a like epidemic in this city; for, as I
suggested some time since to the corporation, whether the disease is
contagious, or whether it was imported or not; this one fact seems to be pretty
firmly established, that it never has spread, but by the influence of
putrefactive effluvia.

If, either from a neglect of the foregoing precautions or from any other
causes, the yellow fever should again become prevalent in any part of this
city, it certainly would be most prudent for such as have it in their power, to
remove from it; or if unavoidable circumstances, or the calls of humanity
should render it necessary for some to continue there for a part of the time,
let them if possible, shun the night air, as the harbinger of death, and
especially to avoid sleeping in that neighborhood, as they value their lives;
for perhaps in the relaxed hours of rest, the epidemic miasmata may act with
redoubled force. Dr. Lind's instances clearly shows the particular danger of
sleeping within the limits of the contaminated air; many persons having been
taken with the complaint, after having slept a night on shore in the low
ground, while others, who had passed a considerable time there during the day,
and always returned to the vessels at night, generally escaped it.

Besides, keeping from the night air of the epidemic neighborhood, and the
sleeping in a healthy part of the town: all persons who are forced to pass some
of their time in the contaminated atmosphere, should avoid with the most
scrupulous attention, excesses of every kind; not only of eating and drinking,
but also of heat, exercise and watching. But I wish to be understood, not to
mean a rigid abstinence from, or a restriction with respect to these things;
but only to advise moderation and regularity in the use of them, because it is
likely that a very low diet and the entire neglect of wine, with them who have
been accustomed to it, as well as cold, inactivity, too much sleep, fear, etc.
may as effectually predispose to this complaint, as their opposite extremes: I
believe the more regularly we support the natural healthy tone of our bodies,
the more powerful they will resist the causes of diseases applied to them.

The observation of Dr. Lining must be a great satisfaction to those who have
once suffered with this disease. He says (Essays and Observations, Physical and
Literary, vol. 2.) It is a great happiness that our constitutions undergo such
alterations in it, as forever afterward secures us from a second attack. He
certainly had a good opportunity of knowing whether it did or not, as it raged
four times in Charlestown, South Carolina (the place of his residence) within
sixteen years. In the West India Isllands an attack of this disease, which
seems almost entirely confined to persons from more northern climates, is
called a seasoning, and after which, if the patient recovers, he is supposed to
be pretty secure. I never have known of any person having had it twice
decidedly; perhaps some instances supposed to have been that fever, were only
common remittents. Dr. Rush says, (Medical Observations, Vol. 2.) that during
the prevalence of the meazles, he as well as Dr. Quier, observed several
persons (who had had that disease, and who were closely confined to the rooms
of persons ill with it) to be affected with a slight cough, sore throat, and
even sores in the mouth. And what are called nurse pocks, are no rare things
with persons (who have previously had the small pox) that have much to do with
patients in that disease: so also is it possible that some people may suffer a
slight indisposition from the cause of this disease, after having had it once,
which perhaps ought not to be considered as a full attack of it. It may be that
the great debility, remaining after a complete removal of this disease, may
predispose to an attack of some other, perhaps of a fever of a different
nature, that might even prove fatal, so like consequences might follow a severe
attack of the small pox and no one would consider this as a return of the
disease. Notwithstanding these remarks are not entirely conclusive with me, yet
they have so much influenced me, in the opinion of the impossibility of taking
this disease more than once, that should it again become epidemic here,
although I could not again venture among it with less hesitation than
heretofore, I certainly should with much less apprehension.

METHOD OF CURE.
In the treatment of this, as of all other diseases, the first object should be
to remove their cause; for although in some instances, the human body by habit
may be enabled to resist the effects of injurious impressions, and even by
proper means to recover itself after morbid effects are inducted, while the
cause still continues; yet that physician would be considered very deficient,
who would undertake to cure an ophthalmia caused by residing in a smoky
apartment, or the cholera infantum, originating from the impurity and heat of
the city air, without first advising his patients to remove from such an
obnoxious situation, for although he might sometimes succeed in his attempts,
yet it certainly would be attended with more difficulty and uncertainty; so
also is it in the yellow fever; hence in this disease it is of the highest
importance to have the patient removed, as soon as possible, out of the reach
of the original cause of his complaints, into a more salubrious atmosphere; a
neglect of this perhaps was one main reason of the great fatality of this
epidemic; therefore, should it again prevail, it would be of the utmost
consequence, for those whose circumstances would admit of it, to secure a
proper asylum in case of an attack, and the poor ought to be industriously
sought after and earnestly advised, early in their complaints, to remove to
such places as the police may prepare for their reception. It may be remarked,
that but a small proportion died at Belle-vue who went there in the early
stages of their diseases.

Whether the original cause be removed or not, the next indications are,

1. To obviate the restricted state of the bowels, and clear the alimentary
canal of the super abundant bile that seems to attend the disease.

2. To use all means in our power to obtain a remission of the fever; and

3. During the remission, to restore the tone of the system so as to prevent a
return.

Whether the seat and throne of this disease is in the stomach and bowels,
according to Dr. Warren, or not, it must be acknowledged that it is in a great
degree upon a particular attention to them, that the hopes of a cure depend, as
it is upon a particular morbid affection of them that the greatest danger is to
be apprehended. To fulfill the first indication, a sufficient dose, viz. ten or
twelve grains of calomel, with as much jalap or rheubarb, should be exhibited
immediately and repeated every six or eight hours, till it purges freely; its
operations should be favored by the plentiful drinking of warm chicken or
barley water or gruel, and keeping warm in bed; by these means oftentimes a
free perspiration is brought on, and the second indication is accomplished at
the same time; an almost complete remission being the consiquence.

Let no one fear the largeness of the dose of the purgative, or its early
repetition as above recommended, for in no disease perhaps is it of more
consequence to obtain the speedy operation of medicine than in this; it is
probable many lives have been lost from the cautious timidity of Physicians, in
giving but small and repeated doses of cathartics, till the disease stole on to
that stage wherein the great irritability of the stomach utterly refused to
retain any more of it, before they have given a sufficiency effectually to
evacuate the intestines.

If a remission does not succeed to the operation of this medicine, but
symptoms of great excitement, with violent pain in the head, etc. particularly
in persons of a full habit of body, with a plenitude in the vascular system,
bleeding undoubtedly promised and proved of the most essential service, and
ought by no means to be neglected; but I do not wish to be understood to
recommend the indiscriminate use of the lancet by any means, for there are
innumerable circumstances, both as they relate to the previous state of the
patient, as well as to the existing symptoms, that should always govern the
judicious physician in the use of this most powerful remedy.

After the operation of the purgative, if the degree of excitement or tone in
the vascular system, should not justify the loosing of blood, or if as much has
been drawn as the state of the patient may render advisable, and still there
remain a degree of tension in the pulse, a dryness on the surface, etc. a
sudorific draught of half an ounce of spt. minderer with twenty drops of tinct.
thebaic has often been exhibited with the happiest effects; a sweat generally
succeeding with a considerable remission of all the symptoms; in conjunction
with the sudorific portion, the patient should have his feet and legs fomented
with flannels wrung out of warm water, for as long as half an hour at least; he
should also favor its operation by a plentiful dilution with the
beforementioned drinks.

The use of antimonial medicines have been greatly recommended in this state of
the disease, to bring on a remission; but I confess, in the few instances
wherein I made trial of them, they did not answer my expectations, the state of
the stomach generally being such as would not bear even the smallest doses of
them.

For the violent pain in the head attending this first stage, nothing seemed
more effectual than the constant application of linen cloths, wetted with cold
vinegar and water to the forehead and temples, and changed as soon as they
became warm.

I know not whether Dr. Jackson's method of using the warm and cold bath
alternately, has been practiced by any physicians of this city; but the dashing
of cold water over the body, and afterward drinking plentifully of a strong
infusion of rad. serpentar. has been much cried up by some; I used it in but a
single case, and although the patient was particularly attended to, yet the
looked for sweat and remission did not succeed; this was nevertheless,
accomplished afterward by the partial application of cold vinegar and water to
his forehead.

After the bowels were properly evacuated and a remission obtained, I lost not
a moment's time, but immediately applied to the use of the bark, in doses
apportioned to the state of the stomach, half a dram, if it would retain so
much, was given every two hours, otherwise half that quantity was given and
increased as the stomach would bear it; it was exhibited in milk and water or
some of the drinks beforementioned, which ever was most agreeable; a few drops
of the acid elix. vitriol with each dose of the bark, sometimes would make it
more agreeable to the stomach; it seems hardly necessary to mention that in
this case it must not be given in milk. When the bark in substance could not be
retained, the cold infusion was substituted in doses from half an ounce to an
ounce, according to circumstances, and repeated every two hours or oftener if
it sat well on the stomach. At the exacerbations of the fever, the use of these
remedies was often suspended, and the means beforementioned were applied to,
till a degree of remission was again obtained, when the use of the bark, etc.
was again resumed. When the patient was costive, he had a few grains of
rheubarb united with each dose of his bark, till that state was obviated.

The acid elix. vitr. was used with advantage during the remission of this
disease, particularly if hemorrhages attended it. I have already mentioned it,
as useful in making the bark sit easy on the stomach; but in case the bark
should be retained well without it, it then would perhaps be better to
administer it between the times of taking that medicine; it may be that this
acid, while it covers the bitter taste, may likewise tend to lessen the tonic
effects the bark

Generally, if the abovementioned means were not used, and frequently
notwithstanding our greatest attention, about the third or fourth day, the
second stage of the disease would be ushered in with pain and constant sickness
at stomach, particularly upon swallowing any thing; an epispastic was often
applied to the scrobiculis cordis in this situation, and sometimes with
advantage; some others received benefit from using warm fomentations to the
part. Laudanum was rejected; but in some instances I thought a grain of solid
opium was administered with good effects, and small bleedings seemed sometimes
useful; this, however, as well as all other means, often failed, the stomach
throwing up every thing that was taken into it. In this desperate state, our
last refuge was to the bowels, and our only dependence appeared to be upon the
plentiful exhibition of our remedies per anum, half an ounce of powdered bark,
with a gill of milk, chicken soup or beef tea, and twenty-five or thirty drops
of laudanum, make a proper injection for this purpose; it should be repeated at
least twice a day. This means no doubt has preserved the lives of many; should
the bark be retained in the bowels till the period of administering the third
dose, it would be advisable to bring it away by a common injection of warm
water, before that is given.

From observing that none died who were affected with a salivation, I attempted
in several instances to induce that affection, by rubbing the gums with calomel
and using mercurial frictions; but as these attempts were made only in the
latter stages of desperate cases, I never succeeded. May not mercurial
frictions be advantageously used from the commencement of the disease to
produce this affection?

The diet of the patient in this disease, should be of the mildest nature;
panado, chicken soup, beef tea, roast apples and milk, tapioca, etc. appeared
to agree best with the delicate situation of the stomach, and perhaps were the
most proper food that could be taken.

In the convalescence, a continuance of the bark and elixir of vitriol, a more
nourishing diet of roasted oysters, beef-steakes, porter, etc. together with
moderate exercise in the country air, were the most effectual means of
restoring the lost tone to the debilitated systems of those who happily
survived the effects of this most dreadful disease.

FINIS.
LETTERS TO WILLIAM BUEL, PHYSICIAN, ON THE FEVER WHICH PREVAILED IN NEW YORK,
IN 1795. BY E. H. SMITH TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, AN ACCOUNT OF THE FEBRILE
DISEASES OF SHEFFIELD, (^^SSACHUSETTS) IN THE YEARS 1793, 1794 AND 1795. BY W.
BUEL.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE FEBRILE DISORDERS WHICH PREVAILED IN SHEFFIELD, IN THE STATE
OF MASSACHUSETTS, IN THE YEARS 1793, 1794 AND 1795. EXTRACTED FROM A LETTER OF
WILLIAM BUEL, PHYSICIAN AT SHEFFIELD, TO E. H. SMITH, PHYSICIAN, OF NEW YORK.
BEFORE entering directly on the subject of the disorders, which prevailed here
in 1793, 1794 and 1795, I shall mention some circumstances relative to the face
of the country in the Town of Sheffield.

The river Housatonak runs in a serpentine course through this town, from North
to South. Upon the banks of the river, on each side, is an extent of intervale,
or meadow land, averaging on both sides at about a mile in breadth. The
greatest part of this intervale is overflowed at the time of the thawing away
of the snow, in the spring; and sometimes, by large and sudden freshets, at
other seasons. The nature of the soil, in general, is such, that, very soon
after the water is off, the land is dry and fit for tillage. It is, however,
much interspersed with coves and marshes; in the former of which the water
remains stagnant a considerable part of the summer, and in many of them
perpetually; of the latter there are not many upon this river, but there are
some which remain such through the season.

Beside the Housatonak, there are two other considerable streams, running
through part of this town, which unite and empty into that river. Upon each of
these streams are large tracts of low, marshy lands; great part of which is
overflowed by freshets, and is never perfectly dry. -- There is (which is very
material) a mill-dam, on each of these streams; and the two dams occasion the
overflowing of several hundred acres of the low lands. As summer advances, and
the ponds fall, considerable parts of these lands are left uncovered by the
water; more or less, according to the drought of the summer. In both of these
ponds are large quantities of timber and other vegetable matters, which, in hot
weather, are always in a state of putrefaction. This state exists in an
increased degree as the substances become more exposed to the action of the
sun. The foetor occasioned by this putrefying mass is such, in hot weather and
when the water is low, as to be extremely offensive to the smell, at the
distance of many rods.

The inhabitants of this town, who live in the vicinity of these marshy and
drowned lands, have, as would naturally be expected, been always subject to
remittent and intermittent fevers, from its first settlement. It is, however,
generally remarked by the old people, that these disorders have of late years
-- until the three last -- decreased: owing, probably, to the clearing, or
partial draining, of the lands.

Although the disorders which have prevailed in this town, for two or three
years past, are owing undoubtedly, principally to these local causes; yet it is
not improbable that some predisposition to them was occasioned by a general
constitution of the air. To ascertain this point, with any degree of precision,
we ought to have before us an accurate history of the weather, for several
years past. Even then it would, perhaps, be impossible; as it has ever been
found a difficult matter to trace any connection between the manifest qualities
of the air, and the effects of a general constitution of it, favorable to
disease. As I am unable, either from minutes, or memory, to give any account of
the weather, I shall leave the matter unattempted.

In the year 1793, during the season in which such complaints usually appear,
intermittents and their concomitants were more frequent than they had been for
many years before. In September and October, there were a few scattering
instances of bilious fevers.

Early in the spring of 1794, inflammatory complaints, chiefly of the pneumonic
kind, were unusually prevalent. They were soon succeeded by intermittents;
which were more frequent than they had been the year before. Nothing peculiar
attended them; and they continued to occur pretty often through the summer.

Toward the last of July, the bilious, or, as it is called here, the
pond-fever, began to make its appearance; principally about the South Pond, one
of the mill-ponds beforementioned, and near the Canaan line. There were some
scattered instances about the North Pond: and a few, which were at such a
distance from both, that they were, probably, occasioned by the stagnant water
about the great river, the Housatonak. But the disorder was chiefly confined to
the vicinity of the South Pond. The influence of this pond appeared to extend
about one mile and a half from its borders. Within this place there are about
150 inhabitants; and about 80 of this number were affected with the fever: part
of them inhabitants of Sheffield, and a part of Canaan. Among those who were
sick, there were five or six instances of mortality. There were not more than
ten or twelve persons who had the disorder in other parts of this town. From
these there was but one death; and that in a case complicated with pregnancy,
and eventually with phthisis pulmonalis. People continued to be attacked with
this fever through the months of August, September and a part of October.

The disorder was, probably, in all respects, what is termed a bilious
remitting fever. It began with an ague fit; intense pains in the back, head and
limbs, soon succeeded by thirst, dryness of the skin, etc. continuing without
much variation 18 or 20 hours: a slight moisture then broke out upon the skin
-- seldom a profuse sweat; a degree of remission of the fever, and abatement of
the pains, then ensued, and continued till about the time of day of the first
attack, when another exacerbation of fever commenced, with symptoms similar to
the first. If the disease was left to itself, the remissions would sometimes
become shorter and more imperfect, as the paroxysms were repeated, until it
grew to be nearly or quite a continued fever. A diarrhea, and sometimes
dysenteric symptoms were added to the rest. Most of those who died were
attended with a preternaturally lax state of the bowels; which, in several
instances, might properly be called dysenteric. The tongue was, from the first,
covered with a white fur. After three or four days, a black stripe began to
appear; extending from the root, toward the extremity; and gradually
spreading, as the disorder advanced, till the whole tongue assumed a black
appearance. Even the teeth and gums were sometimes covered by this black fur;
and in some patients who afterward recovered.

In the treatment of this disorder, evacuation of some kind, is undoubtedly
necessary in the early stage of it. Venesection generally produced a temporary
relief from the violence of the pain, and was, probably, when the constitution
was firm and robust, and the habit plethoric, frequently useful; but it did not
appear to me to be important as a curative remedy. Emetics sometimes did well;
and where there was a great degree of nausea, I thought them useful. But
purging, with calomel and jalap, was the mode of evacuation I preferred, and
generally practiced; and the remedy which of all others appeared to me most
advantageous in the early stage of the disease.

It is unnecessary for me to say any thing more, in this place, than that
assiduous purging, in the beginning, and a plentiful use of the Bark, after the
remissions had become such as to make it admissible, were the essential parts
of the management of this disorder.

So strong was the tendency to disorders of this kind, that people continued in
some instances to be affected with intermittents, or fever and ague, through the
winter. These were very frequent in the spring, but with no peculiarities, and
yielding to the common remedy with the usual facility.

During the month of August 1795, I was in the county of Ontario, in the
western part of the state of New York. There was, at that time, a disorder
prevalent there, of the same nature with that which I found rife in Sheffield,
on my return, and which I am about to describe. It was chiefly existent in the
neighborhood of stagnant waters, and in situations similar to those places, in
this town, to which the disease was mostly confined. The treatment required
was, of course, the same.

On my return to Sheffield, which was the 5th of September, I found a number of
the inhabitants, about the North Pond, afflicted with a fever, which began to
appear about three weeks before. The people first attacked were those who lived
nearest to the pond; whole families of whom were down at once. Numbers
continued to be taken, daily, chiefly within the vicinity of this Pond, or
within three quarters of a mile of its borders, till about the middle of
October; after which time there were few instances of new attacks. In this
time, i. e. from the 10th of August to the 20th of October, of about 200 (which
is not far from the number of persons living within three quarters of a mile of
some of the borders of this pond) not less than 150 were affected with more or
less of this disease; out of which number, but one person died, and that an
aged man, previously debilitated and disordered. -- The number affected with
this fever, in all other parts of this town, did not, I believe, exceed thirty.
Of these, three died: one, an aged woman: the other two, pregnant women; of
whom, one died in the fever, the other suffered an abortion, and died some
months after, dropsical.

The disease, this year, put on a different form to what it did the last. It
might, with more propriety be called an intermittent, than a remittent fever;
though it was very different from a common fever and ague. It began, like other
fevers, with an ague fit, attended with pains in the head, back and limbs. The
duration of this part of the paroxysm was uncertain. It was succeeded by a hot
fit, whose duration was, in different persons, from six to forty-eight hours. A
remission, and, sometimes, nearly or quite, a perfect intermission, then came
on; but whose duration was as irregular and uncertain as was that of the
paroxysm before. After the first, the paroxysms were not generally ushered in
by a regular ague fit; only some slight chills were felt; and these were
irregular, both in degree and continuance. The length of the next succeeding
paroxysms and intervals could, by no means, be calculated for, from the
preceding: so completely irregular was this disorder. The fever evidently
tended to an intermittent form; but it could neither be called quotidian,
tertian, quartan, nor by any other name used by authors to distinguish the
different species of intermitting fevers. The pains in the head, limbs and
back, were very severe, particularly in the latter, which were so universally
intense, that the symptom might almost be considered as characterestic of the
disorder. In the primae viae, flatulency was nearly a constantly-attendant and
very troublesome symptom. Evidences of an increased secretion and excretion of
bile, were generally present through the disease, but were particularly
observable in the convalescence. Some degree of yellowness of the skin, which
was almost universal, indicated a reabsorption of this fluid, and a deposition
of it upon the skin. This yellowness was in two instances, which I saw, very
intense. A slight degree of delirium was very common, during the height of the
fever. The appearance of the tongue was much the same that it was last year.

My method of treating the fever of this year, was similar to that which I
employed the last year. -- Purging, in the beginning, and afterward a
plentiful use of the Bark, appeared to me to be the most successful way of
managing it. In extreme cases, particularly, a free and full exhibition of
bark, wine and laudanum, seemed the only means of salvation. It was absolutely
necessary that the patient should be thoroughly purged, previous to the use of
stimulants, otherwise the bark, wine or laudanum, would have very pernicious
effects. I saw several instances, at the westward, where, by too early a use of
these medicines, the fever was changed into a continued form, attended with a
constantly dry and yellow skin, comatose symptoms, etc. One of the instances of
extreme yellowness, which I have mentioned, was of this kind, and at the
westward. I removed this symptom, and recovered the patient, by giving repeated
doses of calomel and jalap, some perspirative medicines, and afterward the
bark, wine, etc. Each purge, in this case, lessened the degree of yellowness,
very apparently. The other instance of intense yellowness, which I saw, was in
this town, in the case of the pregnant woman, whom I have mentioned to have
died in the fever. This woman's fever never had distinct intermissions. Several
slight attempts were made to administer the bark; but it would not do. Perhaps
my timidity in the use of evacuants, on account of her situation, was injurious
to her.

The Bark did not suspend the paroxysms, in this disorder, in as short a time
as it does in common intermittents; but, if the patient was properly prepared,
and the use of it was persevered in, it never failed to have the effect.

Purging was probably useful in a twofold way: First, by carrying off the
superfluous bile; which was, evidently, secreted and excreted in a
preternatural quantity: Secondly, by reducing the sthenic diathesis, which was,
perhaps, always present, in the early stage of the disorder.

It is true, that those whose fever was suspended by the bark, were subject to
frequent relapses, and to a long and lingering state of convalescence. This
drew an odium upon that medicine; and many were induced to believe that it was
owing to the use of it that people were so long in recovering, and, of course,
that it was improper. I am convinced, however, from very attentive observation,
that those who did not take the bark, but suffered the fever gradually to wear
away, as it sometimes would, were equally subject to those inconveniences.
Indeed, this seems to be the nature of the disease. The old people in this
town, who recollect the times when disorders of this kind have prevailed here
before, and when the bark was not at all used, inform me that those who were
afflicted with them, were a long time in recovering.

It seems that, in all cases, when patients have got rid of the fever, either
by means of the bark, or otherwise, there remains an increased disposition to
the formation and excretion of bile, and that this humor accumulates in the
primae viae, till it first destroys the appetite and occasions nausea, and then
excites a spontaneous discharge by stool or vomiting, or a relapse of fever, or
both. A continuance in the use of some laxative medicine, after a recovery, has
a tendency to prevent these effects; and, if strictly attended to, would
probably prevent them, and perhaps obviate the disposition to relapse entirely.

In reflecting on phenomena of this kind, the human mind is anxious to fix on
something satisfactory as their causes. Specific contagion, I am convinced, was
in no instance, which came under my observation, either here or at the
westward, the cause of the propagation of the disorder. That marsh effluvia, to
whose action the inhabitants of some parts of this town are subject, is the
exciting cause, and is necessary to the production of the disorders in
question, is beyond any manner of doubt. This is evident from their existing
only where this influence extends. But something more is wanting; otherwise we
cannot account for their prevailing in some years, and not in others. Every
circumstance relative to the ponds I have endeavored to discover the cause why
the sickness in 1794, was confined almost entirely to the South, and in 1795,
to the North-Pond; but I can find no local circumstances to have existed which
should produce sickness about one, and not about the other, in either of these
years.
and marshes in this town has, apparently, been the same, for many years past;
and yet very little of this form of disease has appeared, for ten or twelve
years back, until the two last. We must either suppose a peculiar constitution
of the atmosphere, occasioning a predisposition to these disorders, and
coinciding with the local cause, or marsh effluvia; or that the marsh effluvia
itself is, by some peculiarity of the atmosphere, wrought up to a higher pitch
of virulence, and thus produces a higher degree of disease. I am inclined to
admit the latter supposition, as I am convinced that the fevers which have
prevailed here, for two or three years past, and the common intermittent fever,
are the same, only differing in degree. I have seen all degrees, from the
mildest form of intermittents, to the most extreme of bilious remitting fever.
It is impossible to say where the line of division shall be drawn. The disease
this year seems to have formed a connecting link between intermittent and
bilious fever; and, were I to name it, I would call it a bilious intermittent.
Should the intermittent fever, in its usual form, prevail next year, the
disorder may be said, in the three years, to have been in regular gradations
run through.

SHEFFIELD, NOV. 30, 1795.
LETTERS TO WILLIAM BUEL, PHYSICIAN, SHEFFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS, ON THE FEVER
WHICH PREVAILED IN NEW YORK, IN 1795. BY E. H. SMITH.

Advertisement.
THE following letters were written at the request, and for the information, of
a medical friend, with whom the writer has long been accustomed to correspond,
both on professional and general topics. Being composed originally without any
view to the press, and nearly finished before the idea of publication was
suggested, they will need much indulgence for many defects of expression and
method, which the writer has not leisure to correct. Much, too, must be
pardoned to that pruriency of style, and positiveness of decision, into which
persons in habits of fraternal intimacy are apt to fall, and which the laws of
epistolary intercourse do not forbid. A careful revision, would, doubtless,
have rendered these letters more acceptable, in these respects, and have
chastised them of those repetitions of sentiment and expression, which, though
partially avoided in transcribing for the press, still occur too frequently.
But this was impossible. A further, and more satisfactory, apology may be
expected, for the opinions which they contain; -- considering the youth, and
supposed inexperience, of the writer. It is not improbable that hasty and
unfounded opinions have crept into the following pages; opinions unsupported by
fact, and which informed reason would disclaim. If such there are, no person
can be more desirous, than he who has delivered, to discover them, or more
ready to relinquish them. But a conclusion against an opinion should rest on
some better foundation than the age of him who maintains it. To those who think
otherwise, the words of the learned Van Swieten may not impertinently be
addressed.

Honor and respect are due to physicians, eminent from their long and extensive
practice of this salutary art; but they, on their side, ought not to be
supercilious, nor despise the advice of younger professors. If even a gardener
may sometimes speak to the purpose, how much more may not this be expected from
physicians, though young, when regularly educated and diligent in their
profession: they have an opportunity of observing the whole course of a disease
and its successive changes, while the others, overwhelmed with business, view
in haste some of those circumstances only which happen in the time of the
disease, and are obliged to collect the rest from ignorant nurses, who do not
always tell the truth. The public good will be most promoted, if the fire of
the young physician be moderated by the mature discretion and experience of the
old practitioner; nor let these, while they instruct, be ashamed to learn.
Comment: on the 1413 aphorism of Boerhauve.


NEW YORK, (...), 1796.
LETTERS ON THE FEVER OF 1795.
LETTER FIRST. INTRODUCTORY.
IN compliance with your wishes, and in return for the communication with which
you lately favored me, relative to the diseases which prevailed in the
neighborhood where you reside, for the last three years, I have put together
all the scanty information I possess, respecting the fever which was the
occasion of so much distress to this City, in the last summer and autumn. -- I
regret my inability to communicate a more minute and specific statement of
facts; and the more, as there seems little probability, at present, that any
person, qualified for the task, will undertake it. Various circumstances
conspired to narrow the sphere of my observation; and this may have led me into
erroneous conclusions, which more extensive practice and wider observation
would have corrected in me, and may have corrected in others. But, how faulty
soever my reasonings may be thought, I must demand absolute and entire credit
for my facts. In these, I cannot well have been deceived: for the very
circumstances which rendered them few, made me more attentive, and gave me
leisure to be accurate. There is but one possible way in which any falsity can
be chargeable on them; and this might be, were I to pretend to decide that the
course of the disease was always such, as when it came beneath my notice. But
you will understand me strictly. I describe what I saw; and mean only then to
make a remark general, when I sow express it, and when I find a concurrent
opinion on the part of many. In my reasonings on facts, you will not blame me
for taking a range somewhat wider; for, should I, in my way, light on some
truth, interesting and important, it will well repay you for the fatigue of
accompanying me; and, should I not, your friendship will excuse me, in this
instance, as it has often done before. Of one thing further you ought to be
forwarned: That, concerning every thing connected with the fever of 1795, where
opinion may be exercised, there is variety of opinion. And as, in this contest
of jarring and hostile opinions, but one can have justice on its side, I would
have you follow mine, with diffidence, into the field of controversy. Victory
does not always incline the balance on the side of right; but even should mine
deserve defeat, it will suffer in the company of myriads.

LETTER SECOND. An account of the situation and peculiarities of that part of
the City in which the Fever most prevailed, in 1795.
THOUGH the fever continued to extend itself, to the last, yet it never became
general over the city; and, for a long time, it was mostly confined to a
particular district. As the season advanced, the peculiarities of this district
may be supposed to have become common to a larger portion of the city; and
their extension to the whole only prevented by the setting in of winter. To the
district alluded to, the East river, from Long Island ferry to Mr. Rutgers's,
forms the eastern boundary; the northern reaches from thence to
Division-street; thence westerly, down Division-street, Chatham-street, the
extremity of Pearl-street, into William-street, to Franckfort-street, down this
last to Gold-street, through that to Beekman-street, along which the line
proceeds to Pearl-street, as far as the Market, down which it should be
continued to the river. -- The space included in these bounds, is all over
which the fever, according to the best of my remembrance, exerted any power,
till after it had reached its height; when it extended down Water-street, a
little below Wall-street, and proved very mortal. It is true that there were a
few persons affected in various other parts of the town; but, during the great
part of the prevalence of the fever, it was principally active in the
north-eastern and middle parts of the district comprehended as above: and, as a
thorough knowledge of the peculiarities of this portion of our city is, in my
opinion, indispensable to the history of the disease which afflicted it, I
cannot doubt your patience with the minute description I think it necessary to
give.

The first and most obvious remark, on the greater part of the district, just
pointed out, is, that it is the lowest, flattest, and most sunken part of the
whole city. Some places are much more sunken than others; but the whole space
is evidently so, compared with the adjacent ground; and appears to have an
inclination, more or less observable, in different streets, to the East river.
This inclination is very considerable in Dover-street; a street which is said
always to have suffered from fevers of this kind, during the hot season. From
the division of Pearl and Cherry-streets, down the latter, the descent is
rapid, to some where near James's-street; about which is the lowest part of the
street, and from whence it is nearly level to the northern boundary. Beyond
this bound, the ground rises again; and the made ground, by the river side, is
also somewhat elevated: so likewise, is the whole of the ground over which the
westerly line passes through Division, Chatham, etc. streets. Thus you will
perceive, that the part of the city where the fever was most active, for the
longest period, forms, as it were, a basin, having its side, nearest the water,
a little inclined. Within this basin, there are several smaller cavities; one
of which, in particular will require a further description. Those streets,
also, which are not included in this hollow, but which lie along the river,
will require some attention; which shall be given them.

The extreme irregularity in the disposition of the streets, and the narrowness
of the greater number of them, are great obstacles to a free ventilation of
this city. This misfortune, common to every part of it, falls with peculiar
heaviness on that district which has just been spoken of. The comparatively
high and neighboring lands of Morrissania and Long Island, receive almost
solely the benefit of breezes from the north-east and east: The Sound, which
divides them from the city, being too narrow to add much force and freshness to
a breeze nearly spent on their heights. North, the island rises into little
hills, from which the wind passes on to the high parts of the city; rarely
visiting the low and intervening space; unless it may be the topmost rooms of
the houses: and, as the houses are generally low, the effects of a wind from
this quarter must be inconsiderable. -- North-westerly, there is somewhat more
of an opening; but even this is small. West, south west, and south, the other
parts of the town, which are higher, and thickly settled, break the force of
the gales from these points. So that, thus situated, this quarter of the city,
though it were perfectly well laid out, would have but little chance for a free
ventilation: irregularly disposed and narrow as the streets are, we must be
convinced of the impossibility of its receiving the necessary supply of fresh
air. You will understand me as speaking of a thorough ventilation, and in the
sultry season, when it is most necessary: a partial supply of air, equal to the
support of a feverish existence, it undoubtedly obtains.

Much of the ground, in the northern part of this district, is swampy, and
abounds with little pools and puddles of stagnant water. This was especially
true last summer and autumn; there being great rains, and no adequate means for
conducting off the water. Indeed, so flat are some of the paved streets, in
this quarter, that the rains did not run down the gutters, but continued in
little puddles, and were evaporated from the places whereon they fell. In the
new streets, which are unpaved, and without any gutters, numerous imperfect
ditches assisted the disposition of the water to stagnate. These places were
often muddy, when the southern part of the town was dry; and the steams from
them very offensive, when the dry streets, toward the North river, were
perfectly sweet.

Several of the paved streets, and indeed the greater number, in the district
of which I am speaking, are narrow and crooked; some with neither side walks
nor gutters, and by far the largest portion of them, miserably built. Most of
those which are unpaved, are, in all respects, still worse; the buildings
chiefly wooden, and placed on the ground; the old ones falling to decay; the
new, but imperfectly finished. Of them all, it may be remarked, that they are
much exposed, some of them more than others, to the full influence of the
docks, whatever that may be, and it cannot be salutary; or to that of a boiling
sun, from early in the morning, till the middle of the afternoon; and some of
them, to both.

So much for the streets, generally: a few particulars, concerning some of
them, are necessary to the formation of a perfect idea of this district.

A line, drawn from the corner of Ferry and Pearl-streets, up the latter, to
where William street enters it; then down William to Franckfort, and through
that, a part of Gold and Ferry-streets, to Pearl-street again, will form the
ridge of a new cavity (included in the principal boundaries above mentioned)
which seems contrived, by art, for the dwelling place of fever. This courtyard
of the palace of death, is divided by several dismal lanes, courteously
denominated streets; such as Vandewater, Rose and Jacob-streets, etc. which
form the borders to innumerable tan-vats. The whole is one vast tan-yard, the
firm parts of which seem to have been constructed by art in the midst of an
extensive quagmire. To this place, as far as I can discover, there is no
outlet. Think what must be the condition of it, in the months of August and
September! -- Yet human beings live here; and habit renders its noxious
exhalations, in some sort, harmless to them. It is remarkable that few persons,
regularly inhabiting this hollow, died of the fever last year. To those, whose
evil destiny led them to seek a new dwelling place there, it proved highly
pestilential.

Dover-street is a short, narrow street, running from the beginning of
Cherry-street, down to the East river; and contains near twenty buildings. --
The descent, from Cherry into Water-street, is very rapid. As the exposure is
nearly to the east, it receives the whole effect of the sun, from 6 A. M. to 3
P. M. in the summer. The descent makes it easy to keep the surface of the
street clean; though it prevents a free ventilation. But it has been raised,
several feet, since the buildings, which are mostly low, were erected; so that
the road is, in many instances, up to the middle of the lower story windows;
leaving the cellars to the houses, and cellar kitchens, without a communication
with the street. The yards remaining as before, are, of consequence, much lower
than the street; without vent; and, of necessity, all the water, and filth of
every kind, which gathers ^n them, must there stagnate, ferment and putrify.
Add to this, some of these yards are capacious, and contain little, decayed,
wooden huts; sometimes built directly on the ground; and containing,
oftentimes, several families.

Water-street, above Dover-street, is chiefly composed of low, decayed and
dirty wooden buildings. This street being either made-ground entirely, or
raised like Dover-street, the same is true of the situation of the houses and
yards. And, lest any of the filth, or water, should drain off, from any of the
yards, the western side of Water-street has been kindly converted, by the
enlightened zeal of the directors of these affairs, into a perfect dyke; which
answers its design, most completely, by preventing even the slightest leakage.
Beside, as this street lies directly on the water, it has the benefit of the
whole force of the sun, the greater part of the day; and of the exhalations
from the docks; which are here in great number, and in the highest state of
their perfection. There is, however, a better opportunity for fresh air, in
this, than in some other streets. Yet even this is an advantage which the rage
for improvement threatens to transfer to a new street, still further out in the
river; which, if completed, may form another dyke, to the increased
pleasantness and health of this quarter of the town.

Of Roosevelt, Catharine, James, Oliver, etc. streets, nearly the same remarks
are true as of Dover and the upper part of Water-street: for though they are
somewhat wider, straighter, and have more good and new buildings in them, yet
they are raised in the same manner, have sunken yards, and underground
apartments; and Roosevelt street has an open sink, where the drippings of the
tea-water pump, after having gently collected all the filth in their way, are
received; and being just enough to keep up a constant dropping, and not enough
to wash the gutter, or the sewer, the stench is most intolerable, during the
sultry months.

To many other of these streets the same remarks will apply; and to some with
aggravated force: but what has been said, will, perhaps, be sufficient to aid
your imagination in the conception of a just idea of their condition: I mean of
their necessary and unavoidable condition.

Of the Docks, it may be enough to mention, generally, that they are badly
contrived in every part of the town; and worst of all, in this part; being
broken up into numerous little wharves, thus forming narrow slips, where the
ground is left bare at ebb tide; and where vegetable, animal, and
excrementitious matters, being thrown in, at all times, instead of being cast
into the stream, ferment, putrify, and render the stench truly pestiferous.
Indeed, this is so much the case, with all of them, in the summer, that, except
to persons habituated to their exhalations, they are absolutely intolerable;
exciting, in persons of a delicate make, immediate vomiting; and in others
nausea, indigestion, headache, or some temporary illness, when exposed to them
but a short time.

In addition to the above-related facts, concerning the condition of the
streets, in that part of the city where care was most needed, it may be
remarked that, at no time, was there ever so great an apparent inattention to
preserving them clean. Besides the impediments which the level nature of the
streets, in many parts of the town, presented to the draining off of the filth
which is constantly accumulating in large towns like this, artificial
impediments were permitted; as if death were not sufficiently active, and
needed the aid of the magistrate. In all the streets where buildings were going
forward, the workmen were allowed to restrain the course of the water, in the
gutters, by forming little dams, for their convenience in making their mortar.
The effect of this stoppage of water was so great, that even in Broadway, one
of the streets the best calculated of any in the city for free ventilation, in
that part of it where the new Tontine Tavern was building, the stench was
exceedingly offensive. And in this condition was it allowed to remain for near
two months; though it was almost under the windows of the principal magistrate
of the city. If this were true of the widest, and one of the best aired and
cleanest streets, of New York, what think you was the state of those narrow,
crooked, flat, unpaved, muddy alleys, mentioned above? No one can form even a
faint idea who has not walked through them, in the middle of some one of those
deadly, suffocative days, which we experienced in September last.

But this is not all: beside those masses of semiputrid vegetable and animal
matters -- cabbage, turnips, the heads and entrails of fish, etc. which, at all
times of the year, out of compassion to men who might be usefully employed as
scavengers to the city, are allowed to complete the putrefactive process,
undisturbed, in the middle of the streets, -- the sight and the smell were
shocked, at every turn, by dead rat^, fowls, cats, dogs and pigs. So remarkably
was this the case, that I question whether there could have been found a single
street, alley, or even bye-lane, of any tolerable length, which did not lend
its aid to render this exhibition full and frequent.

The preceding statement, melancholy as it may appear, will convey a very
inadequate idea of our misfortune, in respect to situation, without special
information concerning the season, as it appeared here, during the reign of the
fever; and a knowledge of the people who mostly inhabited these parts of the
city, and on whom the severity of the disorder was inflicted. With this
knowledge I shall endeavor to furnish you; but the length which this letter has
already acquired will excuse me, to you, for postponing the attempt, to a
future opportunity.

LETTER THIRD. Some Account of the Season of 1795.
PHYSICIANS, from the earliest ages of medical record, have remarked that great
peculiarities and irregularities of season, have exercised an unfriendly
influence on human health: And Hippocrates, himself, takes notice of the
difficulty, which hence arises, of forming a proper judgment, and adopting a
suitable method of cure, in those diseases which occur under such
circumstances. The importance of this division of my subject, makes me regret
that it is in my power to furnish you with no other than general information.
You will be the more ready to overlook this defect, when you recollect that I
do not pretend to deliver a history of the fever, and are informed that there
is some probability that this particular defect will be supplied by another
hand.

Generally, then -- every one knows that the summer and autumn of 1795 were
excessively sultry and excessively wet. Every article of household furniture,
or in use about a house, susceptible of mould, was speedily and deeply covered
with it. It seemed to penetrate places where we should have deemed its
appearance impossible. A friend of mine found a pocketbook of Morocco leather
quite moldy; though it was in the drawer of a private desk, enclosed within a
large desk -- both of which were usually locked -- and covered by papers. Boots
and shoes hung up by a wall, near a fireplace, heated every day, contracted
mould within twenty-four hours.

Meats spoiled in the marketplace uncommonly quick; and those which were
brought home, apparently fresh and good, in the morning, were often found unfit
to be eaten, when cooked and brought upon table.

Esculent vegetables, in general, and especially fruits, were unusually poor,
tough and tasteless. The peach, particularly that called the cling-stone, was
scarcely digestible; and often occasioned temporary illnesses, quite severe,
while it doubtless aided in the production, or aggravation, of the fever.
Vegetable growth was uncommonly rapid and abundant, in the summer of 1795. I
mention this that no mistake may arise from the above remark concerning
esculent vegetables. The more rank they grow, beyond a certain degree, the more
tasteless they are; and the influence of a wet season, in rendering roots and
fruits tough, as well as insipid, is well known.

It is worthy of remark, that many fruit trees, plumb-trees in particular,
blossomed a second time, last year, and produced an imperfect and second crop
of fruit.




Flies were very numerous and troublesome, in every part of the city, in the
beginning of summer; but they suddenly disappeared, about the middle of July,
from the more airy parts of the town, collecting in swarms, in the less healthy
parts, and succeeded, every where, by clouds of musketoes, incredibly large and
distressing: and these continued to afflict us, long after the time when they
commonly depart. Almost every person suffered exceedingly from the bites of
these insects; and foreigners especially. In some they occasioned universal
swellings, and eruptions, somewhat like Pemphigus; and in others numerous
little ulcers. These last, a physician of my acquaintance, saw even in a native
American. The irritation, restlessness, and consequent watchfulness and
fatigue, occasioned by these animals, no doubt predisposed the well to be
affected by the fever; while they extremely harrassed the sick, and retarded
their recovery.

During the whole of this season, I remember but one thunder-storm; and this
was very gentle. There was but a single hard clap of thunder, for more than
four months, that I remember; and very little thunder and lightning, at any
time.

Our rains, excessive in quantity and frequency as they were, seemed to have
lost their wonted power of cooling the air. In those streets, most unhealthy,
and least ventilated, this effect was, in a degree, observable; but, in the
airy and healthy parts of the town, on the contrary, they never failed to
render the heat more intolerable; and the steams from the hot pavement were
like those of a vapor bath. The clouds, too, seemed to shut out every kind of
breeze. -- One of these heavy rains, which continued two or three days, seemed
to possess all the qualities of steam. It pervaded every recess of the houses,
and dissolved the best glue -- so that furniture, in many instances, which had
been long standing, fell in pieces.

Fogs, which Dr. Lind enumerates among the signs of an unhealthy climate, and
causes of diseases -- page 134 of his Essay on hot climates, etc. -- prevailed
in the city, and spread over all the most unhealthy parts, in particular, in a
remarkable manner, -- in the evenings -- for a considerable part of September
and October. The oppression, thickness, stench, and uncomfortableness in every
respect, of these fogs, was very uncommon. In a physician, who, in the
performance of his professional duty, was exposed to their influence several
hours, one night, they produced bleeding from the gums and fauces, and black
and fetid stools. -- On the city watchmen, however, they had no such effects.
About the first of October but one person had died out of their number; and he
was a man who returned to the city, a little before, and resumed this
occupation, after having been some time absent in the country. -- Whether this
security of the watchmen is to be attributed -- as it is by Dr. Rush, to the
influence of the cool night-air Page 35 of his account of the Fever of
Philadelphia: I ascribe it to the habitual impression of the cool night air
upon the bodies of the city watchmen, etc. By habit, as used above, is ^eant
that condition of the body which is produced by customary exposure to any
particular impression; and I design only to suggest a probability that the
watchmen escaped the fever, as much from their having been rendered by habit
insensible to the influence of the effluvia, etc. of the unhealthy parts of the
city, as from the influence of cold.
, or to that of habit, I leave others to decide. It is not impossible but that
both may concur in producing this insensibility to the cause of disease in
others.

To this imperfect account of the season, which, defective as it is, appeared
to me too important to be omitted, I have one fact to add, on the authority of
a gentleman distinguished for his attention to meteorological phenomena. He
informs me, that no Aurora Borealis has been seen, of any magnitude, in our
country, north of Pennsylvania (as far as he can learn) for near four years,
till the latter end of September 1795; and adds, that his father, a respectable
clergyman, now about 70 years of age, who noticed the same absence of these
appearances, remarks, that, according to his uniform observation, some uncommon
sickness has never failed to follow a long continued disappearance of these
phenomena. How far the experi^^ce of other observers will tend to confirm this
statement, I have had neither time nor opportunity to inquire. And, if it be
admitted as indisputable, it may still be questionable, whether this is to be
regarded as a cause of disease, or whether this disappearance and disease, be
not coordinate effects of a common cause.

LETTER FOURTH. Some circumstances relative to the principal sufferers by the
Fever of 1795.
IT is a fact, generally admitted, I believe, that, of those who were sick and
who died of the Fever of 1795, the greater number were foreigners: persons,
either just arrived from other States, from the West Indies, and from Europe;
or who had not been many months, or years, settled in this city. It is probable
that the proportion of citizens, who died, to strangers, did not exceed one to
seven. Of these strangers, it is thought, a large number were Irish; and there
are some reasons why this should be true; but I cannot pretend to know it to be
so, from my own observation. The causes productive of disease in foreigners, in
those of this nation in particular, are numerous, and some of them deserve
particu^^r attention. This I design to bestow upon them, after remarking, that,
both among natives and foreigners, the severity of the disease was experienced
by the poor.

I. Dr. Blane, in his observations on the diseases of seamen, remarks, that it
sometimes happens, that a ship, with a long established crew, shall be very
healthy; yet, if strangers are introduced among them, who are also healthy,
sickness will be mutually produced; and Dr. Rush, in the first volume of his
"Medical Observations and Inquiries" takes notice of this remark of Dr.
Blane's, and confirms it, by a reference to the experience of our country,
during the late war. These are his words -- The history of diseases furnishes
many proofs of the truth of this assertion. -- It was very remarkable, that,
while the American army at Cambridge, in the year 1775, consisted only of
New England men (whose habits and manners were the same) there was scarcely any
sickness among them. It was not till the troops of the eastern, middle and
southern states, met at New York and Ticonderoga, in the year 1776, that the
Typhus became universal, and spread with such peculiar mortality in the armies
of the United States.

It is unnecessary to enlarge, in this place, on the oppressions and distresses
of what are called the lower order of the people in Europe. War, which doubles
the burdens upon every rank in society, exercises an aggravated violence upon
the poor. This violence, severely felt by all, in England, chiefly falls upon
the manufacturing poor; who are, at the same time, the most ignorant, abject
and depraved: in Ireland, its effects are more general, including in its circle
of wretchedness, the cultivator, as well as the mechanic. The present war in
Europe, unparalelled as it is for the number of men involved in it, has given
birth to oppressions and calamities equally new and destructive. Under these
circumstances, and when men of fortune and respectability, disgusted and
disheartened at the enormous mass of misery which every day and every hour
presented to their view, turned their thoughts toward another hemisphere, it
is not to be wondered at, that the wretched and depressed poor should pant for
a settlement in a country, where liberty is t^^ portion of every man, and
independence the sure crown of all his honest labors; and which had been,
fallaciously, represented as courting their acceptance, and loading their
untoiling hands with every gift of fortune. -- The real blessings of our
government and country are precious and inestimable; but they are of a nature
not to be felt and enjoyed by minds depraved by ignorance and debased by
slavery. That temperate enjoyment of the goods of life, and moderate exercise
of the blessings of independence, which, alone, enlightened liberty sanctions,
can neither be conceived of, nor relished, by those who have been accustomed to
crouch beneath the iron rod of despotism. Liberty, according to their ideas,
was the reverse of all they felt; and independence, the unlimited gratification
of all their appetites. The misrepresentations, too, of speculating and
unprincipled men, who were interested in the sale of large tracts of unsettled
territory, had fostered and extended these erroneous conceptions. Hence, when
the poor and miserable emigrants, on their arrival here, found that neither
gold, nor farms, solicited their acceptance; that, in America, as well as in
Europe, their life was alike destined to be a life of toil; when they perceived
that licentiousness, the only liberty of which they had any notion, brought
punishment along with it; the disappointment, new and unexpected, became a
powerful aggravation to every other cause of disease. You will not understand
me as extending these last remarks to all emigrants to this country, nor
suppose that deceived hope was present, or active, in every case. On some, even
of the better sort, it undoubtedly had a very pernicious influence; on the poor
and friendless, effects still more melancholy. -- But to return: -- Two
motives, then, poverty and oppression at home, and the hope of independence and
wealth abroad, concurred to draw to the United States, an astonishing number of
the inhabitants of Europe; and as these motives were mostly active among the
very poor and very wretched, people of this description emigrated in the
greatest number. Of these, the largest portions fell to the share of the States
of Pennsylvania and New York; and the most worthless and profligate, probably,
rested in the capitals of those States.

The distresses in the West Indies, especially those occasioned by the
destruction of Cape Francaise, obliged numbers of the islanders, white, mulatto
and black, to take refuge here. This circumstance, harmless, in great measure,
to the people themselves, can scarcely be considered as so, in relation to the
whole. Whatever effect it may have had, all things considered, it seems
irrational to suppose it to have been good.

This collection of strangers, from various parts of Europe and America, which
had been rapidly forming for two or three years, was greatly increased by
repeated arrivals of large importations from Great Britain and Ireland, during
the fall of 1794, and the spring and summer of 1795. One or two ships came into
this port, after the commencement of the fever, filled with emigrants.

If, then, the opinion of Dr. Blane, corroborated by the testimony of Dr. Rush,
be founded in truth; that the sudden intermingling of people of various and
discordant habits, climates and nations, be a circumstance favoring the
production of disease; this cause of fever was certainly present, in New York,
in the year 1795.

II. Men who exchange their native, for a distant climate, may be considered --
says Dr. Lind, page 2d, of his Essay on the diseases incidental to Europeans in
hot climates -- as affected in a manner somewhat analogous to plants removed
into a foreign soil; where the utmost care and attention are required to keep
them in health, and to inure them to their new situation; since, thus
transplanted, some change must happen in the constitutions of both.

"Some climates" -- he continues -- are healthy and favorable to European
constitutions, as some soils are favorable to the production of European
plants. But most of the countries beyond the limits of Europe, which are
frequented by Europeans, unfortunately, prove very unhealthy to them.

The healthiness and unhealthiness of a climate, or the effect wrought on the
human constitution by a change of climate, must be more or less considerable,
according to the extent of its connection with other circumstances. How far
such a connection was observable in this city, in respect to the Fever of 1795,
will appear by and bye.

Two remarks may be made, concerning the emigrants from the West Indies. The
first is, that they generally bear the first winter, after their arrival in the
middle and northern states, better than the natives, while they are less
incommoded by the summer heats. The second is, that they suffer less from
Fevers, during the sultry season, than Emigrants from Europe. It seems
difficult to explain the first mentioned fact; the second I shall attempt to
account for, hereafter.

The climate of this part of America differs from that of Great Britain and
Ireland in the intenser cold of its winters; more extreme and longer continued
heat of its summers; and the greater variableness of its temperature.

The great body of emigrants come over to America in large companies, crowded
together in one ship, and ill-accommodated in every respect. After a long
voyage, under such circumstances, they must be sensible, in an uncommon degree,
to the influence of a new climate, and to every sudden variation of
temperature. If they arrive, as is often the case, in the sultry season, the
effects of a change of climate must be felt in all their force. The heats of
the summer must render them less able to cope with the ruggedness of the
following winter; as the severity of the winter makes them more unfit to endure
the scorching sun of the succeeding summer. This will account for the suffering
of many who had passed a season in the country before.

To this it may be added, that, in 1795, the climate must have been
particularly bad; since it may be supposed to have preternaturally affected the
natives of the country. This being admitted, it is not difficult to conceive of
its having had a pernicious influence on strangers; and being, therefore,
fairly enumerable among the causes predisposing to the fever of this season.

III. An animal diet, or a great use of animal food, especially in summer, and
when there is general disposition to fevers, is thought by many physicians, of
our own and other countries, to favor their production; and a vegetable diet,
on the contrary, to be a preventative, or preservative, against them. This,
also, was the opinion of the humane and celebrated Howard, who is known to have
abstained from the use of flesh, for many years previous to his death. -- Both
theory and fact seem to concur in establishing the truth of this doctrine; for
a satisfactory illustration of which I may safely refer you to the publications
of Drs. Rush and Mitchill.

The proportion of animal, to vegetable food, eaten at the best provided tables
in America, is so great as to astonish a European. This may be said of the
country generally -- but is especially true of the cities of New York and
Philadelphia. An objection, too, has been made by Europeans, particularly by
the French, to our mode of cooking meats. They complain, and with apparent
justice, of the imperfect action which fire is allowed to exert upon them; and
represent us as little better than the Abysinians, who devour a part of the ox,
while he is yet expiring. -- It is certain that a great change is observable in
the appearance and kind of diseases, in the United States, since our citizens
have substituted fresh meats, for salted, in summer. -- Some reasons may be
assigned for this effect, which would countenance the opinion of the French;
but they will suggest themselves to your own mind, and would require more room
than I can allow them, in this place. -- But, surely, if meats be prejudicial
to health, in our hot seasons; if they expose us, by their use, to diseases of
the kind, which prevailed here, last year; how peculiarly must this evil have
been felt by us, when they were in a condition so uncommonly bad as the year
1795 -- If the wealthy often had meats brought upon their tables, in a state of
incipient putrescency, what must have been the state of those which were
consumed by the poor? -- Add to this, that the vegetables principally used
among us, are not distinguished for their ascescency. -- These remarks apply to
all ranks of our inhabitants; and plainly show that the situation of our city,
the last year, was unusually bad, in this respect, for natives, as well as
foreigners. Other circumstances assisted to heighten the evil, in relation to
these last.

The poor of Europe, and especially of Ireland, are but sparingly accustomed to
the use of meat. In that island, it is not uncommon for people to pass through
life, without ever having tasted it, except by stealth, accident, or on
holydays. -- In this country, the great use of meat produces a comparative
scantiness in the supply of vegetables; and a proportionate poorness and
dearness of them. This is sufficient to determine the choice of the poor
toward the use of meat; and produce, in the emigrant poor, an almost total and
sudden change, in their aliment. When, too, we recollect that animal food is
more gratifying to a depraved taste; that it provokes to greater repletion,
than vegetable food; that it is more necessary to hard laborers; and that it is
most craved by those who indulge in the habitual use of ardent spirits; we are
alive, at once, to the full perception of the mischievous effects arising from
such a substitute, to their former bland and scanty meals. In those, with whom
this change of diet took place the last year, for the first, the consequences
must have been still more pernicious. For we ought to consider that if the poor
always consume the worst provisions, those who were strangers, as well as poor,
were least likely to procure those which were good; and the slightest
observation is sufficient to convince us, that their bad qualities could not
have been much obviated by the preparation common among the consumers.

May we not, then, conclude -- that the aliment used by the citizens,
generally, was favorable to the production of disease -- and that the great and
sudden change of diet, among the emigrants, considering the nature of their
food in 1795, must have disposed them, in a particular manner, to be affected
by the fever of the country?

IV. If unwholesome aliment assisted in the production, or aggravation, of the
fever of 1795, improper drinks were scarcely less active, to the same end. --
The use of ardent spirits, among all classes of citizens, and especially among
the laboring classes, is astonishingly great and general, throughout the United
States. No country in the world, in all probability, consumes an equal
quantity, in proportion to its population. In vain has the eloquence of the
most enlightened physicians and moralists been exerted against them, for
centuries: governments constitute it the interest of individuals to prepare and
circulate them; they withhold from men that knowledge which would teach them to
shun, or elevate them above the use of, intoxicating liquors; and prejudices
are excited and fostered in their favor, that the ignorant and depraved, to
whom they form a congenial gratification, may continue to consume them; to the
destruction of morals, the emolument of distillers, and the augmentation of the
revenue. As they are more easily and cheaply obtained in America, than in
Europe; as the wages of laborers are more considerable here, than there, and
therefore permit them greater indulgences; as there is every encouragement from
example; and as a fiercer sun, according to common notions, justifies a more
prodigal use of them; it is naturally supposeable that the emigrants of the
laboring class indulged in them, to an unusual degree. Unquestionably, the use
of intoxicating liquors was highly pernicious to those most accustomed to them;
to those not so habituated, it was, as unquestionably, still more pernicious.
In Philadelphia in 1793, when the fever was prevalent, Dr. Rush remarks that --
a plentiful meal, and a few extra glasses of wine, seldom failed of exciting
the fever. With us the disease was less ferocious and less active; but, as if
no means of causing it to become more so were to be neglected, an idea was,
most unhappily circulated -- and, it should seem, was countenanced by persons
bearing the title of physicians, -- that free living, the plentiful use of
vinous and ardent liquors, was a powerful preventative of the fever. The
dreadful consequences which a belief of this sort produced, were numerous, and
shocking to the last degree. The fear of death, so active in ignorant minds,
when once aroused; idleness, the parent of every vice, and listlessness, the
consequence of want of employment* all conspired, with this pernicious
doctrine, to effect the ruin of numbers. Never, I believe, was drunkeness so
common. Not a day passed that I did not meet persons reeling through the
streets, or stretched on the pavement -- sometimes in the noonday sun,
unsheltered, and sometimes exposed to the heaviest rains. I have seen three
men, lying in this condition, in one little street. These were all, as you may
suppose, among the most depraved of our poor; and most of them were foreigners.

Is it possible that conduct such as this should fail of giving new activity to
every other cause of disease?

V. I have, in a former letter, given you some account of the condition of that
part of the town, where the Fever most prevailed; it is now to be noticed that
it is in that district that the greatest number of the poor, especially the
emigrant poor, reside. In those numerous miserable dwellings, were these
wretched people crowded together; many families in one house; and not
infrequently many families of different nations. In some instances, a single
room in one of those half-under-ground huts, served as bedroom, kitchen and
shop, to a whole family; while underneath them, a cellar, half filled with mud
and water, sent up its pestilential steams; and under their window, a yard in
the same condition, was rendered still more noxious, by receiving the offals
cast out from every part of the house.

VI. But, if the sordid and almost unavoidable filthiness of their dwellings
were promotive of the disease, under which the wretched inhabitants languished
or suffered, still more so, in some instances, must have been their inattention
to personal cleanliness.

It was well remarked, formerly, by a foreigner, of the English ladies, and is
applicable, with but little deduction to our own fair country-women, -- That
they were whited sepulchers; beauteous and clean, without; but within -- You
know the rest. --

Were our country-women disciples of Zoroaster, they could not more studiously
hold sacred the element of water. -- How many of those house-wives, how many of
those maidens, the cleanliness of whose houses, and the neatness of whose
apparel, we often have occasion to admire and commend, think you, have applied
to any other parts of their persons, than their hands and faces, this purifying
element? Who can come in, and say, that I mean her;
When such a one as she, such is her neighbor?
-- Let me see wherein
My tongue has wronged her; if it do her right,
Then she has wronged herself; if she be free,
Why then, my taxing, like a wild-goose, flies
Unclaim'd of any one.
AS YOU LIKE IT.
-- The infrequency of bathing among both sexes and all conditions, especially
among females and the poor, in America, is surprising. -- In this respect, the
emigrant poor are in no wise more commendable; and, in every other kind of
cleanliness, still more backward. The French, alone, exhibit a laudable
conduct, in every grade of life, as personal ablution is regarded.

To every physician, who knows the importance of cleanliness to health, and how
rigid an attention to it is necessary, in Fevers, especially in those which are
called malignant, it is useless to insist on the consequences of negligence in
this particular.

I shall conclude this letter with a few remarks, which the subject naturally
inspires.

The preceding statement is strictly applicable, in all its extent, to great
numbers of those who were sick of the Fever of 1795. Your own mind will suggest
to you that there must have been many exceptions; and, likewise, among whom
those exceptions were to be found.

You will learn, from it, that circumstances unfriendly to foreigners were more
numerous and forcible, in more instances, than to natives; and will perceive,
at the same time, what is appropriate to each, and what common to all.

It will, further, be evident, that, though some of these causes may have been
sufficient, singly, to create a predisposition to disease, -- and probably did,
in some instances, create it; yet, that predisposition must have been more
considerable, and the disease which followed more severe, in proportion to the
combination of two, or more, of them.

It now remains to take a comprehensive view of the results furnished to us by
this letter, in connection with the two immediately preceding it; but this I
shall defer to another opportunity.

LETTER FIFTH. Recapitulation of Facts, and an Opinion concerning the Origin of
the Fever of 1795.
FROM the statements contained in the proceeding letters it appears, that the
Fever of 1795 was most active in

SITUATIONS -- where --

There was the least chance for free ventilation;

Where the sun exerted the greatest and longest influence;

there was the least drain for water and filth; the rains which fell stagnated;
there were, constantly, stagnant pools; the streets narrow, crooked, unpaved;
the houses partly underground, wooden, decayed or slight; there were
considerable collections of vegetable and animal matters suffered to remain and
putrify; and where the exhalations from the sewers and docks extended: --
The fever first appeared and continued to be mortal in a SEASON -- which was
unusually sultry and wet; throughout which esculent vegetables were scanty and
poor; meats tended rapidly to putrefaction, and were often consumed in a state
of incipient putrescency; --


During which -- Insects were very numerous and noxious; there was scarcely any
thunder and lightning; there were several violent and sudden alternations of
heat and cold; and the city was, in the evening, often immersed in a very
peculiar and pernicious fog: --


The Fever proved most fatal -- to the poor; to emigrants more than natives; to
the emigrant poor most of all; -- and they -- lived in situations, mostly, such
as abovementioned; were, often, crowded together, in such houses; mingled,
without distinction of nation, climate and habits; changed a mild vegetable,
for an animal diet; perhaps a semi-putrid animal diet; were chiefly laborers in
the open sun; were unusually intemperate; and were inexcusably inattentive to
the cleanliness of their houses and persons.


Such are the facts: -- what inferences would reason, unperverted by prejudice,
interestedness, or ignorance, deduce from them? How would she decide on the
so-much-agitated question of domestic, or foreign, origin? -- Were a rational
being to see hundreds of men, women and children, removed from a temperate and
equable climate, to a climate subject to the extremes of heat and cold, and to
sudden and excessive alternations of temperature; were he to observe this
removal to take place in crowded, ill-provided, ships, which were a long time
at sea, and whose arrival was at such a time as to subject them to the rigors
of a winter, severe beyond their knowledge, and under all the inconveniences
attendant on poverty, ignorance, and vice in a strange land -- or to the
terrors of a summer equally intolerable to them, from its inexperienced
sultriness; were he to view them, after sustaining, one, or more, such seasons,
or immediately, exposed to the influence of a season sultry and moist beyond
the common course, in this new climate; should he learn that they exchanged
oppression for licentiousness, and, in some cases, found all their hopes
illusory; that they substituted a scanty supply of wretched vegetables and a
gluttonous use of semi-putrid, ill-cooked, meats, for a sparing consumption of
mild and healthy vegetable food; that they were often persecuted by swarms of
insects, whose bites raised swellings or caused ulcers, when, till now, they
had been unaccustomed to any; should he see them indulging, habitually, in the
use of intoxicating liquors, to which many of them had hitherto been strangers;
were he to find them dwelling in narrow, unpaved, sunken, and illy-ventilated
streets, in which large collections of putrid matter were allowed to remain,
where there were puddles of stagnant water, or open sewers, and in the
neighborhoods of pools or docks, whose noxious qualities were heightened by the
admixture of putrefying vegetable and animal substances; -- were he to discover
the houses in which they dwelt, to be decayed or slight, and sometimes pervious
to sun and rain, -- in part, below the surface of the earth, and with yards
equally low, and in the condition of the pools and docks abovementioned;
should he, on entering these habitations, find them mingled with emigrants from
various other climates, or with natives of that to which they had removed,
equally debased, and perhaps still more so, than themselves -- with people of
discordant habits, colors, languages and countries, -- and all, alike,
inattentive to personal and household cleanliness; -- I say, were a rational
being to observe all this, and perceive all the circumstances, just enumerated,
to be concurrent, in respect to time, would he, think you, find it necessary to
recur to the East or to the West Indies, for causes of disease? Would he deem
it of much importance whether a single man died on board this, or that, vessel?
Or whether contagion might, or might not, be imported? -- Would not these
circumstances, of themselves, when viewed in connection with each other, and
compared with the known and established laws of health and disease, impress on
his mind, with all the force of intuition, a conviction of the domestic origin
of the Fever of 1795? Is it possible that he should have any other opinion than
that the causes, cure, and prevention, are equally local, and disconnected with
the prevalence or absence of similar diseases in other countries? But, certain
as I feel that this must be the inevitable conclusion from a candid attention
to the facts above-displayed, I am pleased to be able to declare that it is
unnecessary to trust to their testimony, alone, for support to the opinion
derived from their consideration. -- No direct, no clear, evidence, ever has
been, or can be, produced, in favor of the opinion that the Fever was imported.
-- I shall defer the attempt to substantiate this assertion, to a future
opportunity; in the mean time, permit me once more to remark -- That, though
all the circumstances, enumerated in this letter, as concurring to produce the
Fever, did, oftentimes, in reality concur, it is not to be supposed that they
did so uniformly. So much is true, beyond dispute -- A concurrence of the
greater number of some, or other, of them, was observable in a vast majority of
the cases of sickness. More than this was not necessary: -- for, expose the
most temperate and cleanly native, to the full influence of all the causes
predisposing to this fever, beside those which his birth, cleanliness, and
temperance, would disarm, and his chance for continued health must have been
small; especially, after the additional aid which they, questionless, derived
from great numbers of sick and dead, and from the reign of terror. The number
of natives, of this description, who died, was very inconsiderable; and, of
those few, perhaps there was not an individual whose situation, constitution,
or office, did not peculiarly expose him to the attacks of the Fever. To which
may be added, the chance of his falling a sacrifice to an inert, or destructive
practice.

LETTER SIXTH. On the Evidence of the Importation of the Fever of 1795.
No direct, no clear evidence ever has been, or can be produced, in favor of
the opinion that the Fever was imported.

The authority on which the advocates of importation chiefly rest, for the
support of their doctrine, is, as far as I can discover, the letter of the
Health Committee to the Governor, of the 8th of September 1795; or, more
properly, on what is there reported to be the fact. -- I shall quote, from this
letter, the passage referred to.

On the 20th day of July, Doctor Malachi Treat, the late Health-Officer of this
port, visited the brig Zephyr, from Port-au-Prince; on board of which he found
three persons ill of fever, and the corpse of one who died that morning. The
Doctor calls the Fever, in his report, a Bilious-remitting Fever. The brig was
ordered to ride quarantine. On the 22d day of July, Dr. Treat was taken ill,
and died on the 30th, of a fever marked by a yellow skin, hemorrhages, vomiting
of black matter, resembling coffee-grounds, and all such symptoms as
characterize bilious fevers of the malignant kind. -- On the 25th day of July,
four persons, from on board the ship William, from Liverpool, which arrived
here several weeks before (all the crew having, previous to that day, and
during the voyage, been perfectly healthy) were taken ill of Fever, attended
with similar symptoms; and all died within seven days.

This ship lay at a wharf at the foot of Dover-street, in the south-easterly A
mistake of the Press for -- north-easterly.
part of this city, which lies exceedingly low, is much of it made-ground, has
an eastern exposure, and (from the streets having been raised, about three
years ago, which threw the lots and yards into hollows of considerable depth)
is almost unavoidably liable to great collections of offal, and filth of all
kinds; is a part of the town very much crowded by poor inhabitants, and
contains a great number of lodging-houses, in which seamen and strangers of the
poorer class, commonly reside; and ever has suffered most from the regular
autumnal diseases, as well as from any new and uncommon complaint. From all
which circumstances, we entertain no doubt but that the seamen of the ship
William contracted the disease, of which they died, here, and did not introduce
it into the city.

A little before, and immediately after, the attack of the seamen of the ship
William, which first called the attention of this Committee, several other
persons, in Water and Front-streets, and in the neighborhood of Dover-street,
were seized with fever, which, especially in those cases which proved mortal,
was marked by severe vomitings, a yellow skin, hemorrhagy, and, in some cases,
a vomiting a black matter, resembling coffee-grounds, -- and which generally
terminated within seven days, and proved fatal to more, in proportion to the
number seized, than is usual in the ordinary complaints of the season, in this
city.

Two remarks of considerable importance are naturally suggested by a careful
examination of the above quotation: First, that the Committee appear to have
supposed Dr. Treat, alone, to have received the disease of which he died, from
the Zephyr; and, secondly, that they have, in some sort, admitted the
possibility of such a disease as the Fever of 1795, originating here, in their
statement of the circumstances relative to the ship William. It is true that
they are inexplicit, in both instances; and the only absolute conclusion which
we are justified in deducing from what they say is, that the disease was not
introduced into this city by the ship William. This, however, narrows the
ground of controversy, considerably; for no vessels beside the William and the
Zephyr, as far as I can learn, have ever been suspected of introducing any
disease, of this kind, into this city. It is necessary, therefore, only to
disprove the assertion, in respect to the Zephyr, and the whole foundation of
the doctrine of importation is destroyed. -- But, even were we to admit that
Dr. Treat did actually derive the fever of which he died, from the Zephyr, as
no other person is known to have been infected by that vessel, and as the
doctor communicated it to no person, the advocates for importation would not be
greatly benefited by our concession. But, no such concession is necessary. The
following papers, copies of which I am kindly permitted to transmit to you,
appear to me, to establish it, beyond contradiction, that neither Dr. Treat,
nor any other person, contracted a Fever, such as prevailed in New York, in
1795, from any sick, or dead, man, or any thing else, connected with the vessel
in question.

NO I. Letter from the Captain of the brig Zephyr, to Dr. Dingley.
New York, Sept. 8, 1795. SIR,
Having been informed that many people have reported that the late
Health-Officer, of this port, caught the disease with which he died, on board
the brig Zephyr, I have thought it a duty which I owed to the public, to
contradict the report.. This, I trust, will be satisfactorily done, to the
minds of all reasonable men, by my deposition, taken before C. Dunn, jun. one
of the justices for the city and county of New York; which I desire you to
publish, for the information of the citizens, as soon as you may think proper.
-- My departure from this city is the occasion of giving you this trouble.

I am, sir, your friend and humble servant, COMFORT BIRD. Dr. Dingley.


NO II. Captain Bird's Deposition.
Captain Comfort Bird, commander of the brig Zephyr, of Boston, sailed from
Port-au-Prince on the 1st of July, and arrived at New York on the 20th of the
same month. The mate and one mariner had the Fever and Ague seventeen days on
shore, and came on board with the same disease; and the captain himself had a
Dysentery on his arrival in New York; -- and John Wheeler, aged 16 years, died
on the day of the arrival of the brig at New York, by worms crawling up into
his throat and choking him. He was sewed up in a piece of canvass, and ready
to be committed to the deep, when the late Health-Officer came on board, who
desired the captain to have the canvass opened, that he might inspect the body
-- and he only cut the canvass open over the face, and viewed the countenance,
but did not make any other examination of the body, -- which was, soon after,
carried to Governor's Island, and there interred. -- The young man who died as
abovementioned, had suffered chronic complaints, but no fever of a dangerous
nature. -- Eighteen passengers came in the above brig, all in good health, --
who have continued in this state to the present day. -- Three days after the
above event, the Health-Officer visited the same brig, in as good health as
usual.

Signed COMFORT BIRD.
Sworn before me, this seventh day of September, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five, in the City of New York. C. DUNN, JUN.

OF the undoubted veracity of Captain Bird I am assured by Dr. Dingley, who is
personally acquainted with him, and attended him, at the time, for the
dysentery mentioned in the deposition. The opinion, therefore, that the Yellow
Fever, or a contagious disease, was brought into the city, last year, by the
brig Zephyr, seems wholly unsupported by evidence. Neither is it necessary that
any imputation should rest on the memory of Dr. Treat. He saw the mariners
after they had been long affected by the Fever and ague, and perhaps with some
fever upon them at the time; and from the yellowness of the skin, common to the
advanced state of that disease, especially in hot climates, might be easily
induced to suppose it a remittent. This, however, is mere conjecture, and not
necessary to be admitted, since the fact of the men having been sick seventeen
days, previous to their embarking for our coast, is ample proof that their
could not have been affected by the fever which prevailed and was so mortal,
here. -- Indeed, the whole testimony in favor of the idea of importation, is
too loose and slight to build any rational opinion upon. The very words of the
Committee are calculated to strengthen a contrary opinion, if rightly
considered; for they not only countenance the idea that the people of the ship
William became sick from the unhealthiness of the place where they dwelt, but,
also, that the Fever had made its appearance, in various other of the
neighboring houses and streets, previous to their being seized with it. And
what confirms the truth of this opinion is, that persons were taken with the
distemper, about this time, in other parts of the city, who had no connection
with the brig Zephyr, nor with any other vessel, and whose illness may be
satisfactorily accounted for from their situation, in other respects. An
instance of this kind fell under my own observation, the last of July; several
similar cases have been related to me; and one, if I am not misinformed,
occurred in the New York Almshouse, where the disease was distinctly marked,
before Dr. Treat's illness. -- The following statement of facts, too, will
convince every candid mind, that we ought to look at home, for the cause of
this Fever.

The ship Connecticut came to Fitch's wharf, about the 20th of July -- I think
it was on the 21st: she had just arrived from some part of England, and the
people were perfectly healthy. No vessel suspected of being infected, came to
this wharf, during the season; though the ship William lay at the next wharf,
at the distance of about two hundred feet, -- and Mr. Fitch gives the most
positive assurances that all the articles in his store, at this time, were in
good condition. At this wharf the ship Connecticut continued till after the
middle of August. The owner was employed about the ship, great part of the day;
but ate and slept in an airy part of the town. The people of the ship either
stayed on board, or at public houses near by. -- On the evening of the 25th of
July, the owner was seized with the fever; I saw him the 27th; he had good
accommodations, was in a favorable part of the town, in the third story of the
house, and recovered after an illness of about ten days, which was never very
dangerous, though the attack was severe. -- About this time, one of the mates,
the steward, and two of the mariners, of the ship Connecticut, were seized in
the same way, and with the same symptoms, as the owner. They continued in the
ship, or its neighborhood, and all died. I did not see them, but was informed,
by the owner, that the mate, in particular, vomited large quantities of blood,
and expired delirious.

Three persons, who were in Mr. Fitch's store, were taken sick, and two died,
of the Fever. One sickened on the 26th of July, one on the 6th, and the other
on the 9th of August. It was common for all these persons to sit several hours,
in the morning, in the store, with empty stomachs, -- inhaling the effluvia of
the night.

One of the first persons, who died of the Fever, was one who lived at the head
of the wharf, and had been confined for several months with a rheumatic
complaint.

For the facts contained in the two last paragraphs, I am indebted to a
communication from Mr. Fitch to Dr. Dingley, which that gentleman has allowed
me to make use of on this occasion. The account which it contains of the
condition of the wharves in his neighborhood, adds new force to the other
testimony in favor of the opinion that the Fever originated here; and is too
much to the purpose to be omitted. These are his words: --

I am positive that the disorder has originated from local causes -- because,
it has appeared in this quarter, at the same season, for several years past:
the cause why it has is, to me, mysterious; but what appears to me most
probable is, the central situation, and the motion of the tides. The tide of
flood sets directly into these wharves; collecting all the vapors and effluvia
of the city. -- The situation of the ground, between Water and Cherry-streets,
is rendered noxious by raising Water-street, and confining the stagnant waters.
-- The emptying of tubs into the head of the docks, instead of the end of the
wharves, although not peculiar to this part of the city, is a horrible
nuisance; particularly in time of sickness. -- The ponding of water, by running
a bulk-head athwart a dock, and leaving the vacancy for years, to be filled up
with every species of filth and putridity, is an object worth your attention.

A confirmation of the facts, and some of the opinions, contained in this
extract, may be found in a very singular epistle from the late Dr. Wm. Pit
Smith, to Dr. Duffield sen. of Philadelphia, dated September 1st, 1795; which I
presume you have seen and are possessed of.

On the whole, though I am not prepared to maintain that infectious diseases,
and the Yellow Fever among others, may not be, and have not been, imported, and
thus spread over parts of our country, yet this is the most that can be allowed
to the countenancers of the doctrine. For, after all, the testimony of numerous
facts furnishes clear, indubitable, and decisive evidence, that other and
peculiar circumstances must concur with such importation, to effect any general
distribution, circulation, or influence of the disease. Frequent instances have
occurred, nay do occur every year, of persons returning, from the West Indies,
sick with the Yellow Fever; languishing, for some time, in the houses of their
parents, or friends; recovering, or dying; attended by numbers, during their
illness; their very clothes, where they have died, afterward worn by their
relations; and yet no ill effects following therefrom. -- While I resided at
Wethersfield, in Connecticut, I had opportunity of obtaining precise
information of several such cases; and it is a well-established fact, in many
instances during our Fever, and especially during that of Philadelphia, in 1793.

The whole, therefore, that can be granted, or ought to be assumed by those who
maintain the disease which prevailed in New York in 1795, to have been imported
is, -- That infection may be brought into any place (and therefore into this
city) from abroad; that, under certain circumstances of the place, where it is
introduced, it becomes very active and destructive; but that, when these
circumstances do not exist, however the person immediately affected, -- if it
be introduced by a sick person -- may suffer, it is harmless, so far as the
general health of that place is concerned. -- If the subject were viewed in
this light, as most assuredly it ought to be, the question of importation, or
non-importation, would sink into it is merited insignificance; the efficient
cause, the causa fine qua non, of such Fevers, would be clearly discerned as
depending on local circumstances, capable of being wholly changed; the absolute
madness of further delay, in effecting such a change, would be distinctly and
deeply felt; a becoming spirit would animate the citizens; and suitable
exertions speedily place us beyond the possibility of being subjected to a
misfortune, similar to that which has been already sustained. For it is
inconceivable that the nature and extent of the evil should be understood, and
the remedy not be applied: and a comparatively slight and temporaly sacrifice
of property, would render this city, in reality, what the mistaken policy, or
pride, of some of its inhabitants now falsely represent it, -- as healthy as
any in the world; and leave nothing to fear, either from the Fevers of the
Indies, or the Plague of the Levant. -- But, while people continue to foster a
ridiculous vanity, concerning the city in which they reside; while they fear
that its reputation will be wounded, by permitting an idea to get abroad, that
it is unhealthy; while those engaged in commerce cherish the error, from an
apprehension that their interests would suffer from a disclosure of the truth;
while men, invested with the sacred character of physicians, countenance false
opinions, either through ignorance, a reprehensible timidity, or that they may
gather undeserved popularity and wealth; and while the magistracy are more
actuated by a mean regard for offices dependent on popular opinion, and
maintained by a compliance with it, at all hazards, than by a just and
enlightened zeal for the safety and happiness of their fellow-citizens; Truth
may be spoken, but there is no hope that it will be attended to. Considerations
of supposed interest, so various and so forcible, take deep root in the minds
of men who look only to the present moment, and are either incapable of
comprehending the whole of a subject, or unwilling to bestow on it the
necessary consideration. Thus circumstanced, they strive to banish from others,
and to smother in their own breasts, those convictions which irresistible
evidence forces upon them: as if it were possible that truth could be noxious.
-- Nothing can be more melancholy than to observe this wilful blindness, this
obstinate persistency in error, the consequences of which have been so dreadful
already, and threaten to be still more so hereafter. -- Were it possible to
impress the truth vividly on the minds of the great body of citizens; to rouse
men into action; to excite a generous disregard for temporary advantages, and a
lively interest for the future welfare of themselves and their posterity; a few
weeks might enable us to bid defiance to death, in many of the forms in which
he now assails us.

LETTER SEVENTH. Was the Fever of 1795 an Epidemic? Was it Contagious?
HAVING determined, to my own satisfaction at least, what were the remote or
predisposing causes of the Fever of 1795, I might now proceed to a description
of the disease itself, were it not proper to take some notice of two questions,
which have been consideration agitated, viz. Whether the Fever was, as the
Health Committee term it, an Epidemic? -- And, as some suppose, Contagious? --
On both these questions, I shall deliver my opinion, in as succinct a manner as
the subject will permit.

Was the Fever epidemic? -- A principal difficulty occurs in the very outset of
this enquiry; for different writers have made use of the term Epidemic,
differently; some giving it a general, others a more particular and precise
signification. Thus Van Swieten, in his Commentary on the 1380th Aphorism of
Boerhaave, places epidemic in contradistinction to endemic; while Cleghorn, a
writer of deserved authority, in the Introduction to his Observations on the
Diseases, etc. of Minorca, p. 74. constitutes a class of endemic diseases,
which he divides into epidemic and sporadic. -- Examples of like
dissimilarities, in the use of these words, are frequently to be met with, in
authors of equal credit. And thus it may possibly happen, in the present
instance, as on many former occasions, that the whole contention arises from
different conceptions of the import of a particular word. -- But our business
is rather with facts, than with definitions; I shall state to you, therefore,
what appears to me to have been the truth; and, perhaps, in the conclusion of
my statement, a definition will be found.

In the first place, every person conversant with the practice of physic in
New York, knows that a Fever, generally of the remittent or continued kind, and
variously denominated by medical writers, prevails in this city, to a greater
or less degree, every year; perhaps I may say throughout the year -- but,
certainly, in every part of it, except the winter, and particularly from July
to December: its greatest height being in the months of August, September and
October. The violence of this disease is increased or diminished by
constitutional peculiarities, and by the particular situation of the patient in
respect to air, temperature, etc. etc. Its universality, likewise, may be
considered as dependent, in a degree, on the same causes. -- Circumstances,
peculiar to some situations or individuals, occasion it to prove mortal, with
high marks of malignity, in certain instances, almost every year. That an
extension of these peculiarities, so as to make them common to the citizens
generally, would produce the same effects on the many, as on the few, seems
hardly controvertible. Now, this appears, to me, to have been the case, the
last year; and I have no doubt of the identity of the Fever which then raged
here, with that which has prevailed here in former years; and consider it only
as a higher grade of the same disease. -- Compare the history of Fevers, in
Sheffield, with that of Fevers in New York. -- We have a Fever, every year, at
a particular season, usually called the bilious-remitting Fever: in Sheffield,
at the same season, a Fever prevails, called the intermitting Fever. This last
evidently depends on the peculiarities of Sheffield -- such as its ponds,
marshes, etc. -- So, in my opinion, does the former arise from the
peculiarities of New York. -- The season of 1795 was a remarkable one: Was
there any apparent change in the Fever of Sheffield? Yes: the symptoms were
remarkably heightened; some new appearances were observable; and the disease
astonishingly obstinate. And was not this, also, true of New York? Who will
venture to deny it? -- Were either of these Fevers propagated to other, or
neighboring, places? No. You have certified this of the Fever in Sheffield; and
I have heard of no instance of the kind, in relation to that of New York. Both
Fevers, then, were proper to the places in which they prevailed; and the
inference which it would be natural to deduce from this is, that both were
endemic, and not epidemic: for the term epidemic seems to include in it the
capability of diffusion or propagation, without respect to the situation and
constitution of the patient; which the term endemic certainly does not. But,
whichever of these titles may be regarded as most appropriate, the fact will
not be varied by the use of either; and that you will understand to be,
according to my belief, as above-stated. That the Fever of 1795 was no other
than a higher grade of that which prevails here, in the same season, every
year; deriving its severity entirely from the peculiarities of the season, etc.
as related, at large, in the preceding letters.

Was the Fever contagious? Concerning the answer to be made to this, as well as
to the former question, there has been some dispute; but, in this case, as in
that, as much difficulty has arisen in settling the import of the phraseology,
as in determining the fact.

If by the question it is meant to inquire, whether the well became affected
with the Fever, in consequence of the contact of a sick person, or the
clothing of a sick person, or from the performance of the offices of
friendship, charity, and meniality, to those who were sick, -- I answer that no
such cases have come to my knowledge; whereas numerous instances of such
contact fell under my observation, and have been related to me, to which no ill
effects succeeded.

A number of persons, not less than ten or twelve, removed, with the Fever on
them, from New York to Stamford, 40 miles; but no person in Stamford, beside
them, ever had the disorder.

Mr. Fitch, the gentleman mentioned in the preceding letter, attended the young
men who had the disease with him, and to use his own words, lodged in the bed,
warm with the effluvia of the body of the young man who died at his house --
and nevertheless, he had no Fever.

Dr. Treat, according to the account of the Health-Committee, and of his
physicians, died of the very worst degree of the Fever; yet he communicated it
to nobody.

A patient of Dr. Dingley's, in Ferry-street, who was seized with the disease,
without any previous communication with any sick person, and as early as the
17th of August, and who died with it, communicated it to none of his
attendants. And the same is true of several other patients of the same
gentleman.

The writer of some ingenious strictures on Dr. Mitchill's Pamphlet, remarks,
in a note subjoined to his first paper, that he has, in common with many of his
fellow-practitioners, indulged, without the smallest ill effect, a much more
frequent intercourse with his patients, in this disease, than usual, etc. And
the Doctor himself, though he admits the possibility of such fevers becoming
contagious, or being propagated by contact, etc. expressly denies the Fever of
1795 to have been so.

But there would be no end to an enumeration of similar facts; I shall only
add, therefore, that I made use of no precaution whatever, in respect to such
communication with patients; that I have been, for more than two hours, shut up
in a small room, with a person laboring under the worst symptoms of the Fever;
have watched several nights, and performed the most servile offices, with a
near friend, who was sick with it; and never sustained the least inconvenience
from such exposures I might superadd to all this, the ambiguous testimony of
another Physician, who, in proof of the uninfectious nature of the Fever,
affirmed that he had had thirty patients with it, and had taken the breath of
all of them.
.

But, perhaps the advocates for the Contagious, or Infectious, nature of the
disease under consideration, do not intend to confine the meaning of the term
Contagion to that substance, whatever it is, which is generated in an unhealthy
body, and by application to a sound body, excites in it a similar
unhealthiness. They may mean to describe, or designate, by it, that structure,
constitution, or vice, of the atmosphere, which disposes to, or excites
disease. If so, they are in fault -- for they employ the same term to designate
two different facts. -- But let us not dispute about words. Perhaps, the
following statement of my opinions, will lead us to the formation or attainment
of some more accurate notions on this point.

Owing to a variety of causes, which have been enumerated in the course of
these letters, I suppose the atmosphere of New York to have become vitiated, in
1795, to an uncommon degree: that there was either an unusual absence of that
principle necessary to support healthy life, or an extraordinary concentration,
diffusion, or quantity, of some other, unfriendly to healthy life. From the
operation of one, or other, of these states of the atmosphere, and of the
causes abovementioned, on the bodies of the residents in this city, I suppose
a predisposition, greater or less, according to the situation and other
circumstances of individuals, was formed, in the citizens, generally, to the
Fever which prevailed here that year. With some persons, this condition of the
atmosphere, of itself, might be sufficient to produce in them disease. But,
ordinarily, I believe, the aid of some cause, which should disturb the
regularity of the distributions, or functions, of the body, was required to
bring the system into a state of febrile action. Such, for instance, as
intemperance in eating or drinking, sudden fright, fatigue, or indeed, any
considerable irregularity in what Systematics call the Non-Naturals.

This condition of the atmosphere, I suppose, acquired strength, daily, as the
season advanced; or, in other words, the power of the atmosphere, etc. to
predispose to the Fever, was increased, as the season progressed. I say to
predispose, -- for I suspect it seldom, of itself, produced the disease, after
that had attained its height, in those who remained here constantly. Though, on
persons coming into the city, from abroad, it doubtless operated with much
greater force, in many cases, than on the citizens, at any time. This is easily
accounted for, from the known effects of custom. For The monster Custom, who
does, etc.
-- is angel yet in this.


The systems of those who continued here became habituated to the atmosphere;
and while those who came here from the country, with ruddy faces, sunk down in
death, the pale and yellow beings who stalked through our streets, derided
disease, and pursued their customary occupations. -- But, to return from this
digression.

Not only am I convinced of the accuracy of the preceding ideas, but I have no
doubt that this vice of the atmosphere was rendered still greater by
exhalations from the bodies of the sick -- It is a point well-established in
medicine, that the air of a room is rendered unsuitable for respiration, if a
number of healthy persons are obliged to breathe it over several times, without
the admission of fresh air from abroad. So injurious is such a confinement, in
respect to air, to the human body, that it has, in numerous instances, produced
terrible febrile diseases. And if such effects arise from the repeated
breathing over the same, or nearly the same, air, by healthy persons, we should
naturally conclude, as is the fact, that such repeated respiration (especially
when united with the constant exhalation from their bodies) by the sick, must
be still more pernicious to health. -- You will pardon me for the introduction
of remarks so trite and familiar, for the sake of the use I wish to make of
them; which is no other than this -- I have mentioned it as my belief that the
state of the atmosphere was such, in this city, the last year, as, in
conjunction with the general influence of the causes producing that state, to
predispose to, and, in some instances, produce, the Fever; and that this
ill-conditioned atmosphere was rendered still more noxious by means of the
numbers who became sick, in the course of the season; and to this I would add,
for the reasons contained in the remarks above, that I think it not improbable
that some were affected with the Fever, in consequence of the further vitiation
of the atmosphere by the sick, who, without that circumstance, would have
remained free from disease. So, likewise, there may be persons, the balance of
whose health is so tremulously sensible to every external influence, as to
preponderate to the side of disease, on the slightest impulse of its causes.
With such, the mere contact of a sick person, or a transitory exposure to the
effluvia arising from a sick body, may be sufficient to produce Fever; and
instances of this kind may have happened, in the course of the Fever in
question. Such cases, however, must have been extremely rare, if there were
any; and no one has ever come to my knowledge. -- But, with regard to Fevers
produced by such a state of the air, as above-described, even when aided by the
mixture of human effluvia, arising from sick bodies, -- if these are to be
called Contagious diseases, and the cause which excited them Contagion, so,
likewise, may all other Fevers on the same principle, continued, remitting,
intermitting, Fevers, -- be called Contagious, and their causes, as marsh
miasmata, etc, Contagion. -- Now, to such a use of terms I have not the least
objection, provided the person who employs them, be uniform and explicit in his
application of them.

To conclude, -- If, in speaking of the Fever of 1795, the epithet Contagious
is meant to express that it was communicated by contact, etc. like the
Smallpox, Meazles and Plague, I must repeat it, I find no good reason for
admitting this to have been the fact; but, for the reasons before alleged, I
think there is just ground for a belief that the Fever was never excited in
this way. But if, on the other hand, the term Contagion be meant to convey an
idea of the influence of the atmosphere to predispose to, or produce, disease,
-- whether that influence arise from the abstraction, or addition, of a
principle, or be distinct from human effluvia, or combined with them -- there
appears no reason for denying the Fever of 1795 to have been Contagious. --
Still, as the term Contagion is not generally used in a sense to restricted, as
in this second instance, but is often employed by the same writer, to express
both the cause of the disease communicated by contact, etc. and of that
produced by the influence of the atmosphere, there seems to be a propriety in
rejecting it altogether, in the present instance, or at least in confining the
use of it, to designate a single mode of producing disease; and, according as
it is applied in the former or latter instance, the Fever of 1795 may be
denominated Contagious, or the reverse.

I have now gone through with the consideration of all the subjects,
preliminary to an account of the disease itself. In my next letter, I shall lay
before you, the result of those scanty observations which I had opportunity to
make. -- Knowing the causes of their imperfections, you will not fail of
extending your charitable indulgence to their author.

LETTER EIGHTH. Some Account of the Symptoms of the Fever of 1795.
AFTER the frequent confessions, which occur in the preceding letters, of the
circumscribed sphere of my observation, it were presumptuous in me to pretend
to deliver a regular history of the symptoms of the Fever of 1795. You will
observe, from the account which I shall transmit to you, that the appearances
it exhibited were too various to authorize such an attempt in any one who had
not opportunity to examine them, in relation to numbers of the sick. It is
proper, therefore, that I warn you, once more, to consider what is here
delivered as the result of my own observation only -- except where it is
expressly mentioned to be otherwise.

The Fever of 1795 was, generally, sudden in its access; so much so, in some
instances, as to resemble convulsions. In a less number of cases, it came on
gradually, and after a slowly-increasing illness of several days. It began with
great pain of the head, heat and redness of the face, and fullness and redness
of the eyes, accompanied by a strong, full, tense, pulse, and an almost
universal costiveness. Pains in the back and limbs were common; but not as much
so as of the head. A great inquietude, or anxiety, of the stomach and breast,
was common; approaching, sometimes, to syncope, and sometimes a vomiting, which
soon ceased, or continued, at intervals, through the disorder. -- The Fever
which now commenced was rarely ushered in by a chill, and continued for a
greater or lesser period, according to circumstances, with so many varieties
and combinations of symptoms, as to render it impossible to pursue a regular
description. I shall, therefore, dispose my remarks under several heads;
preserving as much connection as circumstances will permit.

I. Though the pulse was generally full, strong, and tense, in the beginning of
the Fever, it was not always so. It was sometimes weak and low, but still tense
-- if it be proper to use this term, to point out a condition of the pulse, as
it appears to me, wholly peculiar to this Fever. I well remember that, in a
youth of 12, or 13, years of age, the pulse became much fuller after a
plentiful bleeding; though he was of a feeble constitution, and had been
slightly affected with the Fever once before. -- In two gentlemen, who were
considerably affected by the Fever, for several weeks, but not to such a degree
as to be confined to their beds, this peculiar pulse was very distinguishable;
as much so, I think, as in any other persons whose pulse I examined.

Hemorrhages, from various parts of the body, were frequent, especially in the
advanced stage of the disease, and where it had been violent from the first.
These were from the nose, fauces, especially the gums, from punctures made in
bloodletting, and from the stomach: I saw no other. Bleeding from the nose and
fauces often occurred in the beginning of the disease, and was removable by the
general remedies. Bleedings from the punctures made in bloodletting, were seen
in the close of the disease, and were restrained with the greatest difficulty.
I recollect to have been constantly engaged in an attempt to restrain such a
hemorrhage, in company with another physician, two of the most melancholy hours
I ever experienced. Hemorrhagy from the stomach I shall mention more
particularly hereafter.

II. Symptoms of pulmonic affection were not uncommon; though I do not
recollect to have observed them till the last of September, or beginning of
October. They sometimes rose nearly to the height of pneumonia.

Hiccough was a troublesome symptom, and often accompanied vomiting; and there
was sometimes, as it appeared to me, a mingled hiccoughing and belching.

III. The marks of congestion in the brain were too numerous and unequivocal to
be mistaken. -- A violent pain in the head was one of the earliest, most
constant, and most distressing, symptoms of this disease -- Coma was a very
frequent symptom; and, as I thought, in proportion to the severity of the
disorder. Toward the close, it amounted almost to total stupefaction; it being
scarcely possible to rouse the patient. Some degree of delirium was common;
particularly at the commencement of an exacerbation of the Fever; manifesting
itself in the hurried manner in which the patient performed any action, and in
the rambling manner in which he conversed. That kind of delirium which some
have called light-headedness, was remarkably present, in one person, at the
close of his disorder. He often started up, wildly, without any apparent
object, then lay down, and commenced singing, in an interrupted, incoherent
manner; but without any violence. And the day before his death, he continued to
sing, with slight intervals, more than an hour. -- At other times, he would fix
on some particular words, and repeat them over and over; sometimes, with no
appearance of emotion; at others, with some glimmering of consciousness. -- In
another person, a patient of a physician of my acquaintance, the affection of
the brain was like that in Phrenitis. A blistering-plaster applied, if I
remember accurately, for 24 hours, to the head, which had been shaven, excited
no vessication, and scarcely any redness, though twice the usual quantity of
cantharides was incorporated, and the patient was of a delicate habit. In this
case the affection of the brain took place on the third day, and the patient
died on the fifth or sixth. -- On examination and dissection of the contents of
the cranium, all the membranes, and the very substance of the brain, were
discovered to be in a remarkable and uncommon state of inflammation. -- I have
been the more particular in relating this case, as it seems to contradict, in a
degree, the ideas of Dr. Rush, p. 50, of his History of the Philadelphia Fever:
our season having been unusually wet.

As connected with the state of the brain, it may be proper to mention here,
that the eyes were often suffused, the whites of them tinged with yellow, and
the small vessels turgid with blood. In some patients they had an expression of
singular wildness; while, in others, there was a remarkable vacuity, or absence
of expression. -- I saw no instance of squinting; nor observed any uncommon
state of the pupil: but I ought to acknowledge that my attention was not
particularly directed to the condition of the eyes, in this respect.

The state of the mind was very variable. Some were exceedingly impatient and
irascible; others, astonishingly obstinate; and this particularly, when, as was
often the case, there was a loss of memory, or some degree of mania. A strong
appeal to their good-sense, calling them by name, seemed to effect a temporary
restoration of their docility and recollection, -- which were soon lost. --
Many were very confident, at first, supposing their illness not be the Fever;
but gave themselves up to despair, immediately on being convinced that it was
the Fever. Many were full of dreadful apprehensions, from the first; and
oftentimes, exceedingly aggravated what would have been, otherwise, a slight
disease. A few, were calm, collected, undaunted, throughout their sickness. And
here it may not be unseasonable to remark, that these same varieties were, in a
degree, observable in those who continued well. Some physicians thought they
could discern a tendency, among the citizens, generally, to mania. It is
certain that fear was a terrible evil, and frequently proved the exciting cause
of the Fever.

IV. I have remarked that a great anxiety at the stomach was sometimes felt, on
the patient's being first seized with the Fever. This anxiety, it may now be
added, in some cases, extended through the complaint; but was most distressing
when the Fever was most violent. A great sense of soreness was often complained
of, when any thing was taken into the stomach, as if it were raw; -- to use the
words of one in whom it was observed. In some, the sensibility of this organ
was so excessive as to make it almost impossible to administer, either food or
medicine, by the mouth.

Patients were often afflicted with extreme pain in the bowels; but more
resembling that in dysentery, than in cholic. A discharge, generally, afforded
a present relief.

Flatulency, both of the stomach and bowels, was almost universal, and to an
extraordinary degree. -- The abdomen was sometimes distended with wind; but the
distension subsided after a conderable discharge of wind, downwards. This was
often the case in one of my patients.

Several dissections, as I am informed by the gentleman principally concerned
in them, show the stomach to have been in a remarkable state of inflammation
and excoriation. It appears to me that this disease of the stomach, or
inflammation -- (if it be proper to call it so) extended through the whole
length of the Alimentary Canal; as it is known to do in Apthae and some other
disorders; for one case of excoriation and partial mortification of the Rectum
came within my knowledge, and I have heard of several others.

I have mentioned, above, that Costiveness was almost universal at the
commencement of the Fever; but it was not always present. For though it was
observable in the greater number of patients, so much so as to deserve to be
ranked among the characteristic signs of the disease; and though a constant
tendency to a costive state, was general in those sick with the disorder; yet,
in some, the Fever was attended from the first, or for a while, by a Diarrhea;
and in one instance, the whole of the Disease appeared to me to be turned upon
the bowels, and to be converted into, or assume the form of a Diarrhea.

Some were seized with vomiting at the first, which was soon stopped, or ceased
spontaneously, and never returned. One case of this kind, proved favorable --
the patient recovering; another unfavorable, the patient dying. -- In others,
vomiting commenced the disease, and continued through it: while in others,
again, it came on in the course, or at the close of the disorder; and this both
in successful and unsuccessful cases.

V. The matters vomited up varied in color and consistence, in different
persons, and in different periods of the disease. The most common was of a
yellowish, greenish, or a muddy green and yellow, appearance, and very fluid.
Vomitings of this kind, were seen both in those who recovered, and who died;
and were both temporary and continued. -- Next, in frequency, was that of a
blackish appearance, commonly described as resembling coffee-grounds, but
bearing a nearer resemblance to blood partly burnt, and diluted with muddy
water. Several who had this vomiting recovered. -- I never saw an instance of
that tar-like vomit, which has been noticed by some writers. But, of all
others, that which struck me as evidential of the greatest derangement of the
stomach, was the vomiting up of, what appeared to be, thin blood, in which
floated a flaky, filmy substance, which I suppose to have been the villous coat
of the stomach. -- This I saw but in a single instance, a few hours before
death. This discharge was frequent, though small; and accompanied by a large
worm.

I cannot help thinking that the matters vomited up, except it be those of the
yellowish or greenish cast, have all a portion of blood mingled with them; and
that their various appearances depend -- aside from their mixture with the
contents of the stomach -- in great measure, on the quantity of blood mingled
with them. It appears to me that, in this disease, the secretion of the Bile is
greatly affected; and that, in many instances, the blood itself passes into the
biliary vessels, charged with the Bile, designed to have been separated, and
being poured into the duodenum, and discharged by stool or vomiting,
communicates the blackness observed in those evacuations. Beside this, as
appears from dissection, and from the case just mentioned, the coats of the
stomach itself are destroyed; and the numerous little vessels, which, in a
healthy state, distill into it a limpid and colorless fluid, now are
preternaturally distended, receive the blood, instead of lymph, and pour it, by
their numerous orifices, into this organ. This effusion of blood may be
supposed to increase, as the disease increases in violence, till, at length,
the tender coats of the stomach are separated, and thrown up, mingled with pure
blood. -- If these ideas be just, it is clear that no vomiting can be more
evidential of a fatal termination of the disease, than this; none can afford a
more unequivocal sign to the physician, that his attention is no longer useful
If the ideas contained in the above paragraph are accurate, they will tend to
confirm both the general notions of the disease, and of the proper mode of
cure, advanced in these letters. For --

1st. The effect of Blood-letting, in stopping the black-vomit, may be
explained on the same principle as in Hemoptoe -- by weakening the circulation,
and allowing time for coagulation.

2d. The reason why all stimulating substances increase the particular
discharges from the stomach, is evident; and, also, why cold drinks, ice, etc.
restrain them.

3d. The astonishing fluidity, or dissolution, as it is called, of the blood is
accounted for, and seen fairly to correspond with the preceding circumstances:
all of which --

4th. Demonstrate the nature of this disease; that it is not a disease of
vascular debility: -- and establish the propriety of employing evacuations, and
whatever may lessen the activity of the circulations, to effect a cure.


.

The discharges from the bowels were very dark, in general, even where no
preparation of mercury was used. They were, likewise, in most cases, remarkably
fluid, where the bowels had been once. (...) thoroughly, opened; and, where the
purgatives were brisk, and in all severe cases, excessively offensive. -- They
were, sometimes, of a dark, shining appearance, somewhat like molasses, melted
pitch, or black-lead. But I have seen stools of this color, in other diseases
-- particularly once in the Croup -- where calomel was frequently used as a
purge. -- I mention this, as it may sometimes happen, that physicians deceive
themselves, in such cases, ascribing that to the disorder, which depends on
medicines.

Some were troubled, with a retention of urine; but, more generally, with an
unusual flow; and this in one instance, I distinctly recollect, where the
quantity of fluids taken into the body, was very small.

In respect to sweating, I discovered nothing uniform. In one case, the patient
always had a profuse, clammy, sweat, when he fell into a restless sleep, with a
rise of fever. This was often observable, likewise, in that state of remarkable
anxiety which frequently preceded an evacuation by stool.

Blood drawn in this Fever, was remarkably wanting in floridity; and this was
especially true of that which was evacuated in the close of the disease --
whether by art, or spontaneous effusion. In one instance it seemed endowed with
a caustic quality, and affected a lancet so as to leave a permanent inequality
and discolouration of its surface.

VI. Sleep, for the most part, appeared unnatural and unrefreshing; attended by
great restlessness; and sometimes by great mobility of the muscles, twitching
of the tendons, and frequent starting up. One of my patients often raised
himself up, suddenly, out of bed, with every appearance of extraordinary
terror; but with no evident or clear consciousness of the act. In one person, I
saw remarkable subsultus tendinum.

There was great variety in muscular power, in different persons. A man who
died with the very worst symptoms of the Fever, the evening before his death,
rose from his bed, ran down two flights of stairs, returned, and was only
prevented from going down a second time by his nurse's having locked him in his
chamber. -- In another case, where the disease was mild, the patient felt
perfectly easy and composed, and in full possession of mental and corporeal
strength, while he lay on his bed; but, when he rose, and attempted to walk, a
sense of universal anxiety was felt, his ideas became confused, his strength
seemed to desert him, a sudden faintness came over him, and twice he sunk down,
unable to proceed.

An evacuation, by stool, often suddenly restored the patient, who was lifted
from bed, to such a degree of strength, that he continued for some time after,
to walk about the room, or sit up.

VII. I noticed no uncommon sensibility to light but in a single case; and that
was not of long duration.

Hearing, in one instance, I observed to be unusually acute; but generally, it
was much impaired; and, sometimes, seemed to be entirely lost. Perhaps this may
account for the apparent loss of memory in some persons.

The taste was either exceedingly impaired, or very fickle. The same may be
said of the appetite. When the appetite began to return, and food to be
relished, the sick were very voracious, but not easily suited. They discovered
no partiality for animal food. Thirst was moderate, in a few instances; but
oftener excessive. I have seen Porter desired; but it was not often relished,
when allowed. The same is true of coffee. Water was, universally, the most
agreeable drink; and I allowed its free use. One of my patients frequently
drank, in one night, when very feverish and restless, three quarts of water.
The appearance of the tongue varied, according to the violence and duration of
the disease, from white, to yellow, darkish, and black, like burnt blood; and
the gums often assumed this last appearance, when there had been bleeding from
them.

An astonishing insensibility to cold was nearly universal. -- I remember, in
one of those cold turns which we had in September, a remark^^le instance of
this. One of my patients occupied a chamber in the second story: the room was
very large, extending the whole width of the house, and having a chimney, a
large door, and two windows at either end. The bed was hard, in the middle of
the room, the door and all the windows open, and he covered with a single
sheet, frequently thrown off in his restlessness, yet he complained of no cold,
while I was chilled through, though sheltered from the draught of air, with my
usual clothes on, and the addition of a surtout and double cloak.

VIII. Yellowness of the skin was not constantly present in this disease; at
least, not in any remarkable degree. A tinge of it was common in the eyes and
on the skin; but not stronger, in numerous instances, than in ordinary Fevers.
Some were exceedingly yellow, even to being tawny -- so that the bed and body
linen were stained, both by the sweat and urine.

I saw eruptions but in a single instance. They resembled musketo bites so
nearly, that, had I not been forewarned of this similarity by Dr. Rush, in his
account of the Philadelphia Fever, I should have mistaken them, especially
considering the numbers of these animals. -- In this instance, the eruptions
were on every part of the body; which had not been exposed to their ravages.

I have sometimes observed a coldness of the skin, on the body, generally, but
especially of the feet, of which the patient was unconscious, while the face
and breast were red and communicated a burning sensation to the touch.

IX. I have, hitherto, said nothing of the type of the Fever of 1795; and, in
truth, it is a point on which I (...) wish to be silent, as, of all others,
connected with the Fever, it is the one where my observation is the least
satisfactory. In its mildest form, the Fever or pyrexia, appeared to me to be
moderate and constant; without any evident or strongly-marked exacerbation:
when severe, it fell in with Dr. Cullen's idea of a Continued Fever, as stated
in his First Lines 27, more than with any other: but, in both cases, I could
not determine that there was any regularity in the rise, or diminution of
pyrexia; on the contrary, the remission (if it be proper to term it so) was
more or less protracted, and the exacerbation sooner or later, moderate or
severe, in proportion as the patient preserved a regular state of body and
mind, or was irregular in these respects. For example -- any sudden agitation
of mind, as anger, perturbation, etc. and any irregularity of body, such as
eat^ng improper food or too much food, drinking any stimulating drink,
restlessness, too long detention of the faeces, etc. appeared to hurry on a
return of all the violent symptoms; while, on the other hand, the sick never
failed to get through the day with more ease to themselves, when no such
excess, or irregularity, happened.

In one case which came under my care, and which various causes contributed to
render the most interesting of any I attended, there were complete
intermissions, during a part of the disorder; but there was no kind of
regularity, either in their commencement, or duration; and a slight excess, in
any of the particulars mentioned in the preceding paragraph, was sufficient to
bring on a speedy and violent turn of Fever.

X. The period of convalescence, as well as of Fever, was variable. In the
former part of the time, and before the weather began to grow cool, patients
seldom died after the tenth day -- as far as I can learn; but their deaths took
place on the 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, rarely on the 8th, and still more rarely
on the 9th day. After the cold weather appeared, they sometimes dropped off
suddenly, and after having exhibited all the marks of convalescence, three
weeks from the time of their seizure. -- So, of those who recovered, some
regained their health with an elastic quickness; while others, were very slow
in the acquisition of strength; were a long time troubled with great weakness
in some of their joints, and oftenest the knees; and were afflicted by
oedematous swellings of the feet, ancles, and legs.

You have now before you the result of my observations, on the appearances of
the Fever of 1795; and I shall conclude this letter by the simple mention of
two facts, which will serve to confirm the doctrine of the great Sydenham,
concerning the despotic nature of the reigning sickness.

The Meazles had begun to appear, when the Fewer came, and they disappeared;
but no sooner was the Fever vanquished, than they returned more generally than
ever, and have continued in this city ever since. April.


I cannot learn that any febrile disease was observed in the city, while the
Yellow-Fever was present. I saw only one instance of Intermitting-Fever in a
lady, who contracted it in the country. It was slight, and was soon cured on
her coming to town, by the usual remedies. Her residence in town, likewise, was
in a part to which the Yellow Fever never came. Beside this, I heard of one
other instance, of a gentleman coming hither, from some other place, with the
Fever and Ague; which was, also, cured by the usual means.

I shall proceed, in my next letter, to bring you acquainted with those means
which were most successful in the removal of that disease which I have just
described.

LETTER NINTH. Method of Cure, in the Fever of 1795.
IT was obvious, to the slightest observation, that the mildness, or severity,
of the Fever of 1795, depended, in no small degree, on the situation of the
patient. That those who lived in the higher, drier, cleaner, and more airy
parts of the town, were more lightly affected; and that a removal, from the
other quarters, into such as were so circumstanced, was always followed by
beneficial effects to the person removed. In consequence, a milder treatment,
in every respect, especially a more sparing use of evacuations, was warrantable
in some cases, than in others; and as some practitioners were chiefly employed
among those whose favorable situations protected them from the most malignant
attacks of the disease, you will readily conceive why there should prevail, in
the minds of some, an opinion that very active remedies were unnecessary, and a
recurrence to the lancet inexpedient, at least, if not pernicious. It is true
that I did not always use it myself; but it is also true, that I never failed
to regret the omission. And though I lost no patient by the neglect, yet I am
convinced that, in every such case, however slight the disease might appear,
the cure was protracted. But, if the remedies were not always the same, the
principle on which they were administered, was uniform; and their operation the
same in kind, if not in degree. -- And, after the Fever became more general,
and the season considerably advanced, there was but little choice left in the
use of means. Positive and speedy relief was required; for to temporize, was to
kill. -- You will sufficiently comprehend, from these remarks, how far the
practice recommended below admitted of variety in the application; and I shall
detain you no longer from the consideration of the particular remedies, which
are meant to be arranged nearly in the order of their comparative importance.

I. BLOOD-LETTING. -- This was indicated by the severe pain, heat, and redness,
of the head and countenance; by the redness, turgescence, and heaviness, of the
eyes; by the oppression, pain, and anxiety, often observable at the breast; by
the fullness, hardness, tensity, or oppressedness of the pulse -- and equally
by that slender, wiry, vermicular feeling which it sometimes had --
communicating an idea of approaching numbness to the finger which felt it. It
is scarcely possible to convey an idea, by words, of minute peculiarities in
the pulse. You will recollect this, and pardon me, if I have failed in this
instance.


The effects of bleeding were, in every instance where I had an opportunity of
observing them, most salutary. The sick seldom failed of finding immediate
relief from it, and of perceiving that relief increased as the blood continued
to flow. It diminished the pains in the head, breast, and stomach: oppression,
anxiety, faintness, and heat, were moderated: the eyes rarely failed to assume
a clearer and more natural appearance: and it seemed to communicate a new
energy to the system. -- I remember an instance where a patient was so unable
to assist himself, on the second day of the disease, that, when I wanted to
bleed him, it required two persons to support him, in passing a few steps from
his bed, into the open air. -- There, he was seated and supported in a chair.
He grew easier, in every respect, as the blood flowed. -- After taking away
about twenty ounces, and tying up his arm, he rose without assistance; walked
several rods, to a Necessary; took care of himself; had a profuse evacuation,
by which he seemed to gain additional strength; and returned to his bed,
without any aid, and with a firm step.

Such were the immediate effects of bleeding early in the disease. The
importance of this remedy was not diminished by the duration of the disorder,
nor the necessity for it lessened, while the symptoms continued which made it
useful in the commencement. -- On the contrary, it was oftentimes as requisite,
and as beneficial, the fifth and the sixth days, as on the first. But this
necessity for its use, at so late a period, did not often occur, where it had
been vigorously employed, in connection with other remedies, at the first.

The following case, which I state briefly, is one among numbers, in evidence
of the advantage of early, free, and repeated bleeding.

A physician was called to a young man, with all the symptoms of the disease --
as it generally appeared at the first -- in the evening. He bled him 16 or 18
ounces; directed purges, etc. in the manner hereafter to be mentioned; and
though the weather was then cool, ordered the windows to be removed, both day
and night. The symptoms were relieved; but the next morning it was thought
necessary to repeat the bleeding; which was done, to an equal quantity. The
purges, etc. were also continued. In the evening, a third bleeding was
performed, and a like quantity of blood was taken away; and the other remedies
were continued. On the ninth day, from the seizure, the man was well, and able
to pursue his business; though his strength was not perfectly restored.

In one instance which came to my knowledge, bleeding removed an obstinate
vomiting, of many days continuance, which threatened the life of the patient,
and which had resisted all other remedies.

It seems hardly necessary to add any thing more, in favor of this remedy,
after its beneficial effects have been stated, with so much eloquence and
perspicuity, by Dr. Rush, in his various publications, respecting the Yellow
Fever.

II. PURGING. No case occurred, in my particular practice, where,
notwithstanding the vomiting, cathartics could not be administered. When this
symptom was very troublesome, they were required to be given in a solid form,
at more considerable intervals, and of as small a size as possible. The
activity of the purge was always to be proportioned to the violence of the
symptoms; and it was important that all medicines of this kind should be given
in divided doses -- so as to promote a gradual and continued discharge. -- The
operation was often very much assisted by clysters; for which water alone was
necessary.

The good effects of cathartics were not less obvious than those of
venaesection. They were indicated by the constipation, so generally present; by
pain in the bowels, flatulency, and tumefaction of the abdomen; by pains of the
head, heat and flushings of the face, and of the whole body; and finally, by
the vomitings: and all these symptoms they rarely failed to obviate, or
relieve. This relief, too, was oftentimes so sudden, as to seem like
enchantment. -- Frequently have I seen a patient, after an hour or more of
severe pain, restlessness, heat, thirst, and inquietude of every kind --
feeble, exhausted, and as it were, ready to expire -- rise with the greatest
difficulty, and with the aid of others, to the chair, and after his evacuation,
feel his pains removed, his heat and restlessness vanished, his strength
renewed, and himself able to fit up, or walk about, and breathe the air with
freedom: and sometimes, the discharge was followed by a refreshing sleep, and
gentle perspiration.

These benefits were neither so certainly, nor so frequently, obtained, where
the evacuations were violent and sudden. Indeed, it appears questionable to me,
whether it be ever proper to excite such discharges, in Fevers. Patients, when
much reduced, are apt to sink under such immediate and abundant evacuations.

III. COOL AIR. -- It was of the utmost importance to procure a constant
application of cool air to the body of the patient, from the commencement of
the Fever. The advantages which resulted, were universal and wonderful. -- To
this end, the sick were ordered to be placed on a hard bed, with very little
covering, in the middle of the room; and the doors and windows were, as much as
possible, kept open day and night. -- The good effects of this practice were
exceedingly increased, where the application of the cool air could be made to
the patient in an erect posture. For, not only was it more equable, but the
head was also relieved, thereby, from that sense of fullness and oppression
which was invariably experienced in a recumbent posture. The sick, therefore,
were directed to sit up, in the course of the day, with the assistance of their
attendants, as long as their strength would permit, without their becoming
exhausted. While in this situation, their feet and legs were covered more
warmly than any other part of the body: and if cloths, dipped in cold water, or
vinegar, were often applied to the temples, the relief obtained was still
greater.

IV. COOL DRINKS. -- The great thirst, which was nearly universal in this
Fever, from the first, made the drinks, of necessity, an article of early
attention. It was observable that they never could be too cold. Patients
complained of the warmth of water which had been standing but a short time; and
seemed to languish for a supply of fresh water, with an anxiety which became
truly painful, when the usual hour of its distribution approached. The water
which is used for drinking, in this city, is mostly drawn from a single pump,
called the Tea-Water Pump; and it is distributed, by means of large casks,
which are carted to every part of the town; once a day, in winter; and every
morning and afternoon, in summer.


The good effects of a plentiful use of cool, diluting drinks, were obvious.
They tempered the preternatural heat and anxiety of the stomach; often
restrained vomiting, and the faucial hemorrhage; served to dilute, and carry
off, the offensive contents of the intestines; and disposed to a more equable
and aqueous sweat. -- Of all other drinks, Water was most relished -- and on
many accounts, was the most proper. A pleasant and suitable drink was made, by
pouring warm water on fresh apples, and suffering it to cool; and likewise, by
the addition of a piece of toasted bread to water. Milk, much diluted with
water, was relished by some; some were fond of butter-milk; and as all these
possessed bland and nutritious, qualities, they were advantageously used, where
a variety of drinks was required by the capricious taste of the patient.

I had no opportunity of trying the effiacy of ICE, but the testimony of a
Physician, in whole judgment and veracity I place great confidence, is
strongly in its favor, and inclines me to believe that it may be used with high
expectations of advantage. Under his direction, it answered, better than any
thing else, in relieving heat and fever; restraining hemorrhagy; and obviating,
partially, or entirely, the vomiting -- even the black vomiting.

V. CLEANLINESS. -- This is of the utmost importance, and, in a measure,
indispensable. -- The bed and body linen should be often changed; the clothes
necessary about the bed, well aired, several times a day: there should be two
beds, one of which may be aired, while the other is in use: all unnecessary
furniture -- particularly woollen, silk and cotton -- every thing which may
absorb and retain effluvia and moisture -- should be removed: all utensils
employed about the patient, frequently changed and rinsed: the room should be
often sprinkled and dusted: the face, mouth, eyes whole head, hands -- and,
where it can be done, body of the patient, washed with cool water, several
times in the day. The more exactly -- other circumstances being regarded --
these directions can be put in execution, the better for the patient; and, as
my own experience convinces me, the more certain and speedy will be his
recovery. -- You will observe that I say cool water; for I cannot believe that
the shock which would follow from the application of cold water to the body,
would be beneficial. -- It is not here, as in the use of air; for water is so
much more perfect a conductor of heat, that the abstraction would be universal
and sudden, were it applied cold. And, beside, as much is effected perhaps, by
the ablution, as by the coldness, consequent upon bathing.

It was not in my power, in any case, to carry this practice to the extent I
wished; but, caeteris paribus, the relief of the patient was proportioned to
the degree in which it was pursued.

VI. BLISTERS. -- The advantages usually derived from the use of blisters, were
not evident. It was sometimes doubtful whether they were any way serviceable.
Yet there were instances in which they afforded relief; though mostly
temporarily. -- I have seen them, applied to the breast, relieve the oppression
at the lungs; and applied to the back of the neck, relieve the head: in both
cases, when the disease had been of some days continuance. A physician, to whom
I mentioned these remarks, informed me that his experience justified them,
except when, as was often observed by him, a hemorrhage ensued from the
vesication, and continued for some days. Perhaps it was necessary to the
efficacy of blisters, that they should have been, always, preceded by copious
blood-letting.

VII. The Tinctura Sacra, given in small quantities, at intervals, in water,
was found by one Physician, to have the happiest effects, in relieving nausea,
and obviating the tendency to vomit, in all cases where a destruction of the
coats of the stomach had not taken place. The same gentleman derived much
advantage over the disease, where, from long-continued vomiting and effort to
vomit, the stomach appeared to have sustained considerable injury, or abrasion,
from the use of Ol. Oliv. vel amygdal. dulc. -- The oil covered the inflamed,
or abraded, part, and protected it from mechanical stimulus, while it allayed
the soreness and irritation produced by the action of the diseased fluids it
contained.

VIII. FOOD. -- I have before remarked that the sick showed no preference for
animal food; on the contrary, they very generally refused it. Some, who
requested it to be prepared for them, found themselves unable to eat it, when
presented to them. -- Fruits, milk, biscuit boiled in milk or water, sago,
salep, hasty-pudding, and vegetable food, generally, were most relished by
them, both during their illness and their convalescence. -- This was peculiarly
fortunate, as any indulgence in a contrary course, was sure to be followed by
distressing effects. The more rigidly attentive patients were to preserving a
simplicity of diet, the more certain and pleasant was their recovery. And, in
all cases that I had opportunity to observe, their convalescence was always
extended or shortened, tedious or satisfactory, in proportion as they returned
suddenly to the use of meats and stimulating drinks, or adhered to vegetable
food and water.

I have now, my dear friend, made you acquainted with that course which I
generally pursued, in regard to those who came under my care. The number was
not great, nor the success always complete -- for I had not always the liberty
of employing the means I wished to, as fully and freely as was necessary to
complete success. But, I can truly say, that I never saw them do injury; and
that they appeared to me to do good, in every case, where they were employed,
and in the proportion of their trial and application. -- More than this no man
can truly declare; more than this ought never to be expected from any remedies.
The most able practitioners are destined to see their patients frequently
expire, in spite of all their care, through the obstinacy of the patients
themselves, and the prejudices of their friends, the carelessness of
attendants, or the intervention of unforeseen and unavoidable accidents. The
consciosuness of having done their duty, of having acquitted themselves, under
circumstances so distressful and embarassing, to the best of their knowledge,
and with purity of intention, will prove a never-failing consolation, though
the execrations of ignorance, and the calumnies of hatred, may pursue and
persecute them. -- Happy, -- at least in this respect, -- are those, "the
peaceful tenor of whose way," while it excites neither opposition nor malice,
and neither elevates to opulence nor fame, secures them from misrepresentation
and injustice.

LETTER TENTH. Miscellaneous remarks on Medicines used as Remedies in the
Fever, and general conclusions.
YOU wish to obtain every possible information, respecting the Fever of 1795;
you are not satisfied with knowing what remedies I employed, nor which were
most successful; but you would learn all that were used; the success, or
failure of each. I applaud your curiosity, my friend, for I am not ignorant of
the benevolent motives which excite it; but I fear that there is little with
which it is in my power further to gratify it. The practice which I saw, was
that which I have recommended: other remedies I know were used; but, not having
had opportunity, but in few instances, to mark their effects, I ought not, from
my own convictions, how well-founded soever they may appear to me,
precipitately to condemn either the prescriptions, or their authors. In the
variety of cases, constitutions, and circumstances, it might happen that some
of those very things, which appeared pernicious when I saw them used, were
sometimes proper and salutary. It would be presumptuous, therefore, in me, to
decide without more information; but I may be allowed an opinion; and that
opinion need not be withheld from a friend. -- I confess, then, that from the
success which attended the antiphlogistic plan of cure, I am persuaded that no
other can be salutary, or safe; and the few instances in which the effects of a
different mode of treating the Fever were observed by me, strengthened my
previous convictions of its inutility and danger.

The medicines chiefly trusted to, by those who pursued a different course from
that laid down in the preceding letter, were, as I am informed, Calomel, to
promote, or effect a Salivation, -- Bark -- Laudanum -- Wine, and other
stimulating drinks -- with an Animal diet.

Of the effects of Salivation, not having seen it take place, by nature nor
art, in the Fever of 1795, I can say nothing. Dr. Rush countenances the
practice, in his Treatise on the Fever of Philadelphia, and adds the testimony
of many respectable authorities to his own. -- As a Cathartic, Calomel,
combined with other purgative substances, was unquestionably useful. Some, I
know, thought otherwise; and that other purgatives might be more safely and
efficaciously employed; and, I confess, I saw some cases in which it appeared
to affect the stomach very painfully. But a Physician on whose judgment I have
great reliance, informs me, that he saw reason to reject a similar opinion,
which he had hastily adopted; repeated observation having convinced him, that
all the symptoms of gastric affection were worse in those who had not been
purged with Calomel, than in those who had been evacuated by its assistance.

I gave Bark, in no form, but in three cases. Two were in the early part of the
reign of the Fever, the two first patients that I had; and I am convinced it
retarded the cure in both. In the other instance, it was administered after the
Fever had left the Patient, and he was convalescent. Here it was given as any
other Bitter, and as much in compliance with his opinions, as from any
expectation of its doing good; and, as far as I can judge, with very little
effect of any kind. -- In the following case, its exhibition was not so
harmless.

A medical friend was called to visit the patient of another Physician, who had
quitted town, on account of his health. The sick man was oppressed by the most
alarming symptoms; of the number of which, were hemorrhagy and the black vomit.
The stimulating system had been steadily pursued, and was continued, under the
direction of a pupil of the physician first employed. In particular, large
quantities of Bark were exhibited, throughout the day. -- On the entrance of
the second physician, the Bark and all other medicines of the kind, were laid
aside; cool air was freely admitted; and the antiphlogistic plan of cure
strictly adhered to. The consequence was, that all the symptoms were relieved,
and a prospect opened on the patient of a recovery. The vomiting and hemorrhagy
had totally ceased. In this situation, and while the Physician was attending to
some persons whose condition was more alarming, the person who had the
immediate charge of the sick man, began, again, to administer the Bark. -- The
next day -- or the very same, at night -- all the bad symptoms recurred; the
Bark was, nevertheless, persisted in; and the man died.

Several similar cases have been reported to me; but none so minutely as to
authorize an attempt to state them to you.

The extreme restlessness of a patient, in whom I had the strongest interest,
and for whose fate the deepest anxiety, induced me, in violation of my more
sober judgment, to administer Laudanum. -- This I did not do, till he had
spent three nearly sleepless nights. -- In every instance, it undoubtedly,
increased the restlessness, clammy sweats, thirst and Fever. I was obliged to
discontinue it.

Wine, brandy and water, and especially porter, when taken by any of my
patients, had the most pernicious effects. I had occasion to see an access of
Fever, repeatedly brought on by the one, and a relapse by the other; where they
were used without my knowledge, and contrary to my direction.

Of the effects of Animal Diet, I have already spoken, and have nothing new to
add.

On the whole, it appears incontestible to me, that what is called the
antiphlogistic treatment is to be adopted in Fevers like that which prevailed
in New York, in 1795, in all its strictness, and adhered to with pertinacious
resolution. Both the symptoms of the disease, and the success attendant on the
practice recommended, concur in establishing the propriety of employing it. --
It is also to be remembered that, in this disease, not a moment is to be lost:
a day, an hour, nay almost an instant of delay, may sometimes be fatal; and the
means practiced must be powerful in proportion to the violence of the symptoms.
Neither must we be deceived by the apparent mildness of the seizure -- for a
few hours may entirely change the face of things, and we may be left to lament
that credulity which led us to temporize, and prevented the use of those
remedies, which delay alone rendered ineffectual.

But, while the Physician strenuously directs his efforts to the removal of the
symptoms of this disease, let him not overlook a passion which never fails to
aggravate them. Fear, the exciting cause, in many instances, of the Fever; the
fomenter of all its evils; and sometimes, as it were, the sole disease; is a
frequent and dreadful calamity, and one of the direst adversaries with which
medicine has to contend. -- In numerous instances, during the continuance of
the Fever of 1795, apprehension touched upon insanity; destroying all
confidence in the Physician and in remedies, or exciting an absurd and
enthusiastic reliance on pretenders and madmen: and utterly disqualfying the
patient for a proper attention to himself. -- In the well, the evil was
scarcely less. The name, alone, of Yellow Fever, seemed sufficient to induce
disease, to banish discretion, to sever the bonds of social connection, rend
asunder the ties of parental, filial, and connubial affection, and put reason
to flight. -- It was in vain to point out the folly of this terror; to declare
the disease not infectious, and easy of prevention; to offer mathematical
demonstration that other disorders were often more mortal, without exciting any
alarm; it was still the Yellow Fever, and that was an irresistible reply to
every argument. -- The city of New Haven, summer before last, lost about 50 of
its inhabitants, with the Yellow Fever. Universal consternation prevailed
throughout the place; all business was at an end; and most of the principal
inhabitants fled. -- Last summer, the Dysentery raged there: more than 70
persons died of it: but nobody fled; nobody was frightened; and the
Magistrates, very gravely, put a stop to all communication with New York, for
fear of the Yellow Fever; made vessels ride quarantine, and confined
stage-coach passengers, that no contagion might be diffused, through the city,
from their trunks and their garments. -- But, it is time to put an end to this
series of letters; and seek, by novelty, to give new interest to our
correspondence. I shall take my leave of the present subject, with an
enumeration of the inferences I have drawn from having viewed it, in the light
here exhibited to you.

1. The Fever of 1795 was Endemic: -- i. e. generated by local causes,
producing a Fever every year, in this city.

2. The peculiar ferocity of the Endemic of New York, in 1795, is ascribable to
the peculiarity of the season, together with a greater accumulation, than
usual, of the ordinary causes.

3. It was not Contagious: i. e. communicated by contact of diseased persons,
by clothes, nor by visiting the sick, etc.

4. As it originated here, its prevention will depend on a change of the local
and individual circumstances which promote it.

5. The Fever in 1795, exhibited such appearances as characterize what are
customarily denominated Inflammatory Diseases.

6. It is cured by the remedies suited to remove Inflammatory Diseases.

7. The same causes which converted the ordinary Fever of New York into the
Yellow Fever, would change the Fever which prevails around our Western Lakes
into the Yellow Fever; and, as certainly, the Intermitting Fever of Sheffield:
while the establishment of a free ventilation, the filling up of all pools,
yards, etc. and a scrupulous attention to cleanliness and simple diet, would
reduce our Fever to a simple Remittent or Intermittent, or remove it
altogether; as the filling up and cultivation of your ponds and marshes, would
forever banish all Fevers of the kind -- as general diseases -- from Sheffield.

I have now, my dear friend, performed the task demanded of me, in the best
manner I am able consistent with my leisure, and my duty toward others. I
cannot conclude without once more soliciting your indulgence, and requesting
you to recollect with what expectations and confessions I entered on the
composition of these letters. -- I have taken the words of Cicero for my motto
-- Rationem, quo ea me cumque ducet sequar --

And if I have erred in my conceptions of what is reason, and what was fact,
let my intentions prove my apology.

E. H. Smith.

LETTER FROM DOCTORS TAILOR AND HANSFORD, TO THE PUBLISHER.

LETTER FROM DOCTORS TAILOR AND HANSFORD. TO THE PUBLISHER.
NORFOLK, VIRGINIA, DECEMBER, 1795 SIR,
IF, in our attempts to add to your information respecting the fever, which
prevailed here in August last, we should draw upon us the illiberal sarcasms,
which we have observed to attend all who endeavor to serve their fellow
creatures in this way, we must leave it to you to justify our intentions, at
least, being ourselves unprepared to answer any thing which may be objected to
what we shall advance. We mean to state facts, or what we believe to be such,
and willing to admit that there are several ways of curing the same disease. It
will not be understood, that we reprobate the practice of others who follow a
different mode of treatment. Our observations have been drawn from thirty years
experience, with the advantage of records relating to similar diseases for a
much longer period. We do not know of a more regular mode of treating the
subject than by answering your inquiries in the order they occur, which will
perhaps comprehend every thing required at present.

The Fever we believe has its origin in the season, and exists every year in
various grades, beginning generally in the month of August, and disappearing
about the middle of October.

The precise time of its commencement and termination, and its degree of
malignancy, depending upon contingent causes. We have been accustomed to call
it a Bilious Remittent, with a tendency to putrefaction; whenever it proves
uncommonly fatal, it is aggravated, according to the best of our observation,
by the prevalence of some unusual weather for a long time together -- Thus we
have seen this disease equally malignant after a dry hot season, and after a
very rainy period. The approach of frosty weather being uniformly the cure for
the effects of either. -- The Fever of the last autumnal season, appeared first
on the river, then on the streets adjoining; was soon after diffused through
the town and suburbs, and finally the neighboring country; though in this last
not generally: as usual it declined on the approach of cold weather. -- The
month of June had been very cool, and at the change of the moon, or a little
before, it began to rain in torrents, and so continued to do, with short
intervals of close sultry weather, till August, when a violent hurricane,
attended with a flood of rain, laid waste the whole vegetable kingdom --
afterward the weather was as before, sultry and moist, with profuse showers
till the end of September. -- The first appearance of the Fever was about the
10th of August; it increased in violence and in extension during all that
month; it was perceived then to abate, and continued to do so till the last day
of September, when a few frosty nights supervening, it disappeared almost
suddenly and entirely.

There were perhaps more deaths, than for many years before; but whether
greater in number to the proportion of the sick, than is usual from autumnal
diseases, which prove as universal as that in question, we cannot undertake to
determine. The same mode of treatment generally succeeded -- as in other
seasons. Our method was plentiful depletion in the beginning, not by bleeding,
but by purging with Jalap, Calomel, Scammony, Aloes, or by the milder purges,
the Neutral Salts -- Sennae, Rhubarb, Manna, etc. as the age, sex and
constitution of the patient pointed out, -- taking care that the evacuation of
the first passages was complete, by whatever means procured. As soon as we
judged that to be sufficient -- which we always endeavored to make so with as
little delay as possible -- the bark was administered in all and every form
that it could be made to remain, without regard to quantity, or to the period,
or height of the fever, with wine, porter, and even brandy, if wine was
rejected by the inclination, habit, or stomach of the patient. We can assure
you, we have no reason to alter our mode of practice in future. In a multitude
of instances, some will occur in all diseases, when a change, and sometimes a
material change of remedies may be necessary -- such cases we found, and in
those we used Blisters, Emetics, Camphor, Opium, and often ventured upon
Cupping -- but never upon venaesection. -- This last, a long course of practice
has taught us to be at least, not advantageous. In different climates, and
under other circumstances -- when the disease may have appeared in other grades
than those we have experienced -- that operation is perhaps found useful. We
wish not to impose our opinion, as a rule for any person; sensible of the
fallability of all human judgment. We ever thought it our duty to give up our
own theories, when contradicted by events. We only mean to recommend that plan,
which long experience has taught us to be most successful. There is no proof
that this disease possessed any specific infection. It was rarely fatal to the
native inhabitants or the old settlers, speaking of the town only; but we have
been told that many of the traders from the Rivers and distant part of the
State, died immediately after leaving the port. The terror which pervaded all
parts of the country, and deprived those victims of the common attentions of
humanity, will easily account for this without applying to the malignancy of
the disease. All, or most of those born in, or who had been accustomed to a
southern climate, escaped death, and when attacked, had the disease in its
milder form.

A large number of the inhabitants enjoyed uninterrupted health; most of the
deaths happened in confined streets and buildings, and in those nearest the
river. -- Those who were accustomed to live well, (as it is termed) did not
suffer so much as the poorer class -- But the intemperate of every description
became victims when attacked -- The small pox immediately preceded this fever.
We did not observe that those who had been the subjects of it were particularly
sufferers. -- There had been no malignant complaint in the preceding winter.

A particular description of the fever, and its symptoms, does not seem to be
here necessary, because, it differed from the ordinary Bilious Remittent, only
in the rapidity with which it passed through the several stages, and in its
malignancy. -- This last circumstance we are of opinion was occasioned by the
long continued and universal heat and moisture of the atmosphere. -- The air
was evidently impregnated with putrid effluvia, arising from decayed substances
of every sort, brought down upon the creeks and rivers by the

(...)
