A LETTER TO GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: CONTAINING
STRICTURES ON HIS ADDRESS OF THE SEVENTEENTH OF SEPTEMBER, 1796, NOTIFYING HIS
RELINQUISHMENT OF THE PRESIDENTIAL OFFICE.

BY JASPER DWIGHT, OF VERMONT.

PRINTED AT PHILADELPHIA, FOR THE AUTHOR, AND SOLD BY THE BOOKSELLERS. Dec.
1796.

A LETTER TO GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, etc.
SIR!
THE cause of Civil Liberty owes you much, and your country still more;
hitherto you have been considered as the man whom posterity should hold up as
an example to every people determined to be free.

Since the days of Columbus no man has appeared in a more conspicuous and
dignified character -- glory collected round you, and, for a while, like the
sun in the center of the universe, you influenced and attracted the admiration
of mankind.

To what causes must I attribute the alteration that has already taken place,
in the sentiments of the world concerning you?

Had the French revolution commenced ten years later, or you retired to the
shades of Mount Vernon four years ago, the friends of public virtue would still
proudly boast of one great man free from the breath of public dispraise, and
your fondly partial country, forbearing to enquire whether or not you were
chargable with private aberrations, would vaunt in you the possession of the
phoenix.

But it is to be feared that the temper of your mind has been mistaken by all
but those who, uniting evil with ambitious dispositions, prevailed over your
judgment to the prejudice of your reputation.

This is the tender opinion of men warmly attached to you: but it is also
alleged that the world has hastily estimated your character from imperfect
materials, and your address of the 17th of September is produced as an evidence
of the fact, and as a phenomenon in the political world even at this eventful
era.

That production has excited the most opposite emotions: on one side
astonishment and affliction -- on the other exultation and gladness: those of
the latter temper uniformly consist of the avowed enemies of equal Liberty, the
decided friends of monarchy, the open advocates of privileged and distinct
classes, but what above all should render such joy suspicious to you, is, that
none are more loud than that numerous body among us, who, after embrewing their
patricidal hands in the blood of our parents, relatives, and friends, were yet
admitted in the generous moment of our victory to a participation of that
freedom which they had labored to destroy, and upon equal terms with those who
achieved it! -- When all these, and these only rejoice and extol your address
to the skies, I need not say who mourn in silence and shame!

You are not insensible of that estimation in which you have been hitherto held
by foreign nations, nor of the celebrity you were likely to obtain in history,
neither have you been indifferent to fame; you know better than any other man
the just extent of your claims to the affections of your country, and you
cannot be insensible how full the measure of gratitude has been with which you
have been constantly repaid.

It is among the amiable errors of our nature, and already appears a too
prominent feature in the character of our countrymen, to carry the generous
sense of gratitude for great services, and admiration of splendid actions, into
the extremes of confidence and devotion -- to prostrate reason at the altar of
blind and undiscriminating affections, and to sacrifice or forsake principles
at the instigations of zeal; thus it is that men, suffering veneration to
mislead their judgment, learn to sanctify frailties and vices.

This temper so innocent in its source, all history proves to have been most
dangerous to the happiness of nations; the influence of power in corrupting the
human heart, is universally acknowleged; how few of those who possess it are
there, that can learn to doubt the wisdom of their own measures, or to compute
for themselves upon rules which they proscribe for the adoption of mankind; in
vain do we cherish in remembrance the magnaninity that called Cincinnatus from
the plough, if we forget the cause and manner of his departure from Rome.

That you have lost some share of your glorious celebrity is not to be denied,
but lamented; -- and as different passions prevail various causes will be
assigned for this extrordinary decadence: -- it is a subject in which your
country is most seriously interested, since it may ultimately influence her
degeneracy or Freedom.

You know that the obligations which bind the citizen to his country perish at
the moment he ceases to be free; -- you know that as all men are equally
interested in that Freedom, so perpetual watchfulness is equally the duty of
every individual, in the hour wherein he conceives there is danger: -- the
afflictions of nations are laid in remote causes, it is a matter of opinion
until it begins to operate, he who thinks he perceives the germ of a plague is
bound to explore it, that men may be aware of their danger.

Your address in my mind is fraught with incalculable evils to your country! --

It affords a most serious lesson indeed to the people of America, and to every
other nation who may yet have to adopt a model in realizing their Liberties.

Yet I must acknowledge it painful -- it is difficult to discuss your
sentiments while the affections would fain palliate and commute the failings of
age, and the errors of a virtuous man perhaps deceived, for substantial
blessings and benefits secured under better auspices.

But Truth and Liberty, which are not the creatures of a day or a generation,
will not sanction that weakness akin to vice, which would throw a veil over the
errors even of the most perfect of mankind; justice however calls upon me to
declare, that by me and every true American, your course of public conduct has
always been viewed with the tenderest partiality; too young to have personally
shared in the hazards and glories of the revolution, I am not yet so young as
not to have partaken of its cares and anxieties, and of that dear and durable
sympathy which is the concommitant of an interest in great perils and great
achievements. In the lisping lessons of infancy and in the ardency of youth, we
learned from the amiable praises of our mothers to lean fondly on your name;
and the stranger who flies from the bondage and oppression of Europe, hourly
hears in the prevailing themes of domestic discourse and the lessons we teach
our children, how closely the affections of America cling around you. Yes! Sir;
Truth unconstrained but always just must place you in an exalted rank among the
great men whom history celebrates for the imitation of posterity: But Truth
disowns a homage to your errors.

In paying a fair and honest tribute of acknowlegment to your private and
public virtues, extensive in no common degree, you will perceive that I know
the nature of the ground upon which I stand, while I venture from retirement,
and without the sanction of a name, to question your measures, and to display
with bold but candid freedom what I see or think I see therein -- of an
alarming and pernicious tendency; to examine and display sentiments of yours,
which I deem inconsistent with yourself, incompatible with the professed
sincerity of your character, and repugnant to the purest maxims of liberality,
wisdom, and morals.

Deeply impressed with these feelings, on the first perusal of your address, I
determined to await the return of calmer emotions, till surprise and
apprehension should abate: cool reflection and mature deliberation have
strengthened the first impressions; I resolved to await the public
determination, expecting to hear opinion flowing from ignorant but honest
affection, or hastening on the wings of servility or party adulation, from all
quarters of the Union; -- but the period is arrived when your address has
completed the tour of the States -- I stop to mark the awful and emphatic
silence! -- Excepting the mercenary and inane cant of booksellers, and the
solitary voice of those who "venture to approach you!" from Shepherds-town, a
dismal sullen silence prevails! even the the public papers conspicuous for
their abject and humiliating praise, or on the other side for freedom and
licenteousness, have alike maintained the same surprising and suspicious
forbearance!

Certainly there must have been some potent cause to produce from such
discordant assimilations one uniform and continued silence -- has it not forced
a sigh from from your bosom, and told your unwilling apprehensions there is
something wrong!

Would to God you had obeyed the internal monitor that prompted your too
wavering sense to speak that faithful but ineffectual truth, -- "Here perhaps I
ought to stop!" President's Address Ormrod's Edition P. 6.
: the sincere effusions of tenderness, untinged by party coloring and
irritation, would be treasured up for ever and transferred without guile to our
children, whose morning orisons should be, unceasing vows to heaven to continue
the choicest tokens of beneficence, which you wished us in the free
constitution the work of your hands -- that its administration in every
department may be stamped with wisdom and virtue -- that in fine the happiness
of the people in those states, under the auspices of LIBERTY may be complete by
so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this blessing, as will
acquire to them the glory of recommending it to every nation which is yet a
stranger to it.

Had you stopped there, partiality would have strove to bury, at least in some
degree the remembrance of certain truths out of respect to you; -- but the
subsequent pages of your address demand the examination which is the purpose of
this letter: I at first proposed to convey my remarks to you in a private
manner; but considering the foundation of the evil effects which I apprehend
from your address, as already laid, I have judged it more proper to lay them
before the people who are alone essentially concerned.

You are so strongly fixed in the affections of the greater part of my fellow
citizens, and not without great right, except in that dangerous extreme which
leads to imbibing the effects of your prejudices as the results of wisdom, that
I can expect to find but a minority willing to examine dispassionately the
observations which I offer: nevertheless, it would ill become me on such an
occasion to shrink from the sense of duty -- since my opinions, if erroneous,
are open to refutation, and can do you no injury; but in expressing them I
shall speak with the frankness of a Freeman, I shall not couch my sentiments
under a treacherous garb of words susceptible of a double interpretation -- a
conduct that would ill become any man in a just cause, but particularly in his
own cause or that of the public.

Your address, exclusive of that excellent introduction composing the first six
pages, where you ought to have stopped, principally consists of three branches,
generally connected, but requiring for perspicuity's sake a distinct
examination.

1 What relates to the permanency and indivisibility of the Union. 2 On Party,
Civil Liberty, and Religion. 3 The best policy with regard to foreign nations.
On the first of these heads you testify to the ardency of the national
affection for Freedom, and justly consider the unity of the government as a
main pillar of our independence -- of our internal tranquillity and external
security -- of our peace and prosperity -- and of that Liberty we so highly
prize; but from that point to the conclusion, there prevails a spirit of
ambiguity and recrimination, blended with maxims good and evil, that are at
variance with each other and that magnanimity and openness which would bespeak
conscious virtue and become the true friend of Freedom; -- which should never
be forsaken by the moral man and the hero of a free nation when dictating
lessens professedly for the advantage of his fellow citizens, and calculated to
make a strong and lasting impression" -- "to moderate the fury of party rage"
-- "to warn against the mischief of foreign intrigues" -- and "to guard against
the impostures of pretended Patriotism!"

It is fit in this place to call to remembrance, that during the early part of
your public life, candor has been the avowed rule of your public and private
conduct, and it is from that engaging quality above all others you have derived
the unlimitted confidence of your country and the respect of other nations; not
so much from being conspicuous in you, but because duplicity and reserve,
self-sufficiency and secrecy, have been heretofore the cloaks which covered the
wily mischiefs of politicians in all the governments of the old world.

Within the last four years, at a period which is ascertainable, but needing
now no particular discussion since it will live in history, you departed from
that precious rule, and the procedure and language of old politicians and
politics have pervaded all your measures since. I shall barely notice one
transaction, since that alone is a sufficient evidence of the conduct to which
I allude, and affords an example that should be a constant warning to Freemen
how they repose extensive power in the hands of any individual, however
dignified by his services or patriotism, for any considerable length of time: I
mean your refusal to grant to the just wishes of the people's representatives,
to the joint wishes of hoth houses, a perusal of papers concerning the people's
own affairs, and for whom you should not have forgot you were but a responsible
agent. I am aware, that under the fatal forms of state secrecy, privilege of
office, or powers assumed to belong to the presidential character, which in
fact are neither more nor less than the worst engraftments from Machiavelian
policy, and the actual essence of monarchical prerogative; this conduct is
affected to be justified, but by such frail disguises and foul advisers you
have been betrayed to withhold the correspondence on the British Treaty, -- to
treat your country as an enemy, whom you wished to overcome by stratagem, and
like a skilful general in the career of success, dictated conditions which
degraded the subjugated by leaving them the show of deliberation without the
means to deliberate, -- when the conditions of surrender were already
irrevocable! But from that fatal moment, when you listened to the seductions of
your deadliest enemies, in opposition to the voice of Freedom which hates
disguise, the brightness of your countenance is said to have faded, the glory
that shone round you dissolved in mist, and like our first parents, you have
borne about you the visible evidences of internal regret, and the perturbations
of virtue struggling between pride and conscious error; from that unhappy hour
the enemies of Liberty and your Country called you their own, and the name of
WASHINGTON sunk from the elevated rank of the SOLONS and LYCURGUSES to the
insignificance of a Venetian Doge or a Dutch Stadtholder!

On that baleful day, the boasted candor, the dignified openness, the
communicative disinterestedness of patriotism, became more than equivocal, and
the clouds of suspicion hovered round you; American politics became discolored
with the jaundiced hue of despotism and cabinet cunning, and the world was
brought once more to look upon the constant declaration of your most vociferous
panegyrists, that " pure republicanism is a fiction," as a fatal truth, and the
American States but as one more of those machines calculated for management of
a capricious or weak individual; the popular representation from that period
lost is respectability, and was degraded into the character of an old French
Parliament, kept only for the mere ceremony of receiving implicitly and
registering without the toleration of enquiry the edicts which the sovereign
wills.

But a more fatal effect results from this measure, in the precedent held out
to your successors, whose ambition may not be circumscribed by age or the want
of heirs, nor by the yet vigorous hatred which subsists upon experience against
the evils of despotism: earnestly as you warn your country against the dangers
to be apprehended from despotism through faction, you in this instance left a
breach, at which ambition may enter with trifold force and facility, where
entrenched behind the authority of your example, and aided by pliant
instruments in public situations (which it is feared our country already
affords) they may machinate treaties and maintain correspondences, which in
their consequences may produce all the calamity in which weak or wicked
ambitious men can involve a notion.

Great labor is visible in the construction of your language! -- I have not
been an inattentive or a light observer of the concerns of my country, yet I
find it not easy to fix upon the description of men to whom you allude in that
sentence -- P. 6.
it is easy to foresee that from different quarters pains will be taken, and
artifices employed to weaken in our minds the conviction, that union is the
bond of our safety; and again frowning upon the first dawn of every attempt to
alienate any portion of our country from the rest.

There have been instances in which the speculations of philosophy have glanced
at the future division of America into a variety of states, M. Linguet and the
Abbe Raynal assumed to predict such an event ere yet we became an independent
nation.

Great Britain has in her system of colonization and policy, speculated upon
those speculations, and transfused the spirit into her colonial arrangments in
Canada; Dorchester and Simcoe acted upon it; and the British ministers and
senate have argued upon the desirableness and practicability of dividing the
United States into distinct governments and interests, to be regulated by
climate, situation, the natural lines of population, productions, manners, and
religions, and all the genera of theoretic circumstance; but in these consists
the difficulty which prevents my mind from fixing upon the persons or party
from whose efforts you apprehend those dangers to the Union; for when I compare
the conduct you displayed on the subjects of British politics and connections,
with these lively warnings, I cannot bring myself to believe that you could
implicate that party in the dangers you deprecate; and what still distracts my
judgment in endeavoring to discover to whom you allude, are the strange and
striking circumstances, that the persons among ourselves who are loudest in
declarations of attachment to our country, are yet the constant and faithful
inmates and advocates of British men and measures, are those who attempted
openly and argumentively to recommend, and as it were prove, the necessity and
utility of dividing the United States into two republics, to consist of the
New England states North and Eastward, and the other of all the Southern
states; but it is not this effort of theirs, nor their incessant clamor in
favor of all things British and against all things French, that distracts and
leaves my opinion unsettled, but that persons very closely in your confidence,
openly profess and defend these attachments; that this party compose your most
ardent eulogists; that they are likewise the constant and no less ardent
eulogists of privileged orders, the advocates of an established Church, and the
eulogists of a British form of government -- Bristish maxims in morals as well
as politics are with them the standard of human perfection, of which they do
not hesitate to declare you to be a living example formed upon a superior model.

I cannot therefore consistently conclude that this party with whom you stand
so high, and who have partaken it must be confessed very largely of your
private regards for three years past, could have been the objects of your
warnings, however pointedly and circumstantially the description may be applied
to them.

There remains indeed the shadow of a surmise yet to notice; persons in the
western countries it has been said, expressed in the moment when they deemed
themselves aggrieved, the idea of separation, to escape oppression -- a most
memorable occasion! should they be indeed the serious objects upon which you
affect alarm, the veil of ambiguity is no longer impenetrable, and it remains
only to be asked how their circumstances and population justify the fear? Who
are their foreign neighbors? What advantage could they derive in effecting such
a purpose? And what motive could be sufficiently strong to urge them to such a
measure?

These questions require no diffusive reasonings no deep research, -- that
their population is inadequate to support independence -- their resources
incompetent to their wants in such a situation, the plain understanding of the
plainest man could determine; but you say be deaf to such as would sever you
from your brethren and connect you with aliens, -- these aliens must be their
neighbors, of whom we have reason to be jealous? The British are their only
neighbors, beside the Indians and Spaniards, from both of whom freemen have
little to apprehend; the British then remain; and that the description applies
to them alone, is fairly inferable from the experience we have had on
numberless occasions, but particularly in their conduct while they kept
possession of the western posts; near which, neither towns nor habitations were
suffered to be erected, the fertile earth was interdicted from culture, and
even the erection of a solitary hut was rigidly obstructed and forbidden;
settlers were not only seduced by gifts of lands and various other temptations,
but forced by open violence to migrate from the American side of the boundary
and settle on that of the British.

But is there no latent motive in this warning? has the system of excise, that
hot-bed of patronage, influence, corruption, and oppression, yet met any
justification other than the western expedition? -- or has that expedition met
any justification, but in the fortunate but unexpected consequence of its
overturning the sanguine expectations of those whose ambition built prospects
most fruitful to their fell purposes upon the establishment of an army of
mercenaries, an establishment which you in the genuine language of truth
declare to be always inauspicious to Liberty, but particularly to Republican
Liberty?

The second head is irksome to discuss, because not to do it without reserve
would be to desert the most sacred principles of truth and justice, which
should never give way to the warmest personal attachments. The foundation of
Civil Liberty and the obligations of allegiance to governments founded on the
representative basis, require no new elucidation at this period of time,
notwithstanding the efforts of your violent adulators, to disparage the cause
of Liberty by attempting under the cloak of literary dictatorship to persuade
unlettered men, that our constitution is not a democracy; fortunately for
mankind the topic is become a vulgar one, within the compass of every man that
can read his bible and understand common sense, your solicitude to promulge new
lights, however, would be commendable, considering that the occasion was an
interesting one, and likely to carry with it an effect commensurate with the
magnitude of your influence on the public mind at the moment, had you adhered
to the earnest enforcement of principles upon their own merits, or even pointed
out the consequences of indifference or neglect, of a slavish or sielent
disregard for their use or abuse; if a rigid adherence to such conduct were on
any occasion prudent and necessary, on this more than any occasion was it
called for; and in proportion to your departure from that candid and
magnanimous line of conduct, so must your true friends have cause to regret,
the friends of Liberty to deplore; and feeling that you have done so to a most
alarming extent, the sacred sentiment of duty obliges me to point out wherein
you have violated your own principles, by making your address the vehicle of
personal resentment, the indirect defense of weak and unjustifiable measures;
where you have urged dogmas repugnant to free government, subversive of the
right of private judgment, and calculated to injure and impede the progress of
morals and the happiness of mankind.

Serious and afflicting are these truths, verified by numerous passages in your
address, upon which I shall remark as I proceed.

"The base of our political systems is" you say, the right of the people to
make and alter their constitutions of government; it is not because this
important principle displays the absurdity or treachery of those professed
friends of yours who never cease railing at democracy, that I quote it; but
because the declaration of principles is too often the cloak for their
violation; in every country from the decline of Roman Freedom to that of
Poland, Sweden, and England, -- from Augustus to George III. the profession of
love has been accompanied by the sacrifice of Liberty! and there can be little
doubt that some of those tyrants blinded by selfish passions imagined that
their most fatal measures were founded in wisdom and consistent with freedom:
but neither the principles of free governments nor the allegiance due to them
is the less sacred for their abuse, the danger proceeds from obscuring the
bounds, or leaving them exposed to the inroads of treachery.

In this point of view the foregoing truth standing alone is unassailable, but
connected with the following unqualified illustration, is fraught with all that
mischief to which bad men can convert the maxims of great authority; you say
But the constitution which at any time exists, till exchanged by an explicit
and authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon all. You
indeed justly add, the very idea of the power and the right of the people to
establish government, presuppposes the duty of every individual to obey the
established government. From the general truth of these principles no friend of
the federal constitution can dissent; but if applied to a particular case, and
certain doctrines daily broached threaten to realize it, would render them
unsafe and destructive, unless connected with other principles, marking the
limits of official power, and showing where aggression on the part of the
constituted authorities would render disobedience the first of patriotic
duties; I will suppose that the administration becomes insensibly composed of
men devoted to monarchical government, ("and though the period may never arrive
it should not yet be kept out of sight!") that by artful constructions, bold
assumptions, or open and powerful hostility, they either alter the form by
specious innovations, or a direct perversion of the principles of the
constitution; what then would be the duty of the patriot citizen? How would the
loose doctrine you lay down apply -- of obedience to any constitution that
might hereafter exist! Strange but affecting truth, that power long possessed
perverts the judgment, else we should not have received so many admonitions
against the people, and so little on the dangers to be apprehended from that
source whence tyranny has crept in all ages!

But it is evident that in this part of your address you were governed by
feelings very separate from those of dipassionate and benevolent patriotism;
this regard for the constitution, although I doubt not of your attachment to it,
appears awkward when engaged in stimulating one side and depressing the other,
and still condemning party; the cause of truth should never be debased into the
instrument of resentment, and your judgment must have been under the dominion
of a most domineering prejudice when you pronounced an anathema against all
combination and association, because a few popular societies of your countrymen
dared to assert their own opinions in opposition to yours -- because they
differed from you on a question which every day's experience since, and which
every sober consideration now, and every probability in the future course of
human affairs, tend to display your error and their propriety.

In this mixture of jealousy resentment and mistaken pride, you forgot that it
is to association, to secret meetings, to the secrecy of great and just
opinions, the United States owe this day the blessings of Independence; you
forgot that whatever may have been the pernicious consequences of some
associations in all parts of the world, that still the sum of good has been
greater than the evil; you forgot that it is the indifference of a people
toward their governors, and the measures they pursue, enables tyranny always
to obtain an establishment on the ruins of freedom, you overlooked that part of
the natural character of mankind, which requires the indispensible activity of
his mind to the preservation of his freedom; but strangely, in the present
progression of science and opinion, while you acknowledge the inherent
disposition you fly in the face of God and nature and condemn both the author
and the work. You never considered, that in commercial cities the deliterious
poison of avarice has always been found destructive of Liberty, that connected
with this fatal poison there is the great and weighty power of the British
mercantile interest, circulating like foul blood through all parts of the
states, infecting our habits, dictating to our manners, insinuating itself into
our Senate, and pervading every branch of our public offices; in denouncing the
few but masculine efforts of a little club, scarcely of sufficient consequence
at any other time to excite ordinary notice, you have attempted to overwhelm
every motive and disposition to free and enlightened association, and labored
with a most affecting perplexity to polish the sting of your vengeance so as
strike a very humble object home but sure.

It is the boast of Englishmen, Sir, that you entertain a decided partiality
for their nation; until the perpetration of the British Treaty, no man would
believe you capable of such truly Christian forgiveness; they observe, with the
peculiar sneer of malicious exultation, that the sentiments as well as the
phraseology of your official productions, have suddenly swelled from their
former simplicity into servile imitations of the pompous verbiage of the
British administration; this was indeed disputed, but in the EXISTING
CIRCUMSTANCES of hatred of Clubs, it is impossible not to discern the course of
your studies; and although you have not had equal reason to hate, nor as just
motives as the British minister to fear the petty vengeance of petty clubs, yet
your principles go as far, and your sympathy of sentiment falls nothing short
of Mr. Pit, on that subject.

All obstructions to the execution of the laws, ALL combinations and
associations under whatever plausible character, with REAL DESIGN to direct,
control, counteract, or overawe the regular deliberation and action of the
constituted authorities, are destructive to this fundamental principle that is
of the allegiance of the people to the constitution at any time established;
But who, sir, are to be the judges of this REAL DESIGN? Is the construction of
men's intentions to be committed to agents of the powers that be, and designs
presumed without regard to the forms of crimination prescribed by the
constitution? These doctrines bear a most obstinate resemblance of the
meausures and language of the British ministry a year ago! You continue, they
serve to organize faction, to give it an artificial force, to put in the place
of the delegated will of the nation, the will of a party, of a small but
enterprizing minority; and according to the alternate triumphs of different
parties, to make the public administration the mirror of illconcerted and in
congruous projects of faction, rather than the consistent and wholesome plans,
digested by common counsels, and modified by mutual interests."

This picture professedly theoretical and prospecttive, presents the real and
melancholy retrospect of those fatal combinations under which that astonishing
measure, the British Treaty, was labored into existence: to no other event can
it be compared, to no other transaction in our history does it so pointedly
apply! -- But, (observing, en passant, that the " delegated will of the
nation," was contemned and deemed either unfit, incapable, or unworthy of
previous counsel or subsequent deliberation on the subject of the treaty!) in
what degree does the force of this vindictive declaration attach as a pretext
for restraining or fettering the opinions of the citizens of the United States?
or for curbing the natural disposition to association, and the free declaration
of private judgment, on measures in which they are every one individually as
much as you concerned? Are men to remain silent until called upon by their
governmental agents? Who are they that the constitution appoints to restrain
private deliberation, and mark the line beyond which freedom becomes sedition?
Where is the law that forbids the exercise of opinion, and restrains the
conscience from its honesty? Or are we henceforward to consider, in defiance of
all experience, -- disinterestedness, wisdom, and virtue, as inherent in the
possessors of national power and trust? Are the peaceable republican citizens
of free America, the men who achieved the blessings we enjoy, to relinquish
social communion, and remain quiescent spectators of the open activity of a
party the most odious and insolent that ever disgraced a free society -- to see
their cities thronged with British emissaries -- the deadly enemies of their
independence -- the oppressors of their trade, the pirates and executioners of
their fellow-citizens -- courted, cherished, and still insulting us in our very
streets, mocking our tameness, and revileing us for our imbecility? -- Must
Americans, I say, become so base as to bend the neck in silence to the
creatures of their will, while those deadly enemies openly triumph over our
persons, trade, and politics, and daringly declare our retrogression to those
evils we shook off when we became free? Shall this organized faction, with the
secret gold of Britain at their command, subsist, and the plain American whose
only hope and glory is Freedom in perpetuity, must be silent! Good God! and are
such the doctrines offered by George Washington to his country!

You are lost, Sir, in the treacherous mazes of passion; you have given way to
the jealousy of irritated feelings, before reflection could soften the violence
of your choler; what avails it that you admit that such combinations and
associations may now and then answer popular ends, when you add they are likely
in the course of time and things to become potent engines, by which
unprincipled and ambitious men will be enabled to subvert the power of the
people and usurp the government: mystery and equivocation are unworthy of you,
as the resentments and precepts which they are employed upon; for until men are
filled with that perfection which you say is not in their nature, the period or
occasion when association may be salutary must be left to the opinion of every
free citizen; would you leave association to the discretion of men in power?
then is your great name and our freedom disgraced! There may be a crisis in our
government, as we see in others, when corruption on one side, and ministerial
perfidy on the other, will render it the duty of every virtuous citizen to
associate -- and who then shall mark the line which seperates grievance from
justice! In a social view, we have too little of community in the industrious
branches of society, we borrow too largely of the boorish inhospitability
produced by enormous taxation in England, and of the selfishness produced by
misery and tyranny in Germany; among the idle and opulent, and in the official
branches of society we assume all the empty vanity, and more of the insolence
than becomes us of the former nation; in our legal abuses and state policy it
is the same; I have already noticed that parts of their politics have been
adopted by yourself-particularly the secrecy constantly and tenaciously
asserted to be an essential part of administration, and which indirectly
asserts the government to possess the only wisdom of the nation, that the
people are not fit to know their own affairs, or judge how they are
administered, or that the nation is a dependant creature on the government.

Your professions it is true are in many respects the same as those of the most
ardent lover of equal Liberty; your admonition against changes, and the
diversitude of hypothesis, and injunctions to adhere by the present government
until experience has proved or disapproved its wisdom, are equally rational;
but how far experience has already discovered blemishes in it, the principle of
secrecy and sanctity in public transactions, the conduct and quantum of duty
performed by our Senate and Vice President, the adequacy of the Senate now, and
at a future time, when the population shall have been greatly increased; and in
relation to the comparative population of each state severally; the abuses in
the remote branches of the Post Office, all under our present constitution, I
pretend not now to determine; the power already vested in the office of
President, particularly what has been construed concerning treaties, and
considering the use to which you applied them, and the construction which has
been assumed from analogy with monarchial governments, in my mind demand public
regard; my fellow-citizens at large no doubt will consider them in proper time
and place.

But without dwelling upon these, I cannot but remark one feature of your
morality, and which in its full extent governs your politics, it is founded on
a maxim which perhaps more than any other has tended to perpetuate the miseries
of society and degrade and enslave mankind; the basis of tyranny temporal and
spiritual, is the alleged innate depravity of man; if there is that innate
depravity, (which, however the long unhappy construction of society and the
prejudices of ages may appear to sanctify it, a close observation of man, and
the sentiments of the greatest moralists disprove,) then indeed may your
position, that the spirit of party is unfortunate and fraught with more than
the dangers you describe, be maintained; but it still remains to be proved that
God created man naturally wicked, or that the inherent predominant diposition
to evil is really implanted in us, since if the predominant passions of man
should be found to be no other than the love of our kind, of participation, and
the desire of sharing the blessings which he possesses in society;
contradistinguished from corrupt despotism which maintains exclusive power in
one or a few at the expense of the rest, then the spirit of party must be the
same as the spirit of resistance to oppression, the spirit of philanthropy, the
spirit of benevolence, of humanity; then indeed the name and odium of party
does not belong so appropriately to any class of men as those who possess and
with to engross all the power and advantages of society, to the exclusion of
the governed: -- shallow and inert must be those faculties which can discern in
the spirit of party that has been displayed in the French Revolution, nothing
but the evil, rejecting in the estimate all the oppression overcome and the
good that has been obtained and is to sollow; or that would rather place to the
opprobrium of party all the destruction, persecution, and crimes sent forth,
and let loose among that already afflicted and oppressed people; which see in
the clubs of France all the distortions of guilt, but close up the judgment
upon the diabolical spirit of the party of despots -- the party of the British
King and Cabinet -- the party that partitioned Poland, and had lotted out
France, and who would have effected its dismemberment, had not the immortal
party of Freedom, rose above their oppression, and stung by the groans of ages,
united its omnipotent force, and released that nation from their rapacious
talons, and in that great effort, rescued America from the certainty of another
struggle for her Liberty, -- and considering how formidable in point of number
the avowed monarchists and British partisans are, from the possibility of being
subjugated and once more reduced to the low condition of a province to that
insatiable maw of political rapacity the kingdom of Britain.

The alternate domination of faction is, you say, itself a frightful
despotism," and you add, that the disorders of faction gradually incline men to
seek PROSPERITY and repose in the absolute power of an individual!!!

Lamentable must be the condition of human intellect in the United States, if
such is the mode of argument necessarily employed to deter men from reflection
-- Good God! SECURITY and REPOSE and in the absolute power of an individual!
From what history is this example drawn, or from what age? have we sunk back
into the iron barbarity of ancient times, or are the citizens of America in
danger of being as much besotted as the English, when they recalled the most
abandoned and profligate of men, Charles II. to perpetuate that monstrous breed
of oppression, an unprincipled hereditary nobility, an intolerant timeserving
hierarchy, passive obedience, non-resistance, licentious guards, wars, funding
systems, excise, standing armies, and senatorial corruptions -- have we trod
back the steps of ages into feudal times, and lost all sense of the rights of
individual freedom and private property, are we plunging again to the condition
of Lords, Vassals, and Villains? -- Is the human character capable of
approximating the persection of Liberty, and stupidly relinquishing its
blessings; while the rest of mankind are rousing from their torpor, expanding
their arms and striding to that point of improvement where freedom will be the
acknowleged right and possession of all! In what individual has an oppressed
people ever found more than a momentary refuge? -- Is it to a Frederic or a
George III. a people not mad would fly for protection or commisseration? Ye
citizens of the once free Dantzic -- ye gallant but betrayed Poles -- ye hardy
Scots, degraded by an iron union -- generous but contaminated Irish -- ye
innoce Hindoos -- ye hapless Africans -- deluded French Emigrants -- and ye
supremely afflicted objects of royal individual commisseration LA FAYETTE and
your faithful wife and offspring, bear witness to the safety and security that
nations and men find in great and ambitious individuals!

But what is the powerful incentive to warnings so significant, why without
looking forward to such an extremity, ought it not yet be kept out of sight! --
and for what end? to discourage and restrain party; -- where and what are the
mischiefs that call for these restrictions? It serves always to distract public
counsels, and enfeeble public administration; to agitate ill-founded jealousies
and false alarms; kindles animosity and foments riot and insurrection; opens
the door to foreign influence and corruption, which find a facilitated access
to the government itself through the channel of party passions, and subjects the
policy of one country to the policy and will of another.

In this short paragraph you have discharged the loathings of a sick mind; you
have collected the aggravating recollections of wounded pride, and warmed to
the inveteracy of hatred, discharged the whole burden of your blazing spirit
at the object of your personal dislike, under the form of advice to your
beloved country!

O God! that you had stopped to weigh the results of prudence in cool
reflection -- that you had shunned the ungracious track of indirect aspersion
-- that you had conquered the remembrance of Mr. Randolph's Vindication -- or
balanced the secrets which he had manfully kept undisclosed, against that part
of your conduct which you compelled him to discover!

But let me examine the principles of this illfated charge against party,
independent of their personal guile.

Does party always distract public counsels -- enfeeble the administrations --
agitate ill-founded jealousies and false alarms?

This charge, however it might have applied to the particular fact of the
struggle between those who wished respectively to see the French and English
interests favored by unequivocal demonstrations of our regard and attachment;
will not certainly bear out the declaration that such will always be its
effects; neither is it true that illfounded jealousies and alarms are the
invariable consequences of popular associations, although it is too frequently
the effect of combinations among external enemies and a governmental party; in
the ever memorable and let me add deplorable occasion above mentioned, what was
the conduct of the members of your own administration, and what was that of the
popular party?

The latter, influenced in no ordinary degree by your repeatedly avowed
affection and regard for the French nation, by your attachment to her generals
and remembrance of the services which they had rendered us in securing our
Independence at a critical and more early period and with a less expense of our
own blood; influenced still more by the virtuous cause for which she was then
fighting, and in a degree still more strong and energetic by the sense of the
wrongs which the combined powers were inflicting on that nation, and not a
little by the sentiment that France was strunggling against the very power that
had sought to enslave us, and whose bloody progress is still pictured in the
minds of our citizens, in the ruins that still call to painful remembrance the
deep inflictions ot British ferocity; the popular associations were decidedly
in favor of that oppressed people, the sympathy of suffering virtue and
magnanimity called for their warmest affections -- our cause was the same -- we
must be worse than monsters of brutality not to pray for their success, not to
glory in their triumphs! -- how did the popular societies act on this occasion?
they openly and like honest and free men, declared their opinions in the face
of their country and all the world -- perfidy itself cannot charge them with
more?

It is true indeed, they have been charged with stirring up the passions of the
citizens to an equally explicit expression of their sentiments -- what! was the
love of Liberty the hatred of Tyranny, confined to the bosoms of a few popular
societies only, among all the citizens of the United States; and were the
citizens at large so devoid of philanthropy and of every sympathetic sentiment,
as not to be able to judge in so plain a case? Away with such detestable
delusion, such mockery of virtue, such perversion of truth and free opinion.

But what was the conduct of the only party, which in truth existed, and drew
forth that fermentation and alarm that really distracted the national counsels
and disgraced its character?

It is not necessary to insist on the precision of dates where facts are
notorious; a short time prior to the agitation of the British Treaty, it should
not be forgotten, that the British Cabinet had issued a secret order to their
cruisers to seize all American vessels which they should meet bound for France,
that some hundreds of them were actually seized before the existence of such an
order was known to our government, that the same period produced the
denunciation against the republican form of government; it should likewise be
well remembered that, at that period the French were reduced to a predicament
wherein an accumulation of internal calamities and an unexampled combination of
external force appeared, in the opinion of weak men, ready to overwhelm that
people and sink them in the scale of nations for ever; the mode of her
partition had already been formally agreed upon and guaranteed, and England
eternally babbling on the balance of power and her faith in treaties --
surrendered these maxims of state and her faith plighted to Poland, as a solemn
testimonial in the face of the world, of the sincerity of her hatred against
any government of the republican form!

At this hour of fatal influence, and reproachful to our character as a free
nation, when destruction seemed to let fall her hand on France -- when Poland
was already sacrificed -- and Britain bloated with the rank insolence of
riches, the fruit of her Eastern spoils, as she is wont to be at the
commencement of all her wars, and blindly confident of the speedy annihilation
of the only nation that curbed her lust of universal domination, that enemy
already staggering at her feet; at this period in contempt of the experience of
an hundred wars against the several powers of Europe, the British government
formed the design of profiting by the naked and defenseless state of America,
from the involvement of France, and rendering our strength which she had lost
by tyranny, subversive to her ambition by the double means of threats and craft
-- a remembrance of the conduct of British ships on our coast, and British
agents in our ports and streets, and the clamourous threats of was or
concession which reverberated in our ears on every side, will be sufficient to
mark the measures and character of the party that prevailed at that time; --
those who think the subject worth a scrutiny, will be able to determine what
share British emissaries took in it, how faithful the Tories and Refugees
proved to their old principles and old friends, and whether or not that party
was a small but enterprizing minority, or the great body of friends to order,
civilized government, and religion!

The seizure of our shipping, the sale of our cargoes, the detention of our
seamen, the ruin of our trade, after some time attracted the attention of our
executive -- (and here it is but equitable to ask What would have been the
conduct of Britain on experiencing such aggressions?) -- a private remonstrance
was made, and the answer returned was to this effect, you may have a Treaty!
And for this gracious condescension the embargo was taken off!

How far the vain cry of war influenced you, sir, is not necessary to enquire,
since the effect completely answered all the calculations of the British party;
since that party boasted then of possessing the car of the greater number of
those who enjoyed your confidence, but as has subsequently appeared, who wholly
engrossed your counsels and led your judgment in silken bondage.

The British Treaty has been already discussed, but a great part of its
improvidence and disregard of our national trade and honor remains yet
unexposed; it requires a separate exposure; at no remote period it is plain to
see, that public exigencies will drag it forth under public odium and
execration.

That treaty was the price of your fears and of the Western posts -- and the
sacrifice of our relations with France was the return for the repeal of the
British order of council, but without the effect of releasing us from the
obloquy of British violence and barbarity at sea.

I shall not break open the seal of cabinet secrecy, to unravel the mystery of
the proclamation of the 22nd. April 1793 -- time will commit that tale to
history, when you shall be no more and my name forgotten -- then history will
develope the intrigues which dictated and directed the declaration and
dereliction of the modern law of nations.

Such were the effects of party, but of what party? They fully illustrate your
doctrine, but they demand aloud of the people to reflect much, to communicate
with each other often, and forbear slumbering away in faithless confidence,
those liberties which can only be endangered by weak or wicked men employed in
the administration of their public affairs.

I have but a few remarks farther to make on party, and shall then proceed to
examine those parts of your address which relate to foreign policy.

Your examples of party influence are uniformly drawn from occasions wherein
your personal opinions, your pride and passions, have been involved; in no
particular more strikingly is this discoverable than in your advice concerning
the powers of the constitution.

"The spirit of encroachment" you say tends to consolidate the powers of all
departments in one, and thus create, whatever the form of government, a real
despotism. This sentence is a palpable allusion to the proceedings in the house
of Representatives on the subject of the treaty, and thus again, Sir, under the
garb of advice to the people you disguise an attack on the Representatives and
an attempt to defend your own secrecy and obstinacy; when I consider this
conduct and the instances to which I have already alluded, and as you direct
me, form an estimate of that love of power and pronenses to abuse it,
predominant in the human heart; and I take into that estimate your refusal of
the just and proper demand of the Houses for the correspondence on the treaty,
then Sir, I cannot but confess the truth of your postulatum -- and I bless God!
-- I bless God, Sir, not on your account nor my own, but on that of my country
and my children's freedom, who in leaving you without the blessing of heirs,
and making you with such a disposition, the powerful instrument in the hands of
providence, for securing our independence, has released us from the danger
which we might else apprehend, through that love you have gained in the honest and
confiding hearts of our countrymen, from reverting again to the odious and
detestable condition of subjects -- and carrying into effect those maxims which
appear to be the result of a close knowledge of your own disposition.

I forbear remarking on other points of blended truth and ambiguity; but I
cannot suffer the spirit of party rancour under the mask of religion to
overturn and annihilate the gratitude which this nation owes to that great man
THOMAS PAIN, it is not for me to defend his writings on the subject of
revelation; but however much I may disallow the arguments he has produced
against it, I am content that those whose province it is to study and search
the scriptures, have been alive to their faith, answered his call, and
satisfied the consciences of all who doubted; but then if I do not approve of
his belief, must I necessarily condemn him? alas! what is belief if it is not
free! -- what must become of the Jew, the savage, the Mohammedan, the Idolator,
upon all of whom the sun shines equally, whom the same heat warms and the same
cold chills, must I allow no virtue, no right of opinion on matters which
divide and have divided all mankind in all periods and times, upon which even
we ourselves are split into countless sects, and have in the course of every
one of our own lives, who have dared to step beyond the threshold of education
and to reflect on our being, been perhaps equally or more skeptical than he;
but you say "volumes would not trace "all the connections of religion with
private and public happiness" -- granted, and this also is my opinion, but then
does he speak sincerely or as a hypocrite? or are we to close up the doors of
discussion against him, who desires every man only to think for himself, and to
disregard his opinions where he gives no reasons for them; to reject them, if
in our own opinions they are not right; who loves God, and has proved his
charity toward all men; -- but there is I fear, and the fear is now becoming
general, a design to erect a national church among us, if such should be your
view in attacking the well earned fame of Thomas Pain, God forgive you! I
trust to no spiritual inquisitor; nor expect "the kingdom of Christ upon
earth;" how far religion should be national, would require a voluminous and
separate discussion, constitutionally it cannot be ours; on the subject of
oaths which are so shockingly multiplied every where, there are many of the
best moralists divided in opinion, and whatever the bounded wisdom of Judge
Rush, Mr. Swift, and yourself may suggest, we see in the conduct of that great
body of virtuous men, the Quakers, how unnecessary are oaths in the orderly
regulation of society; while in the Custom-house perjuries, and those of men in
office and men professing Christianity of all descriptions, most powerful
arguments against their efficacy. I have said more on this delicate topic than
I proposed, but I cannot with justice to the cause of Liberty which PAIN has
well served, and the cause of truth which I adore above every partial
consideration, forbear to remark that an attack on that great assertor of
Freedom, comes from you with particular ungraciousness, and I cannot but openly
apply to you the same charge which you unnecessarily and imprudently lay
against him.

In vain would that man claim the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to
subvert the great pillars of human happiness, (religion and morality) the
firmest props of the duties of men and citizens:" without attempting a comment
on the distinction which you have made in accusing him of attempting to
overturtrn both, I think it enough to remark, that you made it; but there is
another particular in which the defense of religion, but especially the
Christian religion, appears very awkward in your hands: -- Would to God! you
had retired to a private station four years ago, while your public conduct
threw a veil of sanctity round you, which you have yourself rashly broken down,
you fame would have been safe, your country without reproach, and I should not
have the mortifiying task of pointing out the blind temerity with which you
come forward to defend the religion of Christ, who exist in the violation of
its most sacred obligations, of the dearest ties of humanity, and in defiance
of the soverign calls of morality and liberty -- by dealing in HUMAN SLAVES! --
aggravated too by the sad reflections, that neither necessity, self
preservation, the want of fortune, nor the desire of transferring riches to
your descendants, could be urged even as plausible or worldly motives in
extenuation, but on the contrary, when your property, ample for the
gratification of the most extravagant desires -- would would call loudly upon
you to release your species from their unchristian bondage and ignorance, were
it but to present an example of disinterestedness -- of that virtue -- that
morality -- of the sincerity of your love of liberty -- of benevolence -- of
charity -- of the love of God and the most benign religion, to you country,
which you declare to be the main springs of every government, the great pillars
of human happiness, and the firmest props of the duties of men and citizens.

Having already exceeded the bounds which I proposed, for this part of my
letter, and having yet to offer some observations on the remaining subject of
foreign relations, and a few concluding remarks, I shall omit what I purposed
saying concerning taxation and finance, upon which there is ample room for
pointed animadversion.

In what I have said concerning party, I noticed the origin of the Treaty with
Britain, and the defenseless situation in which we then stood, from the
distressed condition of France; it has been asserted, I know not with what
degree of truth, that Britain gave the United States the alternative of a
treaty or a war; upon a surmise it is not necessary to argue, further than the
weight that is expected to be derived from the wisdom which is presumed to have
secured peace in such a dilemma; but if peace was secured upon that occasion
upon such conditions, we certainly should not have been left ignorant of a fact
so necessary for our future guidance, and for the regulation of the national
judgment concerning the conduct of our public agents and allies. Whatever may
have stimulated you to the execution of such a treaty, it is evident the advice
you have here offered to your fellow citizens, with regard to foreign
connexions, conveys a tacit condemnation of that measure, while it displays an
attempt to defend your conduct, though deviating from the policy you recommend;
your aim clearly is to bring over the nation to an unsettled and trimming
policy, in order to cover your own error: but in this, as in former cases, your
mode of defense applies against you, and while you call up every effort of
which you are capable to obliterate the gratitude and attachment due to France
and the cause she is engaged in, you only persuade us with tenfold effect how
conscious you are of the faithless sacrifices which have been made to Britain.

After recommending the total forgetfulness of those just and crying
antipathies which the bloody scenes of Esopus, Paoli, and the North River, must
ever awake in the breasts of feeling men, but which to attempt smothering while
George III. is King of England, Alexander Wedderburne the keeper of his
conscience, Cornwallis his privy counselor, one Arnold his friend, and Sir
Charles Gray his favorite, is such a folly as no experience could hope for,
nor any thing but desparation suggest, to the present and the rising
generation; could you hope for the exclusion of the most honorable and endeared
of the moral virtues from our hearts, or that we could take to our bosoms those
who butchered our fathers and brothers in cold blood, who dishonored our
daughters and sisters, who marked their paths through our country by pillage,
massacre, fire, and desolation, and in the same moment banish from our minds
and affections those who, in the crisis of our fate, by a powerful
interposition, rescued us from the continuity of such honors, secured to us our
freedom, and to whom many of us now owe the existence we enjoy? -- He must be a
sturdy moralist whose nature can bend to such regards for justice!

The nation which indulges toward another an habitual hatred, or an habitual
fondness, is in some degree a slave. This, Sir, is a new mode of reasoning
batred of slavery into love of oppressors! Suppose this new political sophism
were generalized, and by reducing it to the standard of common sense, rendered
intelligible; -- in this way then it will stand thus -- Virtue and Vice
distinguish nations in various degrees, a habitual fondess of the vices of a
nation renders you in some degree a slave to those vices, but if a nation is
conspicuous for virtues, a habitual love for those virtue, is not to be called
slavery, because virtue and slavery cannot exist together. I venture to say,
Sir, this applicatian of your dogma is strictly in point, and it the moral
regard of nations should not go counter to those of individuals, that there can
exist no difficulty when we ask, from what nation are we in most danger of
infection by their vices? It will be granted, that it is not to the animal we
become attached, but the qualities which distinguish nations as much as persons
from each other, the wisdom, science, talents, magnanimity, generosity,
disinterestedness, and sacred devotion to Liberty, -- the question of love or
hatred of nations then becomes a question of morals, and our first enquiry will
be what is the form and character of their Government? -- When any one accuses
the British Government, and convicts it of one Virtue, it will be then time
enough to urge a comparison.

But tho I pass over some expressions calculated to warp the judgment and
insinuate away the opinions of men, there is one truth which Freemen should
never suffer to be absent from their minds -- THE CAUSE OF FREEDOM IS THE CAUSE
OF MANKIND! Applying it to the single cause of France, and supposing her
subjugated and dissected -- "blotted from the map of Europe;" -- the republican
form of government would then remain to undergo the same operation, the petty
oligarchies of Italy and the then feeble remains of Batavian republicanism
would scarcely demand the force of a single member of the despotic
confederation to annihilate them, and could we then expect to remain exempted
from the universal proscription? Let any man turn a moment's earnest reflection
on what must be our condition if France had been extinguished! Could we expect
a magnanimous forbearance from England? From whom then could we expect succor?
Surely not from the partitioners of Poland! But it will be said, we have
already proved ourselves invincible to the power of Britain: Alas! precarious
would be that Liberty which were to be placed on the risk of such a contest!
When we fought for our Freedom all the world was with us; France fought for us;
we had her navy to protect us, her valorous generals to direct us; we had not
the experience and consequent terrors of a savage and assassinating war, and of
the treachery that put the poignard in the hand of our ext door neighbors, nor
the knowledge which we now possess, that nearly one half of our fellow-citizens
are decided partisans of the British and their form of government, a
considerable portion of the friends of Liberty become so totally absorbed in
worldly pursuits and confident of security, that danger at their doors can
scarcely rouse them -- In such a situation, what could the band of firm
republicans do but die nobly, and leave their posterity at the merciless mercy
of their conquerors! That we have not tasted of this bitter cup is not the
effect of your measures, every step displayed the weakness that would invite
domination. But thanks to the better genius of France, that in baffling
despotism secured to us peace and Freedom so long as we shall be worthy of it!
Looking to the future situation of Europe, how are we to appreciate your
maxims? If France should conclude a peace at the close of the present campaign,
what would be our situation with regard to that nation? In what manner could we
justify our uniform conduct toward her, our public declarations of admiration
and attachment, our secret desertion and treachery? Are we to propose
accommodation by a renewal or a complete dereliction of the disregarded treaty
-- are we to throw ourselves into the arms of Britain -- are we (as they
exclaim who supported the British Treaty to avoid war!) to go to war with
France? No other path lies open but that of concession, and that task you leave
to your successor in office!

But let us look beyond these unpleasant limits, and considering what France is
-- what she promises to be, ask wherein consists the prudence or wisdom of your
maxims? After ten years of peace, under a republican government, with the
finest and best situated country in the universe, the most numerous and
enlightened body of philosophers that any nation ever possessed, the most
numerous, intelligent, active, disinterested, and brave people the world has
ever known; with these advantages, seeing what Colbert effected under
circumstances so much inferior, what will such a country have to covet from us
or to fear from all the powers of the earth and sea!

But it has been urged by trimming politicians, that as England now holds the
dominion of the sea, we owe it to ourselves to cultivate peace with her, since
her trade employs our shipping, and her manufactures engross three-fifths of
our internal traffic -- by this mode of argument it is, that the recommendation
of adherence to the faith of Treaties, and a steady assertion of national
independence and neutrality, have been made odious by avarice and faction. and
bellowed forth only as the treacherous whoop prelusive of war.

Such were the proceedings and such the mode of argument, that justified and
effectuated the British alliance; I will not stop to remark minutely how
powerfully all the arguments against the attachment to France might be employed
against that with Britain, it will be enough to state the general circumstances
of each; the government of Britain is a subject deserving the decided
abhorrence of every moral man; that of France is representative like our own;
the perfidious policy of the former will constantly endanger us, if not
ultimately involve us with one or other of the European powers whom she hates
or fears; in a commercial view she will be necessarily dependant on us, for out
staples and the consumption of her fabrics, which we can procure cheaper in
other countries; France can have nothing to fear from our enmity nor to court
from our warmest love, her population and the genius of her people will enable
her to undersed all the manufacturers of Europe, and trade will follow
cheapness; England on the contrary deriving all her consequence from abroad,
and daily sinking under the burden of her ambitious, oppressive, and corrupt
government at home, cannot hope for future prosperity or respectability in
Europe, only in a Revolution and Republican government (an event that would
render your measures perfectly ridiculous) or by wily machinations drawing in
America, as an old Bawd drags her daughter to prostitution, as the only source
of support under the weight of turpitude and age. Our detached and distant
situation invited and enabled us to pursue the course of impartial justice
without fear of war from Great Britain or interference in behalf of France;
that faith which is pledged by the nice obligations of gratitude, honor, and
Liberty should have directed us to this unerring point.

"Why" I repeat after you forego the advantages of so particular a situation?
Why by interweaving our destiny (again with England who would enslave us)
entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of (British) ambition,
rivalship, interest, humor, or caprice?

In the trembling anxiety of your apprehensions you betray a solicitude for the
exculpation of your past conduct, that speaks more than the most minute
examination of your sentiments; having mentioned the British treaty with
applause, you recollect in the sequel that you have deprecated foreign
alliances: you therefore find it necessary to create the distinction between
commercial and political alliances, as if the former were not to all intents
and purposes of the latter description, when the privileges of a favored nation
are sacrificed on one side, and insult and oppression submitted to on the
other; but fearful that even this should be insufficient you further warn us
against permanent alliances, so far I mean as we are now at liberty to do it,
for let me not be underas capable of patronizing infidelity to existing
engagements. This extrordinary advice is fully exemplified in your departure
from the spirit and principle of the treaty with France, which was declared to
be permanent, and exhibits this very infidelity you reprobate in a most
striking and lamentable light.

In forming the treaty with Britain, one of two modes of conduct was pursued,
equally regardless of subsisting obligations; there was either a relinquishment
or sacrifice of particular conditions secured by treaty to France, or a neglect
or disregard of the justice which was due to that contract; or in other words
we have derived the most signal advantages from the assistance of France
particularly in the capture of Cornwallis, that obligation has never been
repaid, -- our treaty with France from this cause and from the attachment of
the philosophical characters of the French nation through whose powerful
influence we acquired the alliance, and by whose advice in conjunction with our
own philosophical agents, the treaty was formed, -- was it not considered as a
great step toward the amelioration of the laws of nations, and which we have
adopted in every treaty we have entered into since excepting that with Britain?
national consistency, therefore, as well as the impressive principles of
generosity and justice should have bound us on that particular occasion to have
regarded principles primarily established by our own example.

There was still another circumstance of particular delicacy in negociating the
British treaty, which a Republic jealous of her reputation, as the most
virruous woman, should not have neglected; -- that the negotiation was
commenced and concluded during the existence of a war between the most favored
nation in alliance with America, and the former enemy of America, then at war
with the most favored nation; under all these circumstances it should appear to
be a most indispensible obligation on America not to accede to any conditions
proposed by Britain incompatible with those already enjoyed by France -- or at
least if America granted all that France enjoyed, to grant no more.

Whether the question on neutral bottoms was ever discussed or not, is a matter
not now to be examined, but speaking in the spirit of charitable forbearance,
the ignorance, or indifference, or imbecility, of our ambassador on that
occasion, surpassed every thing of the kind in the annals of diplomatic
affairs, and placed our national faith in the same rank with that of ancient
Carthage.

Having freely discussed the leading points of your address, there still
remains a considerable share, which might be employed in corroborating with
great force the general charge of deviation in the latter part of your
administration from the spirit and tenor of your former professions, and the
proper and true interests of your country; wherein your advice for the future
is but a defense for the past, -- where your warnings against party appear but
as the result of party spirit -- your lessons upon foreign politics but props
for past measures -- where you have displayed the consciousness of error --
attempted to disguise the acrimony of personal resentment under the semblance
of public virtue -- vainly displaying morals as the spring of Freedom, and
betraying the rashness of resentment, and intolerance of superstition, while
exhibiting the most fatal example of your disbelief or contempt of the morality
and religion you defend, and that Freedom which they uphold; -- but in doing
all these you are perfectly consistent with the views, practices, and
principles, -- nay even with the hatreds of the British party!

The principles that lead men to virtue should be well understood by Freemen,
if Freedom is a blessing and Slavery a curse, then whatever conduces to the
Freedom of Man is Virtue: -- Is the love of Liberty implanted in our nature or
not? Your opinions seem to sanction that cherished maxim of despotism, that man
is naturally depraved; the moral and physical consequencs of such a principle
are incalculable, but confining the consideration to its effect on freedom, we
find that in all despotic Governments it is the great argument for violence,
for sanguinary punishments, for grinding laws; nor can it be denied, that if
God could be so unjust as to create man predominantly prone to depravity, then
we should no longer condemn despotic governments because they would be only the
necessary result and counterpoise of that vicious constitution.

But if the numerous virtues of which men are in the constant exercise, and
which are in perfect unison with the attributes of God, disclaim indignantly
the accursed stigma; or that at least innate depravity is a question in morals;
your support of such an opinion was at least imprudent, and on an occasion
favorable to the propagation of any doctrine you might choose, wears an
appearance that I do not wish to countenance; but the love of your country and
of morals ought to have prevailed with you at such a time, since you cannot be
ignorant that vicious men are ever ready to charge their errors to the supposed
step-motherly behests of nature, rather than to their own wilful agency: this
selfishness is the parent of many errors, through it we disguise to others and
accommodate to our own starting consciences, acts of vice and oppression that
religion loudly forbids and morals cannot tolerate nor endure.

In attacking Thomas Pain, you acted rashly; an eminent philosophical English
bishop has acknowledged that his writings were dictated in sincerity, you do
not question that -- yet you not only wished to disgrace him for that
sincerity, but to deprive him of the title to patriotism which he had justly
obtained joined with you in the great contest for Freedom; his doctrines I do
not defend, but ere you became his censor (honesty is the best policy,) you
should have considered how morality was affected at home!

Religion should be kept apart from politics; -- temporal establishments are
never bettered by spiritual influence; they have always corrupted each other,
and slavery has been the fate of all who have fallen within their united
jurisdiction: strange that while the whole world is divided into numberless
religions, and these each into sects, the body is subjected to punishment for
the involuntary honesty of the conscience; it is a maxim in literature that
truth is never more secure than when exposed to dicussion; it would appear to
be the rule most consonant with reason to leave mind unrestrained by the
trammels of laws or the egotism and caprice of authority; there ever will be
suspicion where there is mystery, and nothing contributes more to strengthen
skepticism than the jealousy of believers; besides it is grossly inconsistent
with the meek religion of Christ, which prays for all, to usurp dominion over
the intellects of men: were we conspicuous over every other religion, which is
not the case, or did our lives exhibit examples of our precepts, we might be in
some degree excused; but our faith would rank very low indeed if it were to be
judged by our works! No one would dispute the right of a man to bestow a
thousand dollars of his own property, nor of another to refuse it; is opinion
then which tyranny vainly interdicts, proscribed by you? Men who rail at
religion, judge by the wickedness practiced in its name, or under the
hypocritical profession of it, and thence to think it is a delusion fostered by
fear, and causing depravity; that if men were extricated from it, virtue would
be loved for its own sake, they would become better, and the laws which are
necessary notwithstanding the influence of religion, would then have to do only
what is now required of them; such is their way of thinking, and their acting
under such impressions is no more objectionable in a rational view, than the
efforts of the missionaries to convert the Indians, or your own plans for
introducing the arts of civilization among them -- the motive of each is the
same, and arises from the innate disposition to promote human bappiness, which
we never cease to pursue unless biassed by some private prejudice or error of
education.

Equally objectionable are your doctrines when you declare it is not for one
nation to expect disinterested favors from another; this also strikes at the
root of morals, and is founded on the baleful examples of the worst
governments, and the supposed depravity of man; but although our conduct toward
France too forcibly maintains the affirmative, I cannot admit the maxim to be
any other than Machiavelian, disproved by various examples from history, and in
a very forcible manner by France, which, in bestowing something more than what
you strangely term nominal favors, and asking of us no sacrifice in return, as
she justly might have done, may very fairly reproach us for having given NO
MORE THAN "the equivalents of nominal favors!" -- for real benefits bestowed.

But, Sir, "in the duty of holding a neutral position" your country and France
herself and the world at large agreed, that it was a justly predominant motive
with you to gain time to our country to settle and mature its recent
institutions, and to progress without interruption to that degree of strength
and consistency which is necessary to give it, humanly speaking, the command of
its fortunes; and these were truly powerful arguments that called upon you for
a rigid adherence to the neutral principle.

But, however willingly every man must allow these obligations and objects to
have been binding and wise, I apprehend I have already shown that you have not
adhered to that rigid and neutral justice which you profess -- every concession
to Britain in prejudice of France was a deviation from neutrality, and above
all, every neglect of justice to our own rights and character as a nation was a
departure from the spirit and basis of the neutral principle -- for independent
of our own disgrace in exhibiting our imbecility at the moment when we
possessed the certain means of preserving our peace and dignity -- we were
wounding an ally in the crisis of her distress, by confessing our despair of
her cause in a pusilanimous indifference for our own commerce and national
character; and this conduct was the more ignominous on our part, in that the
orders of the British government for the seizure of American ships, were issued
at the same time, and formed part of the system that declared hostility against
the Republican form of government; a declaration which is well known to have
glanced at America, and expressed the intentions of Britain when she should
obtain that success with the idea of which she was then blindly intoxicated.

That we might have preserved our honor and avoided war, is within the judgment
of every man acquainted with the nature of the British trade, -- that a
non-importation of their manufactures would have done this, is within the
compass of proof; and knowing that it was neither the desire nor would it have
been the interest of France that we should take a share in the war, so in these
various respects must we submit to the just censure which belings to our
measures, and as your address is but an indirect defense thereof, it must
remain with time to develope motives, that can rescue your name from reproach.

Freedom like this, Sir, you have not been used to; against a man so long and
deservedly elevated into the first trust of a nation, it is painful to exercise
it; there will, however, be found many persons ready to give your words a
color or qualification of which they are in some measure susceptible; others
more attached to you than the Liberties of their country, will either not
discern that departure from your long professed character which I allege, or
considering you as the consummation of political wisdom and moral perfection,
they will hasten to heap obloquy on him who questions your infallibility; they
will find in my comment on your text a new proof of the ingratitude of
Republics, while my obscure voice will not be heard in the clamer, though I speak
in the plainness of truth, that the great error of Republics has been, too much
confidence placed in the virtues and talents of individuals, too much faith in
their professions, and power confided so long in their hands, that by its
exercise the favorite has been deluded into a belief of that perfection
artfully attributed to him, and learned to look upon his equals as the
creatures of his will.

Posterity will in vain search for the monuments of wisdom in your
administration; they will on enquiry find one of the most afflictive of
political diseases inoculated on the constitution, in the funding system --
they will see the excise, a species of taxation equally odious and incongruous
with freedom, giving birth to the first military effort of Freemen against
their fellow citizens; a tax founded in the breach of domestic security, and
engrafting on the municipal trunk the seeds of civil hate, division, and
corruption; -- in vain will they seek for traces of establishments or
institutions calculated to secure the perpetuity of freedom on the strong basis
of education and moral equality; -- examining in order to discover the true
features of your character, the declarations of your former enemies and present
friends will be minutely examined, who assert that your attachment to the
revolution was not the result of a love of republican freedom, but of
disappointed ambition, -- that had you obtained promotion, as you expected for
the services rendered after Braddock's defeat, your sword would have been drawn
against your country: comparing these assertions with sad existing facts, they
will discover that the great champion of American Freedom, the rival of
Timoleon and Cincinnatus, twenty years after the establishment of the Republic,
was possessed of FIVE HUNDRED of the HUMAN SPECIES IN SLAVERY, enjoying the
FRUITS OF THEIR LABOR WITHOUT REMUNERATION, OR EVEN THE CONSOLATIONS OF
RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION -- that he retained the barbarous usages of the feudal
system, and kept men in LIVERY -- and that he still affected to be the friend
of the Christian Religion, of civil Liberty, and moral equality -- and to be
withal a disinteresied, virtuous, liberal and unassuming man.

I hen the foreign political incendiary, that feeds upon your praise, and the
insiduous native sycophant, who battens on your shame, will have sunk to their
congenial home, and the scrutinizing eye of history will try you, as the
ancient Egyptians were wont to do with their kings, and determine upon the
merits of your life, by laws that spurn alike the meretricious evidence of
incense and tinsel.

I have done, Sir, what I deem a duty; you are unhappily fond of flattery;
indirect praise is to you the language of sincerity; the ingenuity without the
vehemence of truth, will offend: in presenting my opinions, my earnest wish is
to expose the PERSONAL IDOLATRY into which we have been heedlessly running --
to awaken my countrymen to a sense of our true situation -- and to show them in
the fallibility of the most favored of men, the necessity of thinking for
themselves.

Should any one blame me for the plain truths here declared, and make any
attempt to controvert or explain them away, I shall be governed in any
attention I may bestow thereon, by the degree of candor and temper they may
display; if I have mistaken a fact, I shall not be backward to acknowledge it,
because I have not stated a sentiment but upon conviction of its rectitude --
notice of any other kind shall be beneath mine.

JASPER DWIGHT.
12th November, 1796.

