Mr. STONE'S AND Mr. UNDERWOOD'S SERMONS, AT THE OPENING OF A NEW MEETING HOUSE
IN DENNIS.

The Duty of worshipping God in his House, considered in A SERMON, DELIVERED
DECEMBER 17 th, 1795, ON OCCASION OF OPENING A NEW MEETING HOUSE IN THE SOUTH
PART OF DENNIS. BY NATHANIEL STONE, A.M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN THAT TOWN.
Published by desire of the HEARERS.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY MANNING and LORING, SPRING-LANE. FEB. 1796.

A SERMON.
TO the honor of God, and for the benefit of his people, more especially in
this part of the town, this house, in which we are now met for the first time,
has lately been erected and completed, for the exercise of public worship.

Let us, with becoming seriousness, give our attention to what may be delivered
at this time, agreeably to those words of the Psalmist, contained in THE 5th
PSALM, 7th VERSE. "But as for me, I will come into thy house, in the multitude
of thy mercy; and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple."



In the beginning of this Psalm we find the Psalmist fervently begging audience
of God to his prayer, and urging this from God's relation to him, and his own
resolved choice of him alone as the object of his worship; as in the following
elegant expressions, in the 1st and 2d verses. "Give ear to my words, O Lord;
consider my meditation. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King and my God;
for unto thee will I pray." He in the next place expresses his hopeful desire
that God will speedily hear him when calling upon him by prayer, and grant an
answer of peace thereto. Says he, "My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O
Lord; in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up." With
a confident and patient expectation he will wait for relief, under his
perplexing troubles: and he encourages himself thereunto, it may be, in part,
from the characters of his adversaries, against whom he prays; who, through
their wickedness, are so contrary to God, that he cannot choose but hear his
faithful servant's prayers, and will destroy the workers of iniquity. "For thou
art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with
thee. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou hate all workers of
iniquity. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing; the Lord will abhor the
bloody and deceitful man."

The text contains his pious resolution what he would make his constant
practice. He would come into the house of God, and, in his fear, worship toward
his holy temple. He would, with holy boldness and confidence, appear in the
presence of God. "I will come into thy house," -- meaning the tabernacle, from
which, probably, he might at this time be excluded by the rage and malice of
his adversaries. Yet he had a confident expectation, that, through the goodness
and mercy of God, the obstacles of hindrance would shortly be removed, and the
way opened for his worshipping him according to his appointment, as he
heretofore had done in his house, or tabernacle. And when thus permitted, he
would do it in the fear of God. "In thy fear, says he, will I worship toward
thy holy temple;" that is, the tabernacle, which in Scripture is sometimes
called by that name; for the temple was not at this time built. Though deprived
of the agreeable and delightful satisfaction of worshipping in the tabernacle,
yet he should ever bear it upon his mind; nay, it could not be easily
eradicated therefrom. Though his troubles were many and distressing, yet they
would not do this. In the fear of God, he would worship toward the temple of
his holiness. He was a steady seeker of God. He maintained a constant course of
secret worship, as well as made conscience of attending the public institutions
of religion. He frequently prayed by himself alone; and in this way he poured
out his soul before the Lord, and resolved upon the continued practice of this
important duty; as evidently appears by what he says in the context: "My voice
shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I direct my prayer
unto thee, and will look up." He made it his business, as well as his delight,
to improve all opportunities of waiting on God in his more public instituted
worship: yea, it was to his great comfort and satisfaction, when he was
permitted to worship God in his sanctuary, in concert with his people. He was
rejoiced at such seasons; and it was to his great grief when deprived thereof;
as appears in diverse passages in the Psalms, particularly 122d and 42d. "I was
glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord." "As the
heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. My
soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before
God? My tears have been my meat, day and night, while they continually say unto
me, Where is thy God? When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me:
for I had gone with the multitude; I went with them to the house of God; with
the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holy day." And we have,
in the text, his determined resolution to worship God in such ways as
Providence might permit, let others do as they would, either by contemning or
neglecting the worship of the only living and, true God. And this he would do
in the fear of God.

Hence we may be led, from the pious resolution of the Psalmist, to consider,
That it is the duty of the people of God, let others do what they will,
resolvedly to come into his house, in the multitude of his mercy, and in the
fear of God, worship in his holy temple.

First -- It is the duty of the people of God, resolvedly, in the multitude of
his mercy, to come into his house and worship him.

Secondly -- When they thus do, it is to be done in the fear of God.

First -- It is the duty of the people of God, resolvedly, in the multitude, or
by the greatness of his mercy, to come into his house and worship him. It is
the duty of the people of God, in special, to worship him. Upon this they are
to resolve. Indeed it is the duty of all, indiscriminately to worship him,
according to their ability, and the knowledge they have of God and their duty.
This is what God requires of them. Hence the psalmist, in the 67th psalm, says,
"Let the people praise thee, O God. Let all the people praise thee." All are
under obligation to worship God. For this end they were made. They were made
for the glory and service of God. Were not made for themselves; to live to, and
serve themselves; but were made to serve God, to worship and glorify him,
according to the directions given in his word; to live lives devoted to his
fear and to his glory. Though it is far otherwise with multitudes of the human
race. They bow down to stocks and stones, pay adoration to them which are no
Gods, and acknowledge the receipt of mercies to those who have no power to
bestow them. What vast multitudes are there in a state of heathenish darkness,
idolatry and superstition, and who are perishing for lack of vision! It is
obvious that there are none but what are under obligation to worship God; since
he is their Creator from whom they receive their being, and it is he who
preserves and upholds them in life and being. Hence Job says, "Thou have
granted me life and favor, and thy visitation has preserved my spirit." His
hands have made and fashioned these bodies of ours, and they are fearfully and
wonderfully made. He breathed into us the breath of life; made us living souls;
endowed us with rational powers and faculties; teaches us more than the beasts
of the earth, and makes us wiser than the fowls of heaven."

Again; He is not only our Creator, but our kind and bountiful Benefactor. All
that we have, we primarily receive from him. That which is necessary to
preserve life, and all the blessings, comforts and enjoyments of life, that we
are made the happy partakers of, come from him, the great Author of all things.
All, good and bad, saints and sinners, are dependent on him for the common
bounties of his providence, and are all sharers in them. He makes his sun to
rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the
unjust. So, all spiritual blessings which any are made to enjoy, flow down to
them from the Father of Lights and of Mercies. Hence the apostle James says,
"Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning."
Now, surely, He who has made us, and continues us in life, and furnishes us
with the blessings and comforts of life, has a special right, yea, has the sole
right to us and our services. All religious worship, homage, adoration and
praise is to be ascribed to Him alone, as his due; and this through Jesus
Christ, the Son of God. And he is highly displeased if it be given to another.
Says he, -- Isaiah xlii.8. "I am the Lord, that is my name; and my glory will I
not give to another, neither my praise to graven images." These things
considered, it plainly appears that all are under obligation to worship God; to
pay all religious worship and service to him. And what he requires of them in
this, as well as every thing else, is just and reasonable; for he requires
nothing of any of his intelligent creatures but what is just. To do otherwise
would be inconsistent with his holiness and the purity of his nature; with that
justice and equity which runs through the whole of the administration of the
divine government.

It is the duty of all, indiscriminately, to worship God, who is the supreme
Ruler and Governor of the universe. Much more so, then, is it the duty of such
as live in a land of Gospel light and knowledge, that are favored with the
word and ordinances of the Lord, and have the knowledge of his mind and will
plainly revealed in the word of truth. The law, word and ordinances of God are
the distinguishing privilege of those who live in a land of Gospel light. "He
has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee,
but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" But, more
especially, God's chosen, covenant people are under peculiar obligations, yea,
the strongest ties, to worship him. For they are his, not only by right of
creation, but by purchase, by right of redemption. All that do or shall believe
in Christ, to the world's end, are the purchase of his blood. With this he has
bought them: And this is the argument which the apostle uses with the
believing Corinthians, to glorify God with their bodies and their spirits which
are his. As in 1 Cor. vi.19, 20. "What, know ye not that your body is the
temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not
your own! For ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your body,
and in your spirit, which are God's." What this price is, the apostle Peter
tells us, both negatively and positively. "Forasmuch as ye know that ye were
redeemed, not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation, received by tradition, from your fathers, but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, and without spot." Surely then,
such as are thus redeemed, are under peculiar obligations to devote their time,
talents and lives to the service of God. Yea, their all is to be devoted to
him. They should have an eye to his glory in all they do. Hence that
exhortation, 1 Cor. x.31. "Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of God." They should give unto the Lord the glory due
unto his name, according to the exhortation, psalm xxix.2. "And worship the
Lord in the beauty of holiness."

It may here be observed that resolution is necessary to the worship and
service of God: and this is essential in that which is private, social, and
public. Resolution will overcome many, and sometimes great obstacles. This we
see it will often do in the common affairs and concerns of life, especially
where self-interest lies at stake: Should it not much more be exercised by us,
in things of a higher nature, that concern our best interest, even our souls'
salvation, as the worship and kingdom of God most certainly does?

The honor and glory of God most nearly and highly concerns every one: For
whatever they do for his glory and honor will finally redound to their own
saving advantage. Whatever they do for him will not go unnoticed or unrewarded
by him. Even he that gives to a disciple, in the name of a disciple, a cup of
cold water, we are assured shall not lose his reward. This is the declaration
of our Lord and Master. Matt. x.40. and the two last verses. "He that receives
you, receives me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent me. He
that receives a prophet, in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's
reward: And he that receives a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man,
shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whosoever shall give to drink unto
one of these little ones, a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple,
verily, I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward." But then where
love is wanting to God and his worship, his service will not be delightful, but
tedious or irksome. It is therefore highly necessary that we have true love to
God; otherwise we shall not have any real delight or satisfaction in his
worship or service. Love will excite to resolution and diligence in the duties
of Christianity. Want of resolution is undoubtedly one great reason why there
is such neglect in the worship and service of God. Love to him, and resolution
in his service will have a happy tendency to check sloth and negligence herein:
Yea, it will surmount many and great obstacles. Good reason then is there that
the worship and service of God should be seriously resolved upon by his people.
Thus we find Joshua resolving, not only for himself, but his house and family,
that they would serve the Lord. It is a happy choice they make who sincerely
choose the service and worship of God. Like unto this is the psalmist's
resolution in the text, that he would worship God. Though others neglected
temple worship, yet he would improve all opportunities that presented for his
going into the house of the Lord, and worshipping him in the way of his own
appointment. "But as for me, I will come into thy house, in the multitude of
thy mercy, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple."

It is the duty of the people of God to worship him publicly; not only in
secret and in their families, but in his house; especially upon his Sabbaths or
holy days. Hence God says to the children of Israel, "Ye shall keep my Sabbaths
and reverence my sanctuary: I am the Lord." It is the appointment of God that
they should do so; and it has been the practice of his people, in all ages of
the world. It was David's resolution to come into the house of the Lord, and
worship there, with others of his faithful worshippers. And this he would do in
the multitude of God's mercy; or by thy great mercy, as some render it: that
is, trusting only to thy great mercy for admittance thither, and acceptance
there: or for, or because of thy many mercies to me; for which I will come to
pay my thanks and service unto thee. Though frequently it was so with him that
he was not permitted to enjoy this blessed privilege, of meeting with the
people of God at his house, and worshipping him there, yet his heart and mind
was there; and it was always to his great grief, when deprived of temple
worship. And it always rejoiced his heart when he was favored with an
opportunity for seeing the going of his God and King in his sanctuary. He could
say, in the sincerity of his heart, as in Psalm xxvi.8. "Lord, I have loved the
habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor dwells."

Secondly -- It is the duty of the people of God to worship him in fear. We are
to attend upon divine institutions with that seriousness and solemnity that
becomes us; are to do it in the manner that God requires: And this must needs
be with reverence and with godly fear: with suitable apprehensions of his
divine excellence and perfection. We should with becoming seriousness consider,
into whose presence it is that we come, when we enter the house of God, to
worship: For it is no less than into the presence of the great heart-searching
and rein-trying God, before whom we must all, in the great day, in the day of
judgment, appear, and render up an account, each one for himself, of the deeds
done in the body. If our minds are duly impressed with a sense of this, we
shall be likely to be awed into a holy fear and reverence of God, when we come
into his house, and attend upon his public, instituted worship. Is it the duty
of all persons to worship God, not only privately but publicly? let none then
allowedly and contentedly live in the neglect of the one or the other. What God
requires of us, as duty, is highly reasonable: And it will be to our own
advantage, if we attend hereunto in the manner required. And this must be done
in spirit and in truth, if we would hope to be accepted of God. Thus we read,
John iv.24. "God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit and truth." And as to the public, instituted worship of God, it becomes
all, but especially Christians, to endeavor after-such a pious disposition and
spirit as David had. They should, as he did, manifest a sincere regard for the
worship of God in his house.

It is to be hoped, there are many that are really of his disposition, whose
local situation and circumstances are such as render it impracticable, with
frequency, to attend upon the stated public worship of God, in his house.

This has been the case with you, my hearers, in this part of the town, and
your ancestors before you. But the prospect is now brightening, as to you and
yours. You, not long since, requested of the Congregational Society in this
town, of which you are members, that public worship might be held, a proportion
of the time, in this part of it. They looked upon your request reasonable; and,
as I doubt not, having in their minds the injunction of our Lord and Master,
"Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them," have
complied with it. Be it spoken to the praise of the Society, that this affair
has been conducted with such brotherly love, and Christian harmony.
Notwithstanding what has taken place, we look upon ourselves to be all
brethren, and of one and the same Society. Let not Pastor or People be wanting
in their endeavors still to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
As to the erecting of this Edifice, you that have been more particularly
engaged in it, have, with much assiduity and unanimity, gone through with it.
But, alas! while in the midst of it, a gloom overspread you and us of this
town, in the sudden removal by death of a principal proprietor, Mr. ISAIAH
BAKER, who died September 25th, Aet. 56. He was justly esteemed as an upright,
serious and charitable man.
and a respectable, useful member of the community. There is his urn! We would
drop a tear over it, for ourselves, and for the bereaved widow and orphan
children.

You will now consider, my friends, that you have an additional price put into
your hands. I mean especially, that you will have the privilege, more
frequently, of worshipping God in his house than heretofore: And many that
could not do it at all, may be in circumstances to do it now. I trust you will
not be regardless of the privilege. And as to this house of worship, as well as
the other, may it be said of this and that man, he was born there.

In a word, let us all manifest our sincere regard to the word, worship, and
ordinances of the Lord, by a steady and conscientious attendance on them: --
and may we be so happy at last, as to meet in the temple that is above.

Public Worship considered and recommended. A SERMON, DELIVERED AT DENNIS,
DECEMBER 17, 1795, AT THE OPENING OF A NEW MEETING HOUSE. BY NATHAN UNDERWOOD,
A. M. PASTOR OF THE SOUTH CHURCH IN HARWICH. Published by desire of the HEARERS.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY MANNING and LORING, SPRING-LANE. FEB. 1796.

A SERMON.
PSALM xxvii.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after;
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple.


A SENSE of Deity and duty is deeply impressed upon the minds of men. The still
voice of reason, and the more powerful suggestions of conscience, with one
voice teach us the existence of a God, whose being and perfections deservedly
merit the attention of his creatures. There is not a creature which moves, or a
plant which grows, but declares the hand which made it to be divine. How much
more the intelligent part of creation, who are admonished by all, within and
without, to worship and venerate their great Creator? The erection of this
magnificent Building, and our assembling therein to Dedicate it unto God, is a
proof also that we acknowledge a Being whose sovereignty and dominion it well
becomes us to reverence and adore. These truths were too strongly imprinted
upon the heart of the psalmist to be erased either by the burdens of royalty or
the equipage of a splendid court. He thought it well became him to regard the
great Lord of nature, and on many occasions, as in the words of the text,
expresses his affection for public worship and desire to "dwell in the house of
the Lord, and to inquire in his temple."

"One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of
the Lord, and to inquire in his temple." It is obvious that the passage before
us is not (but in part) to be literally understood. He does not mean to make
his abode in places dedicated to God and sacred for public worship; but an
habitual sense which he entertained of the great duty and importance of
frequently assembling there; -- at all stated seasons and convenient
opportunities, not only to have his affections, but his presence there. To
"behold the beauty of the Lord" in order to inflame his devotion, and to
"inquire in his temple" that so he might learn to do his will. In this view,
the words before us are applicable to the present occasion. Well does it become
us devoutly to attend and imitate the example of the pious psalmist. It will
readily be acknowledged that public worship has been abused; that many, it is
to be feared, frequent the house of God from sinister views; and appear to
possess the form without the power of godliness. But this can be no apology for
others to withdraw; for certain it is, the example of one sinner can never
justify another; and that where no form of religion appears, the power is not
to be expected. To prove therefore the utility and importance of public worship
is the design of the present Discourse: and since there is an immediate
connection between the means and the end, it must be of consequence to regard
the former, in order to obtain the latter.

Hence in the first place, let us consider it with respect to God. If there be
a God who created the world, and still continues his agency and protection,
nothing can be more reasonable and natural than that those who subsist on his
bounty, and are governed by his providence, should suitably express their
gratitude and praise to the Giver of all good. But besides the private
blessings we enjoy, and which merit a grateful return, there are numerous
favors which we receive in common with others, and which justly claim the
united thanks of all, and the most public expressions of gratitude to our
common Lord. So consonant is this to the common sentiments of mankind, that the
most uncivilized and barbarous of the human race have ever agreed in
establishing some form of worship, and erecting some altars, whereunto they
might repair in common, and pour forth public expressions of gratitude to their
pretended deities. It must therefore be evident, that a principle of worship is
deeply engraven upon the hearts of men. And herein, my friends, consists the
peculiar excellence of the Christian religion, in that it has instructed us in
the simple and spiritual worship of our God; which, disencumbered of rites and
unmeaning ceremonies, is worthy its divine Author; its positive institutions
few and easy, directly tending to the good of society and refining the morals
and manners of men. How inexcuseable then shall we be, who enjoy superior
advantages, if we suffer ourselves to neglect a duty which the very heathens so
punctually observed!

It is true, the refinement of false philosophy has suggested the absurdity of
paying homage to a Being far exalted above all praise; whose essential glory
and happiness can neither be augmented nor diminished by his creatures; yet let
me ask, whether the benefits received from a benefactor in any degree diminish
the debt of gratitude and praise to him, in consequence of our inability to
make an adequate return? or not rather increase every ingenuous feeling, and
prompt us to embrace every opportunity of publicly expressing the pure
emotions of a grateful heart? God is doubtless too great to need our homage;
yet is he too good not to accept it, when poured forth from a grateful heart,
and is the native effusion of a pure mind? If pride and self-sufficiency blind
all sentiments of dependence upon God, no wonder if we adopt the sentiments of
false philosophy; but if we consider him as he is, our Father and Friend, must
it not be acceptable to him to behold his creatures suitably affected toward
their Benefactor? assembling together to express their gratitude in common, and
thereby nourish and increase the general stock of benevolence and love? Are not
such dispositions and affections as these immediately connected with all
virtue? naturally tending to impress us with a sense of our dependence,
increase our reverence and gratitude toward God, and charity and good will
toward his creatures?

Secondly. If we consider public worship as it respects society, we shall there
also doubtless find it of great importance. Wherever we turn our eyes, we
behold a busy world; immersed in the things of time and sense, making provision
for the present life; and were it not for stated seasons of worshipping God,
and thus calling off their attention from worldly pursuits, we have reason to
believe that a sense of duty and futurity would be in a measure erased from the
mind. If it be of consequence to the well-being of society that such a belief
should prevail, as an Almighty Being in the heavens, who surveys and governs
all below; from whom none can escape, and to whom the most secret sins must be
accounted for; that he is a protector of the righteous, and a revenger of
crimes; if it be necessary that the thoughts of men be raised and carried
forward to the day of judgment; surely then it must enforce the authority of
public worship, and prove the necessity of public instruction: Mankind being
doomed to labor, and so early engaged therein, that were it not for those
public resorts where they hear of GOD and CHRIST, of judgment and eternity,
they would doubtless fail in moral improvement, sociability and friendship.
Shut those temples in which they assemble for religious instruction and
improvement, and a declension of religion, of morals and manners, would
probably soon appear. And as a sense of Deity and a future judgment were lost
upon the mind, they would be prone to every outrage which they could commit
with impunity.

It is well known that in the earlier ages of the world legislators were
obliged to have recourse to religion, in order to associate their subjects and
give a sanction to their laws. Thus bringing them together at stated times to
unite in acts of worship, gradually tended to civilize the mind, cement the
affections, and reduce them to order. And even at the present day, exclusive of
any effect upon the moral principle, it is not to be doubted but assembling
together contributes greatly to promote order and decency, as well as charity
and good affections. At the same time it must be agreeable to every humane mind
to think that one day in seven is allotted for rest, and to join with others of
the same mortal stock in devout meditation, and the reverential worship of
their common Lord. It is the only time which gives inferiors to feel an
equality with the great. When worshipping in the same temple, and acknowledging
the same common Parent, then it is that man meets man as a brother; that he is
led to realize that as the present day is, so also shall be the future; that
one day they shall sleep together undistinguished in the grave, and alike
moulder into dust; that the same Almighty Sovereign shall receive their
spirits, and judge them by their works! Such reflections as these tend to
humble the pride of man; and thus by reducing him to a level with man, he
thinks as a man, conducts as a Christian, and thereby secures and promotes the
good of society. But I proceed,

Thirdly -- To consider public worship as it respects individuals. And here we
shall find also its utility and importance no less than in the former case.
Whatever be the station of individuals, they are still men, and as such have
the duties of a man to perform. Were their attendance on public worship of no
other service than to give sanction to a salutary institution, this alone would
make it their duty. But this is not all. If it be necessary for man to preserve
and increase his own stock of virtue, it must be of consequence upon his own
account. It cannot be denied but attendance on public ordinances naturally
tends to call off men's attention from the world, and to solemnize the mind.
And so far as the impressions are good, so far its use and importance must be
confessed.

All Christian institutions have a tendency to promote virtue. They serve to
give warmth to piety, luster to virtue, and dignity to man. Hence these
occasional retreats from the cares and anxieties of life give opportunity for
better thoughts to arise. The body is hereby refreshed, the faculties of the
mind enlivened, and both enabled to perform their functions with greater
activity and success.

But perhaps here it may be urged with too much truth, Are there not many who
are punctual in their attendance upon public ordinances, and appear to derive
no benefit from them? Are they more improved in their moral conduct, and the
discharge of the common duties of life, than others who have apparently
neglected the services of the church?

To which I answer; Should this argument be admitted it can prove no more than
that human weakness and corruption may defeat the best purposes and most
promising means for moral improvement. Doubtless the greatest blessings
conferred upon men may be abused, and by perverseness converted into evil. But
shall we neglect the service of the sanctuary because we have not discovered in
others all that good effect which we wished or expected? Shall we refuse proper
nourishment to the body because others have indulged to excess? But though we
cannot discover every desired effect, it were presumption to conclude that no
good is effected; since it is utterly impossible accurately to determine how
perverse they would otherwise have been. It is doubtless a just remark, that
the manners as well as the morals of men keep pace with their religious
improvements. Where public worship is neglected, factions generally spring up;
and with great similarity in morals and manners exhibit the melancholy picture
which Solomon describes by the field of the slothful. "I went by the field of
the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding, and lo it
was all grown over with thorns; and nettles had covered the face thereof, and
the stone wall thereof was broken down. Then I saw and considered it well; I
looked upon it, and received instruction." It is not to be doubted but
attention to public worship tends to check licentiousness of thought; and that
some assistance is always afforded to good dispositions. Even momentary
impressions of serious meditation are not without their fruit. They generally
leave some traces of good behind; and being frequently repeated by religious
acts of worship, we have reason to hope, through divine grace, will make
lasting impressions upon the mind.

But as our assembling together in the house of God is for the purposes of
social worship, and to hear religious instruction, we ought to remember with
what frame of mind it becomes us to attend. It is not the form of worship or
pretended sanctity of men which God regards; but the devout worshipper, the
humble mind and sincere heart. By the inattentive thought and wandering eye we
profane the temple of the Lord. And while with irreverence and inattention we
join in the solemnities of worship, we dishonor God and frustrate the ends for
which we ought to assemble. Religious knowledge then fails, and the consequence
is, we return more guilty than we went. All religious knowledge comes from God.
It is a light from heaven, which becomes us with seriousness to acknowledge and
regard. When we enter the house of God to inquire in his temple, then it is in
a more especial manner he expects from us an attentive ear and upright heart;
to hear and apply the important truths of the gospel, as well knowing by the
contents thereof we must be tried another day. But too often it is to be feared
we assemble with other views; either in conformity to common custom, or to
criticize upon the preacher. But these dispositions are both derogatory to man
and the solemnity of the place. It is with humility and candor, a desire to
apply and improve, which ought to induce us to hear the word of God. Whenever
therefore we enter the sacred temple, let us consider ourselves as creatures
surrounded with darkness, seeking illumination from the Father of lights; as
guilty creatures, imploring forgiveness from our Judge; as frail and dying
creatures, preparing for that eternal state into which we know not how soon we
may enter. If with such sentiments and dispositions we attend the worship and
ordinances of God, we may comfortably hope, through the merits of Christ, to
join hereafter the nobler society of worshippers in the heavens.

But before I conclude, it may not be improper to address the Proprietors and
Worshippers of this place. Your pious zeal for the worship of your Maker does
you immortal honor! Your union and perseverance for establishing the
ordinances of God among you, and the erection of this magnificent Temple for
that purpose, justly merit our commendation. And as you have this day Dedicated
it unto God, let it also be your care to devote yourselves to his worship and
service. You have heard something of the use and importance of public worship,
as also of the frame of mind with which it becomes you to attend; and we would
charitably hope, from your laudable exertions, you can cheerfully adopt, with
much sincerity of soul, the language of the text: "One thing have I desired of
the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all
the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his
temple." If this be the language of your hearts, happy are ye; and while you
continue it, happy shall you be. While you thus attend the worship of your God,
you have nothing to fear; for he has never said to any of the children of men,
Seek ye me in vain. Isai. xlv.19.
But that he loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob;
Psalm lxxxviii.2.
and that the prayer of the upright is his delight. Our Savior also has
assured us, that where two or three are gathered together in his name, that he
is in the midst of them. Matt. xviii.20.
Let therefore the word of God be your comfort and your guide. Enter his gates
with thanksgiving, and his courts with praise, delighting yourselves to inquire
in his temple.

But while we exhort you to the practice of your duty, we cannot forbear to
drop with you the friendly tear! The loss you have sustained by the death of a
benefactor you doubtless feel. Mr. ISAIAH BAKER, a principal proprietor in the
house, died before it was finished, and was the first buried there. A man of
large property, extensive charity and a public spirit.
His pious zeal for the glory of God, and the perfecting of this House, ought
to endear him to your memory; and though not permitted to join us here in acts
of worship and devotion, we humbly trust he is now on high, worshipping God in
purer strains! May his virtues long live, as a comfort and example for
surviving friends. May his death admonish you that you are also mortal; cement
your union; strengthen the bonds of friendship, and animate you in your
Christian course.

A word to this Assembly shall finish the Discourse. And how shall I speak? For
to some of you I shall doubtless speak no more! You as well as I, are
candidates for a future existence! travelers for a day to an eternal home, and
know not how soon you may arrive there. On the rapid wings of time you are now
passing, and very soon with some of you the scene will be shifted! Very soon,
from worshipping God here below, you may be summoned to meet him in the
heavens, to give account of your pilgrimage on the earth! Here you have no
continuing city nor sure abiding place; but are seeking one to come, whose
builder and maker is God. Does not reason and revelation admonish you of these
solemn truths, and every thing around you solemnize the call? Our fathers!
where are they? and the prophets, do they live forever? Long since have they
obeyed the summons, and entered upon their reward! And in a little time, as
they have done, we also must quit the stage, and leave our places to succeeding
pilgrims! Does it not therefore concern you, as rational and accountable
beings, to meditate upon and apply the truths which have been suggested? Is it
a small thing to disregard religion, and answer it to your Maker? To neglect
divine institutions and the worship of the sanctuary* when every thing which
concerns you as men is built upon it? Success in the present world, peace of
mind, and happiness in the next, are through Jesus Christ the natural fruit of
obedient lives. Means are in order to the end. If then a blessed immortality be
the object of your pursuit, consider now in time the part which becomes you to
act. If with this view you desire to dwell in the house of the Lord and to
inquire in his temple, that so you may know his will and your duty, "keep thy
foot when thou come thither." Hear as for your life, remembering the
omniscience of God, and the solemn account you must one day give of yourselves
to him!

May the almighty Spirit of God dwell richly in your hearts, and guide you in
the way of all truth. And though I must now bid you adieu, as probably to join
no more in acts of worship and devotion upon the earth, yet, guided by light
and truth through this wilderness of life, may we meet again in the heavenly
Jerusalem, to worship our common Lord in nobler strains. And may the day soon
dawn when "all shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth;" when the
kingdoms of the world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord, and the whole
earth be filled with his glory.


