Samuel Thacher's Oration.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED JULY 4, 1796, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF CONCORD, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE.

BY SAMUEL THACHER.

"Tantae molis erat" AMERICANAM "condere gentem."

Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON. 1796.

AT a meeting of a number of the citizens of Concord; Voted, unanimously, that
Jonathan Fay, Esquire, Doctor Isaac Hurd, and Doctor Joseph Hunt, be a
committee to wait on Mr. Samuel Thacher, to thank him for his spirited and
patriotic oration, delivered to a crowded audience, in the meeting house, in
Concord, on the 4th of July, 1796; and likewise, to request a copy for the
press.

GENTLEMEN,
ALTHOUGH sensible that the numerous defects in the oration of the 4th will
appear in more glaring colors to the eye of criticism, than they did to the
candor which marked its reception; convinced that I have least illiberality to
apprehend from those, whom I am most anxious to please; I cannot longer
hesitate to comply with your polite request.

I remain, gentlemen, your very humble servant, SAMUEL THACHER.
The GENTLEMEN OF THE COMMITTEE. July 6th, '96,
AN ORATION.
"WHEN the foundations of the earth were laid, the morning stars sang together,
and all the sons of GOD shouted for joy." Let AMERICANS, in devout imitation,
proclaim the BIRTHDAY of FREEDOM, the glorious REGENERATION of MAN. On this
MEMORABLE ANNIVERSARY, may each heart become an altar of liberty; its incense,
the purest effusions of gratitude. Let industry cease from labor. Let one
common, elevated joy inspire all classes of society!

That an address, in obedience to the wishes of my fellow-citizens, needs not
the dazzling charms of brilliancy to secure attention; that in reciting events,
so often repeated, which ought to be transmitted, without variation, to the
latest ages, novelty would be worse than impertinent; are ideas peculiarly
encouraging. These considerations, added to the generous glow of patriotism
which beams from every countenance, the zealous attachment to INDEPENDENCE
which characterizes the audience, induce the speaker to attempt the praises of
our country; to trace the leading causes, attendants, and effects of the
American revolution.

Assembled, my respected auditors, not like other nations, to celebrate feats
of successful carnage, or the senseless ceremonials of superstition; but
excited by the animating energy of gratitude, we commemorate the struggles of
freemen, the consequent emancipation of a WORLD!

Pause for a moment, and realize with rapture, that our country is free and
happy; that the same country, which, within a century and a half, resounded
with the yell of the savage, and so lately shuddered at the outrages of still
more barbarous Britons; now smiles in peace and plenty, on a nation of
discerning, independent republicans.

In defiance of the tyranny which has so long bestrode creation;
notwithstanding the debased condition to which servitude has reduced so great a
part of the species; the sacred truth, the basis of American constitutions,
that "all men are born free and equal," is deeply engraven, and dearly
cherished in the hearts of those, who have never bowed the knee to slavery.

LIBERTY is a pure, original emanation from the great source of life, which
animates the universe. Yet so long have mankind been insulted with the idea,
that it is the exclusive property of a few; so long have they gazed, in stupid
admiration, at the splendour of dominion, which has shone but to scorch them; so
long have force and artifice on the one hand, and fear and ignorance on the
other, combined with the power of all-conquering habit, that this eternal
principle was almost erased from the human mind; when AMERICA, indignant at
oppression, rose, and proclaimed it with a voice, which broke the spell
confining nations, roused them from the lethargy of ages, and struck like
thunder on the ears of despots.

Government, pure, rational, representative government, equally remote from the
encroachments of power, and the evils of anarchy, has, until our revolution,
been a stranger to nations. Liberty has been hunted about the earth with
implacable malice; and like the dove from the ark, has "found no rest for the
sole of her foot." Chased from one quarter of the globe to another, the
heavenly goddess was ready to abandon her charge, when the enterprise of
Columbus surmounted every difficulty, discovered this western world, and
furnished her a more secure, more inviting retreat.

To trace the progress of usurpation, or the occasional glimmerings of equal
liberty, which appeared, like lightning, to display, by contrast, the horrors
of ancient night, would far exceed our limits.

At the discovery of America, Europe, age after age, encumbered by despotism,
had groaned under the combined pressure of the crown and mitre. Holy popes,
assisted by bigoted, artful, assuming monks, and sacred kings, supported by the
whole strength of the civil arm, assuming the very names of the Deity, invested
themselves with all which could excite the fear, or command the reverence of
the people, and produced a dismal chaos in science, literature, and elegance.

The history of nations shocks humanity. Kings were given the Jews in a curse;
and this incident to royalty has been entailed upon the world. Could all the
popes, kings, and emperors who have ruled mankind, become contemporary
inhabitants of a single city, like Sodom of old, it would contain scarce five
just men to save it from destruction!

The shades of Vandal night began at length to recede before the sun of
science, and a noble spirit of inquiry produced by a number of favorable
events. Navigation was loosed from confinement; its ancient landmarks were
disregarded, and near the close of the fifteenth century, America was
discovered.

More than an hundred years elapsed before the settlement of New England.
Difficulties so numerous and formidable were to be encountered, that some
extraordinary stimulus was necessary to succeed the attempt.

The same pliant credulity which had complimented the pope with the patrimony
of Saint Peter, readily transferred its homage to Henry 8th, king of England.
In a pompous mockery of divine jurisdiction, the sovereigns of that country
thought themselves authorized to establish a standard of religious faith and
worship, at the point of the sword, or even by the terrors of the faggot.
Persecution, with its usual effect, produced a party which dared to dissent
from the bigoted impositions of a Laud. Rather than relinquish the right of
opinion, our ancestors braved the dangers and hardships of a distant
wilderness. Anxious to secure their freedom, they early obtained a promise of
what was, then, considered the ultimate point of liberty, "all the rights,
immunities, and privileges of British subjects." In confidence of this
security, these American states continued, without much molestation, to
increase and prosper, until the peace of Paris, in 1763, terminated a war,
rendered, by the joint exertions of Britain and her colonies, most flattering
to the pride of that haughty nation. But in acquiring unsubstantial renown, she
accumulated an enormous load of debt; and among other desperate expedients for
lessening its weight, employed that of taxing her colonies.

It had long been a favorite folly of Europeans, to represent America vastly
superior to the old world in the whole face of nature, as inhabited by men
inferior to the rest of the species.

The capture of Cape-Breton was the first event by which we attracted foreign
respect. From that moment, Britain watched our rising greatness with a jealousy
which has never ceased to operate. When the loyalty of the colonies was at the
highest pitch; when we discovered the utmost promptitude in submitting not only
to the monopoly of our commerce, but to direct contribution; a British House of
Commons dared unanimously to decree, that they had a right to tax us without
our consent.

Such a flagrant violation of our charters could not fail to grieve and alarm.
Resentment electerized every independent mind. Massachusetts, as ready to
resist the encroachments of power as to comply with just demands, early
resented this unconstitutional resolve, by the vote of her representatives. But
in vain was the principle contested. In pursuance of this erroneous plan, an
ill-directed ministry thought it an opportunity to new-model our charters, and
reduce us to unconditional dependence. That vulture of rapacity, the infamous
stamp act, was fledged, and sent to devour us.

This was an important crisis in our national concerns. The imposition tamely
suffered, arbitrary exaction was established by precedent; our whole property
was completely at the disposal of parliament. Possessing not only the power,
but the most tempting inducement to rob us; every shilling they extorted from
the colonies, would have diminished the weight of their cumbrous national load.
What they plundered from industry with one hand, would have been thrown into
the coffers of extravagance with the other.

The spirited agreement of the colonies, to import no article of British
manufacture, while it existed, forced a king and parliament, who had
unrelentingly heard the clearest reasoning, and the most pathetic
remonstrances, to repeal the stamp act. Still British pride could not brook the
idea of acknowledging an error, even for the purposes of justice. They formally
edicted that "they had a right to bind us in all cases whatever." Heaping
injury upon insult, by quartering troops upon us, with evident intention of
compelling submission, under pretense that we, who had lately saved a British
army from destruction; who had defended ourselves in earliest infancy, needed
protection; more fully displayed their tyrannical designs.

This was but the dawn of oppression. Interested, profligate minions of power,
the worst of whom were our own treacherous governors, had the utmost success in
representing us as a rebellious mob of insurgents. Petitions, the
constitutional mode of seeking redress, were sometimes refused, and always
treated with neglect. Arbitrary institutions, unknown to the laws, were, in
many cases, substituted for trial by jury, the great security of life, liberty,
and property. Our commerce and fisheries were ruined. The most studied
cruelties were combined with the most degrading insults, by successive
ministers, who exhausted ingenuity to enslave the colonies, to deceive, and
almost ruin the whole nation which they governed. If the resistance of the
colonies, or the clamors of Britain, forced them to repeal the most obnoxious
statutes, others started forth, like the heads of the Hydra, more numerous and
terrific than the former. Treason and rebellion were the mildest names applied
to resistance. Britain could not believe, that when subjects in Europe had been
so long in habits of implicit obedience, Americans would dare to investigate
the principles of government. They thought us a servile race of peasants,
formed to bear the load of oppression, to kiss the rod of correction. But,
thank God, their base designs were unattempted, until the people had knowledge
to perceive, and courage to resist the infringement of their rights. A spirit
of inquiry and resistance animated the continent. Combustibles were collected
in every part of the colonies, which needed but a spark to produce a tremendous
blaze.

Previously to these troubles, Britain had been fondly revered as our nurturing
parent. But when, with more than infernal fury, she condemned us unheard;
Gnossius haec Rhadamanthus habet durissima regna; Castigatque auditque dolos.
Virgil


when, with the malevolence of a cruel step-dame, she would have forced us to
pay the debt of her extravagance, and at the same time deprived us of the means
of subsistence; when, with unprecedented barbarity, she let loose all the
savages of Europe and America she could hire, to lay waste our country, and
butcher the defenseless inhabitants; these infant states, unprovided with a
single article for defense but the bravery of their sons, unskilled in human
butchery, were compelled to resist force by force, or bow their necks to the
galling yoke of servitude.

So great a majority of her sons "never ceased to deserve well of their
country," it might savor of partiality in us, my friends, to arrogate peculiar
merit to this, and the neighboring towns, for the first resistance to British
arms. Delicacy might be wounded, should I enlarge in your encomium. But, were
none present, who fought on the auspicious nineteenth of April, '75, we, who
then had not entered the threshold of existence, who now reap the rich harvest
of their toils; would proclaim their patriotism, their valor, their success.
While memory shall fire the breast of the patriot with respect for the
illustrious dead, the tear of gratitude shall bedew their graves.

The difficulties which awaited America, when she suspended the liberty of both
worlds upon the issue of a combat with the giant of tyranny, are far beyond
description.

Need I call your recollection to the dismal scene when the bloody troops of
George 3d, dared to commence the work of civil carnage? when the heroic
soldiers, who opposed the invaders, were saluted with the insulting language,
"Disperse, you rebels, throw down your arms, and disperse"? Need I paint to you
the public stores destroyed, your houses rifled, your wives insulted, and wild
with terror, your friends, perhaps nearest relations, among the slain, and all
the complicate horrors of April, '75? No. You to whom memory, with easy effort,
has too frequently recalled these distressing events, and more especially those
of you, who have fought the battles, or labored in the councils of injured
America, will more deeply feel, on this occasion, than language can express.

Excuse me, if I have touched too sad a string. Our present enjoyments receive
an animated zest from comparison with former distresses. The defenders of their
country ought never to be forgotten.

Who can forget the heroes of our war? What heart but shudders to recollect the
dismal prospect presented America, at the commencement of hostilities? At that
period, when fear had almost induced despair, the great, the good, the
patriotic WASHINGTON, despising the charms of ease and affluence, when
incompatible with public happiness, rose in dignity and brightness, like the
early planet of evening, and led the way to a host of luminaries which shed
their irradiating beams upon our desponding country.

While we recollect, with gratitude, the services of our political savior, let
the long catalogue of statesmen and soldiers, of all, who assisted in
maintaining our rights, be handed as models to the latest ages.

No truth can be more obvious to common understanding, than that allegiance and
protection are reciprocal. When Britain not only withdrew her protection from
the colonies, but attempted to enslave them, we owed her nothing but
resentment. Impressed with a sense of the right, of the indispensable duty of
protecting our freedom; CONGRESS, laboring with every difficulty which could
beset a nation, in the face of the most formidable army which had ever appeared
on the continent, had virtue and courage to proclaim the INDEPENDENCE of
AMERICA! This was patriotism, this was firmness, this was wisdom, which
succeeding ages shall not cease to admire. The declaration of INDEPENDENCE
separated us from haughty Britain, and raised us from disjointed, dependent
colonies, to a respectable, united, independent nation. But for this
declaration, we should, now, be styled, his majesty's submissive subjects. The
narrow prejudices of one colony against another, would have remained in full
operation. Our country, populating beyond example, under the influence of the
federal constitution, would have continued, in a great measure, unexplored,
subject to discordant charters, and royal commissions. Our commerce, now
bounded only by the globe, would still have been confined to a single nation,
hampered by their own restrictions.

But why do I enlarge? How absurd, how degrading the idea, that such a free,
enlightened nation, should be subject to kings born and educated in a foreign
country; in total ignorance of the people, surrounded by sycophants, whose
business it is to cherish their vices, to flatter and deceive them; most
probably inheriting vice and folly, from a long line of profligate ancestors!
What can be more ignominious, than that such a nation, possessing a vast,
fertile continent, should be governed by sovereigns of petty islands, which
would be scarcely visible by the side of America? What more unnatural, than
that a system of SUNS should revolve in humble subservience around a planet?

The declaration of American independence was not an ebullition of faction or
enthusiasm. It was not the effect of sudden success. It was not the offspring
of intemperate ambition. But the cool, considerate resolution of the most
distinguished sages, echoed and supported by millions of freemen, to save
themselves and posterity from the furious jaws of oppression. Imagination, at
this cool period, cannot conceive the ardent patriotism, which sacrificed every
thing to the common cause. Destitute of national resources to supply, or
compensate an army; a formidable band of soldier-citizens was raised, and
supported by the influence of public spirit.

Britons throng our shores. Thunder from your navies. Embattle your own
machines, German hirelings, and Indian auxiliaries. Destroy churches, villages,
towns, all that is dear or sacred. Boast, threaten, issue manifestoes, display
all your fury. WASHINGTON surprises your Hessians in the midst of security,
heroic GATES, and his republican brothers, soon crop the withered laurels from
the brows of your favorite Burgoyne.

Notwithstanding these energetic exertions, thick and alarming clouds lowered
in the political horizon. Embarrassments innumerable sprung from poverty and
inexperience. Surrounded by refugees and foreign armies, our military
establishment extremely precarious, many were willing to comply with insidious
proposals of accommodation, calculated to divide, to conquer and enslave us.

Our allies in Europe, whatever motives actuated their assistance, receive our
grateful acknowledgments. The names of FAYETTE, de GRASS, ROCHAMBEAU,
VERGENNES, and many distinguished Frenchmen, will ever be dear to Americans.

Shall we recite the signal victories obtained over the enemy, both before, and
after the French alliance? Need we display the fortitude, patience and
intrepidity of our troops, until they obtained the object of our toils; until
they forced the enemy to acknowledge our INDEPENDENCE? Modesty forbids it. Fame
has filled the world with praises of our revolution. Admiring nations, already,
imitate the example.

Eight long years our country bled at every vein. Enormous was the national
expense. Inconceivable were the sufferings of our patriotic defenders. IMMORTAL
HEROES! Yours was the glory to protect your injured country; it was yours to
baffle an enemy, hitherto deemed irresistible. You fought in the cause of man.
If the war-worn soldier could not receive pecuniary compensation, his merit is
recorded in the heart of his countrymen, and we trust, on the tablets of
eternal justice.

But, my friends, expelling the enemy was only half our work. To erect a
government, which should secure the advantages, was an object equally
important. The defects of our old confederation were deeply felt. But, to
devise, and persuade the states to adopt a constitution, which should harmonize
the jarring interests, habits, and wishes of so many states, peopled from
different nations, was truly an Herculean task. It was attempted, formed, and
accepted. Three sta^^s have already been added to the federal constellation.
Its splendour becomes daily more bright and diffusive. The DARING EAGLE, fabled
to perch on the scepter of Jupiter, now actually wields the sovereignty of a
WORLD!

Immortal are the names of authors and orators, who, even amidst the dangers of
tyranny, have advocated humanity, have analyzed the principles of government.
But the glory of reducing their theories to practice, of combining the
essential rights of nature with the refinement, the security of civil
association, was reserved for America.

Government, among other nations, has been an enormous weight and restraint
upon the people. The American has diffused unexampled happiness through every
part of the empire. Some of the causes are obvious.

The old governments of the earth derive right and power from the same polluted
source, the grant of kings. These grants are founded upon usurpation, and
supported by a well-known principle in English law, that "kings can do no
wrong;" therefore, are not responsible. The American constitutions acknowledge
no authority superior to the laws. They rest upon very different principles,
that right is derived from heaven, the exercise of power from the people, and
law from the will of a majority. In the picture of Europe, we behold a few
hereditary robbers, in the most conspicuous point of light, engrossing the
honor and profit of governing; in the remotest back ground, we can just
discern the people, crouching under the weight of oppression, dependent on the
nobles even for subsistence. In America, government is maintained for the good
of the whole, by men who scorn to derive support from any source but their own
exertions; equality inspires a spirit of independence. In the former, the very
light of heaven is taxed, the vitals of society are consumed, to support
placemen, pensioners and superfluous officers, whose interest it is, to darken
and brutalize mankind. In the latter, taxes are scarcely felt, and cheerfully
bestowed, because devoted, with strictest economy, to support a government
which protects the liberties, and enlightens the minds of the people. In short,
the one, founded in ignorance, or imposed by conquest, are supported by force
and fraud; the other, constructed by enlightened experience in candid
discussion, rests upon the firm basis of common interest, and general
affection. Even the celebrated constitution of Great Britain is a mere
patch-work of shreds and remnants, extorted from the weakness, or granted by
the affected liberality of kings.

A peculiar and important blessing of the American revolution, is religious
toleration. By abolishing the unnatural connection of civil and ecclesiastical
tyranny, it has left religion to the direction of conscience.

But why enumerate the advantages of governments, which concentrate the wisdom
of ages, which command the admiration and applause of every impartial statesman
in the world? Why describe the evils of despotism, which have received most
pointed execrations from the ablest pens? To realize the curses which bedew
Europe with the tears of its inhabitants, and the blessings which have revived
the golden age in the new; survey Europe, then turn and behold America. On
these subjects, words cannot express my emotions. I can only entreat you to
think, to feel for yourselves.

My zeal, I fear, has already carried the comparison beyond your patience. But
should any heart beat one pulse more with genuine detestation of tyranny, with
grateful exultation that France has broken her fetters, or with love to the
constitutions of our country; the speaker has well employed his time; the
audience, he hopes, will not regret their attention.

Notwithstanding the excellency of our governments, although the legislative,
judiciary, and executive branches are accurately separated, and so nicely
balanced as to guard the encroachments of each other, which best defines a free
constitution; we have an easy, peaceful mode of revision; while other nations
must wade to reformation through seas of blood.

Remote from the vortex of European politics, where the slightest causes may
involve whole nations in war; at peace with all the world, possessing every
article of necessity, utility, or elegance, the UNITED STATES have attained an
unparalleled degree of prosperity and happiness. A numerous body of enlightened
farmers cultivate an extensive continent of their own productive soil, the most
healthy, independent and happy employment of man, and constitute the pillars of
our republic. Although a few of the most insignificant beings in creation have
affected to despise agriculture, a work which has employed the most respected
characters of ancient and modern times; and to deride the mechanic arts, so
useful, so honorable in society, arts, which have engaged the first geniuses of
the world; Americans know their value, they know that a man's family or
employment should confer neither honor nor disgrace; that every honest,
industrious citizen deserves protection and respect. Literature is generally
diffused. The arts and sciences furnish a continual supply for the
gratification of taste, and the support of society. In short, the American
revolution has produced effects equalled only in fiction.

The unprecedented ravages of war, in Europe, afford the most striking lessons
of instruction, at the same time, they administer to our wealth, beyond
calculation, by furnishing a market for every article of produce.

Unhappily, the most perfect works of man are fraught with error, and subject
to abuse. Governments too frequently imbibe, at an early period, the seeds of
corruption, which incorporate with their constitutions, grow with their age,
and at length, effect their ruin. Luxury has destroyed the most renowned
empires of time. Faction, the fruitful mother of evil; faction, the peculiar
curse of republics, has already endangered our rising greatness.

To avoid these elements of destruction, let it ever be remembered, that a free
government cannot long exist, unsupported by a great degree of knowledge and
virtue. Not to mention the other important advantages of morality and learning,
they have uniformly been found foes to tyranny. Many who credulously dread the
sacrifice of our liberty by open attack, who tremble with apprehension, that a
short-lived treaty may prove injurious; or that an unprincipled magistrate may,
hereafter, preside at the helm of government; do not properly consider, that
any evils, which can proceed from such sources, must be temporary and trivial,
compared with those which must ensue from general ignorance, or depravity of
morals. When virtue and information are predominant in a nation, should any
tyrant attempt usurpation, his life would soon be immolated to public
vengeance. On the contrary, a people, prepared, by degeneracy, for a master,
will submit to the sword of a conqueror, or be sold to the highest bidder. The
history of the Jews, Persians, Greeks, Romans, of every considerable nation,
ancient or modern, fully evinces the necessity of public virtue, to the
preservation of liberty; the ruinous tendency of vice. Respect, then, and
support institutions of religion. Secure freedom of the press; liberty, but not
licentiousness of opinion. Patronize with liberal care seminaries of learning.
Citizens in ignorance will be liable to vice, to superstition, to every error
and imposition. Enlighten their minds, they will rise, in a great degree,
superior to prejudice; they will comprehend, revere, obey the laws. Considering
our liability to war, and that their country looks to them for protection, the
militia will preserve their regard to discipline, be ever ready to support the
constituted authorities, and continue the firm guardians of our rights. Resist
the torrent of foreign vice and folly, continually pouring into our seaports.
Their servility, their parade, their vanity, their corruption, may destroy the
simplicity of our manners, create artificial wants, and at length, eradicate
republican sentiments. Let us preserve real independence; establish a standard
of taste, of opinion, of action, purely our own. Many who scorn to barter their
liberty for gold, would thoughtlessly lose it by servile imitation. Avoid,
then, undue foreign influence. We are neither French nor Englishmen, but glory
in the name of AMERICANS. Guard against the tumults of faction, the false
colors of party. Value and preserve purity in elections. Foster a
well-regulated spirit of enterprise, of industry, of economy, and every virtue.
Thus, AMERICANS! may we transmit our free constitutions, unimpaired, to
posterity; thus perpetuate our present enjoyments.

Although the breath of calumny would gladly tarnish the brightest reputations,
our governments have been administered, almost without exception, by men of the
greatest wisdom, integrity and firmness; men who would lose every thing dear,
and gain nothing but infamy, should they betray their constituents.

What are the characters and designs of men, who tell us the contrary, who
abuse the liberty of the press, and the most worthy officers of the people? Who
are these flaming patriots that insult credulity, excite continual uneasiness,
and fill the minds of the people with unreasonable jealousy? Who tell us that
the PRESIDENT is a tyrant, opposed to independence, bribed by British gold, and
other lies, equally gross and senseless? They are a few disappointed, ambitious
demagogues, who attempt to drown the pilot, and sink the federal ship, to
repair their ruined fortunes by the wreck. Where were these new-made champions
of liberty, when Washington inhabited the camp, and braved the foes of his
country? Where will their memory be when his shall be almost adored? They
sprung from faction, are supported by vice and ignorance, and not even their
crimes can save them from oblivion. These are not the friends of the people.
Far from protecting your rights, they would sooner trample on your necks. It
would delight their aspiring pride to see creation the footstool of their
grandeur. Do they discover the cool, dispassionate temper of genuine
republicans? No. They excite the same ferment which disappointed profligates
would always raise. They are actuated by the same lawless ambition, with which
Robespierre bawled liberty in France, until he had desolated that country with
crimes and cruelties beyond conception. They burn with the same malignant envy
at your prosperity, which led the first enemy of man to mar the enjoyments of
Paradise. These observations apply equally to unprincipled, factious men, of
whatever party. They were not intended, as some have imagined, to describe
anti-federalists in principle.
Let us not be duped by men, who need only be known, to become detestable.
Guard with more than vestal care, the exercise of power, but let not
ingratitude mark your vigilance.

The advantages of the American revolution cannot be compressed within the
compass of a few pages. Its effects are not confined to one age or country. The
human mind has received a stimulus, and attained an expansion, which will
extend its influence beyond calculation.

Frenchmen, the most gallant, powerful and philosophical nation in Europe, glow
with the flame first kindled in this commonwealth. The spark excited in
Lexington and Concord, has already consumed the moss-grown, Gothic structure of
arbitrary government in France, and melted the useless, ostentatious statues of
kings, images of saints, and the richest crown in Europe, to purchase liberty
and government, for six and twenty millions of mankind. The same Herculean
spirit of independence, which, in the American cradle, strangled the two
serpents, British tyranny, and domestic faction, is now belaboring the slaves
of despotism with the heaviest blows of republican manhood. But now, from the
mountains of Italy, we heard the reverberated blows.

To celebrate the magnanimity, to mention the amazing resources of genius,
courage and property, which France has discovered during the contest, is far
beyond our power. We hope her excesses, the effect of former oppression, will
totally subside, that her new constitution has established liberty upon law and
reason.

The dismemberment of Poland, the infamous treaty of Pilnitz, with the
subsequent accession of the other powers to the combination in the outrageous
attempt to subjugate an independent nation, have fully displayed the fury, the
madness of despots.

While tyrants are making such desperate efforts to suppress a spirit of
inquiry and freedom, fatal to their existence, it is peculiarly incumbent upon
the friends of liberty, to advocate her cause. Survey the globe. Asia, Africa,
Europe, with few exceptions, the West Indies, and South America, glimmer in
political twilight, or grope in total darkness. FRANCE and the UNITED STATES, a
great political ATLAS, support on their shoulders the REPUBLICAN WORLD.

With confidence we predict, that the mad struggles of despotism will exhaust
its strength. All hail! approaching revolutions! AMERICANS! we have lived ages
in a day! Huge pyramids of lawless power, the work of centuries, have fallen in
a moment. With fondest ardor we indulge our wishes, that nations shall yet see
the pride, the weakness, and the profligacy of their governors. Fired by the
bright examples of France and America, may kingdom rise indignant after
kingdom, burst their chains, and level every fabric of tyranny with the dust.
We cordially supplicate the SUPREME DIRECTOR OF EVENTS, to enlarge the empire
of enlightened reason and pure religion, until virtue, knowledge, liberty and
happiness shall become extensive as the globe, permanent as time. But, whatever
issue awaits the present European contest, whatever may be the fate of other
nations, continue, GREAT AUTHOR OF GOOD, the prosperity of AMERICA, perpetuate
our peace, happiness, INDEPENDENCE!


