OFFICIAL LETTERS TO THE HONORABLE AMERICAN CONGRESS, Written, during the WAR
between the UNITED COLONIES AND GREAT BRITAIN, BY HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE
WASHINGTON, COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE CONTINENTAL FORCES: NOW PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES.

Copied, by Special Permission, from the Original Papers preserved in the
Office of the Secretary of State, Philadelphia.

VOL. I.

NEW YORK: PRINTED AND SOLD BY SAMUEL CAMPBELL, No. 124, PEARL-STREET.
M,DCC,XCVI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
RESPECTING the source from which the following letters have been drawn, and
the grounds on which the reader is expected to rest his belief of their
authenticity, it may be sufficient to inform him (and, for the truth of the
assertion, to appeal to His Excellency Thomas Pinckney, the American Minister
Plenipotentiary) that permission was obtained from the proper authority, to
transcribe, from the original papers preserved in the Secretary of State's
office in Philadelphia, these and sundry other authentic documents relating to
the contest between the colonies and the mother country, viz. Letters from the
Commanders of the continental forces, and other persons employed in the public
service, -- intercepted letters from British Officers and other adherents to
the royal cause, -- Communications from the Governors, Conventions, and
Committees of the several American States, -- Dispatches from Agents and
Commissioners, -- Instructions, -- Reports of Committees of Congress, -- parts
of the Secret Journals hitherto unpublished, -- and various other pieces
elucidative of the events which led to and finally established American
Independence.

That permission was granted early in the year 1792, and immediate advantage
was taken of the indulgence; though, from various circumstances, of little
consequence to the reader to know, the publication has been so long delayed.
Even at this late period, the editor contents himself with laying before the
public but a part of the collection, -- intending, if these volumes meet with a
favorable reception, to continue the publication, and present his readers with
a variety of interesting pieces penned by the leaders and principal agents in
the American Revolution, and tending to throw light on many important
transactions that have hitherto been either enveloped in total darkness, or, at
best but obscurely perceived and imperfectly understood.

Some parts of these letters may perhaps appear too full of minutiae to
interest that class of readers, who, unaccustomed to enter into the
investigation of causes or consequences, delight only in recitals of battles,
sieges, or other striking occurrences, which constitute the more prominent
features of history. But to the reasoning philosophic reader, who wishes to
explore the secret springs of action, -- to trace events to their remote and
latent causes, -- to discover and examine the subordinate and collateral
circumstances (often trifling in appearance, and generally overlooked by the
vulgar eye) which, in the struggles of contending nations, give a preponderancy
to the one or the other scale, -- those minute details will, it is presumed, be
far from unacceptable, as furnishing him with that species of information, upon
which alone he can venture to ground a decisive opinion, and which he might
elsewhere seek in vain.

The enclosures, frequently referred to in these volumes, would still further
contribute to set every circumstance in a clearer and stronger light; and it
was the editor's original intention that they should have accompanied the
letters to which they respectively belong. Obstacles however, at present
insurmountable, stand in the way of their immediate publication: but, when
these are removed, the papers alluded to shall make their appearance in form of
an Appendix, -- such parts of them at least, as are of a curious and
interesting nature.

Meanwhile the reader will observe that it was deemed as yet premature to
publish certain passages of these letters: some omissions have of course taken
place, which are every where pointed out by asterisks, and which will be
supplied at a proper season, probably not far distant. -- On the other hand, in
perhaps half a dozen instances, a single word has been hazarded on conjecture,
to fill up a chasm, where either the original or the copy happened to be torn
or defaced; in which cases the supplemental words are enclosed within crotchets
and printed in Italic. -- A few entire letters, moreover, as appears by
reference made to them in subsequent ones, are here wanted to complete the
chain of correspondence. These the editor can give no account of, as the
originals appear to have been lost from the files of offi^^^.

About a dozen letters, written by the general's secretary, Mr. R. H. Harrison.
, are here inserted, -- a few from the general himself to the board of war, or
committee of Congress, -- one to the president of the New York Convention, and
one to R. Morris, esquire, in the department of finance. These it was thought
proper to omit: nor did it seem worth while, on account of a few exceptions, to
make any alteration in the general title of the book.

OFFICIAL LETTERS FROM GENERAL WASHINGTON TO CONGRESS.
To the Honorable Members of the Continental Congress at Philadelphia.
New York, June 24, 1775. GENTLEMEN,
THE rain on friday afternoon and saturday, -- the advice of several gentlemen
of the Jerseys and this city, by no means to cross Hudson's river at the lower
ferry, -- and some other circumstances too trivial to mention, prevented my
arrival at this place, until the afternoon of this day.

In the morning, after giving general Schuyler such orders, as, from the result
of my inquiry into matters here, appear necessary, I shall set out on my
journey to the camp at Boston, and shall proceed with all the dispatch in my
power. Powder is so essential an article, that I cannot help again repeating
the necessity of a supply. The camp at Boston, from the best account I can get
from thence, is but very poorly supplied. At this place, they have scarce any.
How they are provided at general Wooster's camp, I have not been able yet to
learn.

Governor Tryon is arrived, and general Schuyler directed to advise you of the
line of conduct he moves in. I fear it will not be very favorable to the
American cause.

I have only to add, that I am, with great respect and regard, gentlemen, your
most obedient and obliged humble servant.

G. WASHINGTON,

To-JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire, President of Congress.
New York, sunday, 24 th June, 1775, 5 o'clock, P. M. SIR,
UPON my arrival hdere this afternoon, I was informed that an express was in
town, from the provincial camp in Massachusetts Bay; and having seen, among the
papers in his possession, a letter directed to you as president of the
Congress, I have taken the liberty to open it. I was induced to take that
li^erty, by several gentlemen of New York, who were anxious to know the
particulars of the affair of the seventeenth instant, and agreeable to the
orders of many members of the Congress, who judged it necessary that I should
avail myself of the best information in the course of my journey.

You will find, sir, by that letter, a great want of powder in the provincial
army, which I sincerely hope the Congress will supply as speedily and as
effectually as in their power. One thousand pounds in weight were sent to the
camp at Cambridge, three days ago, from this city; which has left this place
almost destitute of that necessary article: there being at this time from the
best information, not more than four barrels of powder in the city of New York.

I propose to set off for the provincial camp tomorrow, and will use all
possible dispatch to join the forces there.

Please to make my compliments to the gentlemen of the Congress; and believe me
to be, sir, your obliged friend and humble servant.

G. W.
[N. B. All the subsequent letters, not otherwise expressly directed, are
addressed to the President of Congress for the time being.]



Camp, at Cambridge, July 10, 1775. SIR,
I ARRIVED safe at this place on the third instant, after a journey attended
with a good deal of fatigue, and retarded by necessary attentions to the
successive civilities which accompanied me on my whole route.

Upon my arrival, I immediately visited the several posts occupied by our
troops; and, as soon as the weather permitted, reconnoitred those of the enemy.
I found the latter strongly entrenched on Bunker's hill, about a mile from
Charlestown, and advanced about half a mile from the place of the late action,
with their centries extended about one hundred and fifty yards on this side of
the narrowest part of the neck leading from this place to Charlestown. Three
floating batteries lie in Mystic river near their camp, and one twenty-gun
ship below the ferry place between Boston and Charlestown. They have also a
battery on Copse-hill, on the Boston side, which much annoyed our troops in the
late attack. Upon the neck, they have also deeply entrenched and fortified.
Their advanced guards, till last saturday morning, occupied Brown's houses,
about a mile from Roxbury meeting house, and twenty rod^ from their lines: but,
at that time, a party from general Thomas's camp surprised the guard, drove
them in, and burned the houses. The bulk of their army, commanded by general
How, lies on Bunker's-hill, and the remainder on Roxbury-neck, except the
light horse, and a few men in the town of Boston.

On our side, we have thrown up intrenchments on Winter and Prospect hills, --
the enemy's camp in full view, at the distance of a little more than a mile.
Such intermediate points as would admit a landing, I have since my arrival
taken care to strengthen, down to Sewal's farm, where a strong intrenchment has
been thrown up. At Roxbury, general Thomas has thrown up a strong work on the
hill, about two hundred yards above the meeting house; which, with the
brokenness of the ground, and a great number of rocks, has made that pass very
secure. The troops raised in New Hampshire, with a regiment from Rhode Island,
occupy Winter-hill; a part of those from Connecticut, under general Putnam, are
on Prospect-hill. The troops in this town are entirely of the Massachusetts:
the remainder of the Rhode-Island-men are at Sewal's farm. Two regiments of
Connecticut, and nine of the Massachusetts, are at Roxbury. The residue of the
army, to the number of about seven hundred, are posted in several small towns
along the coast, to prevent the depredations of the enemy.

Upon the whole, I think myself authorized to say, that, considering the great
extent of line and the nature of the ground, we are as well secured, as could
be expected in so short a time, and under the disadvantages we labor. These
consist in a want of engineers, to construct proper works and direct the men, a
wan^ of tools, and a sufficient number of men to man the works in case of an
attack. You will observe, by the proceedings of the council of war which I have
the honor to enclose, that it is our unanimous opinion to hold and defend these
works as long as possible. The discouragement it would give the men, and its
contrary effects on the ministerial troops, thus to abandon our encampment in
their face, formed with so much labor, -- added to the certain destruction of a
considerable and valuable extent of country, and our uncertainty of finding a
place in all respects so capable of making a stand, -- are leading reasons for
this determination. At the same time we are very sensible of the difficulties
which attend the defense of lines of so great extent, and the dangers which may
ensue from such a division of the army.

My earnest wish to comply with the instructions of the Congress, in making an
early and complete return of the state of the army, has led into an involuntary
delay in addressing you; which has given me much concern. Having given orders
for this purpose immediately on my arrival, -- and unapprised of the imperfect
obedience which had been paid to those of the like nature from general Ward, I
was led from day to day to expect they would come in, and therefore detained
the messenger. -- They are not now so complete as I could wish: but much
allowance is to be made for inexperience in forms, and a liberty which had been
taken (not given) on this subject. These reasons, I flatter myself, will no
longer exist; and, of consequence, more regularity and exactness will in future
prevail. This, with a necessary attention to the lines, the movements of the
ministerial troops, and our immediate security, must be my apology, which I beg
you to lay before Congress with the utmost duty and respect.

We labor under great disadvantages for want of tents; for, though they have
been helped out by a collection of now useless sails from the seaport towns,
the number is far short of our necessities. The colleges and houses of this
town are necessarily occupied by the troops; which affords another reason for
keeping our present situation. But I most sincerely wish the whole army was
properly provided to take the field, as I am well assured that (besides greater
expedition and activity in case of alarm) it would highly conduce to health and
discipline. As materials are not to be had here, I would beg leave to recommend
the procuring a farther supply from Philadelphia as soon as possible.

I should be extremely deficient in gratitude as well as justice, if I did not
take the first opportunity to acknowledge the readiness and attention, which
the provincial Congress and different committees have shown, to make every
thing as convenient and agreeable as possible. But there is a vital and
inherent principle of delay, incompatible with military service, in transacting
business through such numerous and different channels. I esteem it therefore my
duty to represent the inconvenience which must unavoidably ensue from a
dependence on a number of persons for supplies; and submit it to the
consideration of Congress, whether the public service will not be best promoted
by appointing a commissary-general for these purposes. We have a striking
instance of the preference of such a mode, in the establishment of Connecticut,
as their troops are extremely well provided under the direction of Mr.
Trumbull, and he has at different times assisted others with various articles.
Should my sentiments happily coincide with those of your honors on this
subject, I beg leave to recommend Mr. Trumbull as a very proper person for this
department. In the arrangement of troops collected under such circumstances,
and upon the spur of immediate necessity, several appointments are omitted,
which appear to be indispensably necessary for the good government of the army
-- particularly a quarter-master-general, a commissary of musters, and a
commissary of artillery. These I must earnestly recommend to the notice and
provision of Congress.

I find myself already much embarrassed, for want of a military chest. These
embarrassments will increase every day: I must therefore request that money may
be forwarded as soon as possible. The want of this most necessary article will
(I fear) produce great inconveniences, if not prevented by an early attention.
I find the army in general, and the troops raised in Massachusetts in
particular, very deficient in necessary clothing. -- Upon enquiry, there
appears no probability of obtaining any supplies in this quarter; and, on the
best consideration of this matter I am able to form, I am of opinion that a
number of hunting shirts (not less than ten thousand) would in a great degree
remove this difficulty, in the cheapest and quickest manner. I know nothing, in
a speculative view, more trivial, yet, if put in practice, would have a happier
tendency to unite the men, and abolish those provincial distinctions which lead
to jealousy and dissatisfaction.

In a forme^ part of this letter, I mentioned the want of engineers. I can
hardly express the disappointment I have experienced on this subject, -- the
skill of those we have being very imperfect, and confined to the mere manual
exercise of cannon; whereas the war in which we are engaged requires a
knowledge, comprehending the duties of the field, and fortification. If any
persons thus qualified are to be found in the southern colonies, it would be of
great public service to forward them with all expedition.

Upon the article of ammunition, I must re-echo my former complaints on this
subject. We are so exceedingly destitute, that our artillery will be of little
use, without a supply both large and seasonable. What we have must be reserved
for the smallarms, and that managed with the utmost frugality. * * *

The state of the army you will find ascertained with tolerable precision in
the returns which accompany this letter. Upon finding the number of men to fall
so far short of the establishment, and below all expectation, I immediately
called a council of the general officers, whose opinion (as to the mode of
filling up the regiments, and providing for the pres^^t exigency) I have the
honor of enclosing, together with the best judgment we are able to form of the
ministerial troops. From the number of boys, deserters, and negroes, that have
been enlisted in the troops of this province, I entertain some doubts whether
the number required can be raised here: and all the general officers agree that
no dependence can be put upon the militia, for a continuance in camp, or
regularity and discipline during the short time they may stay. This unhappy and
devoted province has been so long in a state of anarchy, and the yoke * * * * *
been laid so heavily on it, that great allowances are to be made for troops
raised under such circumstances. The deficiency of numbers, discipline, and
stores, can only lead to this conclusion -- that their spirit has exceeded
their strength. But at the same time I would humbly submit to the consideration
of Congress the propriety of making some further provision of men from the
other colonies. If these regiments should be completed to their establishment,
the dismission of those unfit for duty on account of their age and character
would occasion a considerable reduction; and, at all events, they have been
enlisted upon such terms, that they may be disbanded when other troops arrive.
But should my apprehensions be realised, and the regiments here not filled up,
the public cause would suffer by an absolute dependence upon so doubtful an
event, unless some provision is made against such a disappointment.

It requires no military skill, to judge of the difficulty of introducing
proper discipline and subordination into an army, while we have the enemy in
view, and are in daily expectation of an attack: but it is of so much
importance, that every effort will be made, which time and circumstances will
admit. In the mean time, I have a sincere pleasure in observing that there are
materials for a good army, -- a great number of able-bodied men, active,
zealous in the cause, and of unquestionable courage.

I am now, sir, to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of the twenty-eighth,
enclosing the resolutions of Congress, of the twenty-seventh ultimo, and a copy
of a letter from the committee of Albany; to all which I shall pay due
attention.

Generals Gates and Sullivan have both arrived in good health.

My best abilities are at all times devoted to the service of my country; but I
feel the weight, importance, and variety of my present duties too sensibly, not
to wish a more immediate and frequent communication with the Congress. I fear
it may often happen in the course of our present operations, that I shall need
that assistance and direction from them, which time and distance will not allow
me to receive.

Since writing the above, I have also to acknowledge your favor of the fourth
instant by Fessenden, and the receipt of the commissions and articles of war.
The former are yet eight hundred short of the number required. This deficiency
you will please to supply as soon as you conveniently can. Among the other
returns, I have also sent one of our killed, wounded, and missing, in the late
action: but have been able to procure no certain account of the loss of the
ministerial troops. My best intelligence fixes it at about five hundred killed,
and six or seven hundred wounded: but it is no more than conjecture, -- the
utmost pains being taken on their side to conceal it.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Having ordered the commanding officer to give me the earliest
intelligence of every motion of the enemy by land or water, discernible from
the heights of his camp. I this instant, as I was closing my letter, received
the enclosed from the brigade-major. The design of this maneuver I know not:
-- perhaps it may be to make a descent somewhere along the coast: -- it may be
for New York; or it may be practiced as a deception on us. I thought it not
improper however to mention the matter to you: -- I have done the same to the
commanding officer at New York; and I shall let it be known to the committee of
safety here, so that intelligenoe may be communicated, as they shall think
best, along the seacoast of this government.



Camp, at Cambridge, July 14, 1775. SIR,
SINCE I did myself the honor of addressing you on the tenth instant, nothing
material has happened in the camp. From some authentic and later advices of the
state of the ministerial troops, and the great inconvenience of calling in the
militia in the midst of harvest, I have been induced for the present to wave
it: -- but in the mean time recruiting parties have been sent throughout this
province, to fill up the regiments to the establishment of the provincial
Congress. At the same time that I received these advices, I also obtained a
list of the officers of the enemy killed and wounded in the late battle at
Charlestown, which I take this opportunity to enclose.

The great scarcity of fresh provisions in their army has led me to take every
precaution to prevent a supply: for this purpose, I have ordered all the cattle
and sheep to be drawn from the low grounds and farms within their reach. A
detachment from general Thomas's camp, on wednesday night, went over to
Long Island, and brought from thence twenty cattle and a number of sheep, with
about fifteen laborers who had been put on by a Mr. Ray Thomas, to cut the hay,
etc. By some accident they omitted burning the hay, and returned the next day
at noon to complete it; which they effected, amidst the firing of the shipping,
with the loss of one man killed and another wounded.

Last evening also a party of the Connecticut men strolled down on the marsh at
Roxbury, and fired upon a centry; which drew on a heavy fire from the enemy's
lines and floating batteries, but attended with no other effect than the loss
of one killed by a shot from the enemy's lines. In the man time, we are, on
both sides, continuing our works: but there has been no other movement than
what I have noticed above. I shall endeavor to give a regular and particular
account of all transactions as they occur, which you will please to lay before
the honorable Congress. I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Camp, at Cambridge, July 21, 1775. SIR,
SINCE I did myself the honor of addressing you the fourteenth instant, I have
received advice from governor Trumbull, that the assembly of Connecticut had
voted, and that they are now raising, two regiments of seven hundred men each,
in consequence of an application from the provincial Congress of
Massachusetts Bay. The Rhode Island assembly has also made an augmentation for
this purpose. These reinforcements, with the riflemen who are daily expected,
and such recruits as may come in to fill up the regiments here, will, I
apprehend, compose an army sufficiently strong to oppose any force which may be
brought against us at present. I am very sensible that the heavy expense,
necessarily attendant upon this campaign, will call for the utmost frugality
and care, and would therefore, if possible, avoid enlisting one unnecessary
man. As this is the first certain account of the destination of these
new-raised troops, I thought proper to communicate my sentiments as early as
possible, lest the Congress should act upon my letter of the tenth, and raise
troops in the southern colonies, which, in my present judgment may be dispensed
with.

For these eight days past there have been no movements in either camp, of any
consequence. On our side we have continued the works without any intermission;
and they are now so far advanced as to leave us little to apprehend on that
score. On the side of the enemy they have also been very industrious in
finishing their lines, both on Bunker's-hill and Roxburyneck. In this interval
also, their transports have arrived from New York; and they have been employed
in landing and stationing their men. I have been able to collect no certain
account of the numbers arrived: but the enclosed letter, wrote (though not
signed) by Mr. Sheriff Lee, and delivered me by captain Darby (who went express
with an account of the Lexington battle) will enable us to form a pretty
accurate judgment. The increase of tents and men in the town of Boston is very
obvious; but all my accounts from thence agree that there is a great mortality,
occasioned by the want of vegetables and fresh meat; and that their loss in the
late battle at Charlestown (from the few recoveries of their wounded) is
greater than at first supposed. The condition of the inhabitants detained in
Boston is very distressing: they are equally destitute of the comfort of fresh
provisions; and many of them are so reduced in their circumstances, as to be
unable to supply themselves with salt. Such fish as the soldiery leave, is
their principal support. Added to all this, such suspicion and jealousy
prevails, that they can scarcely speak, or even look, without exposing
themselves to some species of military execution.

I have not been able, from any intelligence I have received, to form any
certain judgment of the future operations of the enemy. Sometimes I have
suspected an intention of detaching a part of their army to some part of the
coast, as they have been building a number of flat-bottomed boats, capable of
holding two hundred men each. But, from their works, and the language held at
Boston, there is reason to think they expect the attack from us, and are
principally engaged in preparing themselves against it. I have ordered all the
whale-boats along the coast to be collected: and some of them are employed
every night to watch the motions of the enemy by water, so as to guard as much
as possible against any surprise. * * *

Next to the more immediate and pressing duties of putting our lines in as
secure a state as possible, attending to the movements of the enemy, and
gaining intelligence -- my great concern is to establish order, regularity, and
discipline, without which, our numbers would embarrass us, and, in case of
action, general confusion must infallibly ensue. In order to this, I propose to
divide the army into three divisions: -- at the head of each, will be a general
officer: -- these divisions to be again subdivided into brigades, under their
respective brigadiers. But the difficulty arising from the arrangement of the
general officers, and waiting the further proceedings of the Congress on this
subject, has much retarded my progress in this most necessary work. I should be
very happy to receive their final commands, as any determination would enable
me to proceed in my plan. * * *

In addition to the officers mentioned in mine of the tenth instant, I would
humbly propose that some provision should be made for a judge-advocate, and
provost-marshal. The necessity of the first appointment was so great, that I
was obliged to nominate Mr. Tudor, who was well recommended to me, and now
executes the office under the expectation of receiving captain's pay -- an
allowance (in my opinion) scarcely adequate to the service, in new-raised
troops, where there are court-martials every day. However, as that is the
proportion in the regular army, and he is contented, there will be no necessity
of an addition.

I must also renew my request as to money, and the appointment of a paymaster.
I have forebore urging matters of this nature, from my knowledge of the many
important concerns which engage the attention of the Congress; but as I find my
difficulties thicken every day, I make no doubt, suitable regard will be paid
to a necessity of this kind. The inconvenience of borrowing such sums as are
constantly requisite must be too plain for me to enlarge upon, and is a
situation from which I should be very happy to be relieved.

Upon the experience I have had, and the best consideration of the appointment
of the several officers of commissary-general, muster-master general, quarter
master-general, pay master-general, and commissary of artillery, I am clearly
of opinion that they not only conduce to order, dispatch and discipline, but
that it is a measure of economy. The delay, the waste, and unpunishable
neglect of duty, arising from these officers being in commission of several
hands, evidently show that the public expense must be finally enhanced. I have
experienced the want of these officers, in completing the returns of men,
ammunition, and stores. The latter are yet imperfect, from the number of hands
in which they are dispersed. I have enclosed the last weekly return, which is
more accurate than the former; and hope in a little time we shall be perfectly
regular in this as well as several other necessary branches of duty.

I have made inquiry into the establishment of the hospital, and find it in a
very unsettled condition. There is no principal director, nor any subordination
among the surgeons: of consequence, disputes and contentions have arisen, and
must continue until it is reduced to some system. I could wish it was
immediately taken into consideration, as the lives and health of both officers
and men so much depend upon a due regulation of this department. I have been
particularly attentive to the least symptoms of the smallpox; and hitherto we
have been so fortunate as to have every person removed so soon, as not only to
prevent any communication, but any alarm or apprehension it might give in the
camp. We shall continue the utmost vigilance against this most dangerous enemy.

In an army properly organized, there are sundry offices of an inferior kind,
such as waggon-master, master carpenter, etc. but I doubt whether my powers are
sufficiently extensive for such appointments. If it is thought proper to repose
such a trust in me, I shall be governed, in the discharge of it, by a strict
regard to economy and the public interest.

My instructions from the honorable Congress direct that no troops are to be
disbanded without their express direction, nor to be recruited to more than
double the number of the enemy. Upon this subject I beg leave to represent,
that unless the regiments in this province are more successful in recruiting
than I have reason to expect, a reduction of some of them will be highly
necessary, as the public is put to the whole expense of an establishment of
officers, while the real strength of the regiment (which consists in the rank
and file) is defective. In case of such a reduction, doubtless some of the
privates and all the officers would return home: but many of the former would
go into the remaining regiments; and, having had some experience, would fill
them up with useful men. I so plainly perceive the expense of this campaign
will exceed any calculation hitherto made, that I am particularly anxious to
strike off every unnecessary charge. You will therefore, Sir, be pleased to
favor me with explicit directions from the Congress, on the mode of this
reduction (if it shall appear necessary) that no time may be lost when such
necessity appears.

Yesterday we had an account that the light-house was on fire: -- by whom, and
under what orders, I have not yet learned; but we have reason to believe it has
been done by our irregulars.

You will please to present me to the Congress, with the utmost duty and
respect; and believe me to be, etc.

G. W.
P. S. Captain Darby's stay in England was so short, that he brings no other
information, than what the enclosed letter, and the newspapers which will
accompany this, contain. General Gage's dispatches had not arrived; and the
ministry affected to disbelieve the whole account, treating it as a fiction, or
at most, an affair of little consequence. -- The fall of stocks was very
considerable.



Camp, at Cambridge, July 21, 1775, 5 o'clock, P. M. SIR,
SINCE closing the letters which accompany this, I have received an account of
the destruction of the light-house; a copy of which I have the honor to enclose
-- and of again assuring you that I am, with great respect, etc.

G. W.
P. S. I have also received a more authentic account of the loss of the enemy
in the late battle, than any yet received. Dr. Winship, who lodged in the same
house with an officer of the marines, assures me they had exactly one thousand
and forty-three killed and wounded -- of whom three hundred fell on the field,
or died within a few hours. Many of the wounded are since dead.



Camp, at Cambridge, July 27. 1775. SIR,
NOTHING material has occurred in either camp, since I had the honor of
addressing you on the twenty-first instant by express: but on tuesday three
men-of-war and nine transports sailed out of Boston harbor, and stood a course
about E. S. E.

One Groves, who came out of Boston the same evening informed the officer at
one of the outposts, that the transports had on board six hundred men, and were
bound to Block-Island, Fisher's-Island, and Long Island, to plunder them, and
bring off what cattle they may find. The fellow returned again into Boston
under such suspicious circumstances, that it has led me to doubt the truth of
his intelligence.

A deserter, who came in afterward, informs me that it was given out in their
camp, that they were either gone for Indians or fresh provisions: and that each
transport had but twenty men on board. Upon this intelligence, I immediately
wrote to governor Cook of Rhode Island, and to general Wooster, that they
might take proper precautions for removing the cattle off those islands and the
coasts, and to prevent any surprise. As we are confirmed, by every account, in
the scarcity of fresh provisions in the enemy's camp, and particularly by this
deserter it is very probable this voyage may be only intended for a supply: but
as it may possibly be otherwise, I thought it best to transmit the intelligence
to the honorable Congress, that they may forward it to the southward, or take
such other steps as they may judge proper.

Since writing the above, three more deserters have come out -- which makes
four in twenty-four hours. Their accounts correspond with those of the first
who came out, and which I have related above. -- I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Camp, at Cambridge, Aug. 4, 1775. SIR,
I AM to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of the twenty-fourth July,
accompanied by two hundred and eighty four commissions, which are yet much
short of the necessary number. I am much honored by the confidence reposed in
me, of appointing the several officers recommended in mine of the tenth ultimo;
and shall endeavor to select such persons as are best qualified to fill these
important posts. * * * *

In the renewal of these commissions, some difficulties occur, in which I
should be glad to know the pleasure of the honorable Congress. The general
officers of the Massachusetts have regiments; those of Connecticut have both
regiments and companies; and the other field officers have companies each. From
Rhode Island, the general officer has no regiment, but the field officers have
companies: but I do not find that they have o^ expect pay, under more than one
commission. Should the commissions, now to be delivered, pursue these different
establishments, there will be a distinction between general and field officers
of the same rank. In order to put New Hampshire, Massachusetts, and
Rhode Island, upon a line with Connecticut, it would be necessary to dismiss a
number of officers in possession of commissions, without any fault of theirs.
On the other hand, to bring the Connecticut generals and field officers to the
same scale with the others, will add to the number of officers, and may be
deemed inconsistent with the terms on which they entered into the service,
although you add nothing to the expense, except in the article of provisions.
Upon the whole, it is a case which I would wish the honorable Congress to
consider and determine.

Colonel Gridley of this province, who is at the head of the artillery, has the
rank of major general from the provincial Congress. Will it be proper to renew
his commission here in the same manner? -- It is proper here to remark, that,
in this case, he will take rank of all the brigadiers-general, and even the
majors-general, whose commissions are subsequent in date: and this can answer
no good purpose, but may be productive of many bad consequences.

These are matters of some importance: but I am embarrassed with a difficulty
of a superior kind. The estimate, made in Congress, supposed all the regiments
to be formed upon one establishment; but they are different in different
provinces, and even vary in the same province, in some particulars: In
Massachusetts, some regiments have ten companies, others eleven: the
establishment of the former is five hundred and ninety men, officers included;
-- of the latter six hundred and forty-nine. The establishment of Rhode Island
and New Hampshire is five hundred and ninety to a regiment, officers included:
-- Connecticut has a thousand men to a regiment. Should the Massachusetts
regiments be completed, with the new levies from Rhode Island and Connecticut,
and the riflemen, the number will exceed twenty-two thousand. If they should
not be completed, -- as each regiment is fully officered, there will be a heavy
expense to the public, without an adequate service. The reduction of some of
them seems to be necessary, and yet is a matter of much delicacy, as we are
situated. I most earnestly request it may be taken into immediate
consideration, and the time and mode of doing it pointed out by the honorable
Congress. By an estimate I have made from the general return, -- when the new
levies arrive, and the regiments are completed, there will be twenty-four
thousand four hundred and fifty men on the pay and provision of the United
Colonies. Some of the recruiting officers, who have been out on that service,
have returned with very little success; so that we may safely conclude, the
number of two thousand and sixty-four, now wanting to complete, will rather
increase than diminish. There are the regiments of artillery, consisting of
four hundred and ninetythree men, and one under colonel Sergeant (who has not
received any commission, although he had orders to raise a regiment, from the
provincial Congress here) which are not included in the above estimate. This
last regiment consists of two hundred and thirty-four men by the last return;
but a company has since joined.

By adverting to the reneral return, which I have the honor of enclosing (No.
1), it will be seen, what regiments are most deficient.

If the Congress does not choose to point out the particular regiments, but the
provinces in which the reduction is to be made, the several Congresses and
Assemblies may be the proper channel to conduct this business, which I would
also conceive the most advisable, from their better acquaintance with the
merits, terms, and time of service, of the respective officers. Reducing some
regiments, and, with the privates thereof, filling up others, would certainly
be the best method of accomplishing this work if it were practicable: but the
experiment is dangerous, as the Massachusetts-men, under the privilege of
choosing their own officers, do not conceive themselves bound, if those officers
are disbanded.

As general Gage is making preparations for winter by contracting for
quantities of coal, it will suggest to us the propriety of extending our views
to that season. I have directed that such huts as have been lately made of
boards should be done in such a manner, that, if necessary, they may serve for
covering during the winter. But I need not enlarge upon the variety of
necessities, such as clothing, fuel, etc. (both exceedingly scarce, and
difficult to be procured) which that season must bring with it, if the army or
any considerable part of it is to remain embodied.

From the inactivity of the enemy since the arrival of their whole
reinforcement, -- their continual addition to their lines, -- and many other
circumstances, -- I am inclined to think, that finding us so well prepared to
receive them, the plan of operations is varied, and they mean, by regular
approaches, to bombard us o^t of our present line of defense, or are waiting in
expectation that the colonies must sink under the weight of the expense, or the
prospect of a winter campaign so discourage our troops, as to break up our
army. If they have not some such expectations, the issue of which they are
determined to wait, I cannot account for the delay, when their strength is
lessened every day by sickness, desertions, and little skirmishes.

Of these last we have had only two worthy of notice. Having some reason to
suspect they were extending their lines at Charlestown, I, last saturday
evening, ordered some of the riflemen down, to make a discovery, or bring off a
prisoner. They were accidentally discovered sooner than they expected, by the
guard coming to relieve, and obliged to fire upon them. We have reason to
believe they killed several. They brought in two prisoners, whose account
(confirmed by some other circumstances) removed my suspicions in part. Since
that time, we have, on each side, drawn in our centries, and there have been
scattering fires along the line. This evening we have heard of three captains
who have been taken off by the riflemen, and one killed by a cannot-shot from
Roxbury, besides several privates: but as the intelligence is not direct, I
only mention it as a report which deserves credit. The other happened at the
light-house. A number of workmen having been sent down to repair it, with a
guard of twenty-two marines and a subaltern, -- major Tupper, last monday
morning about two o'clock, landed there with about three hundred men, attacked
them, killed the officer and four privates: but being detained by the tide, in
his return he was attacked by several boats; but he happily got through, with
the loss of one man killed, and another wounded. The remainder of the
ministerial troops (three of whom are badly wounded) he brought off prisoners,
with ten tories, all of whom are on their way to Springfield-jail. The
riflemen, in these skirmishes, lost one man, who (we hear) is a prisoner in
Boston-jail. The enemy, in return, endeavored to surprise our guard at Roxbury:
but they, being apprised of it by a deserter, had time to prepare for it: but
by some negligence or misconduct in the officer of the guard, they burned the
George tavern on the neck; and have every day since been cannonading us, from
their lines, both at Roxbury and Charlestown, but with no other effect than the
loss of two men. On our part, except straggling fires from the small arms about
the lines, which we endeavor to restrain, we have made little or no return.

Our situation, in the article of powder, is much more alarming than I had the
most distant idea of. Having desired a return to be made out (on my arrival) of
the ammunition, I found three hundred and three barrels and a half of powder
mentioned as in the store: but on ordering a new supply of cartridges
yesterday, I was informed, to my very great astonishment, that there was no
more than thirty-six barrels of the Massachusetts store, which, with the stock
of Rhode Island, New Hampshire, and Connecticut, makes nine thousand nine
hundred and thirtyseven pounds, -- not more than nine ^ounds a man. As there
had been no consumption of powder since, that could in any degree account for
such a deficiency, I was very particular in my inquiries, and found that the
committee of supplies, not being sufficiently acquainted with the nature of a
return, or misapprehending my request, sent in an account of all the ammunition
which had been collected by the province: so that the report included not only
what was in hand, but what had been spent.

Upon discovering this mistake, I immediately went up to confer with the
speaker of the house of representatives, upon some measures to obtain a supply
from the neighboring townships, in such a manner as might prevent our poverty
being known; as it is a secret of too great consequence to be divulged in the
general court, some individual of which might perhaps indiscreetly suffer it to
escape him, so as to find its way to the enemy, -- the consequences of which
are terrible even in idea. I shall also write to the governors of Rhode Island
and Connecticut, and the committee of safety in New Hampshire, on this subject,
urging, in the most forcible terms, the necessity of an immediate supply, if in
their power. I need not enlarge on our melancholy situation: it is sufficient
that the existence of the army and the salvation of the country depends upon
something being done for our relief, both speedy and effectual, and that our
situation be kept a profound secret.

In the enclosures, No. 2 and 3, I send the allowance of provisions, etc. made
by the provinces of Connecticut and Massachusetts. The mode and quantity are
different from what has fallen within my experience; and, I am confident, must
prove very wasteful and expensive. If any alteration can be safely made,
(which, I much doubt) there might be a great saving to the public.

A gentlemen of my family, assisted by a deserter who has some skill in
fortification, has by my direction sketched out two draughts of our respective
lines at Charlestown and Roxbury, which, with the explanations, will convey
some idea of our situation, and, I hope, prove acceptable to the members of the
honorable Congress. They are the enclosures, No. 4 and 5.

Since I had the honor of addressing you last, I have been applied to, by a
committee of the general court, for a detachment of the army, to protect the
inhabitants of the eastern parts of this province from some apprehended
depredations on their coasts. I could have wished to have complied with their
request: but, after due consideration, and consulting the general officers,
together with the members of Congress who are here, I thought it my duty to
excuse myself. The application and my answer are the enclosures, No. 6 and 7,
which I hope will be approved by the honorable Congress.

Since I began this letter, the original, of which the enclosure, No. 8, is a
copy, fell into my hands. As the writer is a person of some note in Boston, and
it contains some advices of importance not mentioned by others, I thought
proper to forward it as I received it. By comparing the handwriting with
another letter, it appears the writer is one Belcher Noyes, a person probably
known to some of the gentlemen, delegates from this province, who can determine
from his principles and character, what credit is due-to him.

The army is now formed into three grand divisions, under the command of the
generals Ward, Lee, and Putnam: -- each division into two brigades, consisting
of about six regiments each, commanded by generals Thomas and Spencer at
Roxbury, -- Heath at Cambridge, -- Sullivan and Green at Winter-hill. By this,
you will please to observe, there is a deficiency of one brigadier-general,
(occasioned by Mr. Pomroy's not acting under his commission) which I beg may be
filled as soon as possible. I observe the honorable Congress have also favored
me with the appointment of three brigade-majors. I presume they have or intend
to appoint the rest soon, as they cannot be unacquainted that one is necessary
to each brigade; and, in a new raised army it will be an office of great duty
and service.

General Gage has at length liberated the people of Boston, who land in numbers
at Chelsea every day. The terms on which the passes are granted, as to money,
effects, and provisions, correspond with Mr. Noyes' letter.

We have several reports that general Gage is dismantling Castle-William, and
bringing all the cannon up to town: but, upon a very particular enquiry,
accounts are so various, that I cannot ascertain the truth of it. * * * *

On the first instant, a chief of the Caghnawaga tribe, who lives about six
miles from Montreal, came in here, accompanied by a colonel Bayley of Cahoss.
His accounts of the temper and disposition of the Indians are very favorable.
He says they have been strongly solicited by governor Carleton to engage
against us; but his nation is totally averse; -- that threats, as well as
entreaties, have been used without effect; -- that the Canadians are
well-disposed to the English colonies: and if any expedition is meditated
against Canada, the Indians in that quarter will give all their assistance. I
have endeavored to cherish these favorable dispositions, and have recommended
to him to cultivate them on his return. What I have said, I enforced with a
present, which I understood would be agreeable to him; as he is represented to
be a man of weight and consequence in his own tribe, I flatter myself his visit
will have a good effect. His account of general Carleton's force and situation
at St. John's correspond with what we have already had from that quarter.

The accession of Georgia to the measures of the Congress is a happy event, and
must give a sincere pleasure to every friend of America.

August 5. -- We have accounts this morning of two explosions at the castle; so
that its destruction may now be supposed certain.

I have this morning been alarmed with an information that two gentlemen from
Philadelphia (Mr. Hitchbour^ and captain White), with letters for general Lee
and myself, have been taken by captain Ayscough at Rhode Island, the letters
intercepted and sent forward to Boston, -- with the bearers, as prisoners; that
the captain exulted much in the discoveries he had made: and my informer (who
was also in the boat, but released) understood them to the letters of
consequence. I have therefore dispatched the express immediately back, though I
had before resolved to detain him till Fessenden's return. I shall be anxious
till I am relieved from the suspense I am in, as to the contents of those
letters.

It is exceedingly unfortunate that gentlemen should choose to travel the only
road on which there is danger. Let the event of this be what it will, I hope it
it will serve as a general caution against trusting any letters that way in
future.

Nothing of consequence has occurred in camp these two days. -- The inhabitants
of Boston continue coming out at Chelsea, but under a new restriction, that no
men shall come out without special license, which is refused to all mechanics,
since the tory laborers were taken at the light-house.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

[The following letter bears no date, but appears to have been written on or
about the twenty-sixth of August, 1775.] SIR,
THE enclosed letter came under such a direction and circumstances, as led me
to suppose it contained some interesting advices, either respecting a supply of
powder, or the clothing lately taken at Philadelphia. I therefore took the
liberty of breaking the seal, for which I hope the service and my motives will
apologize.

As the filling up the place of vacant brigadier-general will probably be the
first business of the honorable Congress, I flatter myself it will not be
deemed assuming, to mention, the names of two gentlemen whose former services,
rank and age, may be thought worthy of attention on this occasion. The former
is colonel John Armstrong, of Pennsylvania: he served during the last war, in
most of the campaigns to the southward; was honored with the command of the
Pennsylvania forces, and his general military conduct and spirit much approved
by all who served with him: besides which, his character was distinguished by
an enterprise against the Indians, which he planned with great judgment, and
executed with equal courage and success. It was not till lately that I had
reason to believe he would enter again on public service; and it is now wholly
unsolicited and unknown on his part. The other gentlemen is colonel Fry, of
Massachusetts Bay. He entered into the service as early as 1745, and rose
through the different military ranks, in the succeeding wars, to that of
colonel, until last June, when he was appointed major general by the Congress
of this province. From these circumstances, together with the favorable report
made to me of him, I presume he sustained the character of a good officer,
though I do not find it distinguished by any peculiar service.

Either of these gentlemen, or any other whom the honorable Congress will
please to favor with this appointment, will be received by me with the utmost
deference and respect.

The late adjournment having made it impracticable to know the pleasure of the
Congress as to the appointment of brigade-majors, beyond the number of three
which they were pleased to leave me, -- and the service not admitting of
farther delay, I have continued the other three; which I hope their honors will
not disapprove. These latter were recommended by the respective corpse to which
they belong, as the properest persons for these offices, until farther
direction, and have discharged the duty ever since. They are the majors, Box,
Scammel, and Samuel Brewer.

Last saturday night we took possession of a hill cnosiderably advanced beyond
our former lines; which brought on a very heavy cannonade from Bunker's-hill,
and afterward a bombardment, which has been since kept up with little spirit
on their part, or damage on ours. The work having been continued ever since, is
now so advanced, and the men so well covered, as to leave us under no
apprehensions of much farther loss. In this affair, we had killed -- one
adjutant, one volunteer, and two privates. The scarcity of ammunition does not
admit of our availing ourselves of the situation, as we otherwise might do: but
this evil, I hope, will soon be remedied, as I have been informed of the
arrival of a large quantity at New York, some at New London, and more hourly
expected at different places. I need not add to what I have already said on
this subject. -- Our late supply was very seasonable, but far short of our
necessities.

The late adjournment of the honorable Congress having been made before my
letter of the fourth instant was received, I must now beg leave to recall their
attention to those parts of it which respect the provision for the winter, the
reduction of the troops, the double commissions under different establishments,
and colonel Gridley's appointment of major general; in all which, I hope to be
honored with their commands as soon as possible.

The advocate-general has sent me a memorial respecting his service, which I
have the honor to enclose, (No. 1.) and from the variety and multiplicity of
duty in a new army, as well as his regular service and attendance, I am induced
to recommend him to the farther notice of the honorable Congress.

The treatment of our officers, prisoners at Boston, induced me to write to
general Gage on that subject. His answer and my reply I have the honor to lay
before the Congress, in the enclosures No. 2, 3, 4; since which I have heard
nothing from him.

I remain, with the greatest respect and regard, etc. G. W.

To the Honorable PETER VANBRUGH LIVINGSTON, Esquire. President of the Provincial
Convention, New York.
Camp, at Cambridge, August 30, 1775. SIR,
* * * MR. Livingston and some other gentleman from your city brought us the
acceptable news of the safe arrival of a large quantity of powder, and five
hundred stand of arms. Our situation is such as requires your immediate
assistance and supply in that article. We have lately taken possession of a
hill considerably advanced toward the enemy; but our poverty prevents our
availing ourselves of any advantage of situation. I must therefore most
earnestly entreat that measures may be taken to forward to this camp, in the
most safe and expeditious manner, whatever ammunition can be spared from the
immediate and necessary defense of the province. The value of whatever may be
sent in consequence of this request, will be paid by order from hence when
delivered, or negotiated with the honorable continental Congress at
Philadelphia, as may be agreed with the proprietors. I only request that no
time may be lost through any such difficulties, as our situation is so
critical, and the exigence so great. The mode of conveyance I must leave with
the provincial Congress, or the committee of the city. I doubt not they will
take every precaution to make it safe and expeditious.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, at Cambridge, Sept. 7, 1775. SIR,
I DO myself the honor of addressing you in consequence of an application from
the commissary-general, who is, by my direction, taking all proper precautions
on the approach of winter. I desired him to commit to writing such proposals as
his experience and knowledge of the country might entitle him to make; which he
has done in the paper which I have the honor to enclose. The difficulty of
procuring a sufficient quantity of salt, which I had objected to him, he has
fully obviated, by assuring me that there is so much now actually in store, in
this and the neighboring towns, as will remove all possibility of a
disappointment.

I propose to do myself the honor of writing, in a few days, fully and
particularly on several heads, to which I must now refer. In the mean time, I
have only to inform the honorable Congress, that I have received a small supply
of seven thousand pounds of powder this week from Rhode Island, and in a few
days expect seven tons of lead, and five hundred stand of arms, a part of the
same importation; and to request that more money may be forwarded with all
expedition, the military chest being nearly exhausted.

I am, with the greatest respect, etc. G. W.

Camp, at Cambridge, Sept. 21, 1775. SIR,
I HAVE been in daily expectation of being favored with the commands of the
honorable Congress, on the subject of my two last letters. The season now
advances so fast, that I cannot any longer defer laying before them such
farther measures as require their immediate attention, and in which I wait
their direction,

The mode in which the present army has been collected has occasioned some
difficulty in procuring the subscription of both officers and soldiers to the
continental articles of war. Their principal objection has been, that it might
subject them to longer service than that for which they engaged under their
several provincial establishments. It is in vain to attemt to reason away the
prejudices of a whole army: * * * I have therefore forbore pressing them, as I
did not experience any such inconvenience from their adherence to their former
rules, as would warrant the risk of entering into a contest upon it; more
especially as the restraints, necessary for the establishment of essential
discipline and subordination, indisposed their minds to every change, and made
it both duty and policy to introduce as little novelty as possible. -- With the
present army, I fear such a subscription is impracticable: but the difficulty
will cease with this army.

The Connecticut and Rhode Island troops stand engaged to the first of December
only; and none longer than the first of January. A dissolution of the present
army therefore will take place, unless some early provision is made against
such an event. Most of the general officers are of opinion the greater part of
them may be re-enlisted for the winter, or another campaign, with the
indulgence of a furlough to visit their friends, which may be regulated so as
not to endanger the service. How far it may be proper to form the new army
entirely out of the old, for another campaign, rather than from the contingents
of the several provinces, is a question which involves in it too many
considerations of policy and prudence, for me to undertake to decide. It
appears to be impossible to draw it from any other source than the old army,
for this winter: and, as the pay is ample, I hope a sufficient number will
engage in the service for that time at least. But there are various opinions of
the temper of the men on the subject; and there may be great hazard ^n
deferring the trial so long.

In the continental establishment, no provision has been made for the pay of
artificers, distinct from that of the common soldiers; whereas, under the
provincial, such as found their own tools, were allowed one shilling per diem
advance, and particular artizans, more. The pay of the artillery also now
differs from that of the province: the men have less, the officers more; and,
for some ranks, no provision is made, as the Congress will please to observe by
the list which I have the honor to enclose (No. 1). These particulars, though
seemingly inconsiderable, are the source of much complaint and dissatisfaction,
which I endeavor to compose in the best manner I am able.

By the return of the rifle companies, and that battalion, they appear to
exceed their establishment very considerably. I doubt my authority to pay these
extra men without the direction of the Congress: but it would be deemed a great
hardship, wholly to refuse them, as they have been encouraged to come.

The necessities of the troops having required pay, I directed that those of
the Massachusetts should receive for one month upon their being mustered, and
returning a proper roll: but a claim was immediately made for pay by lunar
months; and several regiments have declined taking up their warrants on this
account. As this practice was entirely new to me, though said to be warranted
by former usage, here the matter now waits the determination of the honorable
Congress. I find, in Connecticut and Rhode Island, this point was settled by
calendar months; in Massachusetts, though mentioned in Congress, it was left
undetermined; which is also the case of New Hampshire.

The enclosure No. 2, is a petition from the subalterns, respecting their pay.
Where there are only two of these in a company, I have considered one as an
ensign, and ordered him pay as such, as in the Connecticut forces. I must beg
leave to recommend this petition to the favor of the Congress: as I am of
opinion the allowance is inadequate to their rank and service, and is one great
source, of that familiarity between the officers and men, which is so
compatible with subordination and discipline. Many valuable officers of those
ranks, finding themselves unable to support the character and appearance of
officers (I am informed) will retire as soon as the term of service is expired,
if there is no alteration.

For the better regulation of duty, I found it necessary to settle the rank of
the officers, and to number the regiments; and, as I had not received the
command of the Congress on the subject, and the exigence of the service forbade
any further delay, the general officers were considered as having no regiments,
-- an alteration, which, I understand, is not pleasing to some of them, but
appeared to me and others to be proper, when it was considered, that, by this
means, the whole army is put upon one footing, and all particular attachments
dissolved.

Among many other considerations which the approach of winter will demand, that
of clothing appears to be one of the most important. So far as regards the
preservation of the army from cold, they may be deemed in a state of nakedness.
Many of the men have been without blankets the whole campaign: and those which
have been in use during the summer, are so much worn as to be of little
service. In order to make a suitable provision in these articles, and at the
same time to guard the public against imposition and expense, it seems
necessary to determine the mode of continuing the army: for, should these
troops be clothed under their present engagement, and at the expiration of the
term of service, decline renewing it, a set of unprovided men may be sent to
supply their places.

I cannot suppose it to be unknown to the honorable Congress that, in all
armies, it is an established practice to make an allowance to officers, of
provisions and forage, proportionnte to their rank. As such an allowance formed
no part of the continental establishment, I have hitherto forbore to issue the
orders for that purpose: but, as it is a received opinion of such members of
the Congress as I have had an opportunity of consulting, as well as throughout
the army, that it must be deemed a matter of course, and implied in the
establishment of the army, I have directed the following proportion of rations,
being the same allowed in the American armies last war: -- major general,
fifteen; brigadier-general, twelve; colonel, six; lieutenant colonel, five;
major, four; captain, three; subaltern, two; staff, two.

If these should not be approved by the honorable Congress, they will please to
signify their pleasure, as to the alterations they would have made in the whole
or in part.

I am now to inform the honorable Congress, that, encouraged by the repeated
declarations of the Canadians and Indians, and urged by their requests, I have
detached colonel Arnold with a thousand men, to penetrate into Canada by way of
Kennebeck river, and, if possible to make himself master of Quebec. By this
maneuver, I proposed either to divert Carleton from St. John's, which would
leave a free passage to general Schuyler; -- or, if this did not take effect,
Quebec, in its present defenseless state, must fall into his hands an easy
prey. I made all possible enquiry, as to the distance, the safety of the route,
and the danger of the season being too far advanced; but found nothing in
either, to deter me from proceeding, more especially as it met with very
general approbation from all whom I consulted upon it. But, that nothing might
be omitted, to enable me to judge of (...) propriety and probable consequences,
I communicated it by express to general Schuyler, who approved of it in such
terms, that I resolved to put it in immediate execution. They have now left
this place seven days; and, if favored with a good wind, I hope soon to hear of
their being safe at Kenne-beck river. For the satisfaction of the Congress, I
here enclose a copy of the proposed route (No. 3). I also do myself the honor
of enclosing a manifesto, which I caused to be printed here, and of which
colonel Arnold has taken a suitable number with him. This is the enclosure, No.
4. I have also forwarded a copy of his instructions (No. 5): -- from all which,
I hope the Congress will have a clear view of the motives, plan, and intended
execution of this enterprise, and that I shall be so happy as to meet with
their approbation in it.

I was the more induced to make this detachment, as it is my clear opinion,
from a careful observation of the movements of the enemy, corroborated by all
the intelligence we receive by deserters and others, (of the former of whom we
have some every day) that the enemy have no intention to come out, until they
are reinforced. They have been wholly employed for some time past in procuring
materials for barracks, fuel, and making other preparations for winter. These
circumstances, with the constant additions to their works which are apparently
defensive, have led to the above conclusion, and enabled me to spare this body
of men where I hope they will be usefully and successfully employed.

The state of inactivity, in which this army has lain for some time, by no
means corresponds with my wishes, by some decisive stroke to relieve my country
from the heavy expense its subsistence must create. After frequently
reconnoitring the situation of the enemy the town of Boston, collecting all
possible intelligence, and digesting the whole, a surprise did not appear to me
wholly impracticable, though hazardous. I communicated it to the general
officers some days before I called them to a council, that they might be
prepared with their opinions. The result I have the honor of enclosing (No. 6).
I cannot say that I have wholly laid it aside: but new events may occasion new
measures. Of this I hope the honorable Congress can need no assurance, that
there is not a man in America who more earnestly wishes such a termination of
the campaign, as to make the army no longer necessary.

The season advances so fast, that I have given orders to prepare barracks and
other accommodations for the winter. The great scarcity of tow-cloth in this
country, I fear, will totally disappoint us in our expectations of procuring
hunting-shirts. -- Governor Cook informs me, few or none are to be had in
Rhode Island; and governor Trumbull gives me little encouragement to expect
many from Connecticut.

I have filled up the office of quarter-master-general, which the Congress was
pleased to leave to me, by the appointment of major Mifflin, which I hope and
believe will be universally acceptable.

It gives me great pain to be obliged to solicit the attention of the honorable
Congress to the state of this army, in terms which imply the slightest
apprehension of being neglected. But my situation is inexpressibly distressing,
to see the winter fast approaching upon a naked army; the time of their service
within a few weeks of expiring; and no provision yet made for such important
events. Added to these, the military chest is totally exhausted: the paymaster
has not a single dollar in hand: the commissary-general assures me he has
strained his credit, for the subsistence of the army, to the utmost. The
quarter-master-general is precisely in the same situation; and the greater part
of the troops not far from mutiny, upon the deduction of their stated
allowance. I know not to whom I am to impute this failure: but I am opinion, if
the evil is not immediately remedied, and more punctually observed in future,
the army must absolutely break up. I hope I have so fully expressed myself on
this subject (both by letter, and to those members of the Congress who honored
the camp with a visit), that no disappointment could possibly happen: I
therefore hourly expected advice from the paymaster that he had received a
fresh supply, in addition to the hundred and seventy-two thousand dollars
delivered him in August: and thought myself warranted to assure the public
creditors that in a few days they should be satisfied. But the delay has
brought matters to such a crisis, as admits of no further uncertain
expectation. I have therefore sent off this express, with orders to make all
possible dispatch. It is my most earnest request that he may be returned with
all possible expedition, unless the honorable Congress have already forwarded
what is so indispensably necessary.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, at Cambridge, Sept. 30, 1775. SIR,
THE reverend Mr. Kirkland, the bearer of this, having been introduced to the
honorable Congress, can need no particular recommendation from me. But as he
now wishes to have the affair of his mission and public employ put upon some
suitable footing, I cannot but intimate my sense of the importance of his
station, and the great advantages which have and may result to the United
Colonies, from his situation being made respectable.

All accounts agree that much of the favorable disposition shown by the
Indians, may be ascribed to his labor and influence. He has accompanied a chief
of the Oneidas to this camp, which I have endeavored to make agreeable to him,
both by civility and some small presents. Mr. Kirkland being also in some
necessity for money to bea^ his traveling charges and other expenses, I have
supplied him with thirty-two pounds lawful money.

I cannot but congratulate the honorable Congress on the happy temper of the
Canadians and Indians, our accounts of which are now fully confirmed by some
intercepted letters from officers in Canada to general Gage and others in
Boston, which were found on board the vessel lately taken, going into Boston
with a donation of cattle and other fresh provisions for the ministerial army.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, at Cambridge, October 5, 1775. SIR,
I WAS honored with your favor of the twenty-sixth ultimo, late the night
before last; and a meeting of the general officers having been called upon a
business which will make a considerable part of this letter, I took the
opportunity of laying before them those parts of yours which respect the
continuance and new-modelling of the army, the fuel, clothing, and other
preparations for the ensuing winter. They have taken two or three days to
consider; and, as soon as I am possessed of their opinions, I shall lose no
time in transmitting the result, not only on the above subjects, but the number
of troops necessary to be kept up.

I have also directed the commissary-general and the quarter master-general to
prepare estimates of the expense of their departments for a certain given
number of men, from which a judgment may be made, when the number of men, to be
kept in pay is determined: -- all which I shall do myself the honor to lay
before the Congress, as soon as they are ready.

I have now a painful, though a necessary duty to perform, respecting Dr.
Church, director-general of the hospital. About a week ago, Mr. secretary Ward
of Providence, sent up to me one Wainwood, an inhabitant of Newport, with a
letter directed to Major Cane in Boston, in [ accult] characters, which he said
had been left with Wainwood some time ago, by a woman who was kept by Dr.
Church. She had before pressed Wainwood to take her to captain Wallace, Mr.
Dudley the collector, or George Rome; which he declined. She then gave him the
letter, with a strict charge to deliver it to either of those gentlemen. He
suspecting some improper correspondence, kept the letter, and after some time
opened it; but, not being able to read it, laid it up, where it remained until
he received an obscure letter from the woman, expressing an anxiety after the
original letter. He then communicated the whole matter to Mr. Ward, who sent
him up with the papers to me. I immediately secured the woman; but for a long
time she was proof against every threat and persuasion to discover the author.
-- However, at length she was brought to a confession, and named Dr. Church. I
then immediately secured him and all his papers. Upon his first examination, he
readily acknowledged the letter, said it was designed for his brother Fleming,
and, when deciphered, would be found to contain nothing criminal. He
acknowledged his never having communicated the correspondence to any person
here but the girl, and made many protestations of the purity of his intentions.
Having found a person capable of deciphering the letter, I, in the mean time,
had all his papers searched, but found nothing criminal among them: but it
appeared on enquiry, that a confident had been among the papers before my
^^^^enger arrived. I then called the general officers together for their
advice, the result of which you will find in the enclosure, No. 1. The
deciphered letter is the enclosure No. 2. The army and country are exceedingly
irritated; and upon a free discussion of the nature, circumstances, and
consequence of this matter, it has been unanimously agreed to lay it before the
honorable Congress for their special advice and direction; at the same time
suggesting to their consideration, whether an alteration of the twenty-eighth
article of war may not be necessary.

As I shall reserve all further remarks upon the state of the army till my
next, I shall now beg leave to request the determination of Congress, as to the
property and disposal of such vessels and cargoes as are designed for the
supply of the enemy, and may fall into our hands. There has been an event of
this kind at Portsmouth (as by the enclosure, No. 3), in which I have directed
the cargo to be brought hither for the use of the army, reserving the
settlement of any claims of capture to the decision of Congress.

As there are many unfortunate individuals whose property has been confiscated
by the enemy, I would humbly suggest to the consideration of Congress the
humanity of applying, in part or in the whole, such captures to the relief of
those sufferers, after compensating any expense of the captors, and for their
activity and spirit. I am the more induced to request this determination may be
speedy, as I have directed three vessels to be equipped in order to cut off the
supplies; and, from the number of vessels hourly arriving, it may become an
object of some importance. In the disposal of these captures, for the
encouragement of the officers and men, I have allowed them one-third of the
cargoes, except military stores, which, with the vessels, are to be reserved
for the public use. I hope my plan, as well as the execution, will be favored
with the approbation of Congress.

One Mr. Fisk, an intelligent person, came out of Boston on the third instant,
and gives us the following advices: -- that a fleet, consisting of a
sixty-four, and twenty-gun ship, two sloops of eighteen guns, and two
transports with six hundred men, were to sail from Boston as yesterday; that
they took on board two mortars, four howitzers, and other artillery, calculated
for the bombardment of a town: -- their destination was kept a profound secret:
-- that an express sloop of war, which left England the eighth August, arrived
four days ago; -- that general Gage is recalled, and last sunday, resigned his
command to General How; -- that Lord Percy, colonel Smith, and other officers
who were at Lexington, are ordered home with Gage; -- that six ships of the
line and two cutters were coming out under sir Peter Dennis; -- that five
regiments and a thousand marines are ordered out, and may be expected in three
or four weeks: -- no prospect of accommodation; but the ministry determined to
push the war to the utmost.

I have an express from colonel Arnold, and herewith send a copy of his letter
and an enclosure, No. 4 and 5. -- I am happy in finding he meets with no
discouragement. -- The claim of the rifle officers, to be independent of all
the superior officers, except colonel Arnold, is without any countenance or
authority from me, as I have signified in my last dispatch both to colonel
Arnold and captain Morgan. -- The captain of the brig from Quebec for Boston,
informs me, that there is no suspicion of any such expedition; and that, if
Carleton is not driven from St. John's, so as to be obliged to throw himself
into Quebec, it must fall into our hands, as it is left without a regular
soldier, and many of the inhabitants are most favorably disposed to the
American cause; -- and that there is the largest stock of ammunition ever
collected in America.

In the above vessel some letters were also found, from an officer at Quebec,
to General Gage and major Sheriff at Boston, containing such an account of the
temper of the Canadians, as cannot but afford the highest satisfaction. I have
thought it best to forward them: they are the enclosures, No. 6 and 7.

I am, with the greatest respect, etc. G. W.

Camp at Cambridge, Oct. 12, 1775. SIR,
I AM honored with your several favors of the twenty-sixth and thirtieth
September, and fifth October, the contents of which I shall beg leave to notice
in their respective order.

Previous to the direction of Congress to consult the general officers on the
best mode of continuing and providing for the army during the winter, I had
desired them to turn their thoughts upon these subjects, and to favor me with
the result, by a particular day, in writing. In this interval, the appointment
of Dr. Franklin, Mr. Lynch, and colonel Harrison, was communicated, -- an
event, which has given me the highest satisfaction, as the subject was too
weighty and complex for a discussion by letter. This appointment made any
conclusion here unnecessary, as it is not probable any such arrangement would
be agreed on, as would not be altered in some respects, upon a full and free
conference. This good effect will arise from the step already taken, that every
officer will be prepared to give his sentiments upon these important subjects.

The estimates of the commissary and quarter-master-general I have now the
honor of enclosing. The first is No. 1, -- the other No. 2.

With respect to the reduction of the pay of the men, which may enter into the
consideration of their support, it is the unanimous opinion of the general
officers, that it cannot be touched with safety at present. * * *

Upon the presumption of there being a vacancy in the direction of the
hospital, lieutenant colonel Hand, formerly a surgeon in the eighteenth
regiment of royal Irish, and Dr. Foster, late of Charlestown, and one of the
surgeons of the hospital under Dr. Church, are candidates for that office. I do
not pretend to be acquainted with their respective merits, and therefore have
given them no farther expectation, than that they should be mentioned as
candidates for the department. I therefore need only to add upon this subject,
that the affairs of the hospital require that the appointment should be made as
soon as possible.

Before I was honored with your favor of the fifth instant, I had given orders
for the equipment of some armed vessels, to intercept the enemy's supplies of
provisions and ammunition. One of them was on a cruise between Cape Anne and
Cape Cod, when the express arrived. The others will be fit for the sea in a few
days, under the command of officers of the continental army, who are well
recommended, as persons acquainted with the sea, and capable of such a service.
Two of these will be immediately dispatched on this duty; and every particular,
mentioned in your favor of the fifth instant, literally complied with.

That the honorable Congress may have a more complete idea of the plan on which
these vessels are equipped, I enclose a copy of the instructions given to the
captains now out, (No. 4). These, with the additional instructions directed,
will be given to the captains who go into the mouth of St. Lawrence's river. As
both officers and men most cheerfully engage in the service on the terms
mentioned in these instructions, I fear that the proposed increase will create
some difficulty, by making a difference between men engaged on similar service.
I have therefore not yet communicated this part of the plan, but reserved an
extra bounty as a reward for extraordinary activity. There are no armed vessels
in this province; and governor Cook informs me the enterprise can receive no
assistance from him, as one of the armed vessels of Rhode Island is on a long
cruise, and the other unfit for service. Nothing shall be omitted to secure
success. A fortunate capture of an ordnance ship would give new life to the
camp, and an immediate turn to the issue of the campaign.

Our last accounts from colonel Arnold are very favorable: he was proceeding
with all expedition; and I flatter myself (making all allowances) he will be at
Quebec the twentieth instant, where a gentleman from Canada (Mr. * * *) assures
me he will meet with no resistance.

In the quarter-master's estimate, there are some articles omitted, of which he
informs me he cannot pretend to furnish a computation, -- such as cartage,
tools, etc. for which some general allowance must be made.

From the various accounts received from Europe, there may be reason to expect
troops will be landed at New York, or some other middle colony. I should be
glad to know the pleasure of the Congress, whether, upon such an event, it
would be expected that a part of this army should be detached, or the internal
force of such colony and its neighborhood be deemed sufficient; or whether, in
such case, I am to wait the particular direction of Congress.

The fleet, mentioned in my last, has been seen standing N. N. E. so that we
apprehend it is intended for some part of this province, or New Hampshire, or
possibly Quebec.

The latest and best accounts we have from the enemy, are, that they are
engaged in their new work across the south end of Boston, preparing their
barracks, etc. for winter: -- that it is proposed to keep from five hundred to
a thousand men on Bunker's hill all winter, who are to be relieved once a week;
-- the rest to be drawn into Boston.

A person who has lately been a servant to major Conolly, (a tool of Lord
Dunmore's) has given an account of a scheme to distress the southern provinces,
which appeared to me of sufficient consequence to be immediately transmitted. I
have therefore got it attested, and do myself the honor of enclosing it, No. 5.

The new levies from Connecticut have lately marched into camp, and are a body
of as good troops as any we have: so that we have now the same strength, as
before the detachment made under colonel Arnold.

I am, with the most respectful sentiments to the honorable Congress, and
yourself, sir, your most obedient, etc.

G. W.

Camp at Cambridge, October. 24, 1775. SIR,
MY conjecture of the destination of the late squadron from Boston, in my last,
has been unhappily verified by an outrage, exceeding, in barbarity and cruelty,
every hostile act practiced among civilized nations. I have enclosed the
account given me by Mr. Jones, a gentleman of the town of Falmouth, of the
destruction of that increasing and flourishing village. He is a very great
sufferer, and informs me that the time allowed for the removal of effects was
so small, that valuable property of all kinds, and to a great amount, has been
destroyed. The orders shown by the captain for this horrid procedure, (by which
it appears the same desolation is meditated upon all the towns on the coast)
made it my duty to communicate it as quickly and extensively as possible. As
Portsmouth was the next place to which he proposed to go, general Sullivan was
permitted to go up, and give them his assistance and advice to ward off the
blow. I flatter myself the like event will not happen there, as they have a
fortification of some strength, and a vessel has arrived at a place called
Sheepscot, with fifteen hundred pounds of powder.

The gentlemen of the Congress have nearly finished their business: but as they
write by this opportunity, I must beg leave to refer you to their letter, for
what concerns their commission.

We have had no occurrence of any consequence in the camp since I had the honor
of addressing you last; but expect every hour to hear that Newport has shared
the fate of unhappy Falmouth.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp at Cambridge, October. 30, 1775. SIR,
The information, which the gentlemen who have lately gone from hence can give
the Congress, of the state and situation of the army, would have made a letter
unnecessary, if I did not suppose there would be some anxiety to know the
intentions of the army on the subject of the re-enlistment.

Agreeable to the advice of those gentlemen, and my own opinion, I immediately
began by directing all such officers as proposed to continue, to signify their
intentions as soon as possible. A great number of the returns are come in, from
which I find that a very great proportion of the officers of the rank of
captains, and under, will retire; -- from present appearances, I may say, half,
-- but at least, one third. It is with some concern also that I observe, that
many of the officers who retire, discourage the continuance of the men, and, I
fear, will communicate the infection to them. Some have advised that those
officers who decline the service should be immediately dismissed; but this
would be very dangerous and inconvenient. I confess I have great anxieties upon
the subject, though I still hope the pay and terms are so advantageous, that
interest, and, I hope also, a regard to their country, will retain a greater
proportion of privates than their officers. In so important a matter, I shall
esteem it my indispensable duty, not only to act with all possible prudence,
but to give the most early and constant advice of my progress.

A supply of clothing, equal to our necessities, would greatly contribute to
the encouragement and satisfaction of the men. In every point of view, it is so
important that I beg leave to call the attention of the Congress to it in a
particular manner.

A sergeant has just come in from Bunker's-hill, but brings no important news.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, Nov. 2, 1775. SIR,
I COULD not suffer Mr. Randolph to quit this camp without bearing some
testimony of my duty to the Congress; although his sudden departure (occasioned
by the death of his worthy relative, whose loss, as a good citizen, and
valuable member of society, is much to be regretted) does not allow me time to
be particular.

The enclosed return shows, at one view, what reliance we have upon the
officers of this army, and how deficient we are like to be in subaltern
officers. A few days more will enable me to inform the Congress what they have
to expect from the soldiery, as I shall issue recruiting orders for this
purpose, so soon as the officers are appointed, -- which will be done this day,
-- having sent for the general officers, to consult them in the choice.

I must beg leave to recall the attention of the Congress to the appointment of
a brigadier-general, -- an officer as necessary to a brigade, as a colonel is
to a regiment, and will be exceedingly wanted in the new arrangement.

The proclamations and association, herewith enclosed, came to my hands on
monday last. I thought it my duty to send them to you. -- Nothing of moment has
happened since my last.

With respectful compliments to the members of Congress, I have the honor to
be, etc.

G. W.

Cambridge, Nov. 8, 1775. SIR,
The immediate occasion of my giving the Congress the trouble of a letter at
this time is to inform them, that, in consequence of their order, signified in
your letter of the twentieth ultimo, I laid myself under a solemn tie of
secrecy to captain M'Pherson, and proceeded to examine his plan for the
destruction of the fleet in the harbor of Boston, with all that care and
attention which the importance of it deserved, and my judgment could lead to.
But not being happy enough to coincide in opinion with that gentleman, and
finding that his scheme would involve greater expense, than (under my doubts of
its success) I thought myself justified in giving into, I prevailed upon him to
communicate his plan to three gentlemen of the artillery in this army, well
acquainted in the knowledge and practice of gunnery. By them he has been
convinced, that, inasmuch as he set out upon wrong principles, the scheme would
prove abortive. Unwilling, however, to relinquish his favorite project of
reducing the naval force of Great Britain, he is very desirous of building a
number of row galleys for this purpose. But as the Congress alone are competent
to the adoption of this measure, I have advised him-(although he offered to go
on with the building of them at his own expense, till the Congress should
decide) to repair immediately to Philadelphia with his proposals; where, if
they should be agreed to, or vessels of superior force, agreeable to the wishes
of most others, should be resolved on, he may set instantly about them, with
all the materials upon the spot: -- here, they are to collect. -- To him
therefore I refer for further information on this head.

A vessel, said to be from Philadelphia and bound to Boston, with a hundred and
twenty pipes of wine (a hundred and eighteen of which are secured) stranded at
a place called Eastham, in a gale of wind, on the second instant; -- another,
from Boston, to Halifax, with dry goods etc. (amounting, per invoice, to about
two hundred and forty pounds lawful money) got disabled in the same gale, near
Beverly. These cargoes, with the papers, I have ordered to this place, -- the
vessels to be taken care of till further orders. I have also an account of the
taking of a woodsloop bound to Boston, and carried into Portsmouth by one of
our armed vessels; -- particulars not yet come to hand; -- and this instant, of
two others, from Nova Scotia to Boston, with hay, wood, live stock, etc. by
another of our armed schooners. -- These are in Plymouth.

These accidents and captures point out the necessity of establishing proper
courts without loss of time, for the decision of property, and the legality of
seizures; otherwise I may be involved in inextricable difficulties.

Our prisoners, by the reduction of Fort Chamblee (on which happy event I most
sincerely congratulate the Congress), being considerably augmented, and likely
to be increased, I submit it to the wisdom of Congress, whether some convenient
inland towns, remote from the post-roads, ought not to be assigned them; the
manner of their treatment, subsistence, etc. defined; and a commissary or agent
appointed, to see that justice is done both to them and the public, proper
accounts rendered, etc. Without a mode of this sort is adopted, I fear there
will be sad confusion hereafter, as there are great complaints at present.

I reckoned without my host, when I informed the Congress in my last, that I
should in a day or two be able to acquaint them of the disposition of the
soldiery toward a new enlistment-I have been in consultation with the generals
of this army ever since Thursday last, endeavoring to establish new corpse of
officers; but find so many doubts and difficulties to reconcile, that I cannot
say when they are to end, or what may be the consequences; as there appears to
be such an unwillingness in the officers of one government mixing in the same
regiment with those of another; and, without it, many must be dismissed, who
are willing to serve; notwithstanding, we are deficient on the whole.

The council of Officers are unanimously of opinion that the command of the
artillery should no longer continue in colonel * * *; and knowing of no person
better qualified to supply his place, or whose appointment will give more
general satisfaction, have taken the liberty of recommending Henry Knox,
esquire, to the consideration of Congress, thinking it indispensably necessary,
at the same time, that this regiment should consist of two lieutenant-colonels,
two majors, and twelve companies, agreeable to the plan and estimate handed in;
which differing from the last establishment, I should be glad to be instructed
on.

The commissary-general not being returned, will apologize, I hope, for my
silence respecting a requisition of the expense of his clerks, etc. which I was
to have obtained together with others, and forwarded.

I have heard nothing of colonel Arnold since the thirteenth ultimo. His letter
of, and journal to that date, will convey all the information I am able to give
of him. I think he must be in Quebec. If any mischance had happened to him, he
would, as directed, have forwarded an express. -- No account yet of the armed
vessels sent to St. Laurence. -- I think they will meet the stores inward or
outward bound.

Captain Symons, in the Cerberus, lately sent from Boston to Falmouth, has
published the enclosed declaration at that place; and it is suspected he
intends to make some kind of a lodgment there. I wrote immediately to colonel
Finnie, of this army, who went up there upon the last alarm, to spirit up the
people and oppose it at all events. -- Falmouth is about a hundred and thirty
miles from this camp.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I send a general return of the troops, and manifests of the cargoes and
vessels taken at Plymouth.



Cambridge, Nov. 11, 1775. SIR,
* * * Enclosed, you have a copy of an act, passed this session, by the
honorable council and house of representatives of this province. It respects
such captures as may be made by vessels fitted out by the province, or by
individuals thereof. -- As the armed vessels, fitted out at the continental
expense, do not come under this law, I would have it submitted to the
consideration of Congress, to point out a more summary way of proceeding, to
determine the property and mode of condemnation of such prizes as have been or
hereafter may be made, than is specified in this act.

Should not a court be established by authority of Congress, to take cognizance
of prizes made by the continental vessels? -- Whatever the mode is which they
are pleased to adopt, there is an absolute necessity of its being speedily
determined on: for I cannot spare time from military affairs, to give proper
attention to these matters.

The inhabitants of Plymouth have taken a sloop, laden with provisions, etc.
from Halifax, bound to Boston, and the inhabitants of Beverly have, under cover
of one of the armed schooners, taken a vessel from Ireland, laden with beef,
pork, butter, etc. for the same place. The latter brings papers and letters of
a very interesting nature, which are in the hands of the honorable council, who
informed me they will transmit them to you by this conveyance. To the contents
of these papers and letters, I must beg leave to refer you and the honorable
Congress, who will now see the absolute necessity there is, of exerting all
their wisdom, to withstand the mighty efforts of our enemies.

The trouble I have in the arrangement of the army is really inconceivable.
Many of the officers sent in their names to serve, in expectation of promotion;
others stood aloof * * *; whilst a number who have declined, have again sent in
their names, to serve. So great has the confusion, arising from these and many
other perplexing circumstances, been, that I found it absolutely impossible to
fix this very interesting business exactly on the plan resolved on in the
conference, though I have kept up to the spirit, as near as the nature and
necessity of the case would admit of; the difficulty with the soldiers is as
great, -- indeed more so, if possible, than with the officers. They will not
enlist, until they know their colonel, lieutenant colonel, major, captain, etc.
so that it was necessary to fix the officers the first thing; which is, at
last, in some manner done; and I have given out enlisting orders.

You, sir, can much easier judge, than I can express, the anxiety of mind I
must labor under on the occasion, especially at this time, when we may expect
the enemy will begin to act on the arrival of their reinforcement, part of
which is already come, and the remainder daily dropping in.

I have other distresses of a very alarming nature. The arms of our soldiery
are so exceeding bad, that I assure you, sir, I cannot place a proper
confidence in them. Our powder is wasting fast, notwithstanding the strictest
care, economy, and attention is paid to it. The long series of wet weather we
have had, renders the greater part of what has been served out to the men, of
no use. Yesterday I had a proof of it, as a party of the enemy, about four or
five hundred, taking the advantage of a high tide, landed at Leechmore's point:
we were alarmed, and of course ordered every man to examine his cartouch-box;
when the melancholy truth appeared; and we were obliged to furnish the greater
part of them with fresh ammunition.

The damage done at the point was the taking of a man who watched a few horses
and cows; ten of the latter they carried off. Colonel Thompson marched down
with his regiment of riflemen, and was joined by colonel Woodbridge, with a
part of his and a part of Patterson's regiment, who gallantly waded through the
water, and soon obliged the enemy to embark under cover of a man-of-war, a
floating battery, and the fire of a battery on Charlestown neck. We have two of
our men dangerously wounded by grape shot from the man-of-war, and, by a flag
sent out this day, we are informed the enemy lost two of their men.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, November 19, 1775. SIR,
I received your favors of the seventh and tenth instant, with the resolves of
the honorable Congress, to which I will pay all due attention. -- As soon as
two capable persons can be found, I will dispatch them to Nova Scotia, on the
service resolved on in Congress.

The resolve to raise two battalions of marines will (if practicable in this
army) entirely derange what has been done. It is therein mentioned, "one
colonel for the two battalions." -- of course, a colonel must be dismissed. One
of the many difficulties, which attended the new arrangement, was in
reconciling the different interests, and judging of the merits of the different
colonels. -- In the dismission of this one, the same difficulties will occur.
-- The officers and men must be acquainted with maritime affairs; to comply
with which, they must be picked out of the whole army, -- one from this corpse,
one from another, -- so as to break through the whole system, which has cost us
so much time, anxiety and pains, to bring into any tolerable form.
Notwithstanding any difficulties which will arise, you may be assured, sir,
that I will use every endeavor to comply with their resolve.

I beg leave to submit it to the consideration of Congress (if these two
battalions can be formed out of this army) whether this is a time to weaken our
lines, by employing any of the forces appointed to defend them, on any other
service. The gentlemen who were here from the Congress know their vast extent:
they must know that we shall have occasion for our whole force for that
purpose; more so now than at any past time, as we may expect the enemy will
take the advantage of the first hard weather, and attempt to make an impression
somewhere. That this is their intention, we have many reasons to suspect.

We have had, in the last week, six deserters, and took two straggling
prisoners. They all agree that two companies, with a train of artillery and one
of the regiments from Ireland, were arrived at Boston; -- that fresh ammunition
and flints have been served out; -- that the grenadiers and light infantry had
orders to hold themselves in readiness at a moment's warning.

As there is every appearance that this contest will not be soon decided, and
of course that there must be an augmentation of the continental army, would it
not be eligible to raise two battalions of marines in New York and
Philadelphia, where there must be numbers of sailors now unemployed? -- This
however is matter of opinion, which I mention with all due deference to the
superior judgment of the Congress.

Enclosed, you have copies of two letters, -- one from colonel Arnold, -- the
other from colonel * * *. I can form no judgment on the latter's conduct, until
I see him. Notwithstanding the great defection, I do not despair of colonel
Arnold's success. He will have, in all probability, many more difficulties to
encounter, than if he had been a fortnight sooner; as it is likely that
governor Carleton will, with what forces he can collect after the surrender of
the rest of Canada, throw himself into Quebec, and there make his last effort.
There is no late account from captains Broughton and Sillman, sent to the river
St. Laurence. The other cruisers have been chiefly confined to harbor, by the
badness of the weather. The same reason has caused great delay in building of
our barracks; which, with a most mortifying scarcity of firewood, discourages
the men from enlisting. The last, I am afraid, is an insuperable obstacle. I
have applied to the honorable house of representatives of this province, who
were pleased to appoint a committee to negotiate this business; and
notwithstanding all the pains they have and are taking, they find it impossible
to supply our necessities. The want of a sufficient number of teams, I
understand to be the chief impediment.

I got returns this day from eleven colonels, of the numbers enlisted in their
regiments. The whole amount is nine hundred and sixty-six men. There must be
some other stimulus besides love for their country, to make men fond of the
service. It would be a great encouragement, and no additional expense to the
continent, were they to receive pay for the months of October and November;
also a month's pay advance. The present state of the military chest will not
admit of this. The sooner it is enabled to do so, the better.

The commissary-general is daily expected in camp. I cannot send you the
estimate of the clerks in his department, until he arrives.

I sincerely congratulate you upon the success of your arms, in the surrender
of St. John's, which I hope is a happy presage of the reduction of the rest of
Canada.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, Nov. 28, 1775. SIR,
I HAD the honor of writing to you on the nineteenth instant. I have now to
inform you that Henry Knox, esquire, is gone to New York, with orders to
forward to this place what cannon and ordnance stores can be there procured.
From thence he will proceed to general Schuyler on the same business, as you
will see by the enclosed copy of instructions which I have given him. It would
give me much satisfaction, that this gentleman, or any other whom you may think
qualified, was appointed to the command of the artillery regiment. In my letter
to you, of the eighth instant, I have expressed myself fully on this subject,
which I beg leave to recommend (...) your immediate attention; as the formation
of that corpse will be at a stand, until I am honored with your instructions
thereon. * * * *

There are two persons engaged to go Nova Scotia, on the business recommended
in your last. By the best information we have from thence, the stores, etc.
have been withdrawn some time. Should this not be the case, it is next to an
impossibility to attempt any thing there, in the present unsettled and
precarious state of the army. * * *

From what I can collect in my enquiries amongst the officers, it will be
impossible to get the men to enlist for the continuance of the war; which will
be an insuperable obstruction to the formation of the two battallions of
marines on the plan resolved on in Congress. As it can make no difference, I
propose to proceed ceed on the new arrangement of the army, and, when
completed, inquire out such officers and men as are best qualified for that
service, and endeavor to form these two battalions out of the whole. This
appears to me the best method, and will, I hope, meet the approbation of
Congress.

As it will be very difficult for the men to work when the hard frost sets in,
I have thought it necessary (though of little use at present) to take
possession of Coble-hill, for the benefit of any future operations. It was
effected, without the least opposition from the enemy, the twenty-third
instant. Their inactivity on this occasion is what I cannot account for: -- it
is probable they are meditating a blow somewhere.

About three hundred men, women and children, of the poor inhabitants of
Boston, came out to Point-Shirley last Friday -- They have brought their
household furniture, but are unprovided of every other necessary of life. I
have recommended them to the attention of the committee of the honorable
council of this province now sitting at Watertown.

The number enlisted since my last are two thousand four hundred and fifty men,
* * * * Our situation is truly alarming: and of this general How is well
apprised, it being the common topic of conversation when the people left Boston
last friday. -- No doubt, when he is reinforced, he will avail himself of the
information.

I am making the best disposition I can for our defense, having thrown up,
besides the work on Coble-hill, several redoubts, half-moons, etc. along the
bay: and I fear I shall be under the necessity of calling in the militia and
minute-men of the country to my assistance: I say, I fear it, -- because, by
what I can learn from the officers in the army, belonging to this colony, it
will be next to an impossibility to keep them under any degree of discipline,
and that it will be very difficult to prevail on them to remain a moment longer
than they choose themselves. It is a mortifying reflection, to be reduced to
this dilemna. There has been nothing wanting on my part, to infuse a proper
spirit amongst the officers, that they may exert their influence with the
soldiery. You see, by a fortnight's recruiting amongst men with arms in their
hands, how little has been the success.

As the smallpox is now in Boston, I have used the precaution of prohibiting
such as lately came out, from coming near our camp. -- General Burgoyne, I am
informed, will soon embark for England. -- I think the risk too great to write
you by post, whilst it continues to pass through New York. It is certain that a
post has been intercepted the beginning of last month, as they sent out several
letters from Boston, with the post-mark of Baltimore on them. This goes by
captain Joseph Blewer, who promises to deliver it carefully unto you.

You, doubtless, will have heard, before this reaches, of general Montgomery's
having got possession of Montreal. I congratulate you thereon. He has troubles
with his troops, as well as I have. -- All I can learn of colonel Arnold is,
that he is neat Quebec. I hope Montgomery will be able to proceed to his
assistance. I shall be very uneasy until I hear they are joined.

My best respects attend the gentlemen in Congress: and believe me, sir, your
most obedient, etc.

G. W.

Cambridge, Novem. 30, 1775. SIR,
I HAD the honor to write to you, the twenty-eighth instant, by captain Joseph
Blewer. Last evening I received the agreeable account of the Schooner Lee,
commanded by captain Manly, having taken and carried into Cape-Anne, a large
Brigantine, bound from London to Boston, laden with military stores, the
inventory of which I have the pleasure to enclose you. Cape-Anne is a very open
harbor, and accessible to large ships; which made me immediately send off
colonel Glover and Mr. Palfry, with orders to raise the minute-men and militia
of that part of the country, to have the cargo landed without loss of time, and
guarded up to this camp. This I hope, they will be able to effect before it is
known to the enemy, what port she is carried into. I sincerely congratulate you
on this very great acquisition; and am, sir, your most humble, etc.

G. W.
Manly has taken also a sloop in the ministerial service; and captain Adams, in
the schooner Warren, has taken a schooner laden with potatoes and turnips,
bound to Boston, and carried her into Portsmouth.



Cambridge, Dec. 4, 1775. SIR,
I HAD the honor of writing to you, the thirtieth ultimo, enclosing an
inventory of the military stores taken on board the brig Nancy by captain Manly
of the armed schooner Lee. I have now to inform you that he has since sent into
Beverly, a ship named the Concord, James Lowrie, master, from Greenock in
Scotland, bound to Boston. She has on board dry goods and coals, to the value
of three thousand six hundred and six pounds, nine shillings and seven pence,
sterling, shipped by Crawford, Anderson and Co. and consigned to James
Anderson, merchant in Boston. It is mentioned in the letters found on board,
that this cargo was for the use of the army; but, on a strict examination, I
find it is really the property of the shippers and the person to whom
consigned. -- Pray what is to be done with this ship and cargo? and what with
the brigantine which brought the military stores? -- It was agreed, in the
conference last October, " that all vessels employed merely as transports, and
unarmed, with their crews, be set at liberty, upon giving security to return to
Europe; but that this indulgence be not extended longer than till the first of
April next." In the shippers' letter, they mention: "you must procure a
certificate from the general and admiral, of the Concord being in the
government service, such as the Glasgow packet brought with her, which was of
great service, procured a liberty to arm her, which was refused us; also gave
her a preference for some recruits that went out in her." In another part of
the letter, they say: -- "Captain Lowrie will deliver you the contract for the
coals: we gave it to him, as it perhaps might be of use, as a certificate of
his ship being employed in the government service." Every letter on board
breathes nothing but enmity to this country: and a vast number of them there
are.

It is some time since I recommended to the Congress that they would institute
a court for the trial of prizes made by the continental armed vessels: which I
hope they have ere now taken into their consideration: otherwise I should again
take the liberty of urging it in the most pressing manner.

The conduct of a great number of the Connecticut troops has laid me under the
necessity of calling in a body of the militia much sooner than I apprehended
there would be an occasion for such a step. I was afraid some time ago that
they would incline to go home when the time of their enlistment expired. I
called upon the officers of the several regiments, to know whether they could
prevail on the men to remain until the first of January, or till a sufficient
number of other forces could be raised to supply their place. I suppose they
were deceived themselves: I know they deceived me by assurances that I need be
under no apprehensions on that score, for the men would not leave the lines.
Last friday showed how much they were mistaken, as the major part of the troops
of that colony were going away with their arms and ammunition. We have however,
by threats, persuasion, and the activity of the people of the country, who sent
back many of them that had set out, prevailed upon the most part to stay. There
are about eighty of them missing.

I have called in three thousand men from this province; and general Sullivan,
who lately returned from the province of New Hampshire, having informed me that
a number of men were there ready, at the shortest notice, I have demanded two
thousand from that province. These two bodies, I expect, will be in by the
tenth instant, to make up the deficiency of the Connecticut-men, whom I have
promised to dismiss on that day, as well as the numbers to whom I was obliged
to grant furloughs before any would enlist. -- As the same defection is much to
be apprehended when the time of the Massachusetts Bay, New Hampshire, and
Rhode Island forces is expired, I beg the attention of Congress to this
important affair.

I am informed that it has been the custom of these provinces in the last war,
for the legislative power to order every town to provide a certain quota of men
for the campaign. This or some other mode should be at present adopted, as I am
satisfied the men cannot be had without. This the Congress will please to take
into their immediate consideration. My suspicions on this head I shall also
communicate to the governors Trumbull and Cook, also to the New Hampshire
convention.

The number enlisted in the last week are about thirteen hundred men. By this
you see how slow this important work goes on. * * *

An express is just come in from general Schuyler, with letters from colonel
Arnold and general Montgomery, copies of which I have the honor to enclose you.
Upon the whole, I think affairs carry a pleasing aspect in that quarter. The
reduction of Quebec is an object of such great importance, that I doubt not the
Congress will give every assistance in their power for the accomplishing it
this winter.

By the last accounts from the armed schooners sent to the river St. Lawrence,
I fear we have but little to expect from them: they were falling short of
provision, and mention that they would be obliged to return; which at this time
will be particularly unfortunate, as if they chose a proper station, all the
vessels coming down that river must fall into their hands. The plague, trouble,
and vexation I have had with the crews of all the armed vessels, is
inexpressible. I do believe there is not on earth a more disorderly set, --
every time they come into port, we hear of nothing but mutinous complaints.
Manly's success has lately, and but lately, quieted his people. The crews of
the Washington and Harrison have actually deserted them; so that I have been
under the necessity of ordering the agent to lay the latter up, and get hands
for the other on the best terms he could.

The house of representatives and the honorable board have sent me a vote of
theirs relative to the harbor of Cape-Cod, which you have herewith. I shall
send an officer thither to examine what can be done for its defense, though I
do not think I shall be able to give them such assistance as may be requisite;
for I have at present neither men, powder, nor cannon to spare. The great want
of powder is what the attention of Congress should be particularly applied to.
I dare not attempt any thing offensive, let the temptation or advantage be ever
so great, as I have not more of that most essential article, than will be
absolutely necessary to defend our lines, should the enemy attempt to attack
them.

By recent information from Boston, general How is going to send out a number
of the inhabitants, in order, it is thought, to make more room for his expected
reinforcements. There i^ one part of the information I can hardly give credit
to: -- a sailor says that a number of those coming out have been innoculated,
with design of spreading the smallpox through this country and camp. I have
communicated this to the general court; and recommended their attention thereto.

They are arming one of the transports in Boston, with which they mean to decoy
some of our armed vessels. As we are apprised of their design, I hope they will
be disappointed.

My best respects wait on the gentlemen in Congress, and I am, sir, your most
humble, etc.

G. W.
P. S. I was misinformed when I mentioned that one regiment had arrived at
Boston; a few companies of the seventeenth, and artillery are all that are yet
come. -- Near three hundred persons are landed on Point-Shirley from Boston.



Cambridge, Dec. 7, 1775. SIR,
I WROTE you, the fourth instant, by express, to which I beg you will be
referred. My fears, that Broughton and Sillman would not effect any good
purpose, were too well founded. They are returned, and brought with them three
of the principal inhabitants from the Island of St. Johns'. * * * They brought
the governor's commission, the province seal, etc. etc. As the captains acted
without any warrant for such conduct, I have thought it but justice to
discharge these gentlemen, whose families were left in the utmost distress.

I am credibly informed that James Anderson, the consignee and part owner of
the ship Concord and cargo, is not only unfriendly to American liberty, but
actually in arms against us, -- being captain of the Scotch company at Boston.
Whether your being acquainted with this circumstance, or not, will operate
against the vessel and cargo, I will not take upon me to say: but there are
many articles on board, so absolutely necessary for the army, that, whether she
is made a prize or not, we must have them.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, December 11, 1775. SIR,
* * * The numbers enlisted last week are (...) men. If they go on at this slow
rate, it will be a long time before this army is complete. I have wrote to the
governors of Connecticut and Rhode Island, also to the Convention of
New Hampshire, on this subject. A copy of my letter to them I have the honor to
enclose herewith. A letter to the same purport I sent to the legislature of
this province.

The militia are coming in fast. I am much pleased with the alacrity which the
good people of this province, as well as those of New Hampshire, have shown
upon this occasion. I expect the whole will be in this day and tomorrow, when
what remains of the Connecticut [ troops], who have not enlisted, will have
liberty to go to their fire-sides.

The commissary-general is still, by his indisposition, detained from Camp. He
committed an error when making-out the ration-list: for he was then serving out
(and has continued so to do) six ounces per man, per week, of butter, though it
is not included in the list approved of by Congress. I do not think it would be
expedient to put a stop thereto; as every thing, that would have a tendency to
give the soldiery room for complaint, must be avoided.

The information I received that the enemy intending spreading the smallpox
amongst us, I could not suppose them capable of. -- I now must give some credit
to it, as it has made its appearance on several of those who last came out of
Boston. -- Every necessary precaution has been taken to prevent its being
communicated to this army; and the general court will take care that it does
not spread through the country.

I have not heard that any more troops are arrived at Boston; which is a lucky
circumstance, as the Connecticut troops, I now find, are for the most part gone
off. -- The houses in Boston are lessening every day: They are pulled down,
either for firewood, or to prevent the effects of fire, should we attempt a
bombardment or an attack upon the town. -- Coble-hill is strongly fortified,
without any interruption from the enemy. * * * This is what at present occurs,
from sir, your most obedient, etc.

G. W.
P. S. The weekly returns of enlistments not being yet received for more than
ten regiments, amounting to seven hundred and twenty-five men, I cannot fill up
the blank in this letter: but this, added to the former, makes in the whole
five thousand two hundred and fifty-three.



Cambridge, December. 14, 1775. SIR,
I RECEIVED your favor of the second instant, with the several resolves of
Congress therein enclosed. -- The resolves relative to captures made by
continental armed vessels only want a court established for trial, to make them
complete. This, I hope, will be soon done, as I have taken the liberty to urge
it often to the Congress.

I am somewhat at a loss to know whether I am to raise the two battalions of
marines here, or not. As the delay can be attended with but little
inconvenience, I will wait a further explanation from Congress, before I take
any steps therein.

I am much pleased that the money will be forwarded with all possible
expedition, as it is much wanting; also that Conolly and his associates are
taken. It has been a very fortunate discovery. I make no doubt but that the
Congress will take every necessary measure to dispossess lord Dunmore of his
hold in Virginia; the sooner steps are taken for that purpose, the more
probability there will be of their being effectual. * * * *

I will make application to general How, and propose an exchange for Mr. Ethan
Allen. I am much afraid I shall have a like proposal to make for captain
Martindale of the armed brigantine Washington, and his men, who, it is
reported, was taken a few days past by a man-of-war, and carried into Boston.
-- We cannot expect to be always successful.

You will doubtless hear of the barbarity of captain Wallace on Conanicut
island, ere this reaches your hands.

About a hundred and fifty more of the poor inhabitants are come out of Boston.
The smallpox rages all over the town: such of the militia as had it not
before, are now under innoculation. This, I apprehend, is a weapon of defense
they are using against us. What confirms me in this opinion, is, that I have
information that they are tearing up the pavement, to be provided against a
bombardment.

I wrote you this day by Messrs. Pennel and De Pliarne, who will lay before the
Congress, or a committee thereof, proposals for furnishing the continent with
arms and ammunition. I refer you to themselves for further particulars.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

OBSERVATIONS OF THE DAY.
Chelsea, December. 16, 1775.
LAST evening, eight men came in a boat from Boston, to our guard at the ferry,
-- six of them captains of vessels. -- They brought the following account:

Yesterday, one large mortar was carried over to Bunker's-hill: -- the troops
filling water, carrying it on board the transports: -- provisions scarce -- not
more than sufficient for six weeks. One regiment of foot, and three companies
of light horse, sail for Halifax this day.

Dorchester, December 16, 1775.
Sailed out of Boston harbor this morning, eight large and two small vessels,
taken to be tenders; -- by their firing, appeared to be going a voyage out to
sea.

Mr. Joshua Pico came last night from Boston. He confirms the information that
the regiment of foot, and some companies of the light horse, were preparing to
embark for Halifax.

Cambridge, December 16, 1775. SIR,
The information, contained in the above, coming so many different ways,
corroborated by several vessels having sailed this day from Boston, -- I
thought it my duty to transmit it to you. Though Halifax is the place given out
for their destination, it is possible they may be bound elsewhere. I shall
communicate this intelligence to governors Cook and Trumbull, and to the
convention of New York, for their government.

I remain, sir, your most obedient, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, Dec. 19, 1775. SIR,
CAPTAIN Manly, of the Lee armed schooner, took an^ sent into Beverly the sloop
Betsey, A. Atkinson master. She is an armed vessel, dispatched by lord Dunmore,
with Indian corn, potatoes, and oats, for the army in Boston. The packets of
letters found on board, I have the honor to send you with this by captain James
Chambers, they being of so much importance, that I do not think it would be
prudent to trust them by a common express.

As lord Dunmore's schemes are fully laid open in these letters, I need not
point out to the Congress the necessity there is of a vigorous exertion being
adopted by them, to dispossess his lordship of the strong hold he has got in
Virginia. -- I do not mean to dictate; but I am sure they will pardon me for
giving them freely my opinion, which is that the fate of America a good deal
depends on his being obliged to evacuate Norfolk this winter, or not.

I have Kirkland well secured, and think I will send him to you for
examination. By most of the letters relative to him, he is a dangerous fellow.
John Stewart's letters and papers are of a very interesting nature. Governor
Tonyn's and many other letters from Augustine showing the weakness of the
place; at the same time, of what vast consequence it would be for us to possess
ourselves of it, and the great quantity of ammunition contained in the forts.
-- Indeed these papers are of so great consequence, that I think this but
little inferior to any prize our famous Manly has taken.

We now work at our ease on Leechmore's hill. On discovering our party there
yesterday morning, the ship which lay opposite began a cannonade, to which
Mount Horam added some shells. -- One of our men was wounded. -- We fired a few
shot from two eighteen-pounders which are placed on Coble-hill, and soon
obliged the ship to shift her station. She now lies in the ferry-way: and,
except a few shells from the mount in Boston (which do no execution), we have
no interruption in prosecuting our works, which will in a very short time be
completed. When this is done, -- when we have powder to sport with, -- I think,
if the Congress resolve on the execution of the proposal made relative to the
town of Boston, it can be done.

I have sent a letter in this day to general How, of which a copy goes
herewith. My reason for pointing out brigadier-general Prescot as the object
who is to suffer Mr. Allen's fate, is, that, by letters from general Schuyler,
and copies of letters from general Montgomery to Schuyler, I am given to
understand that Prescot is the cause of Allen's sufferings. -- I thought it
best to be decisive on the occasion, as did the generals whom I consulted
thereon.

The returns of men enlisted since my last, amount to about eighteen hundred,
making in the whole seven thousand one hundred and forty. The militia that are
come in, both from this province and New Hampshire, are very fine-looking men,
and go through their duty with great alacrity. The dispatch made, both by the
people in marching and by the legislative powers in complying with my
requisition, has given me infinite satisfaction.

Your letter of the eighth instant, with the explanatory resolve respecting my
calling forth the militia and minute-men, is come to hand; to which I shall pay
all due attention. You have removed all the difficulties which I labored under,
about the two battalions of marines. I shall obey the orders of Congress in
looking out for proper officers to command that corpse. I make no doubt but,
when the money arrives to pay off the arrears and the month's advance, that it
will be a great encouragement for the men to enlist.

Enclosed is a letter I lately received from Mr. James Lovell.

His case is truly pitiable. I wish some mode could be fallen upon to relieve
him from the cruel situation he is now in. -- I am sensible of the impropriety
of exchanging a soldier for a citizen: but there is something so cruelly
distressing in regard to this gentleman, that I dare say you will take it under
your consideration.

I am, with great respect, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, Dec. 25, 1775. SIR,
I HAD the honor to address myself to you on the nineteenth instant, since
which I have received undoubted information that the genuine instructions given
to Conolly have not reached your hands; that they are very artfully concealed
in the tree of his saddle, and covered with canvas so nicely that they are
scarcely discernable; that those which were found upon him were intended to
deceive, if he were caught. -- You will most certainly have his saddle taken to
pieces, in order to discover this deep-laid plot.

Enclosed is a copy of general Howe's letter in answer to the one I wrote him
the eighteenth instant. The conduct I am to observe toward brigadier Prescot
in consequence of these letters, the Congress will oblige me by determining for
me.

The gentlemen by whom you sent the money are arrived. -- The sum they brought,
though large, is not sufficient to answer the demands of the army, which at
this time are remarkably heavy: there is three month's pay due, one month's
advance, two dollars for each blanket -- the arms, that are left by those who
are dismissed, to be paid for, -- besides the demands which are on the
commissary and quarter-master-generals. You will therefore see the necessity of
another remittance, which I beg may be as soon as you conveniently can.

I will take the opportunity of the return of these gentlemen, to send colonel
Kirkland to you for examination, and that you may dispose of him as to you may
seem proper.

A committee from the general court of this province called on me the other
day, informing me that they were in great want of ordnance for the defense of
the colony; that, if what belonged to them, now in use here, was kept for the
continent, they would be under the necessity of providing themselves with
others; of course what is kept must be paid for. There are many of the cannon
of very little use; such of them as are good, I cannot at present part with:
perhaps when I receive the supply from New York and Canada, it may be in my
power to spare them.

Mr. Wadsworth has sent in his report respecting Cape-Cod harbor, a copy of
which you will receive herewith; also a letter from Mr. Jacob Bailey, put into
my hands by colonel Little. -- It contains some things that may not be unworthy
the consideration of Congress.

We have made good progress in the works of Leechmore's point. They would have
been finished ere this, but for the severity of the weather, which prevents our
people from working.

I received a letter from governor Cook, which expresses the fears of the
people of Rhode Island, lest the ships, which we had information were sailed
with some troops on board, were destined for Newport. I sent major general Lee
there, to point out to them such defense as he may think the place capable of.
I sincerely wish he may be able to do it with effect, as that place, in its
present state, is an asylum for such as are disaffected to American liberty.

Our returns of enlistments, to this day, amount to eight thousand five hundred
men.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Enclosed is an estimate of the demands of the army.



Cambridge, Dec. 31, 1775. SIR,
I WROTE to you the twenty-fifth instant; since which I am not honored with any
of your favors. The estimate I then enclosed you was calculated to pay the
troops, etc. up to the first of January. That cannot be done for want of funds
in the paymaster-general's hands; which causes a great murmuring amongst those
who are going off. -- The monthly expenses of this army amount to near two
hundred and seventy-five thousand dollars, which I take the liberty of
recommending to the observation of Congress, that their future remittances may
be governed thereby.

It sometimes happens that persons would wish to deposit money in the hands of
the paymaster-general, for his bills on the treasury at Philadelphia. He has
hitherto declined such offers, not having authority from Congress to draw. --
Would it not be proper to give this power? -- If it should be approved of, you
will please to point out the mode that the Congress would choose to have it done
in.

The clothing sent to the quarter-master-general is not sufficient to put half
our army into regimentals; nor is there a possibility of getting any quantity
here. I have wrote to general Schuyler, that I wish what was lodged at Albany
could be spared for these troops, as General Montgomery would clothe the men
under his command at Montreal. If this can be done, it will be of infinite
service; and no time should be lost in forwarding them to this camp.

In forming the regiments for the new establishment, I thought it but justice
to appoint the officers, de^ached under colonel Arnold, to commissions in them.
Their absence at present is of very great detriment to the service, especially
in recruiting: I would therefore wish, if the Congress intend raising troops in
or for Canada, that they could be taken in there. The sooner I have their
opinion of this matter, the better, that, if they can be commissioned in
Canada, I may appoint officers here to replace them.

Enclosed you have a copy of representation sent to me by the legislative body
of this province, respecting four companies stationed at Braintree, Weymouth,
and Hingham. As they were never regimented, and were doing duty at a distance
from the rest of the army, I did not know whether to consider them as a part of
it; nor do I think myself authorized to direct payment for them without the
approbation of Congress.

It has been represented to me that the free negroes who have served in this
army are very much dissatisfied at being discarded. As it is to be apprehended
they may seek employ in the ministerial army, I have presumed to depart from
the resolution respecting them, and have given license for their being
enlisted. If this is disapproved of by Congress, I will put a stop to it.

* * * I must remark that the pay of the assistant engineers is so very small,
that we cannot expect men of science will engage in it. Those gentlemen, who
are in that station, remained under the expectation that an additional
allowance would be made them by the respective provinces in which they were
appointed, to that allowed by the Congress.

Captain Freeman arrived this day at camp from Canada. He left Quebec the
twenty-fourth ultimo, in consequence of general Carleton's proclamation, which
I have the honor to send you herewith. He saw colonel Arnold the twenty-sixth,
and says that he was joined at Point-a-tremble, by general Montgomery, the
first instant; -- that they were about two thousand strong, and were making
every preparation for attacking Quebec; -- that general Carleton had with him
about twelve hundred men, the majority of whom are sailors; -- that it was his
opinion the French would give up the place if they get the same conditions
granted to the inhabitants of Montreal. * * *

Captains Semple and Harbeson take under their care, Mr. Kirkland. * * *
Captain Mathews and Mr. Robinson will accompany them. The two latter were taken
prisoners by lord Dunmore, who was sending them to Boston, from whence there is
little doubt but they would be forwarded to England, to which place I am
credibly informed captain Martindale and the crew of the Washington are sent;
also colonel Allen, and the prisoners taken with him in Canada. This may
account for general Howe's silence on the subject of an exchange of prisoners
mentioned in my letter to him.

General Lee is just returned from his excursion to Rhode Island; -- he has
pointed out the best method the island would admit of for its defense; he has
endeavored all in his power to make friends of those who were our enemies. You
have, enclosed, a specimen of his abilities in that way, for your perusal. I am
of opinion, that, if the same plan was pursued through every province, it would
have a very good effect.

I have long had it on my mind to mention to Congress that frequent
applications had been made to me respecting the chaplain's pay, which is too
small to encourage men of abilities. Some of them, who have left their flocks,
are obliged to pay the parson acting for them, more than they receive. I need
not point out the great utility of gentlemen whose lives and conversation are
unexceptionable, being employed for that service, in this army. There are two
ways of making it worth the attention of such: one is an advancement of their
pay; the other that one chaplain be appointed to two regiments. This last, I
think, may be done without inconvenience. I beg leave to recommend this matter
to Congress, whose sentiments hereon I shall impatiently expect.

Upon a farther conversation with captain Freeman, he is of opinion that
general Montgomery has with him near three thousand men, including colonel
Arnold's. He says that lord Pit had received repeated orders from his father
to return home; in consequence of which, he had embarked some time in October,
with a captain Green who was master of a vessel belonging to Philadelphia.

By a number of salutes in Boston harbor yesterday, I fancy admiral Shuldham is
arrived. Two large ships were seen coming in.

Our enlistments now amount to nine thousand six hundred and fifty.

Those gentlemen, who were made prisoners by lord Dunmore being left destitute
of money and necessaries, I have advanced them a hundred pounds lawful money
belonging to the public, for which I have taken captain Mathews's draught on
the treasury of Virginia, which goes enclosed.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. You have, enclosed, the returns of the army.



Cambridge, January 4, 1776. SIR,
SINCE my last of the thirty-first ultimo, I have been honored with your favor
of the twenty-second, enclosing sundry resolves, which shall, in matters they
respect, be made the rule of my conduct.

The resolution relative to the troops in Boston, I beg the favor of you, sir,
to assure the Congress shall be attempted to be put in execution the first
moment I see a probability of success, and in such a way as a council of
officers shall think most likely to produce it: but if this should not happen
as soon as you may expect or my wishes prompt to, I request that Congress may
be pleased to advert to my situation, and do me the justice to believe, that
circumstance, and not want of inclination (...) the cause of delay.

It is not in the pages of history, perhaps, to furnish a case like ours; -- to
maintain a post within musket shot of the enemy, for six months together,
without Left blank in the original to guard against the danger of miscarriage.
-- Read, "without powder."
(...), and at the same time to disband one army, and recruit another, within
that distance of twenty odd British regiments, -- is. more, probably, than ever
was attempted. But if we succeed as well in the last, as we have heretofore in
the first, I shall think it the most fortunate event of my whole life.

By a very intelligent gentleman, a Mr. Hutchinson, from Boston, I learn, that
it was admiral Shuldham that came into the harbor on saturday last; -- that two
of the five regiments from Cork are arrived at Halifax; -- two others have
sailed for Quebec; but what was become of them, could not be told: -- and the
other (the fifty-fifth) has just got into Boston. Certain it is also, that the
greater part of the seventeenth regiment is arrived there, Whether we are to
conclude from hence that more than five regiments have been sent out, or that
the companies of the seventeenth, arrived at Boston, are part of the regiments
destined for Hallifax and Quebec, I know not.

We also learn from this gentleman and others, that the troops, embarked for
Halifax (as mentioned in my letter of the sixteenth) were really designed for
that place, but recalled from Nantasket road, upon advice being received of the
above regiments there. I am also informed of a fleet now getting ready under
the convoy of the Scarborough and Fowey men-of-war, -- consisting of five
transports and two bomb vessels, with about three hundred marines, and several
flat bottomed boats. It is whispered that they are designed for Newport, but
generally thought in Boston, that it is meant for Long Island: and it is
probable it will be followed by more troops, as the other transports are taking
in water, -- to lie, as others say, in Nantasket road, to be out of the ice. A
large quantity of biscuit is also baking.

As the real design cannot with certainty be known, I submit it, with all due
deference, to the superior judgment of Congress, whether it would not be
confident with prudence, to have some of the Jersey troops thrown into
New York, to prevent an evil, which would be almost irremediable, should it
happen, -- I mean, the landing of troops at that place, or upon Long Island,
near it.

As it is possible you may not yet have received his majesty's " most gracious"
speech, I do myself the honor to enclose one of many, which were sent out of
Boston yesterday. It is full of * * *, and explicitly holds forth his royal
will to be, that vigorous measures must be pursued, to deprive us of our * * *.
These measures, whatever they be, I hope will be opposed by more vigorous ones,
and rendered unavailing and fruitless, though sanctioned and authorized by the
name of majesty, -- a name, which ought to promote the blessings of his people,
and not their oppression.

I am, sir, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, Jan. 11, 1776. SIR,
EVERY account I have out of Boston, confirms the embarkation of troops
mentioned in my last, which, from the season of the year, and other
circumstances, must be destined for some expedition to the southward of this. I
have therefore thought it prudent to send major general Lee to New York. I have
given him letters recommendatory to governor Trumbull, and to the committee of
safety at New York. I have good hopes that in Connecticut he will get many
volunteers, who (I have some reason to think) will accompany him on this
expedition, without more expense to the continent than their maintenance. But
should it be otherwise, and that they should expect pay, I think it is a
trifling consideration, when put in competition with the importance of the
object, which is to put the city of New York, with such parts of the North
river and Long Island as to him shall seem proper, in that state of defense,
which the season of the year and circumstances will admit of, -- so as, if
possible, to prevent the enemy from forming a lodgment in that government,
which, I am afraid, contains too many persons disaffected to the cause of
liberty and America. I have also wrote to lord Stirling to give him all the
assistance that he can with the troops under his command, in the continental
service, provided it does not interfere with any orders he may receive from
Congress relative to them.

I hope the Congress will approve of my conduct in sending general Lee on this
expedition: -- I am sure I mean it well; as experience teaches us that it is
much easier to prevent an enemy from posting themselves, than it is to dislodge
them after they have got possession.

The evening of the eighth instant, a party of our men, under the command of
major Knoulton, were ordered to go and burn some houses which lay at the foot
of Bunker's-hill, and at the head of Charleston. They were also ordered to
bring off the guard, which, we expected, consisted, of an officer and thirty
men. They crossed the mill-dam about half after eight o'clock, and gallantly
executed their business, -- having burned eight houses, and brought with them a
sergeant and four privates of the tenth regiment. There was but one man more
there, who making some resistance, they were obliged to dispatch. The gun that
killed him was the only one discharged by our men, though several hundred were
fired by the enemy from within their works, but in so confused a manner, that
not one of our people was hurt.

Our enlistments go on very heavily.

I am, with great respect, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, Jan. 14, 1776. SIR,
I AM exceedingly sorry that I am under the necessity of applying to you, and
calling the attention of Congress to the state of our arms, which is truly
alarming. Upon the dissolution of the old army, I was apprehensive that the new
would be deficient in this instance: and, that the want might be as
inconsiderable as possible, I gave it out in orders, that the arms of such men
as did not re-enlist (or such of them as were good) should be retained at the
prices which should be affixed by persons appointed to inspect and value them:
and, that we might be sure of them, I added that there would be a stoppage of
pay for the months of November and December, from those who should carry their
firelocks away without their being first examined. I hoped, by these
precautions, to have procured a considerable number: but, sir, I find with much
concern, that from the badness of the arms, and the disobedience of too many in
bearing them off without a previous inspection -- very few were collected.
Neither are we to expect that many will be brought in by the new recruits, the
officers, who are out enlisting, having reported that few men who have arms
will enlist in the service; and that they are under the disagreeable
alternative of taking men without arms, or of getting none. Unhappy situation,
and much to be deplored! -- especially when we have every reason to convince
us, that we have to contend with a formidable army, well provided of every
necessary; and that there will be a most vigorous exertion of ministerial
vengeance against us, as soon as they think themselves in a condition for it. I
hope it is in the power of Congress to afford us relief: -- if it is not, what
must, what can be done?

Our treasury is almost exhausted, and the demands against it very
considerable. A constant supply of money, to answer every claim and exigency,
would much promote the good of the service. In the common affairs of life, it
is useful: in war, it is absolutely necessary and essential. I would beg leave,
too, to remind you of the tents, and their importance; -- hoping that if an
opportunity has offered, you have procured them. I fear that our army will not
be raised to the new establishment in any reasonable time, if ever: the
enlisting goes on so very slow, that it almost seems at an end.

In my letter of the fourth instant, I wrote you that I had received certain
intelligence from a Mr. Hutchinson and others, that two of the five regiments
from Cork were arrived at Halifax, one at Boston, and the two others had sailed
for Quebec, and had not been heard of. I am now assured (as a matter to be
relied on) by four captains of ships, who left England about the second of
November, and who appear to be men of veracity, that the whole of these
regiments (except the two companies that arrived at Boston some time ago), when
they sailed, were at Milford Haven, where they had been obliged to put in, by a
violent storm, the nineteenth of October; that they would not be able to leave
it for a considerable time, as they were under the necessity of repairing their
vessels, and getting some new ones taken up. -- Such is the uncertainty and
contradiction in what I now hear, that it is not possible to know what to
believe or disbelieve-

I wrote to the general court yesterday, and to the convention of
New Hampshire, immediately upon seeing the great deficiency in our arms, --
praying that they would interest themselves in the matter, and furnish me with
all in their power. Whether I shall get any, or what quantity, I cannot
determine, not having received their answers. -- The same application will be
made to the governments of Connecticut and Rhode Island.

I do myself the honor to send you sundry newspapers I received from the
abovementioned captains, as they may be later than any you have seen, and
contain some interesting intelligence.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, Jan. 19, 1776. SIR,
TAKING it for granted that general Schuyler has not only informed you of the
fall of the brave and much-to-be-lamented general Montgomery, but of the
situation of our affair^ in Canada (as related by general Wooster, colonel
Arnold, colonel Campbell, and others), I shall not take up much more of your
time on this subject, than is necessary to enclose you a copy of his letter to
me, with the result thereon, as appears by the council of war, which I
immediately summoned on the occasion, and at which Mr. Adams, by my particular
desire, was good enough to attend.

It may appear strange, sir, as I had not men to spar^ from these lines, that I
should presume (without first sending to Congress, and obtaining an express
direction) to recommend to the governments of Massachusetts, Connecticut, and
New Hampshire, to raise each a regiment, on the continental account, for this
service. I wish most ardently that the urgency of the case would have admitted
of the delay. I wish also that the purport of general Schuyler's letter had
not, unavoidably as it were, laid me under an indispensable obligation to do
it: -- for having informed you in his letter (a copy of which he enclosed me)
of his dependence on this quarter, for men, I thought you might also have some
reliance on my exertions. This consideration, added to my fears of the fatal
consequences of delay, -- to an information of your having designed three
thousand men for Canada, -- to a belief, founded chiefly on general Schuyler's
letters, that few or none of them were raised, -- and to my apprehensions for
New York, which led me to think that no troops could be spared from that
quarter, -- induced me to lose not a moment's time in throwing in a force
there; being well assured that general Carleton will improve, to the utmost,
the advantages gained, leaving no artifices untried, to fix the Canadians and
Indians (who, I find, are too well disposed to take part with the strongest) in
his interest.

If these reasons are not sufficient to justify my conduct in the opinion of
Congress, -- if the measure contravenes any resolution of theirs, -- they will
please to countermand the levying and marching of the regiments as soon as
possible, and do me the justice to believe that my intentions were good, if my
judgment has erred.

The Congress will please to observe, that the measures of supporting our posts
in Canada appeared of such exceeding great importance, that the general
officers (agreeing with me in sentiment, and unwilling to lay any burden which
can possibly be avoided, -- although it may turn out an ill-timed piece of
parsimony) have resolved that the three regiments of Canada shall be part of
the thirteen militia regiments which were requested to reinforce this army, --
as appears by the minutes of another council of war, held on the sixteenth
instant. I shall (being much hurried and fatigued) add no more in this letter,
than my duty to Congress, and that I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.
P. S. I enclose you a copy of my letter to the governments of Massachusetts,
Connecticut, and New Hampshire; also a copy of a resolution of this colony, in
answer to an application of mine for arms.

Since writing the above, I have been informed by a message from the general
court of Massachusetts, that they have resolved upon the raising of a regiment
for Canada, and appointed the field officers for it, in the western parts of
this government. I am also informed by express from Governor Trumbull, that he
and his council of safety had agreed upon the raising of a regiment for the
same purpose; which was anticipating my application to that government.

If commissions (and they are applied for) are to be given by Congress to the
three regiments going to Canada, you will please to have them forwarded, as I
have none by me for that purpose.



Cambridge, Jan. 24, 1776. SIR,
THE commissary general being at length [ recovered] from a long and painful
illness, I have it in my power to comply with the requisition of Congress, in
forwarding an estimate of the expense attending his office, as also that of the
quarter-master-general.

You will please to observe that the commissary, by his account of the matter,
has entered into no special agreement with any of the persons he has found
occasion to employ (as those, to whose names sums are annexed, are of their own
fixing), but left it to Congress to ascertain their wages. I shall say nothing
therefore on this head, farther than relates to the proposition of Mr. * * *,
to be allowed one-eighth for his trouble and the delivery of the other
seven-eighths of provisions, which to me appears exorbitant in the extreme,
however conformable it may be to custom and usage: I therefore think that
reasonable stipends had better be fixed upon. Both the quartermaster and
commissary-generals assure me that they do not employ a single person
uselessly: and as I have too good an opinion of them to think they would
deceive me, I believe them.

I shall take the liberty, in this place, of recommending the expediency,
indeed the absolute necessity, of appointing fit and proper persons to settle
the accounts of this army. To do it with precision, requires time, care, and
attention: the longer it is left undone, the more intricate they will be, the
more liable to error, and difficult to explain and rectify; -- as also the
persons in whose hands they are (if disposed to take undue advantage) will be
less subject to detection. I have been as attentive as the nature of my office
would admit of, in granting warrants for money on the paymaster: but it would
be absolutely impossible for me to go into an examination of all the accounts
incident to this army, and the vouchers appertaining to them, without devoting
so large a portion of my time to the business, as might not only prove
injurious, but fatal to it in other respects. This ought, in my humble opinion,
to be the particular business of a select committee of Congress, or one
appointed by them, who, once in three months at furthest, should make a
settlement with the officers in the different departments.

Having met with no encouragement from the governments of Massachusetts and
New Hampshire, from my application for arms and expecting no better from
Connecticut and Rhode Island, I have as the last expedient, sent one or two
officers from each regiment into the country, with money to try if they can
buy. In what manner they succeed, Congress shall be informed as soon as they
return.

Congress, in my last, would discover my motives for streng^^ening these lines
with the militia: but whether, -- as the w^^ther turns out exceedingly mild,
insomuch as to promise nothing favorable from ice, -- and no appearance of
powder, -- I shall be able to attempt any thing decisive, time only can
determine. No man upon earth wishes more ardently to destroy the nest in
Boston, than I do: -- no person would be willing to go greater lengths than I
shall, to accomplish it, if it shall be thought advisable. But if we have
neither powder to bombard with, nor ice to pass on, we shall be in no better
situation than we have been in all the year: -- we shall be worse, because
their works are stronger.

I have accounts from Boston, which I think may be relied on, that general
Clinton, with about four or five hundred men, has left that place within these
four days. Whether this is part of the detachment which was making up (as
mentioned in my letter of the fourth instant, and then at Nantasket) or not, is
not in my power to say. If it is designed for New York or Long Island as some
think, throwing a body of troops there may prove a fortunate circumstance. If
they go farther south agreeable to the conjectures of others, I hope there will
be men to receive them.

Notwithstanding the positive assertions of the four captains from Portsmouth,
noticed in my letter of the fourteenth, I am now convinced from several
corroborating circumstances, -- the accounts of deserters, and of a lieutenant
Hill, of Lord Percy's regiment, who left Ireland the fifth of November, and was
taken by a privateer from Newburyport, -- that the seventeenth and fifty-fifth
regiments are arrived at Boston, and other troops at Halifax, agreeable to the
information of Hutchinson and others. Lieutenant Hill says that the transports
of two regiments only were forced into Milford Haven.

Congress will think me a little remiss, I fear, when I inform them that I have
done nothing yet toward raising the battallions of marines: but I hope to
stand exculpated from blame, when they hear the reason, which was, that already
having twenty-six incomplete regiments, I thought it would be adding to an
expense, already-great, in officers, to set two entire corpse of officers on
foot when perhaps we should not add ten men a week by it to our present
numbers. In this opinion the general officers have concurred, which induced me
to suspend the matter a little longer. -- Our enlistments, for the two last
weeks, have not amounted to a thousand men, and are diminishing. The regiment
for Canada (it is thought) will soon be filled, as the men are to choose all but
their field officers, who are appointed by the court.

On sunday evening, thirteen of the Caghnewaga Indians arrived here on a visit.
I shall take care that they be so entertained during their stay, that they may
return impressed with sentiments of friendship for us, and also of our great
strength. One of them is colonel Louis, who honored me with a visit once before.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, Jan. 30, 1776. SIR,
YOUR favors of the sixth and twentieth instant I received yesterday, with the
several resolves of Congress alluded to: for which I return you my thanks.

Knowing the great importance Canada will be of to us in the present
interesting contest, and the relief our friends there stand in need of, I
should be happy, were it in my power to detach a battalion from this camp: but
it cannot be done. On the nineteenth instant, I had the honor to write to you,
which will fully convey the resolutions of a council of war, and the sentiments
of the general officers here, as to the propriety and expediency of sending
troops from these lines, for the defense of which we have been and now are
obliged to call in the militia; -- to which I beg leave to refer you. You may
rest assured that my endeavors and exertions shall not be wanting, to stimulate
the governments of Connecticut and New Hampshire to raise and forward
reinforcements as fast as possible; nor in any other instance that will promote
the expedition.

I shall, in obedience to the order of Congress, though interdicted by general
How, propose an exchange of governor Skene for Mr. Lovell and family, and
shall be happy to have an opportunity of putting this deserving man (who has
distinguished his fidelity and regard to his country to be too great for
persecution and cruelty to overcome) in any post agreeable to his wishes and
inclination.

I do not know that there is any particular rank annexed to the office of
aids-de-camp. Generally they are captains, and rank as such: but higher rank is
often given on account of particular merit and particular circumstances. --
Aids to the king have the rank of colonels. -- Whether any distinction should
be made between those of your commander-in-chief and the other generals, I
really know not: I think there ought.

You may rely that Conolly had instructions concealed in his saddle. Mr. * * *
who was one of lord Dunmore's family, and another gentleman who wishes his name
not to be mentioned, saw them cased in tin, put in the tree, and covered over.
He probably has exchanged his saddle, or withdrew the papers when it was
mended, as you conjecture. Those that have been discovered are sufficiently
bad; but I doubt not of the others being worse, and containing more diabolical
and extensive plans. -- I hope he will be taken proper care of, and meet with
rewards equal to his merits.

I shall appoint officers in the places of those who are in Canada, as I am
fully persuaded they will wish to continue there, for making our conquest
complete in that quarter. -- I wish their bravery and valor may be attended
with the smiles of fortune.

It gives me great pleasure to hear of the measures Congress are taking for
manufacturing powder. I hope their endeavors will be crowned with success. I
too well know and regret the want of it. It is scarcely possible to describe
the disadvantages an army must labor under, when not provided with a sufficient
supply of this necessary. It may seem strange, that, after having received
about eleven tons, added to about five tons which I found here, and no general
action has happened, we should be so deficient in this article and require
more. But you will please to consider, that, besides its being in its nature
subject to waste, and (whilst the men lay in bad tents) unavoidably damaged by
severe and heavy rains (which could not have been prevented, unless it had been
entirely withdrawn from the men, and an attack hazarded against us without
ammunition in their hands) -- the armed vessels, our own occasional firings,
and some small supplies I have been obliged to afford the seaport towns
threatened with destruction, -- to which may be added the supply to the
militia, and going off of the old troops, -- have occasioned, and ever will, a
large consumption of it, and waste, in spite of all the care in the world. The
king's troops never have less than sixty rounds a man in their possession,
independent of their stores. -- To supply an army of twenty thousand men in
this manner, would take near four hundred barrels, allowing nothing for stores,
artillery, etc. I have been always afraid to place more than twelve or fifteen
rounds at a time in the hands of our men, lest, any accident happening to it,
we should be lest destitute, and be undone. -- I have been thus particular, not
only to show our poverty, but to exculpate myself from even a suspicion of
unnecessary waste.

I shall inform the paymaster-general of the resolution of Congress respecting
his draughts, and the mode and account of them.

The companies at Chelsea and Malden are and have always been regimented. -- It
is not my intention to replace with continental troops the independent
companies at Hingham, Weymouth, and Braintree. These places are exposed, but
not more than Cape Ann, Beverly, Salem, Marblehead, etc. etc. etc.

Is it the intention of Congress that the officers of the army should pay
postage? -- They are not exempted by the resolve of the ninth instant.

The Congress will be pleased, I have no doubt, to recollect that the five
hundred thousand dollars, now coming, are but little more than enough to bring
us up to the first day of this month; that tomorrow will be the last of it:
and, by their resolves, the troops are to be paid monthly.

I wish it was in my power to furnish Congress with such a general as they
desire, to send to Canada. Since the unhappy reverse of our affairs in that
quarter, general Schuyler has informed me, that, though he had thoughts of
declining the service before, he would now act. My letter of the eleventh will
inform them of general Lee's being at New York. He will be ready to obey their
orders, should they incline to send him: -- but, if I am not greatly deceived,
he or some other spirited able officer will be wanted there in the spring, if
not sooner; as we have undoubted intelligence that general Clinton has sailed
with some troops. -- The reports of their number are various, from between four
and five hundred to nineteen companies of grenadiers and light infantry. It is
also imagined that the regiments, which were to sail the first of December, are
intended for that place or Virginia. -- General Putnam is a most valuable man,
and a fine executive officer: but I do not know how he would conduct in a
separate department. He is a younger major general than Mr. Schuyler, who, as I
observed, having determined to continue in the service, will, I expect, repair
into Canada. -- A copy of my letter to him, on this and the other subjects, I
enclose you, as it will explain my motives for not stopping the regiments from
these governments.

When captain Cochran arrives, I will give him every assistance in my power, in
obedience to the orders of Congress: but I fear it will be the means of laying
up our own vessels, as these people will not bear the distinction. Should this
be the consequence, it will be highly prejudicial to us, as we sometimes pick
up their provision-vessels, and may continue to distress them in this way.

Last week captain Manly took a ship and brig bound to Boston from Whitehaven,
with coals chiefly, and some potatoes, for the army. I have for his great
vigilance and industry, appointed him commodore of our little squadron; and he
now hoists his flag on board the schooner Hancock.

I congratulate you upon the recovery of Smith, and am exceedingly glad to hear
of the measures Congress are taking for the general defense of the continent.
The clouds thicken fast: -- where they will burst, I know not: but we should be
armed at all points.

I have not succeeded in my applications to these governments for arms. They
have returned for answer, that they cannot furnish any. -- Whether I shall be
more lucky in the last resource left in this quarter, I cannot determine,
having not received returns from the officers sent out to purchase of the
people. I greatly fear that but very few will be procured in this way, as they
are exceedingly scarce, and but a small part of what there are, fit for
service, -- when they make their report you shall be informed.

The quarter-master-general has just received from general Schuyler clothing
for the soldiery, amounting to about seventeen hundred pounds York currency. It
has come very seasonably, as they are in great want, and will contribute a
little to their relief.

Since writing the above, I saw Mr. * * *, and mentioning that nothing had been
found in the tree of Conolly's saddle, he told me there had been a mistake in
the matter; that the instructions were artfully concealed on the two pieces of
wood which are on the mail-pillion of his portmanteau-saddle; that, by order of
lord Dunmore he saw them contrived for the purpose, the papers put in, and
first covered with tin, and over that with a waxed canvas cloth. -- He is so
exceedingly pointed and clear in his information, that I have no doubt of its
being true. -- I could wish them to be discovered, as I think they contain some
curious and extraordinary plans.

In my letter of the twenty-fourth instant, I mentioned the arrival of thirteen
of our Caghnewaga friends. They honored me with a talk today, as did three of
the tribes of the St. John's and Pasmiquoddi Indians; -- copies of which I beg
leave to enclose you. I shall write to general Schuyler respecting the tender
of service made by the former, and not to call for their assistance, unless he
shall at any time want it, or be under the necessity of doing it to prevent
their taking the side of our enemies.

I had the honor of writing to you on the nineteenth of November, and then I
informed you of having engaged two persons to go to Nova Scotia on the business
recommended in your letter of the tenth: and also that the state of the army
would not then admit of a sufficient force being sent, for carrying into
execution the views of Congress respecting the dock-yards, etc. -- I would now
beg leave to mention, that if the persons, sent for information, should report
favorably of the expediency and practicability of the measure; it will not be
in my power to detach any men from these lines: the situation of our affairs
will not allow it. -- I think it would be advisable to raise them in the
eastern parts of this government. If it is attempted, it must be by people from
the country. -- A colonel * * * and a captain * * * have been with me: they
think the men necessary may be easily engaged there, and the measure
practicable: -- provided there are not more than two hundred British troops at
Halifax, they are willing and ready to embark in the matter, upon the terms
mentioned in their plan, which I enclose you. I would wish you to advert to the
considerations inducing them to the expedition, as I am not without
apprehension, should it be undertaken upon their plan, that the innocent and
guilty will be involved in one common ruin. -- I presume they do not expect to
receive more than the five or ten thousand pounds mentioned in their scheme,
and to be at every expense. -- If we had men to spare, it might be undertaken
for less than either, I conceive. -- Perhaps, if Congress do not adopt their
proposition, they will undertaken to raise men for that particular purpose, who
may be disbanded as soon as it is effected, and upon the same terms that are
allowed the continental troops in general. -- Whatever may be the determination
of Congress upon the subject, you will please to communicate it to me
immediately: for the season most favorable for the enterprise, is advancing
fast; and we may expect in the spring that there will be more troops there, and
the measure be more difficult to execute.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, Feb. 9, 1776. SIR,
THE purport of this letter will be directed to a single object: -- through you
I mean to lay it before Congress; and -- at the same time I beg their serious
attention to the subject, -- to ask pardon for intruding an opinion, not only
unasked, but, in some measure repugnant to their resolves.

The disadvantages attending the limited enlistment of troops are too apparent
to those who are eyewitnesses to them, to render any animadversions necessary:
but to gentlemen at a distance, whose attention is engrossed by a thousand
important objects, the case may be otherwise.

That this cause precipitated the fate of the brave and much-to-be-lamented
general Montgomery, and brought on the defeat which followed thereupon, I have
not the most distant doubt: -- for, had he not been apprehensive of the troops
leaving him at so important a crisis, but continued the blockade at Quebec, a
capitulation (from the best accounts I have been able to collect) must
inevitably have followed. And that we were not at one time obliged to dispute
these lines under disadvantageous circumstances (proceeding from the same
cause, to wit, the troops disbanding of themselves before the militia could be
got in), is to me a matter of wonder and astonishment; and proves that general
How was either unacquainted with our situation, or restrained by his
instructions from putting any thing to a hazard till his reinforcements should
arrive.

The instance of general Montgomery -- (I mention it, because it is a striking
one: -- for a number of others might be adduced) -- proves, that, instead of
having men to take advantage of circumstances, you are in a manner compelled,
right or wrong, to make circumstances yield to a secondary consideration. Since
the first of December, I have been devising every means in my power to secure
these encampments: and, though I am sensible that we never have, since that
period, been able to act upon the offensive, and at times not in a condition to
defend, yet the cost of marching home one set of men, -- bringing in another,
-- the havoc and waste occasioned by the first, -- the repairs necessary for
the second, -- with a thousand incidental charges and inconveniences which have
arisen, and which it is scarcely possible either to recollect or describe, --
amount to near as much, as the keeping up a respectable body of troops the
whole time, ready for any emergency would have done. -- To this may be added,
that you never can have a well-disciplined army.

To bring men well acquainted with the duty of a soldier, requires time. To
bring them under proper discipline and subordination not only requires time,
but is a work of great difficulty, and in this army where there is so little
distinction between the officers and soldiers, requires an uncommon degree of
attention. To expect then the same service from raw and undisciplined recruits
as from veteran soldiers, is to expect what never did and perhaps never will
happen. Men who are familiarised to danger meet it without shrinking; whereas
those who have never seen service often apprehend danger where no danger is.
Three things prompt men to a regular discharge of their duty in time of action,
-- natural bravery, -- hope of reward, -- and fear of punishment. The two first
are common to the untutored and the disciplined soldier: but the latter most
obviously distinguishes the one from the other. A coward, when taught to
believe, that, if he breaks his ranks and abandons his colors, he will be
punished with death by his own party, -- will take his chance against the
enemy: but a man who thinks little of the one and is fearful of the other, acts
from present feelings, regardless of consequences.

Again men of a day's standing will not look forward: and from experience we
find, that, as the time approachcs for their discharge they grow careless of
their arms, ammunition, camp utensils, etc. Nay, even the barracks themselves
have felt uncommon marks of wanton depredation, and lay us under fresh trouble
and additional expense in providing for every fresh set, when we find it next
to impossible to procure such articles as are absolutely necessary in the first
instance. To this may be added the seasoning which new recruits must have to a
camp, and the loss consequent thereupon. But this is not all -- Men, engaged
for a short limited time only, have the officers too much in their power: for,
to obtain a degree of popularity in order to induce a second enlistment, a kind
of familiarity takes place, which brings on a relaxation of discipline,
unlicenced furloughs, and other indulgences incompatible with order and good
government; by which means, the latter part of the time for which the soldier
was engaged, is spent in undoing what you were aiming to inculcate in the first.

To go into an enumeration of all the evils we have experienced in this late
great change of the army, and the expenses incidental to it, -- to say nothing
of the hazard we have run, and must run, between the discharging of one army
and enlistment of another, unless an enormous expense (...) militia is
incurred, -- would greatly exceed the bounds of a letter. What I have already
taken the liberty of saying will serve to convey a general idea of the matter:
and therefore I shall, with all due deference, take the freedom to give it as
my opinion, that, if the Congress have any reason to believe that there will be
occasion for troops another year, and consequently of another enlistment, they
would save money, and have infinitely better troops, if they were, even at a
bounty of twenty, thirty, or more dollars, to engage the men already enlisted
(till January next), and such others as may be wanted to complete the
enlistment, for and during the war. I will not undertake to say that the men
can be had upon these terms; but I am satisfied that it will never do, to let
the matter alone, as it was last year, till the time of service was nearly
expiring. The hazard is too great in the first place: -- in the next, the
trouble and perplexity of disbanding one army and raising of another at the
same instant, and in such a critical situation as the last was, is scarcely in
the power of words to describe, and such as no man, who has experienced it
once, will ever undergo again.

If Congress should differ from me in sentiments upon this point, I have only
to beg that they will do me the justice to believe, that I have nothing more in
view than what to me appears necessary to advance the public weal, although in
the first instance it will be attended with a capital expense; -- and that I
have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Cambridge, Feb. 9, 1776. SIR,
IN compliance with the resolves of Congress, I have applied to general How
for the exchange of Mr. Lovell. A copy of my letter, and his answer thereto,
you have enclosed.

Captain Watters and captain Tucker, who command two of the armed schooners,
have taken and sent into Gloucester a large brigantine, laden with wood, a
hundred and fifty butts for water, and forty suits of bedding bound from La
Have in NovaScotia, for Boston. She is one of the transports in the ministerial
service. The captain says that he was at Halifax, the seventeenth of January,
and that general Massy was arrived there with two regiments from Ireland.

The different prizes were all libelled immediately on the receipt of the
resolves of Congress pointing out the mode; but none of them yet brought to
trial, owing to a difference between the law passed in this province, and the
resolutions of Congress. The general court are making an amendment to their
law, by which the difficulties that now occur will be removed, as I understand
it is to be made conformable to your resolves. The unavoidable delay attending
the bringing the captors to trial is grievously complained of by the masters of
these vessels, as well as the captors. Many of the former have applied for
liberty to go away without waiting the decision, -- which I have granted them.

I beg leave to recall the attention of Congress to their appointing a
commissary in these parts, to attend the providing of necessaries for the
prisoners who are dispersed in these provinces. Complaints are made by some of
them, that they are in want of bedding and many other things. As I understand
that Mr. Franks has undertaken that business, I wish he was ordered to send a
deputy immediately to see that the prisoners get what is allowed them by
Congress; also to supply the officers with money as they may have occasion. It
would save me much time and much trouble.

There are yet but few companies of the militia come in. This delay will, I am
much afraid, frustrate the intention of their being called upon, as the season
is slipping fast away when they may be of service.

The demands of the army were so very pressing before your last remittance came
to hand, that I was under the necessity of borrowing twenty-five thousand
pounds, lawful money from this province. They very cheerfully lent it, an^
passed a vote for as much more, if required. I have not repaid the sum
borrowed, as I may stand in need of it before the arrival of another supply,
which the demands of the commissary-general quartermaster-general, and paying
off the arrearages will very soon require.

Your esteemed favor of the twenty-ninth ultimo is just come to hand. It makes
me very happy to find my conduct has met the approbation of Congress. I am
entirely of your opinion, that, should an accommodation take place, the terms
will be severe or favorable in proportion to our ability to resist, and that we
ought to be on a respectable footing to receive their armaments in the spring.
But how far we shall be provided with the means, is a matter I profess not to
know, under my present unhappy want of arms, ammunition, and, I may add, men,
-- as our regiments are very incomplete. The recruiting goes on very slow, and
will, I apprehend, be more so, if for other service the men receive a bounty,
and none is given here.

I have tried every method I could think of, to procure arms for our men. They
really are not to be had in these governments (belonging to the public); and if
some method is not fallen upon, in the southern governments, to supply us, we
shall be in a distressed situation for want of them. There are near two
thousand men now in camp without firelocks. -- I have wrote to the committee of
New York this day, requesting them to send me those arms which were taken from
the disaffected in that government. The Congress interesting themselves in this
request will doubtless have a good effect. I have sent officers into the
country, with money to purchase arms in the different towns. Some have
returned, and brought in a few: -- many are still out: -- what their success
will be, I cannot determine.

I was in great hopes that the expresses, resolved to be established between
this place and Philadelphia, would ere now have been fixed. It would, in my
opinion, rather save than increase the expense; as many horses are destroyed by
one man coming the whole way. It will certainly be more expeditious, and safer,
than writing by the post or private hands, which I am often under the necessity
of doing.

I am, with great respect, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, Feb. 9, 1776. SIR,
I BEG leave to inform you, at the request of the committee of pay-table of the
colony of Connecticut, that I have not advanced, to any of the regiments from
that government, any money except the sum of seven thousand one hundred and
seventy-two dollars and one-ninth, on the twentieth of November last, to
major general Putnam, for the thirty-fourth regiment under his command. I
should have paid them in the same manner I did the rest of the army, had I not
been prevented by the colonels, who expressed their inclination to receive the
whole at once, upon their return home, at the expiration of service, as was
customary in their colony. For this reason, I never included them in my
estimates of money, and have made no provision for their payment, always
imagining that whatever payments the colony made them, Congress would apply to
their credit in the general account against the United Colonies, or refund upon
application.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, Feb. 14, 1776. SIR,
THROUGH you, I beg leave to lay before Congress the enclosed letter from Lord
Drummond to general Robertson, which came to my hands a few days ago, in order
to be sent into Boston.

As I never heard of his lordship being vested with power to treat with
Congress upon the subject of our grievances, nor of his having laid any
propositions before them for an accommodation, I confess it surprised much, and
led me to form various conjectures of his motives, and intended application to
general How and admiral Shuldham for a passport, for the safe conduct of such
deputies as Congress might appoint for negociating terms of reconciliation
between Great Britain and us. -- Whatever his intentions are, however
benevolent his designs may be, I confess that his letter has embarressed me
much; and I am not without suspicion of its meaning more than ^th generous
purposes it professes. I should suppose, that, if the mode for negotiation,
which he points out, should be adopted (which I hope will never be thought of),
it ought to have been fixed and settled previous to any application of this
sort; and at best, that his conduct in this instance is premature and
officious, and leading to consequences of a fatal and injurious nature to the
rights of this country. His zeal and desire, perhaps, of an amicable and
constitutional adjustment's taking place may have suggested and precipitated
the measure. Be that as it may, I thought it of too much importance, to suffer
it to go in without having the express direction of Congress for that purpose*
and that it was my indispensable duty to transmit them the original, to make
such interpretations and inferences as they may think right.

Messrs. Willard and Child, who were sent to Nova Scotia in pursuance of the
resolve of Congress, have just returned, and made their report, which I do
myself the honor to enclose you. They have not answered the purposes of their
commission by any means, as they only went a little way into that country, and
found their intelligence upon the information of others. You will see the
reasons they assign in excuse or justification of their conduct, in the report
itself.

Last night a party of regulars, said to be about five hundred, landed on
Dorchester neck, and burned some of the houses there, which were of no value to
us; nor would they have been, unless we take post there; they then might be of
some service. A detachment went after them as soon as the fire was discovered:
but, before it could arrive, they had executed their plan, and made their
retreat.

Enclosed is a letter for David Franks, esquire, from Mr. Chamier in Boston,
upon the subject of victualling such of the king's troops as may be prisoners
within the limits of his contract, which I beg the favor of you to deliver him,
and that proper agents may be appointed by him, to see that it is done. I could
wish too, that Congress would fall upon some mode for supplying the officers
with such money as they may really stand in need of, and depute proper persons
for that purpose, and furnishing the privates with such clothing as may be
absolutely necessary. I am applied to, and wearied by their repeated requests.
In some instances I have desired the committees to give the prisoners within
their appointments, what they should judge absolutely necessary for their
support, -- as the only means in my power of relieving their distress, -- but I
imagine, that, if there were persons to superintend this business, their wants
would be better attended to, and many exorbitant charges prevented and saved to
the continent; and the whole would then be brought into a proper account.

I am, sir, with great esteem, etc. G. W.
P. S. I send a return of the strength of the regiments.



Cambridge, Feb. 18, 1776. SIR,
THE late freezing weather having formed some pretty strong ice from Dorchester
point to Boston neck, and from Roxbury to the Common, thereby affording a more
expanded and consequently a less dangerous approach to the town, I could not
help thinking, -- notwithstanding the militia were not all come in, and we had
little or no powder to begin our operation by a regular cannonade or
bombardment, -- that a bold and resolute assault upon the troops in Boston with
such men as we had (for it could not take many men to guard our own lines at a
time when the enemy were attacked in all quarters) might be crowned with
success: and therefore, seeing no certain prospect of a supply of powder on the
one hand, and a certain dissolution of the ice on the other, I called the
general officers together, for their opinion, agreeably to the resolve of
Congress, of the twenty-second of December.

The result will appear in the enclosed council of war; and, being almost
unanimous, I must suppose it to be right; although, from a thorough conviction
of the necessity of attempting something against the ministerial troops before
a reinforcement should arrive, and while we were favored with the ice, I was
not only ready, but willing, and desirous of making the assault, under a firm
hope (if the men would have stood by me) of a favorable issue, notwithstanding
the enemy's advantage of ground, artillery, etc.

Perhaps the irksomeness of my situation may have given different ideas to me,
than those which influenced the gentlemen I consulted, and might have inclined
me to put more to the hazard, than was consistent with prudence: -- If it had,
I am not sensible of it, as I endeavored to give it all the consideration that
a matter of such importance required. True it is, and I cannot help
acknowledging, that I have many disagreeable sensations on account of my
situation: for, to have the eyes of the whole continent fixed with anxious
expectation of hearing of some great event, -- and to be restrained in every
military operation, for want of the necessary means of carrying it on, -- is
not very pleasing, especially as the means used to conceal my weakness from the
enemy, conceal it also from our friends, and add to their wonder.

I do not utter this by way of complaint. I am sensible that all that the
Congress could do, they have done; and I should feel most powerfully the weight
of conscious ingratitude, were I not to acknowledge this. But as we have
accounts of the arrival of powder in captain Mason, I would beg to have it sent
on in the most expeditious manner: otherwise we not only lose all chance of the
benefits resulting from the season, but of the militia, who are brought in at a
most enormous expense, upon a presumption that we should, long ere this, have
been amply supplied with powder, under the contracts entered into with the
committee of Congress.

The militia, contrary to an express requisition, are come and coming in
without ammunition. To supply them alone with twenty-four rounds (which is less
by three fifths, than the regulars are served with) will take between fifty and
sixty barrels of powder; and to complete the other troops to the like quantity,
will take near as much more, and leave in store not more than about sixty
barrels, besides a few rounds of cannon cartridges ready filled for use. This,
sir, Congress may be assured, is a true state of our powder, and will I hope
bear some testimony of my incapacity for action in such a way as may do any
essential service.

February 21. When I began this letter, I proposed to have sent it by express.
But recollecting that all my late letters have been as expressive of my want of
powder and arms as I could paint them, and that Mr. Hooper was to set off in a
day or two, I thought it unnecessary to run the continent to the expense of an
express, merely to repeat what I had so often done before, when I am certain
that Congress, knowing our necessities, will delay no time that can possibly be
avoided in supplying them.

My duty is offered to Congress; and with great respect and esteem, I have the
honor to be, etc.

G. W.
P. S. Hearing of the arrival of a small parcel of powder in Connecticut, I
have been able to obtain three thousand weight of it, which is in addition to
the sixty barrels before mentioned.



Cambridge, Feb. 26, 1776. SIR,
I HAD the honor of addressing you on the eighteenth and twenty-first instant,
by Mr. Hooper; since which, nothing material has occurred.

We are making every necessary preparation for taking possession of Dorchester
heights as soon as possible, with a view of drawing the enemy out. How far our
expectations may be answered, time only can determine: but I should think, if
any thing would induce them to hazard an engagement, it will be our attempting
to fortify these heights; as on that event's taking place, we shall be able to
command a great part of the town, and almost the whole harbor, and to make them
rather disagreeable than otherwise, provided we can get a sufficient supply of
what we greatly want.

Within these three or four days, I have received sundry accounts from Boston,
of such movements there -- (such as taking the mortars, from Bunker's hill, --
the putting them, with several pieces of heavy ordnance, on board of ship, with
a quantity of bedding, -- the ships all taking in water, -- the baking a large
quantity of biscuit, etc.) -- as to indicate an embarkation of the troops from
thence. A Mr. Ides, who came out yesterday, says that the inhabitants of the
town generally believe that they are about to remove either to New York or
Virginia, and that every vessel in the harbor, on Tuesday last, was taken up
for government's service, and two months' pay advanced them. -- Whether they
really intend to embark, or whether the whole is a feint, is impossible for me
to tell. However I have thought it expedient to send an express to general Lee,
to inform him of it -- (in order that he may not be taken by surprise, if their
destination should be against New York,) -- and continued him on to you. If
they do embark, I think the possessing themselves of that place, and of the
North river, is the object they have in view, thereby securing the
communication with Canada, and rendering the intercourse between the northern
and southern United Colonies exceedingly precarious and difficult. To prevent
them from effecting their plan, is a matter of the highest importance, and will
require a large and respectable army, and the most vigilant and judicious
exertions.

Since I wrote by Mr. Hooper, some small parcels of powder have arrived from
Connecticut, which will give us a little assistance.

On thursday night a party of our men at Roxbury made the enemy's
out-centuries, consisting of a corporal and two privates, prisoners, without
firing a gun or giving the least alarm.

I shall be as attentive to the enemy's motions as I can, and obtain all the
intelligence in my power; and, if I find them embark, shall in the most
expeditious manner detach a part of the light troops to New York, and repair
thither myself if circumstances shall require it. I shall be better able to
judge what to do, when the matter happens. At present, I can only say, that I
will do every thing that shall appear proper and necessary.

Your letter of the twelfth instant, by colonel Bull, came to hand yesterday
evening: and I shall agreeable to your recommendation, pay proper notice to
him. -- The supply of cash came very seasonably, as our treasury was just
exhausted, and nothing can be done here without it.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. This was intended to have been sent by express: but meeting with a
private opportunity, the express was countermanded.



Cambridge, March 7, 1776. SIR,
ON the twenty-sixth ultimo I had the honor of addressing you, and then
mentioned that we were making preparations for taking possession of Dorchester
heights. -- I now beg leave to inform you, that a council of general officers
having determined a previous bombardment and cannonade expedient and proper, in
order to harrass the enemy and divert their attention from that quarter, -- on
saturday, sunday and monday nights last, we carried them on from our posts at
Coble-^ill, Leechmore's point, and Lam's-dam. Whether they did the enemy any
considerable and what injury, I have not yet heard, but have the pleasure to
acquaint you that they greatly facilitated our schemes, and would have been
attended with success equal to our most sanguine expectations, had it not been
for the unlucky bursting of two thirteen, and three ten-inch mortars, among
which was the brass one taken in the ordnance brig. To what cause to attribute
this misfortune, I know not, -- whether to any defect in them, or to the
inexperience of the bombardiers. But to return, -- on monday evening, as soon
as our firing commenced, a considerable detachment of our men, under the
command of brigadier-general Thomas, crossed the neck, and took possession of
the two hills, without the least interruption or annoyance from the enemy; and
by their great activity and industry, before the morning, advanced the works so
far as to be secure against their shot. They are now going on with such
expedition, that in a little time I hope they will be complete, and enable our
troops stationed there to make a vigorous and obstinate stand. -- During the
whole cannonade, which was incessant the last two nights, we were fortunate
enough to lose but two men, -- one, a lieutenant, by a cannon ball's taking off
his thigh, -- the other, a private, by the explosion of a shell, which also
slightly wounded four or five more.

Our taking possession of Dorchester heights is only preparatory to taking post
on Nuke-hill, and the points opposite the south end of Boston. It was
absolutely necessary that they should be previously fortified, in order to
cover and command them. -- As soon as the works on the former are finished and
complete, measures will be immediately adopted for securing the latter, and
making them as strong and defensible as we can. Their contiguity to the enemy
will make them of much importance, and of great service to us.

As mortars are essential, and indispensably necessary for carrying on our
operations, and for the prosecution of our plans, I have applied to two
furnaces to have some thirteen inch ones cast with all expedition imaginable,
and am encouraged to hope, from the accounts I have had, that they will be able
to do it. When they are done, and a proper supply of powder obtained, I flatter
myself, from the posts we have just taken and are about to take, that it will
be in our power to force the ministerial troops to an attack, or to dispose of
them in some way that will be of advantage to us. I think from these posts they
will be so galled and annoyed, that they must either give us battle or quit
their present possessions. I am resolved that nothing on my part shall be
wanting, to effect the one or the other.

It having been the general opinion that the enemy would attempt to dislodge
our people from the hills, and force their works as soon as they were
discovered, which probably might have brought on a general engagement, -- it
was thought advisable that the honorable council should be applied to, to order
in the militia from the neighboring and adjacent towns. I wrote to them on the
subject, which they most readily complied with: and in justice to the militia,
I cannot but inform you that they came in at the appointed time, and manifested
the greatest alertness and determined resolution to have acted like men engaged
in the cause of freedom.

When the enemy first discovered our works in the morning, they seemed to be in
great confusion, and, from their movements, to have intended an attack. It is
much to be wished that it had been made: the event, I think, must have been
fortunate, and nothing less than success and victory on our side, as our
officers and men appeared impatient for the appeal, and to have possessed the
most animated sentiments and determined resolution.

On tuesday evening a considerable number of their troops, embarked on board of
their transports, and fell down to the castle, where part of them landed before
dark. One or two of the vessels got a-ground, and were fired at by our people
with a field-piece, but without any damage. -- What was the design of this
embarkation and landing, I have not been able to learn. It would seem as if
they meant an attack; for it is most probable, that, if they make one on our
works at Dorchester at this time, they will first go to the castle, and come
from thence. If such was their design, a violent storm that night, and which
lasted till eight o'clock the next day, rendered the execution of it
impracticable. It carried one or two of their vessels on shore, which have
since got off.

In case the ministerial troops had made an attempt to dislodge our men from
Dorchester hills, and the number detached upon the occasion had been so great
as to have afforded a probability of a successful attack's being made upon
Boston, -- on a signal given from Roxbury, for that purpose, agreeable to a
settled and concerted plan, four thousand chosen men, who were held in
readiness, were to have embarked at the mouth of Cambridge river, in two
divisions, the first under the command of brigadier-general Sullivan, the
second under brigadier-general Green, -- the whole to have been commanded by
major general Putnam. The first division was to land at the powder-house, and
gain possession of Bacon-Hill and Mount-Horam, -- the second at Barton's point
or a little south of it, and, after securing that post, to join the other
division, and force the enemy's gates and works at the neck, for letting in the
Roxbury troops. Three floating batteries were to have preceded, and gone in
front of the other boats, and kept up a heavy fire on that part of the town
where our men were to land.

How far our views would have succeeded, had an opportunity offered for
attempting the execution, is impossible for me to say: nothing less than
experiment could determine with precision. The plan was thought to be well
digested; and, as far as I could judge from the cheerfulness and alacrity which
distinguished the officers and men who were to engage in the enterprise, I had
reason to hope for a favorable and happy issue.

The militia who were ordered in from the adjacent towns bro't with them three
day's provision. They were only called upon to act under the idea of an
attack's being immediately made, and were all discharged this afternoon.

I beg leave to remind Congress that three major-generals are essential and
necessary for this army; and that, by general Lee's being called from hence to
the command in Canada, the left division is without one. I hope they will fill
up the vacancy by the appointment of another. General Thomas is the first
brigadier, stands fair in the point of reputation, and is esteemed a brave and
good officer. If he is promoted, there will be a vacancy in the
brigadier-generals, which it will be necessary to supply by the appointment of
some other gentleman that shall be agreeable to Congress: But justice requires
me to mention that William Thompson, esquire, of the rifle regiment, is the
first colonel in this department, and, as far as I have had an opportunity of
judging, is a good officer and a man of courage. What I have said of these two
gentlemen, I conceived to be my duty, at the same time acknowledging, whatever
promotions are made will be satisfactory to me.

March 9. -- Yesterday evening, a captain Irvine, who escaped from Boston the
night before, whith six of his crew, came to headquarters, and gave the
following intelligence: -- "That our bombardment and cannonade caused a great
deal of surprise and alarm in town, as many of the soldiery said they never
heard or thought we had mortars or shells; -- that several of the officers
acknowledged they were well and properly directed; -- that they made much
distress and confusion: -- that the cannonshot, for the greatest part, went
through the houses; and he was told that one took off the legs and arms of six
men lying in the barracks on the neck; -- that a soldier, who came from the
lines, there on tuesday morning informed him that twenty men had been wounded
the night before; it was reported that others were also hurt, and one of the
light horse torn to pieces by the explosion of a shell: (this was afterward
contradicted:) -- that, early on tuesday morning, admiral Shuldham, discovering
the works our people were throwing up on Dorchester heights, immediately sent
an express to general How, to inform him that it was necessary they should be
attacked and dislodged from thence, or he would be under the necessity of
withdrawing the ships from the harbor, which were under his command; -- that
preparations were directly made for that purpose, as it was said; and, from
twelve to two o'clock, about three thousand men embarked on board the
transports, which fell down to the castle with a design of landing on that part
of Dorchester next to it, and attacking our works on the heights at five
o'clock the next morning; -- that lord Percy was appointed to command; -- that
it was generally believed the attempt would have been made, had it not been for
the violent storm which happened that night, as I have mentioned before; --
that he heard several of the privates, and one or two sergeants, say as they
were embarking, "that it would be another Bunker's-hill affair."

He further informs -- "that the army is preparing to leave Boston, and that
they will do it in a day or two; -- that the transports necessary for their
embarkation were getting ready with the utmost expedition; -- that there had
been great movements and confusion among the troops, the night and day
preceding his coming out, in hurrying down their cannon, artillery and other
stores, to the wharfs, with the utmost precipitation, and they were putting
them on board the ships in such haste, that no account or memorandum was taken
of them; -- that most of the cannon were removed from their works, and embarked
or embarking; -- that he heard a woman say, whom he took to be an officer's
wife, that she had seen men go under the ground at the lines on the neck,
without returning; -- that the ship he commanded was taken up, places fitted,
and fitting for officers to lodge, and several shot, shells and cannon already
on board; that the tories were to have the liberty of going where they please,
if they can get seamen to man the vessels, of whom there was a great scarcity;
-- that, on that account, many vessels could not be carried away, and would be
burned; -- that many of the inhabitants apprehended the town would be
destroyed; and that it was generally thought their destination is Halifax."

The account given by captain Irvine, as to the embarkation, and their being
about to leave the town, I believe true. There are other circumstances
corroborating; and it seems fully confirmed by a paper signed by four of the
selectmen of the town, (a copy of which I have the honor to enclose you,) which
was brought out yesterday evening by a flag, and delivered to colonel Learned,
by major Basset of the tenth regiment, who desired it might be delivered me as
soon as possible. I advised with such of the general officers upon the
occasion, as I could immediately assemble; and we determined it right (as it
was not addressed to me or any one else, nor authenticated by the signature
nature of general How, or any other act obliging him to a performance of the
promise mentioned on his part) that I should give it no answer; at the same
time, that a letter should be returned, as going from colonel Learned,
signifying his having laid it before me, -- with the reasons assigned for not
answering it. -- A copy of this is sent.

Tonight I shall have a battery thrown up on Nuke-hill (Dorchester point) with
a design of acting as circumstances may require; it being judged advisable to
prosecute our plans of fortification as we intended, before this information
from the selectmen came.

It being agreed on all hands that there is no possibility of stopping them in
case they determine to go, -- I shall order look-outs to be kept upon all the
head-lands, to discover their movements and course, and moreover direct
commodore Manly and his little squadron to dog them, as well for the same
purpose as for picking up any of their vessels that may chance to depart their
convoy. From their loading with such precipitancy, it is presumable they will
not be in the best condition for sea.

If the ministerial troops evacuate the town and leave it standing, I have
thoughts of taking measures for fortifying the entrance into the harbor, if it
shall be thought proper, and the situation of affairs will admit of it.

Notwithstanding the report from Boston that Halifax is the place of their
destination, I have no doubt but they are going to the southward of this, --
and, I apprehend, to New York. Many reasons lead to this opinion: it is in some
measure corroborated by their sending an express ship there, which, on
wednesday week, got on shore and bilged at Cape-Cod. The dispatches, if
written, were destroyed when she was boarded. She had a parcel of coal, and
about four thousand cannon shot, six carriage-guns, a swivel or two, and three
barrels of powder.

I shall hold the riflemen and other parts of our troops in readiness to march
at a moment's warning, and govern my movements by the events that happen, or
such orders as I may receive from Congress, which I beg may be ample, and
forwarded with all possible expedition.

On the sixth instant, a ship bound from London, with stores for the
ministerial army, consisting of coal, porter, and krout, fell in with our armed
vessels, four of them in company, and was carried into Portsmouth. She had had
a long passage, and of course brought no papers of late date. The only letters
of importance, or in the least interesting, that were found, I have enclosed.

I beg leave to mention to Congress that money is much wanted. The militia from
these governments, engaged till the first of April, are then to be paid: and,
if we march from hence, the expense will be very considerable, must be
defrayed, and cannot be accomplished without it. The necessity of making the
earliest remittance for these purposes is too obvious, for me to add more.

When I wrote that part of this letter which is antecedent to this date, I
fully expected it would have gone before now by colonel Bull, not deeming it of
sufficient importance to send a special messenger. But he deferred his return
from time to time, and never set off till today. These reasons I hope will
excuse the delay, and be received as a proper apology for not transmitting it
sooner.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, March 13, 1776. SIR,
IN my letter of the seventh and ninth instant which I had the honor of
addressing you, I mentioned the intelligence I had received respecting the
embarkation of the troop^ from Boston; and fully expected, before this, that
the town would have been entirely evacuated. Although I have been deceived, and
was rather premature in the opinion I had then formed, I have little reason to
doubt but the event will take place in a very short time, as other accounts
which have come to hand since, of the sailing of a great number of transports
from the harbor of Nantasket road, and many circumstances corresponding
therewith, seem to confirm and render it unquestionable.

Whether the town will be destroyed, is a matter of much uncertainty: but it
would seem, from the destruction they are making of sundry pieces of furniture,
of many of their wagons, carts, etc. which they cannot take with them as it is
said, that it will not: for, if they intended it, the whole might be involved
in one general ruin.

Holding it of the last importance in the present contest that we should secure
New York, and prevent the enemy from possessing it, -- and conjecturing they
have views of that sort, and their embarkation to be for that purpose, -- I
judged it necessary, under the situation of things here, to call a council of
general officers to consult of such measures as might be expedient to be taken
at this interesting conjuncture of affairs. A copy of the proceedings I have
the honor to enclose you.

Agreeable to the opinion of the council, I shall detach the rifle regiment
tomorrow, under the command of brigadier-general Sullivan, with orders to
repair to New York with all possible expedition; which will be succeeded, the
day after, by the other five in one brigade, -- they being all that it was
thought advisable to send from hence till the enemy shall have quitted the
town. Immediately upon their departure, I shall send forward major general
Putnam, and follow myself with the remainder of the army as soon as I have it
in my power, -- leaving here such a number of men as circumstances may seem to
require.

As the badness of the roads at this season will greatly retard the march of
our men, I have, by advice of the general officers, wrote to governor Trumbull
by this express, to use his utmost exertions for throwing a reinforcement of
two thousand men into New York, from the western parts of Connecticut, -- and
to the commanding officer there, to apply to the provincial convention or
committee of safety of New Jersey, for a thousand more for the same purpose, to
oppose the enemy and prevent their getting possession, in case they arrive
before the troops from hence can get there; of which there is a probability,
unless they are impeded by contrary winds. This measure, though it may be
attended with considerable expense, I flatter myself, will meet with the
approbation of Congress. -- Past experience, and the lines in Boston and on
Boston neck, point out the propriety, and suggest the necessity of keeping our
enemies from gaining possession and making a lodgment.

Should their destination be further southward, or for Halifax (as reported in
Boston) for the purpose of going into Canada, -- the march of our troops to
New York will place them nearer the scene of action, and more convenient for
affording succors.

We have not taken post on Nuke-hill, and fortified it, as mentioned that we
should, in my last. On hearing that the enemy were about to retreat and leave
the town, it was thought imprudent and unadvisable to force them with two much
precipitation, that we might gain a little time, and prepare for a march.
Tomorrow evening we shall take possession, unless they are gone.

As New York is of such importance, -- prudence and policy require that every
precaution that can be devised should be adopted, to frustrate the designs
which the enemy have of possessing it. To this end I have ordered vessels to be
provided and held ready at Norwich, for the embarkation and transportation of
our troops thither. This I have done with a view not only of greatly expediting
their arrival (as it will save several day's marching,) but also that they may
be fresh and fit for intrenching and throwing up works of defense as soon as
they get there, if they do not meet the enemy to contend with; -- for neither
of which would they be in a proper condition after a long and fatiguing march
in bad roads. If Wallace, with his ships, should be apprised of the measure,
and attempt to prevent it by stopping up the harbor of New London, they can
but pursue their march by land.

You will please to observe that it is the opinion of the general officers, if
the enemy abandon the town, that it will be unnecessary to employ or keep any
part of this army for its defense; and that I have mentioned, on that event's
happening, I shall immediately repair to New York with the remainder of the
army not now detached, leaving only such a number of men here as circumstances
may seem to require. What I partly allude to, is, that, as it will take a
considerable time for the removal of such a body of men, and the divisions must
precede each other in such order as to allow intermediate time sufficient for
them to be covered and provided for, and many things done previous to the march
of the whole, for securing and forwarding such necessaries as cannot be
immediately carried, and others which may be proper to keep here, -- that
directions might be received from Congress respecting the same, and as many men
ordered to remain for that and other purposes, as they may judge proper. I
could wish to have their commands upon the subject, and in time; as I may be
under some degree of embarrassment as to their views.

Congress having been pleased to appoint colonel Thompson a brigadier-general,
there is a vacancy for a colonel in the regiment he commanded, to which I would
beg leave to recommend the lieutenant colonel Hand. I shall also take the
liberty of recommending captain Hugh Stephenson, of the Virginia, riflemen, to
succeed colonel Hand, and to be appointed in his place as a lieutenant colonel,
-- there being no major to the regiment since the promotion of major Magraw to
be lieutenant colonel of one of the Pennsylvania battalions, and who is gone
from hence. He is, in my opinion, the fittest person in this army for it, as
well as the oldest captain in the service, having distinguished himself at the
head of a rifle company all the last war, and highly merited the approbation of
his superior officers.

Colonel Mifflin informed me today of his having received tent-cloths from Mr.
Barrel of Philadelphia, to the amount of seven thousand five hundred pounds
Pennsylvania currency, and applied for a warrant for payment of it. But, as our
fund is low, and many necessary demands against it which must be satisfied, --
and our calls for money are and will be exceedingly great, -- I could not grant
it, thinking it might be convenient for payment to be made in Philadelphia, by
your order on the treasury there.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Cambridge, March 19, 1776. SIR,
IT is with the greatest pleasure I inform you, that, on sunday last, the
seventeenth instant, about nine o'clock in the forenoon, the ministerial army
evacuated the town of Boston, and that the forces of the United Colonies are
now in actual possession thereof. I beg leave to congratulate you, sir, and the
honorable Congress, on this happy event, and particularly as it was effected
without endangering the lives and property of the remaining unhappy inhabitants.

I have great reason to imagine their flight was precipitated by the appearance
of a work which I had ordered to be thrown up last saturday night on an
eminence at Dorchester, which lay nearest to Boston neck called Nuke-hill.

The town, although it has suffered greatly, is not in so bad a state as I
expected to find it; and I have a particular pleasure in being able to inform
you, sir, that your house has received no damage worth mentioning. Your
furniture is in tolerable order, and the family pictures are all left entire
and untouched. Captain Cazneau takes the charge of the whole, until he shall
receive further orders from you.

As soon as the ministerial troops had quitted the town, I ordered a thousand
men (who had had the smallpox,) under command of general Putnam, to take
possession of the heights, which I shall endeavor to fortify in such a manner
as to prevent their return, should they attempt it. But, as they are still in
the harbor, I though it it not prudent to march off with the main body of the army
until I should be fully satisfied they had quitted the coast. I have therefore
only detached five regiments, besides the rifle battalion, to New York, and
shall keep the remainder here till all suspicion of their return ceases.

The situation in which I found their works evidently discovered that their
retreat was made with the greatest precipitation. They have left their barracks
and other works of wood at Bunker's-hill, etc. all standing, and have destroyed
but a small part of their lines. They have also left a number of fine pieces of
cannon which they first spiked up, also a very large iron mortar; and, as I am
informed, they have thrown another over the end of your wharf. I have employed
proper persons to drill the cannon, and doubt not I shall save the most of
them. -- I am not yet able to procure an exact list of all the stores they have
left. -- As soon as it can be done, I shall take care to transmit it to you. --
From an estimate of what the quarter-master-general has already discovered, the
amount will be twenty-five or thirty thousand pounds.

Part of the powder mentioned in yours of the sixth instant, has already
arrived. The remainder I have ordered to be stopped on the road, as we shall
have no occasion for it here. -- The letter to general Thomas, I immediately
sent to him. He desired leave for three or four days, to settle some of his
private affairs; after which he will set out for his command in Canada. -- I am
happy that my conduct in intercepting lord Drummond's letter is approved of by
Congress.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, March 24, 1776. SIR,
WHEN I had the honor to address you on the nineteenth instant upon the
evacuation of the town of Boston by the ministerial army, I fully expected, as
their retreat and embarkation were hurried and precipitate, that, before now,
they would have departed the harbor, and been far in their passage to the place
of their destination. But, to my surprise and disappointment, the fleet is
still in Nantasket road. The purpose inducing their stay is altogetoer unknown:
nor can I suggest any satisfactory reason for it. On wednesday night last,
before the whole of the fleet fell down to Nantasket, they demolished the
castle and houses belonging to it, by burning them down, and the several
fortifications. They left a great number of cannon, but have rendered all of
them except a very few, entirely useless, by breaking off the trunnions; and
those they spiked up: but they may be made serviceable again: -- some are
already done.

There are several vessels in the docks, which were taken by the enemy (some
with, and others without cargoes,) which different persons claim as their
property and right. Are they to be restored to their former owners on making
proof of their title, or to belong to the continent, as captures made from the
enemy? -- I wish Congress would direct a mode of proceeding against them, and
establish a rule for decision: they appear to me to be highly necessary. In
like manner, some of the cannon which are in Boston are said to have come from
the castle. Supposing them, with those remaining at the castle, to have been
purchased by and provided originally at the expense of this province, -- are
they now to be considered as belonging to it, or to the public? I beg leave to
refer the matter to the opinion of Congress, and pray their direction how I am
to conduct respecting them.

It having been suggested to me that there was considerable property, etc.
belonging to persons who had, from the first of the present unhappy contest,
manifested an unfriendly and inveterate disposition, in the town of Boston, I
thought it prudent to write to the honorable general court upon the subject,
that it might be enquired after and secured. A copy of the letter I herewith
send you, and submit it to Congress through you, whether they will not
determine how it is to be disposed of, and as to the appropriation of the money
arising from the sale of the same.

As soon as the town was abandoned by the enemy, I judged it advisable to
secure the several heights, lest they should attempt to return; and, for this
purpose, have caused a large and strong work to be thrown up at Fort-hill, a
post of great importance, as it commands the whole harbor, and, when fortified,
if properly supported, will greatly annoy any fleet the enemy may send against
the town, and render the landing of their troops exceedingly difficult, if not
impracticable. This work is almost done, and in a little time will be complete:
and, that the communication between the town and country may be free and open,
I have ordered all the lines upon the neck to be immediately destroyed, and the
other works on the sides of the town facing the country, that the inhabitants
from the latter may not be impeded, and afforded an easy entrance, in case the
enemy should gain possession at any future time. These matters I conceived to
be within the line of my duty; of which I advised the general court, and
recommended to their attention such other measures as they might think
necessary for securing the town against the hostile designs of the enemy.

I have just got an inventory of stores and property belonging to the crown,
which the enemy left in Boston, at the castle, and Bunker's-hill, -- which I
have the honor to transmit you; and shall give strict orders that a careful
attention be had to any more that may be found. I shall take such precautions
respecting them, that they may be secure, and turn to the public advantage, as
much as possible, or circumstances will admit of.

A Mr. Bulfinch from Boston, who acted as a clerk to Mr......., having put into
my hands a lift of rations drawn the saturday before the troops evacuated the
town, I have enclosed it for your inspection. He says, neither the staff
officers nor women are included in the list; from which it appears that their
number is greater than we had an idea of.

Major General Ward and brigadier general Fire are desirous of leaving the
service, and, for that purpose, have requested me to lay the matter before
Congress that they may be allowed to resign their commissions. The papers
containing their applications you will herewith receive. They will give you a
full and more particular information upon the subject; and therefore I shall
take the liberty of referring you to them.

I would mention to Congress that the commissary of artillery stores has
informed me, that whatever powder has been sent to this camp has always come
without any bill ascertaining the number of casks or quantity. This it is
probable, has proceeded from forgetfulness or inattention in the persons
appointed to send it, or the negligence of those who brought it, though they
have declared otherwise, and that they never had any. As it may in some measure
prevent embezzlements (though I do not suspect any to have been made), and the
commissary will know what and how much to receive, and be enabled to discover
mistakes if any should happen, -- I should be glad if you will direct a bill of
parcels to be always sent in future.

There have been so many accounts from England, all agreeing that commissioners
are coming to America, to propose terms for an accommodation, as they say, --
that I am inclined to think the time of their arrival not very far off. -- If
they come to Boston (which probably will be the case, if they come to America
at all) I shall be under much embarressment respecting the manner of receiving
them, and the mode of treatment that ought to be used. I therefore pray that
Congress will give me directions, and point out the line of conduct to be
pursued, -- whether they are to be considered as ambassadors and to have a pass
or permit for repairing through the country to Philadelphia or to any other
place, -- or whether they are to be restrained in any and what manner. I shall
anxiously wait their orders, and, whatever they are, comply with them literally.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, March 27, 1776. SIR,
I received your favor of the eleventh instant by saturday night's post; and
must beg pardon for not acknowledging it in my last of the twenty-fourth. The
hurry I was then in occasioned the neglect* and I hope will apologize for it.

I now beg leave to inform you that I have just received intelligence, that the
whole of the ministerial fleet, besides three or four ships, got under way this
evening at Nantasket road, and were standing out for sea; in consequence of
which, I shall detach a brigade of six regiments immediately from hence for
New York, under the command of brigadier-general Sullivan (brigadier-general
Heath having gone with the first); which will be succeeded by another in a day
or two; and directly after, I shall forward the remainder of the army (except
four or five regiments which will be left for taking care of the barracks and
public stores, and fortifying the town, and erecting such works for its defense
as the honorable general court may think necessary) -- and follow myself.

Apprehending that general Thomas will stand in need of some artillerists in
Canada, I have ordered two companies of the train to march immediately: and two
mortars, with a quantity of shells and shot, to be sent him. -- He set out on
the twenty-first instant.

Enclosed you have a copy of the return of ordnance stores left in Boston by
the enemy. In it are not included the cannon left at the castle, amounting to a
hundred and thirty-five pieces, as reported, all of which, except a very few,
they have destroyed and rendered useless, by knocking off the trunnions, and
spiking up.

I beg leave to transmit you the copy of a petition from the inhabitants of
Nova Scotia, brought me by * * * esquire, mentioned therein, who is now here
with an Acadian. From this it appears they are in a distressed situation; and,
from Mr. * * *'s account, are exceedingly apprehensive that they will be
reduced to the disagreeable alternative of taking up arms and joining our
enemies, or to flee their country, unless they can be protected against their
insults and oppressions. He says that their committees think many salutary and
valuable consequences would be derived from five or six hundred men being sent
there, as it would not only quiet the minds of the people from the anxiety and
uneasiness they are now filled with, and enable them to take a part in behalf
of the colonies, but be the means of preventing the Indians (of whom there are
a good many) from taking the side of government, and the ministerial troops
from getting such supplies of provisions (...) as they have done.

How far these good purposes would be answered if such (...) force was ^ent as
they ask for, is impossible to determine in the present uncertain state of
things. For, if (...) army from (...) is going to Halifax (as reported by them
before their departure,) that (...) a much more considerable force would be
(...) avail: -- if not, and they possess the friendly disposition to our cause,
suggested in the petition and declared by Mr. * * *, it might be of great
service, unless another body of (...) should be sent thither by administration,
too powerful for them to oppose. It being a matter of some importance, I judge
it prudent to lay it before Congress for their consideration; and, requesting
their direction upon the subject, shall only add, if they determine to adopt
it, that they will prescribe the number to be sent, and whether it is to be
from the regiments which will be left here. -- I shall wait their decision,
and, whatever it is, will endeavor to have it carried into execution.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Cambridge, April 1, 1776. SIR,
THIS letter will be dilivered you by * * *, esquire, the gentleman from
Nova Scotia, whom I mentioned to you in mine of the twenty-seventh ultimo. He
seemed desirous of waiting on the honorable Congress, in order to lay before
them the state of public affairs, and situation of the inhabitants of that
province. And, as it might be in his power to communicate many things
personally which could not be so well done by letter, I encouraged him in his
design, and have advanced him fifty dollars to defray his expenses. The Acadian
accompanies him; and, as they seem to be solid judicious men, I beg leave to
recommend them both to the notice of Congress; -- and am most respectfully,
sir, your (...) obedient, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, Cambridge, April 1, 1776. SIR,
AN express arrived this morning with a letter from governor Cook of
Rhode Island, of which the enclosed is a copy. In consequence of this important
intelligence, I immediately dispatched an express after general Sullivan, who
is on his march to Norwich with six regiments, and ordered him to file off to
Providence, if he should be so desired by governor Cook, to whom I have wrote
on the subject.

General Green was to have marched this morning with five more regiments, by
way of Providence. I have ordered him to hasten his march for that place and
hope to collect a force there, sufficient to prevent the enemy from effecting
their purpose.

Whether (...) movement be only a feint to draw our attention from their
principal object, or not, is at present impossible to determine. -- I momently
expect further intelligence from governor Cook. -- If the alarm should be well
grounded, I shall hasten to Providence, and make the necessary dispositions for
their reception. I beg you to assure the honorable Congress I shall exert
myself to the utmost to frustrate the designs of the enemy.

I am, sir, your most obedient, etc. G. W.

Cambridge, April 4, 1776. SIR,
I WAS honored with your favors of the twenty-first and twenty-fifth ultimo, on
the second instant, -- the former by Mr. Hanson, etc, -- the latter by
Fessenden. I heartily wish the money had arrived sooner, that the militia might
have been paid as soon as their time of service expired. The disappoinment has
given them great uneasiness, and they are gone home much dissatisfied: nor have
I been without severe complains from the other troops, on the same account.
When I get to New York, I hope a sufficient sum will be there, ready to pay
every claim.

It is not in my power to make report of the deficiency of arms, in compliance
with the direction of Congress, at this time, as some of the regiments are at,
and most of the other on their march to New York; nor do I know that it would
answer any good purpose, if it were, -- having made repeated applications to
the several assemblies and conventions upon the subject, and constantly
received for answer, that they could afford no relief.

When I arrive at New York, I shall, in pursuance of the order of Congress,
detach four battalions to Canada, if the situation of affairs will admit of it;
and shall be extremely happy if they and the troops already there can effect
the important end of their going.

In my letter of the first instant, per post, I enclosed you a copy of a letter
from governor Cook, advising me of the arrival of a ship of war, etc. at and
near the harbor of Newport. I have now the pleasure to inform you that the
report was entirely premature, and without any foundation. You have a copy of
his letter of the first instant to this effect, -- I wish the alarm had never
been given: it occasioned general Sullivan and his brigade to make an
unnecessary and inconvenient diversion from their route.

Enclosed is a copy of an account, presented by the honorable general court, of
powder furnished the continental army by this colony. From the account, it
appears that part of it was supplied before the army was under my command; and
therefore I know nothing of it; but have not the smallest doubt of the justice
of the charge. I shall leave about two hundred barrels of this article with
major general Ward, out of which Congress will direct him to make a return, if
they think proper, -- and also repayment of what may have been furnished by the
other governments.

A proclamation of general Howe's, issued a few days before his departure from
town, having fallen into my hands, I have enclosed you a copy, which will
probably have been the occasion of large quantities of goods being carried away
and the removal of many persons, which otherwise would not have happened.

Colonel Warren, paymaster-general, finding the army likely to be removed from
hence, informed me the other day that the situation of his affairs and
engagements in the business of the colony are such, as to prevent him from
personally attendning the army; and offered, in case it should be required, to
resign. This was rather embarrassing. To me it appears indispensably necessary
that the paymaster-general, with his books, should be at or near headquarters,
Indeed it is usual for the head of every department in the army, however
dispersed that army may be, to be with the commanding general, keeping deputies
in the smaller departments. On the other hand, colonel Warre^^'s merit and
attachment to the cause are such, that I could do nothing less than desire (as
some money must be left for the pay and contingent charges of the army which
will remain here), he would wait here till Congress shall be pleased to give
their sentiments upon the matter, -- sending, in the mean time, some person in
whom he could confide, with the money, but little of which there will be to
carry, though great the demands, as nine of the regiments which have marched to
New York have only received five hundred pounds each, toward their pay for the
months of February and March, -- and for others, not a farthing. I hope
therefore this matter will be considered by Congress, and the result
transmitted me as soon as done.

I would also mention to Congress that the militia regiments which were last
called upon, in making up their abstracts, charged pay, -- the officers, from
the time they received orders to raise companies, -- and the privates, from the
time they respectively engaged to come or were called upon, though they did not
march for a considerable time after, -- some not within three, four, or twenty
days, during all which, they remained at home about their own private affairs,
without doing any thing else than "preparing for the march," as they say by way
of plea. This appeared to me so exceedingly unreasonable, and so contrary to
justice, that the public should pay for a longer time than from the day of
their march to that of their return, that I ordered the abstracts to be made
out accordingly, and refused to give warrants on any other terms. They say that
the enlisting orders, which went out from their governments, give them the pay
they claim. The fact may be that something in these may seem to authorize it:
but I must submit it to Congress, and wish for their decision, whether the
continent must pay it. -- I am, with great esteem, etc.

G. W.
P. S. I shall set off today.



New York, April 15, 1776. SIR,
I AM now to inform you that on the fourth instant I set out from Cambridge,
and arrived here on saturday last. I came through Providence, Norwich, and
New London, in order to see and expedite the embarkation of the troops. The
third brigade, under the command of general Green, was at New London when I
left it, where there was a sufficient number of transports to embark them, --
and most probably would have arrived here before this, had it not been for a
severe storm which happened the night they sailed, which dispersed them, and, I
fear, has done them some injury.

General Spencer, with the last brigade, marched from Roxbury the day I left
Cambridge, and would be at New London, ready to embark in the return transports
which brought general Sullivan's division to this place. The whole of the
troops may be reasonably expected here in the course of this week. The badness
of the roads, and difficulty of procuri^g teams for bringing the stores,
baggage, etc. have greatly prolonged their arrival at this place.

I have not had time, since I came, to look fully about me; but find many works
of defense begun, and some finished. -- The troops are much dispersed, -- some
on Long Island, others on Staten-Island, etc.

I have ordered four battalions from hence to Canada, and am taking measures to
have them forwarded to Albany by water with all possible expedition. This will
greatly expedite their arrival, and ease the men of much fatigue. I have wrote
general Schuyler of their coming, that he may have necessary measures taken to
hurry their march to general Thomas.

I am informed by general Putnam that the militia, that were called in for the
support of this town, in case the ministerial army had arrived before our
troops, are all discharged, it being unnecessary to keep them longer.

All the ships of war, besides the Asia, moved out of this harbor on saturday,
and the Asia yesterday; some of which are now below the Narrows, and the rest
gone to sea.

Your favor of the tenth instant, by major Sherburne, directed to general
Putnam or the commanding officer here, came to hand on saturday evening, with
three boxes of money, which I shall deliver the paymaster as soon as he
arrives, and transmit you his receipt for the same.

Having received information from hence before my departure from Cambridge,
that thirty pieces of heavy cannon were wanting, and essentially necessary for
the defense of this place, in addition to those already here, -- I took the
liberty of applying to admiral Hopkins, whom I saw at New London, for that
number, with the mortars and stores he brought from Providence, -- a list of
which he had transmitted you. He told me, that, as many were wanting for the
defense of Providence river and the harbor at New London, it was uncertain
whether I could have all I wanted; but that he would send me all that could b^
spared.

I have not been able to get a return of the troops since I came: -- as soon as
I do, I will send it you.

I am, sir, with great respect, etc. G. W.

New York, April 18, 1776. SIR,
PERMIT me, through you, to convey to the honorable Congress the sentiments of
gratitude I feel for the high honor they have done me in the public mark of
approbation contained in your favor of the second instant, which came to hand
last night. I beg you to assure them that it will ever be my highest ambition
to approve myself a faithful servant of the public; and that, to be in any
degree instrumental in procuring to my American brethren a restitution of their
just rights and privileges, will constitute my chief happiness.

Agreeable to your request, I have communicated, in general orders, to the
officers and soldiers under my command, the thanks of Congress for their good
behavior in the service; and am happy in having such an oppertunity of doing
justice to their merit. They were indeed, at first, " a band of undisciplined
husbandmen:" but it is (under God) to their bravery and attention to their
duty, that I am indebted for that success, which has procured me the only
reward I wish to receive, -- the affection and esteem of my countrymen.

The medal, intended to be presented to me by your honorable body, I shall
carefully preserve as a memorial of their regard. I beg leave to return you,
sir, my warmest thanks for the polite manner in which you have been pleased to
express their sentiments of my conduct; and am, with sincere esteem and
respect, sir, yours and their most obedient and most humble servant.

G. W

New York, April 19, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE this moment received a letter from general Schuyler, containing
enclosures of a very important nature, copies of which, I imagine, are
contained in the enclosed letter to you, which I thought it my duty immediately
to forward by express, that they may be laid before the honorable Congress, and
proper measures pursued to prevent the fatal effects which are therein
apprehended. For my own part, I have done my utmost to forward the four
regiments ordered by Congress but a variety of incidents have hitherto
conspired to prevent their embarkation. The men had scarcely recovered
themselves from the fatigues of their march from Boston, and are quite
unprovided with necessaries. The colonels of the regiments, though repeatedly
called upon for that purpose, had neglected making out the abstracts for their
pay. All obstacles however, are now removed; and I hope to begin the
embarkation this day. Indeed it would have been best, in my opinion, to have
sent the regiments, raised in this province and New Jersey, upon that service,
had not the peculiar circumstances under which they were raised prevented it.
By the terms of their enlistment, they are to serve during the war, and at five
dollars per month, on condition, (as I am informed) that they shall not be sent
out of those provinces. Besides, they are very ill provided with arms, some
companies not having any. It must be a great burden upon the continent to keep
such a number of useless men in pay: and yet, if they should be dismissed, and
an unexpected supply of arms should arrive, it may be sound very difficult to
replace them.

The officers of the several corpse that have arrived here have been so busily
employed in fixing their men in quarters, that I have not yet been able to
procure an exact return of their numbers. Some are yet behind. As soon as the
whole are collected, I shall order the proper returns, and transmit them to
Congress.

You will please to notice what colonel Hazen says of the disposition of the
Indians. In my opinion, it will be impossible to keep them in a state of
neutrality. They must, and, no doubt, soon will take an active part either for
or against us: and I submit it to the consideration of Congress, whether it
would not be best immediately to engage them on our side, and to use our utmost
endeavors to prevent their minds being poisoned by ministerial emissaries,
which will ever be the case while a king's garrison is suffered to remain in
their country. Would it not therefore be advisable to send a sufficient force
from the back counties of Pennsylvania, to take possession of the garrisons of
Niagara and Detroit? This, I think, might easily be effected, and would answer
the most salutary purposes. The Seneca Indians, who have hitherto appeared
friendly to us, might be usefully employed in this business.

I am in hopes most of the difficulties mentioned in (...) Hazen's letter will
be obviated by the appearance of the respectable committee of Congress in
Canada, and the forces that have been and will be sent there. The security of
that country is of the utmost importance to us. This cannot be done so
effectually by conquest, as by taking strong hold of the affections and
confidence of the inhabitants. It is to be lamented that any conduct of the
continental troops should tend to alienate their affections from us.

The honorable Congress will be able to judge from the papers sent them by
general Schuyler, and information they may receive of the designs of the enemy,
whether it is expedient to send a further reinforcement to Canada. If such
should be their determination, I stand ready to execute their orders; and am,
with respect, sir, your most obedient, humble servant.

G. W.
Enclosed is a return of the four regiments ordered for Canada besides which,
there will be two rifle companies, a company of artificers, and two
artillery-men, all under the command of brigadier-gener^l Thompson.



New York, April, 22, 1776. SIR,
I WAS this day honored with the receipt of your favor of the twentieth
instant. I have now the pleasure to acquaint you that the four regiments
designed for Canada embarked yesterday with a fair wind for Albany, under the
command of colonels Greaton, Patterson, Bond, and Poor; besides which, there
was a company of riflemen, a company of artificers, and two engineers, -- the
whole commanded by brigadier-general Thompson.

I have repeatedly mentioned to the honorable Congress the distressful
situation we are in for want of arms. -- With much pains and difficulty I got
most of the regiments from the eastward tolerably well furnished; but find the
York regiments very badly provided. Colonel Ritzema's has scarcely any: and yet
these men, being enlisted during the war, and at five dollars per month, ought
not (in my judgment) to be discharged; as we find it almost as difficult to get
men, as arms. This is a matter of some importance, which I should be glad to
receive the particular opinion of Congress upon.

Mr. Baldwin is one of the assistant engineers ordered to Canada. He is indeed
a very useful man in this department, but declined the service, on account of
the pay, which he says is inadequate to his support. In order to induce him to
continue, I promised to represent his case to Congress, and would recommend an
increase of his pay, and that he should have the rank of lieutenant colonel, of
which he is very deserving. I beg leave therefore to recommend him to Congress,
and that they would make provision for him accordingly.

A few days ago, application was made to me by the committee of safety for this
colony, for an exchange of prisoners. For the particulars I beg leave to refer
you to their letter, a copy of which you have enclosed. As there is a standing
order of Congress that no sailors or soldiers shall be exchanged for citizens,
I did not incline to comply with the request without the particular direction
of Congress: but I have been since informed, that the prisoners, mentioned in
the committee's letter as citizens, are really seamen taken from private
vessels, but not in arms. How far this may alter the case, or how far the
reasons which induced the Congress to pass the resolve abovementioned may
still exist, must be left to their determination.

The militia, who, on my application were ordered to this place to keep
possession until I should arrive with the continental forces, were obliged to
return home without their pay, as there was not then money sufficient in the
treasury for that purpose, and to answer the exigencies of the army. This
occasioned great uneasiness among them, and may be attended with very bad
consequences in case we should have occasion for their service on any future
emergency. I therefore beg the Congress would make provision for their pay, and
point out particularly, whether it is to be done by the commander of the
continental forces, or by the provincial assemblies or conventions from whence
they are sent.

As the time for which the riflemen enlisted, will expire on the first of July
next, and as the loss of such a valuable and brave body of men will be of great
injury to the service, I would submit it to the consideration of Congress,
whether it would not be best to adopt some method to induce them to continue.
They are indeed a very useful corpse; but I need not mention this, as their
importance is already well known to the Congress. It is necessary they should
pay an early attention to this matter, as we know from past experience, that
men are very slow in re-enlisting.

When I had the honor of seeing admiral Hopkins at New London, he represented
to me the weak state of his fleet, occasioned by sickness and the damage he
received in his engagement with the enemy; and requested I would spare him two
hundred men to assist him in a design he had formed of attacking Wallace. This
I readily consented to; and the men are to be returned as soon as the service
is performed.

I wish it was in my power at present to furnish general Lee with the companies
of artillery he desires. -- I have already sent two companies to Quebec; and I
have not yet been able to procure a return of those that are here. I expect
colonel Knox every moment, and shall then be able to determine whether any can
be spared from hence. Blankets we are in great want of, ourselves; and it was
with great difficulty a few could be procured for the riflemen that were
ordered for Canada.

I enclose you Mr. Winthrop's receipt for two hundred thousand dollars, brought
some time ago from Philadelphia by major Sherburne, which you will please to
deliver to the continental treasurers.

On my arrival here, I found that Mr. Livingston had been appointed by the
provincial Congress, a commissary, to furnish the continental troops stationed
in this city, with provisions. I suppose this was done because there was no
continental commissary then on the spot. Mr. Livingston still claims a right of
furnishing all the troops but those lately arrived from Cambridge. Mr. Trumbull
is now here: and, as I consider him as the principal in that office, I should
be glad to know whether any part of the continental troops is to be furnished
by any other than their commissary-general. I must needs say, that to me it
appears very inconsistent, and must create great confusion in the accounts as
well as in the contracts. -- I intended to have laid before Congress the amount
of the rations, as supplied by colonel Trumbull and Mr. Livingston; and called
upon those gentlemen to furnish me with a separate estimate for that purpose.
Colonel Trumbull has given me his, by which it appears he supplies the troops
at eight pence and one-third per ration. I have not yet received any from Mr.
Livingston; but am informed his contract is at ten pence halfpenny. The
difference is immense, as it will amount to no less than two hundred pounds per
day, for twenty thousand men. It is indeed to be considered that Mr.
Livingston's contract is, including every other charge; and that to Mr.
Trumbull's must be added store-hire, clerks, and every other contingent
expense. But even then it will not amount to so much as Mr. Livingston's, by a
penny per ration, which in the gross, will be something very considerable. I
thought it my duty, without prejudice or partiality, to state the matter fairly
to Congress, that they might take such order upon it as to them shall seem
necessary, I cannot, however, in justice to Mr. Trumbull, help adding that he
has been indefatigable in supplying the army; and I believe, from his
connections in New England, is able to do it on as good terms as any person in
America.

The several matters contained in the foregoing, I must beg the early attention
of Congress to; and that I may be favored with an answer as soon as possible.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, April 23, 1776. SIR,
IN a letter which I had the honor to receive from Congress some considerable
time ago, they were pleased to ask what rank aids-de-camp bore in the army?
from whence I concluded that they had adverted to the extraordinary trouble and
confinement of those gentlemen, with a view to make them an adequate allowance.
But nothing being since done or said of the matter, I take the liberty, --
unsolicited by, and unknown to my aids-de-camp, -- to inform your honorable
body that their pay is not by any means equal to their trouble and confinement.

No person wishes more to save money to the public, than I do: and no person
has aimed more at it. But there are some cases in which parsimony may be ill
placed; and this I take to be one. Aids-de-camp are persons in whom entire
confidence must be placed: it requires men of abilities to execute the duties
with propriety and dispatch, where there is such a multiplicity of business, as
must attend the commander-in-chief of such an army as ours: and persuaded I am,
that nothing but the zeal of those gentlemen (who live with me, and act in this
capacity) for the great American cause, -- and personal attachment to me, --
has induced them to undergo the trouble and confinement they have experienced
since they have become members of my family.

I give into no kind of amusements myself; and consequently those about me can
have none, but are confined from morning till eve, hearing and answering the
applications and letters of one and another, which will now, I expect, receive
a pretty considerable addition, as the business of the northern and eastern
departments (if I continue here) must, I suppose, pass through my hands. If
these gentlemen had the same relaxation from duty as other officers have in
their common routine, there would not be so much in it. But, to have the mind
always upon the stretch, -- scarce ever unbent, -- and no hours for recreation,
-- makes a material odds. Knowing this, and at the same time how inadequate the
pay is, I can scarce find inclination to impose the necessary duties of their
office upon them. To what I have here said, this further remark may be made,
and is a matter of no small concernment to me, and, in its consequences, to the
public: -- and that is, that, while the duty is hard and the pay small, it is
not to be wondered at, if there should be found a promptness in them to seek
preferment, or in me to do justice to them by facilitating their views; by
which means I must lose their aid when they have it most in their power to
assist me. -- Influenced by these motives, I have taken the liberty of laying
the matter fully, and with all due deference, before your honorable body, not
doubting its meeting with a patient hearing.

I am, sir, with the greatest respect, etc. G. W.

New York, April 23, 1776. SIR,
THAT I might be in readiness to take the field in the spring, and prepared for
any service Congress should think proper to send me upon, this campaign, -- I
desired colonel Reed, when he left Cambridge in the fall, to get me a set of
camp equipage, tents, and baggage-waggons, made at Philadelphia under his own
inspection, and sent to me. This, he informs me, is now done, and ready to come
on. I have therefore to beg the favor of Congress, through you, to order
payment of them from the treasury, as it will save the expense and hazard of a
remittance from hence, where we stand much in need of every farthing we have.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, April 25, 1776. SIR,
I Received by last evening's post a letter from Joshua Wentworth, esquire, of
Portsmouth, whom I had appointed agent for our little fleet in that province.
It is dated the fifteenth instant; an extract from which I have the honor of
transcribing for your perusal.

"The third instant, commodore Manly brought in the brigantine Elizabeth, one
of the third division which sailed from Nantasket, with a valuable cargo of
English goods, and a few hogsheads of rum and sugar, by a Mr. J * * *, who was
a passenger, part freighter, and a very great tory. Suppose the cargo worth
twenty thousand pounds sterling. Those goods are, the greatest part, owned by
the inhabitants of Boston, and by some that were inhabitants when the troops
left it, -- the residue by this Mr. J * * *, and others of the same cast. The
complicate state of this prize required my immediate setting off for Boston,
expecting I might find some directions for my government there; when I waited
on general Ward, who was obliging enough to give me his opinion (but not able
to direct, having received no instructions to the point) that the vessel and
cargo must be libelled, and a dividend to the captors would follow, of all such
goods as might be legally claimed by the friends to America; and those that
were the property of them inimical, might be decreed forfeited. Upon further
inquiry, I was informed a resolve passed in Congress that all vessels and
goods, retaken previous to a condemnation by a British court of Admiralty, were
liable to a partial decree (by every colony judge) to the captors, -- not more
than one-third, nor less than one-fourth. The present prize falls under this
resolve: and any other, that [ makes the] property of our internal enemies
liable to a full confiscation, may be necessary for my government: therefore
shall be much obliged by your full direction of this capture, and a copy of the
continental resolves thereon. This brigantine is owned by a Mr. Richard Heart of
this town, taken on her return from the West Indies last October and carried
into Boston, not condemned. The rum on board are seventeen hogsheads, -- and
four of sugar, not removed out of her from the time of capture. The other cargo
was in general stolen by virtue of general Howe's proclamation (which
undoubtedly you have seen) appointing one C * * * B * * * superintendant, who,
by the way, was taken in the prize, and is now confined in the Massachusetts
colony, with Mr. J * * * and sundry others, by order of the general court, to
whom general Ward delivered them.

"There were a sergeant and twelve privates of the fourth, or king's own
regiment, taken prisoners on board, with the others, making sixty-three souls.

"There appeared from the pillage of this cargo by many of the passengers, the
property was in him who could secret the most. For when examining the chests
and bedding of the prisoners, I found great quantity of goods that they had
collected while on board, which were taken out of ware houses without packing,
and hove promiscuously on board the vessel. Even the sailors had provided for
their disposal at pleasure. In fact, the destruction of property under cover of
general Howe's proclamation, is unparalelled. * * *

"I am now discharging the cargo, as it is in a perishing situation; and, when
selected, and the regular course pursued through the admiralty, shall advertise
agreeable to his excellency's instructions to general Ward, who was obliging
enough to give me an abstract.

"The general court of this province, finding a difficulty in making a code of
laws for the admiralty court, did not complete that institution their last
session, when they adjourned to June; which lapse of time will not admit my
facilitating the disposal of the prizes under my care, so early as I could
wish, for the safety of part of the interest of the Susanna's cargo, viz. the
porter, which I fear may be spoiled by lying so long, -- it not having equal
body to that commonly imported for sale; -- which induces me to desire your
direction for a disposal of that article either at private or public sale."

That, sir, is an exact copy of part of Mr. Wentworth's letter to Mr. Moylan. I
now request you will please to dirct me, in what manner I shall instruct the
agent respecting the complicated cargo, and whether he may be empowered to
dispose of the porter or any other articles on board the prizes under his care,
which the delay of establishing the court of admiralty may make liable to
perish.

I have not yet heard that there has been any trial of the prizes carried into
Massachusetts bay. This procrastination is attended with very bad consequences.
Some of the vessels I had fitted out are now laid up, the crews being
dissatisfied that they cannot get their prize-money. I have tired the Congress
upon this subject: but the importance of it makes me again mention, that, if a
summary way of proceeding is not resolved on, it will be impossible to get our
vessels manned. I must also mention to you, sir, that captain Manly and his
crew are desirous to know when they may expect their part of the value of the
ordnance stores taken last fall. They are anxious to know what the amount may
be. As the inventory of that cargo is in the hands of Congress, I would humbly
submit it to them, whether a valuation thereof should not be made, and the
captors' dividend be remitted them as soon as possible. It will give them
spirit, and encourage them to be alert in looking out for other prizes.

Several officers belonging to the regiments raised in these middle colonies
inform me that their men (notwithstanding their agreement) begin to murmur at
the distinction of pay made between them and the regiments from the eastward. I
would be glad that the Congress would attend to this in time, lest it may get
to such a pitch as will be difficult to suppress. They argue that they perform
the same duty, undergo the same fatigue, and receive five dollars, when the
eastern regiments receive six dollars and two-thirds per month. For my own
part, I wish they were all upon the same footing: for, if the British army will
not face this way, it will be necessary to detach a great part of our troops:
in that case, I would, for many reasons, be sorry there should be any
distinctions of regiments that are all in the pay of the United Colonies.

The deficiency of arms (in the New York regiments especially) is very great.
If I am rightly informed, there are scarce as many in colonel Ritzema's
regiment as will arm one company. -- Can the Congress remedy this evil? If they
can, there should not a moment be lost in effecting it, as our strength at
present is, in reality, on paper only. Should we think of discharging those men
who are without arms, the remedy would be worse than the disease: for, by
vigorous exertions, I hope arms may be procured; and I well know that the
raising men is exceeding difficult, especially to be engaged during the
continuance of the war, which is the footing on which colonel Ritzema's
regiment is engaged.

April 26. -- I had wrote thus far before I was honored with your favor of the
twenty-third instant. In obedience to the order therein contained, I have
directed six regiments more for Canada, which will embark as soon as vessels
and other necessaries can be provided. These regiments will be commanded by
general Sullivan. I shall give him instructions to join the forces in that
country under general Thomas, as soon as possible.

With respect to sending more troops to that country, I am really at a loss
what to advise, as it is impossible at present to know the designs of the
enemy. Should they send the whole force under general How up the river St.
Laurence to relieve Quebec and recover Canada, the troops gone and now going
will be insufficient to stop their progress: and should they think proper to
send that or an equal force this way from Great Britain for the purpose of
possessing this city and securing the navigation of Hudson's river, the troops
left here will not be sufficient to oppose them: and yet, for any thing we
know, I think it not improbable they may attempt both, -- both being of the
greatest importance to them, -- if they have men.

I could wish indeed that the army in Canada should be more powerfully
reinforced: at the same time I am conscious that the trusting this important
post (which is now become the grand magazine of America) to the handful of men
remaining here, is running too great a risk. The securing this post and
Hudson's river is to us also of so great importance, that I cannot at present
advise the sending any more troops from hence: -- on the contrary, the general
officers now here, whom I thought it my duty to consult, think it absolutely
necessary to increase the army at this place with at least ten thousand men,
especially when it is considered, that, from this place only, the army in
Canada must draw its supplies of ammunition, provisions, and, most probably, of
men; and that all reinforcements can be sent from hence much easier than from
any other place. By the enclosed return, you will see the state of the army
here, and that the number of effective men is far short of what the Congress
must have expected.

I have found it necessary to order colonel Dayton's regiment from New Jersey,
to march as one of the six to Canada: wherefore I must recommend it to Congress
to order two companies of one of the regiments still in Pennsylvania to march
to Cape-May, which can be done much sooner: for, had this destination of that
regiment not taken place, it would have been very inconvenient to have detached
two companies from it to that place; as the march would (according to lord
Sterling's and other accounts) have been at least two hundred miles from Amboy,
and they must have passed within twenty miles of Philadelphia, there being no
practicable road along the seacoast of New Jersey for their baggage to have
passed.

Dr. Potts, who is bearer hereof, was, I understand, appointed director of the
hospital for these middle colonies; but the army being removed, with the
general hospital, from the eastward, does in course supercede him. He is
inclined to go to Canada, where he may be very useful, if a person is not
already appointed for that department. -- I would humbly beg leave to ask the
Congress whether, in all the appointments, it would not be best to have but one
chief, to whom all the others should be subordinate.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, April 30, 1776. SIR,
I MEAN, through you, to do myself the honor of laying before Congress a copy
of an address transmitted them some time ago by the assembly of Rhode Island,
which governor Cook favored me with in the month of January, at the same time
requesting me to interest myself in procuring a body of forces on the
continental establishment, for the defense of that colony. I doubt not but the
address and the subject of it have had the attention and consideration of
Congress before now. But if they have not decided upon the matter, I would beg
leave to mention that I have made inquiry into the situation and condition of
the colony, and find it to be as stated in the address; and, with all deference
to the opinion of Congress, conceive it highly necessary and expedient that
they should adopt some measures for relieving their distress, and granting the
aid prayed for. The importance of it in the chain of the union, -- its
extensive seacoast, affording harbors for our shipping and vessels, at the
same time exposing and subjecting the inhabitants to the ravages and
depredations of our enemies, -- the zeal and attachment which it has shown, and
which still actuates it, toward the common cause, -- their incapacity to pay a
sufficient number of men for its defense, should they be able to furnish them
after so many engaged in other services; -- these and many other reasons which
are too obvious to be mentioned, plead powerfully for the notice and attention
of Congress, and seem to me to claim their support.

Having thus stated the matter to Congress for their consideration, agreeable
to my promise to governor Cook when I had the honor of seeing him on my way
here, -- I shall leave it with them, not doubting but they will duly weigh its
importance, and give such assistance as they may think reasonable and just. --
What they chiefly wish for is that the troops they have raised may be taken
into continental pay, and commanding officers appointed by Congress.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, May 5, 1776. SIR,
I AM honored with your favor of the thirteenth ultimo, and observe what
Congress have done respecting the settlement of the paymaster's accounts. This
seems expedient, as he is out of office, and, I am certain, will be attended
with but little if any difficulty; nothing more being necessary, than to
compare the warrants with his debts, and the receipts he has given, with his
credits. I wish every other settlement as easy, and that a committee was
appointed to examine and audit the accounts upon which the warrants are
founded, particularly those of the quartermaster and commissary-general's.
They are long and of high amount, consisting of a variety of charges, -- of
course more intricate, -- and will require time and an extraordinary degree of
attention to adjust and liquidate in a proper manner. -- Upon this subject, I
did myself the honor to write you a considerable time ago.

Having had several complaints from the officers in the eastern regiments, who
have been, and are engaged in recruiting, about the expense attending it, and
for which they have never yet been allowed any thing, though the officers in
these governments have, as I am informed. -- I shall be glad to know whether
the allowance of ten shillings, granted to the officers for every man enlisted,
by the resolve of Congress in [ January], is general and indiscriminate, or
confined to the middle districts. If general, must I have retrospect to the
time of the resolves and pay for the services since, or only for future
enlistments?

In a letter I wrote to Congress the twenty-fifth of December, I enclosed one I
had received from Jacob Bailey, esquire, about opening a road from Newbury to
Canada. I have received another of the fifteenth ultimo: and, from his account
and the intelligence I have from others upon enquiry, I have no doubt of the
practicability of the measure; and am well informed that the distance will be
considerably shortened, insomuch that our people going from any part of the
New England governments eastward of Connecticut-river, to Canada, or returning
from thence home, will perform their march in five or six days less time than
by coming or going any way now used. Add to this, that the road may be so
conducted (as it is said) as to go to the river Missisque, from whence the
water carriage to St. John's is good, except forty odd miles, -- or be carried
so far to the northward as to keep clear of the lakes altogether, and afford an
easy pass into Canada at all seasons. The advantage resulting from this route
being so great and important, I have advanced colonel Bailey two hundred and
fifty pounds to begin with, and directed him to execute his plan. No doubt it
will require a considerable advance to accomplish it: but that will be soon
sunk. The expense saved by taking off six days' pay and provisions from the
soldiers returning to the eastern governments at the expiration of this
campaign, will be almost if not more than equal to the charge incurred in
opening it. If not, -- as in all probability there will be often a necessity
for sending detachments of our troops to Canada from those governments, and for
others to return, it will soon be repaid.

By a letter from general Schuyler, of the twenty-seventh ultimo, I find
general Thompson and his brigade were at Albany; general Sullivan with the last
(except three or four companies of colonel Wayne's regiment, not yet come) is
embarked and gone, and probably will be soon there. I am apprehensive, from
general Schuyler's account, that they will not proceed with the wished for
expedition, owing to a difficulty in getting teams and provinder for cattle,
necessary to carry their baggage, and a scarcity of batteaux at the lakes for
so large a number, though he is taking the utmost pains to procure them. Should
they be stopped for any time, it will be exceedingly unfortunate, as their
going from hence has weakened us here much, and our army in Canada will not be
strengthened.

I have sent with the last brigade sixty barrels of powder, and other stores
and intrenching tools, a supply being asked for; also the chain for a boom at
the narrows of Richelieu, and the three boxes of money brought by Mr. Hanson;
and have wrote to Mr. Schuyler to have the boom fixed as soon as possible. --
The commissary too has forwarded about eight hundred barrels of pork, and is in
expectation of a further quantity from Connecticut, which will go on without
stopping here.

As the magazine from whence the northern and eastern armies will occasionally
receive supplies of powder will probably be here, and our stock is low and
inconsiderable, being much reduced by the sixty barrels sent to Canada, I shall
be glad to have a quantity immediately forwarded. Our stores should be great:
for if the enemy make an attack upon the town, or attempt to go up the
North-river, the expenditure will be very considerable. Money too is much
wanted: -- the regiments that are paid have only received to the first of
April, except those of Pennsylvania and Jersey which are gone to Canada: they
are paid to the last of April. By a letter from general Ward, I find his chest
is just exhausted; the money which was left with him for the payment of the
five regiments at Boston and Beverly, being almost expended by large draughts
in favor of the commissary and quartermaster, and in fitting out the armed
vessels.

I would here ask a question, to wit, whether, as Mr. Warren's commission is
superceded by Mr. Palfrey's appointment, it will not be necessary to fix upon
some person to pay the troops there: or are the payments to go through his
hands? -- He does not incline to do any thing in the affair without the
direction of Congress.

I have enclosed you a return of the last brigade detached, and also of the
forces remaining here. And as it is a matter of much importance to know the
whole of our strength from time to time, and to see it at one view, for
regulating our movements with propriety; I wish it were a direction from
Congress to the commanding officers in the different districts to make monthly
returns to the commander-in-chief of the continental army, and of the state of
the troops in their departments, and also of the military stores. Such
direction will probably make them more attentive than they otherwise would be.
-- I could not get a return of the army in Canada all last year.

I beg leave to lay before Congress a copy of the proceedings of a
court martial upon lieutenant * * * * of the second regiment, and of his
defense, -- which I should not have troubled them with, had I not conceived the
court's sentence, upon the facts stated in the proceedings, of a singular
nature, to be by no means adequate to the enormity of his offense, and to be of
exceeding dangerous and pernicious tendency. Upon these principles I thought it
my duty to transmit the proceedings to them, in order that they may form such a
judgment upon the facts stated, as they may conceive right and just, and
advancive of the public good. -- At the same time I would mention to Congress
that I think it of material consequence that they should pass a resolve,
cutting off the right of succession in the military line from one rank to
another, which is claimed by many upon the happening of vacancies, -- (upon
which principle this offense seems to have originated in a great measure, and
the extraordinary judgment in this instance to be founded) -- declaring that no
succession or promotion can take place upon any vacancy, without a continental
commission giving and authorizing it. It is of much consequence to check and
entirely suppress this opinion and claim, which is becoming too prevalent, and
has an obvious tendency to introduce mutiny and disorder; -- or, if they
conceive the claim good, and that it should take place, that they will declare
it so, that the point may be settled and known in future.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, May 5, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE so often and so fully communicated my want o arms to Congress, that I
should not have given them the trouble of receiving another letter upon this
subject at this time, but for the particular application of colonel Wayne of
Pennsylvania, who has pointed out a method by which he thinks they may be
obtained.

In the hands of the committee of safety at Philadelphia, there are, according
to colonel Wayne's account, not less than two or three thousand stand of arms
for provincial use. From hence he thinks a number might be borrowed by
Congress, provided they are replaced with continental arms as they are brought
into the magazine in that city. At a crisis so important as this, such a loan
might be attended with the most signal advantages, -- while the defenseless
state of the regiments, if no relief can be had, may be productive of fatal
consequences.

To give Congress some idea of our situation with respect to arms -- (and
justice to my own character requires that it should be known to them, although
the world at large will form their opinion of our strength from numbers,
without attending to circumstances) -- it may not be amiss to enclose a copy of
a return which I received a few days ago from the forts in the Highlands, and
add, that, by a report from colonel Ritzema's regiment, of the twenty-ninth
ultimo, there appeared to be only ninety-seven firelocks and seven bayonets
belonging thereto: and that all the regiments from the eastward are deficient
from twenty to fifty of the former. Four of those companies at the
fortifications in the Highlands, belong to colonel Clinton's regiment; but in
what condition the residue are on account of arms, and how colonel Wyncoop's
men are provided, I cannot undertake to say, but am told, most miserably; as
colonel Dayton's of New Jersey, and colonel Wayne's of Pennsylvania also are.
This, sir, is a true, though melancholy description of our situation. The
propriety therefore of keeping arms in store when men in actual pay are in want
of them, and who (it is to be presumed) will, as they ought, bear the heat and
burden of the day, is submitted with all due deference to the superior judgment
of others.

I cannot by all the enquiries I have been able to make, learn what number of
arms have been taken from the tories, where they lie, or how they are to be got
at. The committee of safety for this colony have assured me that no exertions
of theirs shall be wanting to procure arms: but our sufferings in the mean time
may prove fatal, as men without are in a manner useless. I have therefore
thoughts of employing an agent whose sole business it shall be to ride through
the middle and interior parts of these governments, for the purpose of buying
up such arms as the inhabitants may incline to sell, and are fit for use.

The designs of the enemy are too much behind the curtain for me to form any
accurate opinion of their plan of operations for the summer's campaign. We are
left to wander therefore in the field of conjecture: and as no place (all its
consequences considered) seemed of more importance in the execution of their
grand plan, than possessing themselves of Hudson's river, I thought it
advisable to remove with the continental army to this city as soon as the
king's troops evacuated Boston. But if Congress, from their knowledge,
information, or belief, think it best for the general good of the service that
I should go to the northward or elsewhere, they are convinced, I hope, that
they have nothing more to do than signify their commands.

With the greatest respect, I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, May 7, 1776. SIR,
At a quarter after seven this evening, I received by express a letter from
Thomas Cushing, esquire, chairman of a committee of the honorable general
court, covering one to them for the committee of Salem; copies of which I do
myself the honor to lay before Congress, that they may judge of the
intelligence contained therein, and direct such measures to be taken upon the
occasion as they may think proper and necessary.

I would observe, that, supposing captain Lee's account to be true in part, I
think there must be a mistake either in the number of troops or the transport
ships. If there are no more ships than what are mentioned, it is certain there
cannot be so many troops. Of this, however, Congress can judge as well as
myself: and I submit to them, whether, upon the whole of the circumstances, and
the uncertainty of their destination (if they were seen at all) they choose that
any forces shall be detached from hence, as they will see, from the returns
transmitted yesterday, that the number of men now here is but small and
inconsiderable; and (what is to be regretted) no small part of these without
arms. -- Perhaps, by dividing and subdividing our force too much, we shall have
no one post sufficiently guarded.

I shall wait their direction: and, whatever their order is, shall comply with
it as soon as possible.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I have by the same express, a letter from general Ward, containing a
similar account to that from the Salem committee, and by way of captain Lee.

Should the commissioners arrive that are mentioned, how are they to be
received and treated? -- I wish the direction of Congress upon the subject, by
return of the bearer.



New York, May 11, 1776. SIR,
I AM now to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of the fourth and seventh
instant, with their several enclosures, and am exceedingly glad, that before
the resolution respecting lieutenant colonel Ogden came to hand, I had ordered
him to join his regiment, and had quelled a disagreeable spirit both of mutiny
and desertion, which had taken place and seemed to be rising to a great degree
in consequence of it. In order to effect it, I had the regiment paraded, and
ordered two more at the same time under arms, convinced them of their error and
ill conduct, and obtained a promise for their good behavior in future. To such
of the men as had absconded I gave pardons, on their assurances to return to
their duty again.

In my letter of the fifth instant which I had the honor of addressing you, I
mentioned to Congress the refractory and mutinous conduct of lieutenant * * * *
of the second regiment, and laid before them a copy of the proceedings of a
court martial upon him, and of his defense, with a view that such measures
might be adopted as they should think adequate to his crime. -- I would now beg
leave to inform them, that, since then, he has appeared sensible of his
misconduct and having made a written acknowledgment of his offense, and begged
pardon for it (as by the enclosed copy will appear), I thought it best to
release him from his confinement, and have ordered him to join his regiment;
which I hope will meet their approbation, and tender any determination, as to
him, unnecessary; -- observing at the same time that I have endeavored, and I
flatter myself, not ineffectually, to support their authority, and a due
subordination in the army, I have found it of importance and highly expedient
to yield many points in fact, without seeming to have done it, -- and this, to
avoid bringing on a too frequent discussion of matters, which, in a political
view, ought to be kept a little behind the curtain, and not be made too much
the subjects of disquisition. -- Time only can eradicate and overcome customs
and prejudice of long standing: they must be got the better of, by slow and
gradual advances.

I would here take occasion to suggest to Congress (not wishing or meaning of
myself to assume the smallest degree of power in any instance) the propriety
and necessity of having their sentiments respecting the filling up the
vacancies and issuing commissions to officers, especially to those under the
rank of field officers. Had I literally complied with the directions given upon
this subject when I first engaged in the service, and which I conceived to be
superceded by a subsequent resolve for forming the army upon the present
establishment, I must have employed one clerk for no other business than
issuing warrants of appointment, and giving information to Congress for their
confirmation or refusal. It being evident from the necessity of the thing, that
there will be frequent changes and vacancies in office, from death and a
variety of other causes, I now submit it to them, and pray their direction
whether I am to pursue that mode and all the ceremonies attending it, or to be
at liberty to fill up and grant commissions at once to such as may be sit and
proper persons to succeed. * * *

Before I have done, with the utmost deference and respect I would beg leave to
remind Congress of my former letters and applications respecting the
appointment of proper persons to superintend and take direction of such
prisoners as have already fallen and will fall into our hands in the course of
the war, -- being fully convinced, that, if there were persons appointed who
would take the whole management of them under their care, the continent would
save a considerable sum of money by it, and the prisoners be better treated and
provided with real necessaries than they now are; -- and shall take the liberty
to add that it appears to me a matter of much importance, and worthy of
consideration, that particular and proper places of security should be fixed on
and established in the interior parts of the different governments for their
reception.

Such establishments are agreeable to the practice and usage of the English and
other nations, and are ^ounded on principles of necessity and public utility.
The advantages which will arise from them are obvious and many: -- I shall only
mention two or three. -- They will tend much to prevent escapes (which are
difficult to effect when the public is once advertised that the prisoners are
restrained to a few stated and well-known places, and not permitted to go from
thence), and the more ingenious among them from disseminating and spreading
their artful and pernicious intrigues and opinions throughout the country,
which would influence the weaker and wavering part of mankind, and meet with
but too favorable a hearing. Further, it will be less in their power to join
and assist our enemies in cases of invasion, and will give us an opportunity
always to know, from the returns of those appointed to superintend them, what
number we have in possession, the force sufficient to check and suppress their
hostile views in times of emergency, and the expenses necessary for their
maintenance and support. Many other reasons might be adduced to prove the
necessity and expediency of the measure; -- I shall only subjoin one more, and
then have done on the subject, -- which is, that many of the towns where
prisoners have been already sent, not having convenience for or the means of
keeping them, complain they are burdensome; and have become careless,
inattentive, and altogether indifferent whether they escape or not; and those
of them that are restricted to a closer confinement (the limits of jail) are
neglected, and not treated with that care and regard which Congress wish.

I have not received further intelligence of the German troops since my letter
of the seventh instant, covering Mr. Cushing's dispatches. But, lest the
account of their coming should be true, may it not be advisable and good policy
to raise some companies of our Germans to send among them when they arrive, for
exciting a spirit of disaffection and desertion? -- If a few sensible and
trusty fellows could get with them, I should think they would have great weight
and influence with the common soldiery, who certainly have no enmity toward
us, having received no injury nor cause of quarrel from us. The measure having
occurred, and appearing to me expedient, I thought it prudent to mention it for
the consideration Congress.

Having received a letter from general Ward, advising that Congress have
accepted his resignation, and praying to be relieved, -- and it being necessary
that a general officer should be sent to take the command of the troops at
Boston, especially if the army should arrive which is talked of, and which some
consider as a probable event. -- I must beg leave to recommend to Congress the
appointment of some brigadier-generals, not having more here (nor so many at
this time) than are essential to the government and conducting the forces and
the works that are carrying on. -- Generals Sullivan and Thompson being ordered
to Canada, I cannot spare one more general officer from hence without injuring
the service greatly, and leaving the army here without a sufficient number.

Having frequent application from the committee of safety and others, about an
exchange of prisoners, and not having authority to pursue any other mode in
this instance, than that marked out by a resolve of Congress some considerable
time ago, I hope they will pardon me when I wish them to take under
consideration such parts of my letter of the twenty-second ultimo as relate to
this subject; and for their determination upon it. I shall then have it in my
power to give explicit and satisfactory answers to those who shall apply.

I am, sir, etc. G. W.

New York, May 15, 1776. SIR,
SINCE my last of the eleventh instant, which I had the honor to address to
you, nothing of moment or importance has occurred; and the principal design of
this is to communicate to Congress the intelligence I received last night from
general Schuyler by a letter of the tenth, respecting the progress of our
troops in getting toward Canada, not doubting of their impatience and anxiety
to hear of it and of every thing relating to the expedition. For their more
particular information and satisfaction, I have done myself the pleasure to
extract the substance of his letter on this head, which is as follows: -- "that
general Thompson, with the last of his brigade, on the morning of tuesday
se'nnight, embarked at Fort-George; and, in the evening of the next day,
general Sullivan arrived at Albany; -- that he had ordered an additional number
of carpenters to assist in building boats; who, finished eight every day, would
have a hundred and ten complete by the twenty-first, before which he was
fearful the last of general Sullivan's brigade could not embark; -- that they
would carry thirteen men each, besides the baggage, ammunition, and intrenching
tools." * * *

He also informs, "That the sixty barrels of powder had arrived, and would be
forwarded that day; that the first regiment of general Sullivan's brigade
marched that morning; and that the intrenching tools and about six hundred
barrels of pork were also gone on; -- that he cannot possibly send more than
half of the three hundred thousand dollars into Canada, (being greatly in debt
on the public account, and the creditors exceedingly clamorous and importunate
for payment), which sum he hopes will be sufficient, till the Canadians agree
to take our paper currency, to which they are mnch averse, and of which he is
exceedingly doubtful: -- that he had got the chain, and would forward it that
day to general Arnold, with orders to fix it at the rapids of Richelieu." He
adds, "that he had reviewed general Sullivan's brigade in presence of about two
hundred and sixty Indians, who were greatly pleased with the order and
regularity of the troops, and surprised at the number, which, the tories had
industriously propagated, consisted only of three companies, and that they were
always kept walking the streets, to induce them to believe their number was
much greater than it really was."

I have enclosed a copy of general Schuyler's instructions to James Price,
esquire, deputy commissary-general, for the regulation of his conduct in that
department, which I received last night, and which general Schuyler requested
me to forward you. -- I also beg leave to lay before Congress, a copy of a
letter from Samuel Stringer, director of one of the hospitals, purporting an
application for an increase of surgeon's-mates, etc. an estimate of which is
also enclosed; and submit it to them, what number must be sent from hence or
got elsewhere. It is highly probable that many more will be wanted in Canada
than are already there, on account of the late augmention of the army: but I
thought it most advisable to make his requisition known to Congress, and to
take their order and direction upon it. -- As to the medicines, I shall speak
to Dr. Morgan (not yet arrived) as soon as he comes, and order him to forward
such as may be necessary and can be possibly spared.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, May 17, 1776. SIR,
I THIS moment received by express from general Schuyler an account of the
melancholy prospect and reverse of our affairs in Canada; and presuming that
the letters which accompany this will give Congress full information upon the
subject, I shall only add, that general Schuyler, in pursuance of orders from
the honorable commissioners, has directed brigadier-general Sullivan to halt
his brigade; as a further reinforcement (on account of the scarcity of
provisions) would not relieve, but contribute greatly to distress our troops
already in Canada. Before he received these orders, all the brigade, except
Dayton's and Wayne's regiments, had left Albany: but I suppose he will be able
to stop their march.

By my letter of the fifteenth, Congress will perceive the quantity of pork
already gone from hence: and the commissary has assured me that he will forward
a further supply as soon as it can be possibly collected. I had also directed
five tons of lead to be sent to general Schuyler for the Canada expedition,
before I received this unfortunate account; which was as much as could be
spared for the present (our stock being inconsiderable in proportion to the
demand we may reasonably expect for it); and shall do every thing in my power
to relieve our affairs from their present distressed and melancholy situation
in that quarter, which occurs to me and appears necessary.

I am also to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of the tenth and
thirteenth instant, with their several enclosures. The money, accompanying the
letter, came to the paymaster's hands safe. --

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, May 18, 1776. SIR
I DO myself the honor to transmit to you the enclosed letters and papers I
received this morning in the state they now are, which contain sundry matters
of intelligence of the most interesting nature. As the consideration of them
may lead to important consequences and the adoption of several measures in the
military line, I have thought it advisable for general Gates to attend
Congress -- (he will follow tomorrow, and satisfy, and explain to them some
points they may wish to be informed of in the course of their deliberations) --
not having an opportunity at this time to submit my thoughts to them upon these
interesting accounts.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, May 19, 1776. SIR
THIS will be delivered you by general Gates who sets out today for Congress,
agreeable to my letter of yesterday. I have committed to him the heads of
sundry matters to lay before Congress for their consideration, which, from the
interesting intelligence contained in my last, appear to me of the utmost
importance, and to demand their most early and serious attention.

Sensible that I have omitted to set down many things necessary, and which
probably, when deliberating, they will wish to be acquainted with, -- and not
conceiving myself at liberty to depart from my post (though to attend them)
without their previous approbation, -- I have requested general Gates to
subjoin such hints of his own, as he may apprehend material. His military
experience and intimate acquaintance with the situation of our affairs will
enable him to give Congress the fullest satisfaction about the measures
necessary to be adopted at this alarming crisis: and, with his zeal and
attachment to the cause of America, have a claim to their notice and favors.

When Congress shall have come to a determination on the subject of this
letter, and such parts of my former letters as have not been determined on, you
will be pleased to honor me with the result. -- I am, sir, etc.

G. W.

New York, May 20, 1776. SIR,
YOUR favor of the sixteenth, with several resolutions of Congress therein
enclosed, I had not the honor to receive till last night. Before the receipt, I
did not think myself at liberty to wait on Congress, although I wished to do
it; and therefore, the more readily assented to general Gates's attendance, as
I knew there were many matters which could be better explained in a personal
interview than in whole volumes of letters. He accordingly set out for
Philadelphia yesterday morning, and must have been too far advanced on his
journey (as he proposed expedition) to be overtaken.

I shall, if I can settle some matters which are in agitation with the
provincial Congress here, follow tomorrow or next day: and therefore, with
every sentiment of regard, attachment, and gratitude to Congress, for their
kind attention to the means which they think may be conducive to my health, and
with particular thanks to you for the politeness of your invitation to your
house, conclude, dear sir, your most obedient, etc.

G. W.

Philadelphia, June 3, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE perused the petition preferred by the independent corpse of Boston, and
beg leave, through you to inform Congress that the five regiments there are
extremely deficient in arms, as are many other regiments in continental pay;
and submit it to their consideration, whether any part of the arms lately
taken, under these circumstances, should be delivered to the gentlemen applying
for them; -- determining, at the same time, that whatever decision they come
to, will be agreeable to me, and be literally complied with, by, sir, your most
obedient, etc.

G. W.

New York, June 7, 1776. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to inform Congress that I arrived here yesterday
afternoon about one o'clock, and found all in a state of peace and quiet. I had
not time to view the works carrying on, and those ordered to be begun when I
went away; but have reason to believe, from the report of such of the general
and other officers as I had the pleasure to see, that they have been prosecuted
and forwarded with all possible diligence and dispatch.

I am much concerned for the situation of our affairs in Canada, and am
fearful, ere this, it is much worse than was first reported at Philadelphia.
The intelligence from thence, in a letter from captain Wilkinson of the second
regiment, to general Green, is truly alarming. It not only confirms the
account of colonel Biddle and major Sherburne's defeat, but seems to forbode
general Arnold's, with the loss of Montreal. -- I have enclosed a copy of the
letter, which will but too well show that there is foundation for my
apprehensions.

On wednesday evening I received an express from general Schuyler, with sundry
papers respecting sir John Johnston, which I have not time to copy, as the post
is just going off, but will do myself the honor of transmitting you as soon as
I possibly can.

Before I left Philadelphia, I employed a person to superintend the building of
the gondolas which Congress had resolved on for this this place. He is arrived,
and all things seem to be in a proper channel for facilitating the work: but
when they are done, we shall be much in want of guns, having never received any
of those taken by commodore Hopkins.

Be pleased to mention me to Congress with the utmost respect: and I am, sir,
with every sentiment of regard and esteem, your and their obedient servant,

G. W.
P. S. I this minute received your faver of the fifth instant. -- I am in need
of commissions, and beg Congress to point out precisely the line I am to pursue
in filling them up. This I mentioned in my letter of the eleventh ultimo. -- I
am much pleased at the fortunate captures, and the generous conduct of the
owners and masters, for the tender of the money to Congress.



June 8, 1776. SIR,
IN my letter of yesterday which I had the honor of addressing you, and which
was designed to have gone by post, but was prevented by his departure at the
usual time, I mentioned my having received by express a letter and sundry
papers from general Schuyler, respecting sir John Johnston, copies of which I
herewith transmit you for your inspection and perusal. They will show you what
measures were planned and attempted for apprehending him, and securing the
Scotch Highlanders in Tryon county.

Having heard that the troops at Boston are extremely uneasy and almost
mutinous for want of pay (several months being now due) I must take the liberty
to repeat a question contained in my letter of the fifth ultimo, -- "what mode
is to be pursued respecting it?" whether is money to be sent from hence by the
paymaster-general, or some person subordinate to him to be appointed there for
that purpose? -- I expected some direction would have been given in this
instance, long ere this, from what was contained in yours accompanying (or
about the time of) the last remittance. I presume it has been omitted by reason
of the multiplicity of important business before Congress.

In perusing the several resolves you honored me with when at Philadelphia and
since my return, I find one allowing a chief engineer for the army in a
separate department. The service requiring many of them, I wish Congress, if
they know any persons skilled in this business, would appoint them. General
Schuyler has frequently applied, and suggested the necessity of having some in
Canada. -- I myself know of none.

I also find there is a resolve of the third of June, for taking Indians into
the service, which, if literally construed, confines them to that in Canada. --
Is that the meaning of Congress, or that the commander-in-chief may order their
service to any place he may think necessary?

In respect to the establishing expresses between the several continental
posts, -- who is to do it? -- the resolves does not say. -- Is it expected by
Congress that I should? -- Whoever the work is assigned to, I think should
execute it with the utmost dispatch. The late imperfect and contradictory
accounts respecting our defeat at the Cedars, strongly point out the necessity
there is for it. No intelligence is yet come from any officer in command there
(and most probably for want of a proper channel to convey it,) though this
misfortune happened so long ago.

When I had the honor of being in Congress, if I mistake not, I heard a resolve
read, or was told of one, allowing the NewYork troops the same pay as others in
the continental service. -- This, if any such, I do not find; and if there is
not such a one, I shall be under some embarrassment, how to pay the militia to
be provided by this province. The resolve providing them, says they are to be
paid, while in service, as other troops are. But if those enlisted heretofore
in this province are to receive according to the first establishment, it is a
matter of doubt, what the militia are to have.

Before this comes to hand, a hand-bill, containing an account of a victory
gained by general Arnold over the party that had defeated colonel Biddle and
major Sherburne, will most probably have reached you. I have inquired into the
authenticity of this fortunate report, and have found there is no dependence to
be put in it: nor do I believe it deserving of the least credit. I shall be
happy not to hear the reverse.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. If Congress have come to any resolution about an allowance to induce men
to re-enlist, you will please to favor me with it, as the time the rifle
regiment is engaged for is just expired.

As the militia will be coming in, and they will be in much need of covering,
please to have all the tents, and cloth proper, for making them that can be
procured, forwarded as soon as possible.



New York, June 9, 1776. SIR,
I WAS honored yesterday with your favor of the seventh, with its enclosures.
When Dr. Potts arrives, I shall order him to Canada or Lake-George, as may
appear most proper. It is certainly necessary that he or Dr. Stringer should go
to the former. -- The resolves respecting general Wooster's recall I will
immediately transmit him with directions to repair hither without delay.

The situation of our affairs in Canada, as reported by the honorable
commissioners, is truly alarming: and I am sorry that my opinion of the ill
consequences resulting from the short enlistment of the army should be but too
well confirmed by the experience they have had of the want of discipline and
order in our soldiery there. This induces me again to wish Congress to
determine on a liberal allowance to engage the troops already in service, to
re-inlist for a longer period, or during the continuance of the war; nor can I
forbear expressing my opinion of the propriety of keeping the military chest
always supplied with money, as evils of the most interesting nature are often
produced for want of a regular payment of troops. -- The neglect makes them
impatient and uneasy.

I am much surprised at the scarcity of provisions there, particularly of
flour; as, from several accounts I had received from thence, I was led to
expect that considerable supplies of that article could be procured there. That
our misfortunes may not become greater, I have wrote to the commissary to
forward more provisions, in addition to those already sent.

An adjutant and quarter-master-general are indispensably necessary, with
assistants. The money saved to the continent by their non-appointment will be
but small and trifling, when put in competition with the loss for want of them.
Colonel Fleming who acted in the former capacity under general Montgomery, is
now here: but his indisposition is such as to render him unfit, at this time,
for the post: -- it is an important one, and requires vigor and activity to
discharge the duties of it. He will be of much service to colonel Reed, the
business of whose office will increase considerably by the augmentation of the
army.

It will be necessary, too, that the commissaries in Canada, and the deputy
quarter-master-generals, should have several assistants and clerks: nor do I
think a precise number can be fixed on, as a variety of circumstances may and
must occur, to render the number, essential for doing the business in those
departments, greater or less at different times. It will be better, I
apprehend, to leave it indefinite, and with power to the commanding officer to
allow such as may be wanted.

I am still in the dark, how the unfortunate affair ended at the Cedars, or on
what terms the surrender was made, as the last letter from the commissioners
has reference to a former, and mentions an agreement entered into, which I have
not seen: but I know of it more than I could wish.

I have received from Providence, in consequence of Mr. Morris's order, as
chairman of the secret committee of Congress, two hundred and thirty-four
muskets, in part of the two hundred and forty-four directed to be sent. The
enclosed copy of a letter from Mr. Brown, will account for the deficiency.

I shall be much obliged by your ordering a quantity of lead and flints to be
immediately forwarded; our demands for both are and will be very pressing.
There are also wanted some particular and necessary medicines to complete our
hospital chests, of which I will get Dr. Morgan to furnish Congress with a
list, when he writes or waits on them about some other matters necessary to be
fixed in his department.

As general Wooster in all probability, will be here in a little time, in
compliance with the resolve of Congress and my order transmitted to him, I wish
to know what I am to do with him when he comes.

General Schuyler in his letter of the thirty-first ultimo, of which I
transmitted you a copy yesterday, mentions that sundry persons had a design to
seize him as a tory, and probably still have; and wishes Congress to give him
some public mark of their approbation, if they are convinced of his zeal and
attachment to the cause of his country. -- Whether he intended that I should
communicate his desire to them, or not, I am not certain; but, supposing that
he did, I must beg leave to request that you will lay the paragraph before
them, that they may do, in the instance of his requisition, whatever they may
judge necessary. --

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. If Congress have agreed to the report of the committee for allowing the
Indians fifty pounds for every prisoner they shall take at Niagara, etc. it is
material I should be informed of it. This will be a favorable opportunity for
them to embrace, to gain possession of Detroit and the other posts, whilst the
enemy are engaged toward Montreal, etc.



New York, June 10, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I did myself the honor of writing to you yesterday, I have had the
satisfaction of seeing, and for a few minutes conversing with, Mr. Chase and
Mr. Carroll from Canada. -- Their account of our troops and the situation of
affairs in that department cannot possibly surprise you more than it has done
me. But I need not touch upon a subject which you will be so well informed of
from the fountainhead; nor should I have given you the trouble of a letter by
this day's post, but for the distraction which seems to prevail in the
commissary's department, as well as others in that quarter, -- the necessity of
having it under one general direction, -- and the dissatisfaction of colonel
Trumbull at the allowance made him by Congress as an equivalent for his
trouble. With respect to this particular matter, I can only say that I think he
is a man well [ calculated] for the business, and that, where a shilling is
saved in the pay, a pound may be lost by mismanagement in the off^ce; and that
his resignation at this time (I mean this campaign) may possibly be attended
with fatal consequences. I therefore humbly submit to Congress the propriety of
handsomely rewarding those gentlemen who hold such very important, troublesome,
and hazardous offices, as commissary and quartermaster.

In speaking to the former about the supplies necessary for the troops to be
raised, he informed me that the quantity of salt provisions which was shipping
from hence, might render his attempts to do it precarious; in consequence of
which, I desired him to lay the matter before the convention of this colony,
which he will do this day, but in the mean while desired Congress might be
informed of the matter, which I cannot better do than his own words enclosed,
and submit the consideration of it to the wisdom of that honorable body.

To Congress I also submit the propriety of keeping the two continental
battalions (under the command of colonels She and M'Gaw) at Philadelphia, when
there is the greatest probability of a speedy attack upon this place, from the
king's troops. The encouragements given by governor Tryon to the disaffected,
which are circulated, no one can well tell how, -- the movements of these kind
of people, which are more easy to perceive than describe, -- the confident
report, which is said to have come immediately from governor Tryon, and brought
by a frigate from Halifax, that the troops at that place are embarking for
this, -- added to a thousand incidental circumstances, trivial in themselves,
but strong from comparison, -- leaves not a doubt upon my mind but that troops
are hourly expected at the Hook.

I had no doubt, when I left this city for Philadelphia, but that some measures
would have been taken to secure the suspected and dangerous persons of this
government before now, and left orders for the military to give every aid to
the civil power. But the subject is delicate, and nothing is done in it. We may
therefore have internal as well as external enemies to contend with.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, New York, June 13, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE the honor of transmitting to Congress a letter which came by express
last night from general Schuyler, enclosing a copy of a letter to him from
colonel Kirkland. I have likewise enclosed the copy of one directed to general
Putnam or the commanding officer at New York. The representations contained in
these letters have induced me, without waiting the determination of Congress,
to direct general Schuyler immediately to commence a treaty with the Six
Nations, and to engage them in our interest, upon the best terms he and his
colleagues in commission can procure; and I trust the urgency of the occasion
will justify my proceedings to the Congress: -- the necessity for decision and
dispatch in all our measures, in my opinion, becomes every day more and more
apparent.

The express, Mr. Bennet, was overtaken at Albany by general Schuyler, who had
received intelligence at Fort-George that a considerable body of Mohawk Indians
were coming down the Mohawk river under the conduct of sir John Johnston. The
general's extreme hurry would not allow him to write: but it seems his
intention is to collect at Albany a sufficient force to oppose sir John. I have
given him my opinion that colonel Dayton's regiment should be employed in that
service, and to secure the post where Fort-Stanwix formerly stood.

In consequence of an information that several merchants were exporting salt
pork and beef from this place, I requested the commissary to make application
to the provincial Congress for a restraint to be laid on the exportation of
those articles, as I apprehended, not only that the enemy might receive
supplies by the capture of our vessels, but that our people might shortly
experience a scarcity. The provincial Congress have accordingly made a
resolution (a copy of which is enclosed) to stop the exportation for fourteen
days. They expect Congress will in the mean time frame some general regulations
on this head. They are unwilling (they say) to subject their constituents to
partial restraints.

I once mentioned to Congress that I thought a war-office, extremely necessary;
and they seemed inclined to institute one for our army: but the affair seems to
be since dropped. Give me leave again to insist on the utility and importance
of such and establishment. The more I reflect upon the subject, the more I am
convinced of its necessity, and that affairs can never be properly conducted
without it.

It Is with pleasure I receive the resolve enclosed in your favor of the
eleventh instant. One considerable ground of disaffection in in the army is
thereby removed.

I have employed persons in building the gondolas and rafts which the Congress
thought necessary for the defense of this place: and, in conjunction with the
provincial Congress, have determined to sink chevaux-de-frise, one of which is
already begun.

I am, with the utmost respect and esteem, etc. G. W.

New York, June, 14, 1776. SIR,
I Herewith transmit you copies of a letter from general Schuyler and its
several enclosures, which I received since I had the honor of addressing you
yesterday. From these you will learn that general Thomas died the second
instant; and the apprehensions of our frontier friends in this colony, that our
savage foes are meditating an attack against them.

I must beg leave to refer you to a paragraph in the copy of general Schuyler's
letter to general Putnam or the commanding officers here, enclosed in mine of
the thirteenth, where he requests a supply of clothing to be sent for the army
in Canada. As there is but little or no probability of getting it here, I shall
be glad to know whether there will be any chance of procuring it in
Philadelphia; and, if it should be sent through the hands of the quartermaster
here, to what account it is to be charged.

I was last evening favored with yours of the eleventh instant, and hope the
two battalions, which Congress have ordered from Philadelphia for the defense
of this place, will come provided with arms. If they do not, they will be of no
service, as there are more troops here already than are armed.

From general Schuyler's letter, he has in view the taking post where
Fort-Stanwix formerly stood. I wrote him, I thought it prudent, previous to
that, to secure a post lower down, about the falls below the German-Flats, lest
the savages should possess themselves of the country, and prevent supplies of
men and provisions that may be necessary to send there in future. He says he is
in want of cannon and ammunition; but has expressed himself so ambiguously,
that I am at a loss to know whether he meant what he has said as an application
or not, -- this being the only intelligence on the subject, and the first
mention of his want. I have desired him to explain the matter, and, in his
future requisitions for necessaries, to be more certain and explicit as to
quantity and quality. In the mean time I shall send him some intrenching tools,
and inquire whether there are any cannon that can be spared from hence.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, June 16, 1776. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to transmit to Congress a copy of a letter covering
copies of other papers, which I received yesterday evening from general
Sullivan. The intelligence communicated by him is pleasing and interesting, and
such as must afford the greatest satisfaction, if the conduct the Canadians
have discovered since his arrival among them is ingenious and sincere.

General Sullivan mentions his having given commissions to some of the
Canadians as a measure founded in necessity, and requests my approbation of it.
But not considering myself empowered to say any thing upon the subject, it may
not be improper for Congress to give him their opinion in this instance.

I have also enclosed copies of General Schuyler's letters received at the same
time. They contain accounts respecting the Indians, variant from what was
reported by Mr. Kirkland, but amounting to the same thing, -- the probability
of the savages attacking our frontiers.

By last night's post I had information of a capture made by our armed vessels,
of one of the transports with a company of Highlanders on board, bound to
Boston. The enclosed extract from general Ward's letter to me will give you the
intelligence more particularly. -- There are accounts in the city, mentioning
other valuable prizes: but as general Ward has said nothing of them, I fear
they want authenticity.

I beg leave to mention that a further sum of money will be wanted for our
military chest by the time it can be sent. The enclosed note from the
paymaster-general shows the necessity for it; and, I may add, besides his
estimates of draughts to be made, there are the claims of the eastern troops at
Boston, for three or four month's pay, not included, and now due.

Colonel Magaw is arrived with part of his battalion; and by wednesday evening
the whole, both of his and colonel She Is will be here, as I am told.

As it is and may be of great importance to have a communication with the
Jerseys and Long Island, I have had several flat-bottomed boats built for the
purpose, and have thoughts of getting more for Posaic and Hickinsac rivers
where they may be equally necessary for transporting our army or part of it
occasionally, or succors coming to or going from it.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, June 17, 1776. SIR,
I BEG leave to inform Congress that general Wooster has repaired to
headquarters, in obedience to their resolve transmitted him; and shall be
extremely glad if they will give me such further directions about him as they
may conceive necessary. He is desirous of seeing his family in Connecticut, as
I am informed, having been a good while from it. -- I shall wait their
instructions as to his future employment.

I am, sir, with sentiments of much esteem, etc. G. W.

New York, June 20, 1776. SIR,
I AM now to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of the fourteenth and
eighteenth instant, and the interesting resolves contained in them, with which
I have been honored. The several matters recommended to my attention shall be
particularly regarded, and the directions of Congress and your requests
complied with in every instance, as far as in my power.

The instituting a war-office is certainly an event of great importance, and,
in all probability, will be recorded as such in the historic page. The benefits
derived from it, I flatter myself, will be considerable, though the plan upon
which it is first formed may not be entirely perfect. This, like other great
works, in its first edition, may not be free from error: -- time will discover
its defects, and experience suggest the remedy, and such further improvements
as may be necessary; but it was right to give it a beginning, in my opinion.

The recommendation to the convention of New York for restraining and punishing
disaffected persons, I am hopeful, will be attended with salutary consequences;
and the prohibition against exporting provisions appears to have been a measure
founded in sound policy, lest proper supplies should be wanted, wherewith to
supply our armies.

I have transmitted general Schuyler the resolves about the Indians, and the
others on which he is to act; and have requested his strict attention and
exertions in order to their being carried into execution with all possible
dispatch.

I note your request respecting Mr. Hancock. He shall have such directions as
may be necessary for conducting his office; and I am happy he will have so
early a remittance for paying the troops in his department.

The silver and paper money designed for Canada will be highly serviceable, and
I hope will be the means of re-establishing our credit there in some degree
with the Canadians, and also encourage our men too, who have complained in this
instance. When it arrives, I will send it forward under a proper guard.

I have communicated to major general Gates the resolve of Congress for him to
prepare to Canada, and directed him to view Point-au-fer, that a fortress may
be erected if he shall judge necessary. He is preparing for his command, and in
a few days will take his departure for it. I would fain hope his arrival there
will give our affairs a complexion different from what they have worn for a
long time past, and that many essential benefits will result from it.

The kind attention Congress have shown to afford the commander-in-chief here
every assistance, by resolving that recommendatory letters be written to the
conventions of New Jersey, New York, and assembly of Connecticut, to authorize
him to call in the militia in case of exigency, claims my thankful
acknowledgments; and, I trust, if carried into execution, will produce many
advantages in case it may be expedient at any time to call in early
reinforcements. The delays incident to the ordinary mode may frequently render
their aid too late, and prove exceedingly injurious.

I this evening received intelligence of the nineteenth instant from captain
Pond of the armed sloop Schuyler, of his having taken, about fifty miles from
this, on the south side of Long Island, a ship and a sloop bound to Sandy-Hook.
The ship from Glasgow, with a company of the forty-second regiment, had been
taken by one of commodore Hopkins's fleet, who took the soldiers out, and
ordered her to Rhode Island; after which, she was retaken by the Cerberus, and
put under the convoy of the sloop. As captain Pond informs me, there were five
commissioned officers, two ladies, and four privates on board. They are not yet
arrived at headquarters. -- Enclosed is an invoice of what they have on board.

General Wooster having expressed an inclination and wish to wait on Congress,
I have given him permission, not having any occasion for him here. He set out
this morning.

I have been up to view the grounds about Kingsbridge, and find them to admit
of several places well calculated for defense; and, esteeming it a pass of the
utmost importance, have ordered works to be laid out, and shall direct part of
the two battalions from Pennsylvania to set about the execution immediately,
and will add to their number several of the milita when they come in, to
expedite them with all possible dispatch.

Their consequence, as they will keep open the communication with the country,
requires the most speedy completion of them.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, June 21, 1776. SIR,
I WAS this morning honored with your favur of the nineteenth instant, with
sundry resolves of Congress, which came to hand after I had closed mine of the
twentieth. I shall appoint a deputy muster-master-general as soon as I can fix
on a proper person for the office, and direct him immediately to repair to
Canada.

Mr. Bennet, the bearer of this, delivered me a letter today from general
Schuyler, enclosing the proceedings of the commissioners of Indian affairs, at
a meeting at Albany, in consequence of the resolution of Congress (as they say)
which I transmitted, the seventh instant, for engaging the Indians in our
service. The gentlemen appear to me to have widely mistaken the views of
Congress in this instance, and to have formed a plan for engaging such Indians
as were not in contemplation. -- I cannot account upon what principle they have
gone, as a part of their proceedings shows they are about to hold a conference
with the Six Nations. I suppose they esteemed what they have done, a necessary
measure; -- a copy of which I have the honor to enclose you.

I shall now beg leave to lay before Congress a preposition made to me by
captain Leary of this city, in behalf of a body of men who are desirous of
being employed in the continental service, as a troop of horse, and at the same
time to offer my opinion that such a corpse may be extremely useful in many
respects. In a march, they may be of the utmost service in reconnoitring the
enemy and gaining intelligence, and have it in their power to render many
important benefits. The terms on which they are willing to engage are enclosed,
which appear to me moderate and reasonable. -- I am also informed that another
company might readily be made up, and most probably upon the same terms. I
would therefore submit the propriety and expediency of the measure to the
consideration of Congress, and wish their opinion whether it will be agreeable
to them that both or either of them should be formed and incorporated in this
army, in manner as has been proposed by captain Leary, if it can be done.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, June 21, 1776. SIR,
THIS will be delivered to you by the chevalier de Kirmovan and monsieur de
Vermonet. They are French gentlemen just arrived in this place, who have made
application to me to be received into the continental service. They bring
letters to Dr. Franklin and some other gentlemen of the Congress. I suppose it
will better appear from those letters, than from any information I can give,
whether it will be proper to employ them in the capacity they are desirous of.

I am, sir, with the greatest esteem, etc. G. W.

New York, June 23, 1776. SIR,
I Herewith transmit you an extract of a letter from general Ward, which came
to hand by last night's post, containing the agreeable intelligence of their
having obliged the king's ships to leave Nantasket road, and of two transports
more being taken by our armed vessels, with two hundred and ten Highland troops
on board.

I sincerely wish the same success had attended our arms in another quarter: --
but it has not. In Canada, the situation of our affairs is truly alarming. The
enclosed copies of generals Schuyler, Sullivan, and Arnold's letters will
inform you that general Thompson has met with a repulse at Three Rivers, and is
now a prisoner in the hands of general Burgoyne, who (these accounts say) is
arrived with a considerable army. Nor do they seem to promise an end of our
misfortunes here: -- it is greatly to be feared that the next advices from
thence will be, that our shattered, divided and broken army (as you will see by
the return) have been obliged to abandon the country, and retreat, to avoid a
greater calamity, -- that of being cut off or becoming prisoners. -- I will
have done upon the subject, and leave you to draw such conclusions as you
conceive, from the state of facts, are most likely to result: only adding my
apprehensions that one of the latter events, -- either that they are cut off,
or become prisoners, -- has already happened, if they did not retreat while
they had an opportunity. General Schuyler and general Arnold seem to think it
extremely probable; and if it has taken place, it will not be easy to describe
all the fatal consequences that may flow from it. At least our utmost exertions
will be necessary, to prevent the advantages they have gained being turned to
our greater misfortunes. -- General Gates will certainly set out tomorrow, and
would have gone before now, had he not expected to receive some particular
instructions from Congress, which colonel Braxton said he imagined would be
given and transmitted here.

Enclosed is a copy of a letter from general Arnold, respecting some of the
Indian tribes, to general Schuyler, and of a talk had at Albany, with thirteen
of the Oneidas. They seemed then to entertain a friendly disposition toward
us, which I wish may not be changed by the misfortunes we have sustained in
Canada.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, June 27, 1776. SIR,
I THIS morning received by express, letters from generals Schuyler and Arnold,
with a copy of one to general Sullivan from the former, and also of others to
general Sullivan; of all which I do myself the honor to transmit you copies*
They will give you a further account of the melancholy situation of our affairs
in Canada, and show that there is nothing left to save our army there but
evacuating the country.

I am hopeful general Sullivan would retreat from Isle-auxnoix without waiting
for previous orders for that purpose; as from general Schuyler's and Arnold's
letters, it is much to be feared, by remaining there any considerable time, his
retreat would be cut off, or at least be a matter of extreme difficulty. I
would observe to Congress that it is not in my power to send any carpenters
from hence to build the gondolas and galleys general Arnold mentions, without
taking them from a work equally necessary (if not more so) here, of the same
kind: -- and submit it to them whether it may not be advisable (as it is of
great importance to us to have a number of those vessels on the lake, to
prevent the enemy's passing) to withdraw the carpenters for the present from
the frigates building up the North river, and detach them immediately, with all
that can be got at Philadelphia, for that purpose and carrying on those here.

I have the pleasure to inform you of another capture made by our armed
vessels, of a transport, on the nineteenth instant, with a company of Highland
grenadiers on board. The enclosed extract of a letter from general Ward, by
last night's post, contains the particulars; to which I beg leave to refer you.

I have been honored with your favors of the twenty-first and twenty-fifth
instant in due order, with their important enclosures, to which I shall
particularly attend. -- I have transmitted general Schuyler a copy of the
resolve of Congress respecting the Mohickan and Stockbridge Indians, and
directed him to put an immediate stop to the raising the two companies.

The quarter-master-general has been called upon for stopping the tents
designed for Massachusetts Bay, and ordered to forward them immediately. He
means to write to Congress upon the subject, and hopes his conduct will not
appear to deserve their reprehension. Of this they will judge from his relation
of the matter.

Being extremely desirous to forward the intelligence from Canada to Congress,
well knowing their anxiety about our affairs there, I must defer writing upon
some other matters, I want to lay before them, until the next opportunity,
which I hope will be tomorrow, when I will inform them fully upon the subject
of rations, having desired the commissary-general to furnish me with some
things necessary in that instance.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, June 27, 1776. SIR,
UPON information that major * * * was traveling through the country under
suspicious circumstances, I thought it necessary to have him secured, I
therefore sent after him, he was taken at South-Amboy, and brought up to
New York. Upon examination he informed me that he came from New Hampshire, the
country of his usual abode, where he had left his family; and pretended he was
destined to Philadelphia on business with Congress.

As by his own confession he had crossed Hudson's-river at New-Windsor, and was
taken so far out of his proper and direct route to Philadelphia, this
consideration added to the length of time he had taken to perform his journey,
-- his being found in so suspicious a place as Amboy, -- his unnecessary stay
there on pretense of getting some baggage from New York, and an expectation of
receiving money from a person here, of bad character, and in no circumstances
to furnish him out of his own stock, -- the major's reputation, and his being a
half pay officer, -- have increased my jealousies about him.

The business, which he informs me he has with Congress, is a secret offer of
his services, to the end that, in case it should be rejected, he might have his
way left open to an employment in the East Indies, to which he is assigned: and
in that case he flatters himself he will obtain leave of Congress to go to
Great Britain.

As he had be en put upon his parole by Congress, I thought it would be
improper to stay his progress to Philadelphia, should he be infact destined
thither. I therefore send him forward, but (to prevent imposition) under the
care of an officer, with letters found upon him, which, from their tenor, seem
calculated to recommend him to Congress. -- I submit it to their consideration,
whether it would not be dangerous to accept of the offer of his service.

I am, sir, with the greatest respect, etc. G. W.

New York, June 28, 1776. SIR,
IN compliance of the request of Congress contained in your favor of the
twenty-fifth instant, and my promise of yesterday, I do myself the honor to
inform you the cost of a ration, according to the commissary-general's
estimate, from the first of July to the first of December, will be from
eight-pence to eight-pence half penny, York currency.

Having discharged the obligation I was under in this instance, and finding
that many applications have been made for victualling the flying camp, I would,
with all possible deference, wish Congress to consider, the matter well before
they come to any determination upon it. Who the gentlemen are that have made
offers upon this occasion, I know not: consequently my objection to their
appointment cannot proceed from personal dislike; nor have I it in view to
serve Mr. Trumbull the commissary-general, by wishing him to have the direction
of the whole supplies for his emolument: because whatever rations are taken
from him save him the trouble of supplying provisions to the amount, without
diminishing his pay, -- that being fixed and certain: -- but what influences me
is a regard to the public good. I am morally certain, if the business is taken
out of Mr. Trumbull's hands and put into another's, that it may, and will in
all probability, be attended with great and many inconveniences. It is likely,
during the continuance of the war between us and Great Britain, that the army
here, or part of it, and the troops composing the flying camp, will be
frequently joined, and under the necessity of affording each other mutual aid.
If this event is probable (and most certainly it is), the same confusion and
disorder will result from having two commissaries, or one commissary and one
contractor in the same army in the same department, as did between Mr. Trumbull
and Mr. Livingston on the coming of the former to New York. I cannot
discriminate the two cases; and not foreseeing that any good consequences will
flow from the measure, but that many bad ones will, -- such as clashing of
interests, -- a contention for stores, carriages, -- and many other causes that
might be mentioned if hurry of business would permit, -- I confess I cannot
perceive the propriety of appointing a different person, or any but the
commissary.

I would also add, that few armies, if any, have been better supplied than the
troops under Mr. Trumbull's care in this instance; which, I should suppose,
ought to have considerable weight, especially as we have strong reasons to
believe that a large share of the misfortunes our arms have sustained in
Canada, sprang from a want of proper and necessary supplies of provisions.

Mr. Trumbull too (I am informed) has already made provision in New Jersey for
the flying camp which will be stationed there, and employed proper persons in
that colony to transact the business incident to his department, in obedience
to my orders, and in full confidence that it was to come under his management.

My great desire to see the affairs of this important post, on which so much
depends, go on in an easy, smooth and uninterrupted course, has led me to say
thus much upon the subject, and will, I hope (if I am unhappy enough to differ
in opinion with Congress), plead my excuse for the liberty I have taken.

I would also beg leave to mention to congress the necessity there is of some
new regulations being entered into, respecting the chaplains of this army. They
will remember that applications were made to increase their pay, which was
conceived too low for their support; and that it was proposed (if it could not
be done for the whole) that the number should be lessened, and one be appointed
to two regiments, with an additional allowance. This latter expedient was
adopted, and, while the army continued all together at one encampment, answered
well, or at least did not produce many inconveniences. But the army now being
differently circumstanced from what it then was, -- part here, part at Boston,
and a third part detached to Canada, -- has introduced much confusion and
disorder in this instance; nor do I know how it is possible to remedy the evil,
but by affixing one to each regiment, with salaries competent to their support.
No shifting, no change from one regiment to another can answer the purpose; and
in many cases it could never be done though the regiments should consent, -- as
where detachments are composed of unequal numbers, or ordered from different
posts. Many more inconveniences might be pointed out: but these, it is
presumed, will sufficiently show the defect of the present establishment, and
the propriety of an alteration. What that alteration shall be, Congress will
please to determine.

Congress, I doubt not, will have heard of the plot, that was forming among
many disaffected persons in this city and government for aiding the king's
troops upon their arrival. No regular plan seems to have been digested; but
several persons have been enlisted, and sworn to join them. The matter, I am in
hopes, by a timely discovery, will be suppressed and put a stop to. Many
citizens and others, among whom is the mayor, are now in confinement. The
matter has been traced up to governor Tryon; and the mayor appears to have been
a principal agent, or go-between him and the persons concerned in it. The plot
has been communicated to some of the army, and part of my guard engaged in it.
T * * * H * * *, one of them, has been tried, and, by the unanimous opinion of
a court martial, is sentenced to die, -- having enlisted himself, and engaged
others. The sentence, by the advice of the whole council of general officers,
will be put in execution today at eleven o'clock. The others are not tried, I
am hopeful this example will produce many salutary consequences, and deter
others from entering into the like traitorous practices.

The enclosed copy of a resolve of the provincial Congress will show that some
of the diaffected on Long Island have taken up arms. -- I have, agreeable to
their request, sent a party after them, but have not as yet been able to
apprehend them, -- having concealed themselves in different woods and morasses.

General Gates set out on tuesday with a fine wind, which has been fair ever
since, and would soon arrive at Albany.

I this moment received a letter from lieutenant Davison, of the Schuyler armed
sloop, a copy of which I have enclosed; to which I beg leave to refer you for
the intelligence communicated by him.

I could wish general How and his armament not to arrive yet, as not more than
a thousand militia have yet come in, and our whole force, (including the troops
at all the detached posts, and on board the armed vessels, which are
comprehended in our returns) is but small and inconsiderable, when compared
with the extensive lines they are to defend, and (most probably) the army that
he brings. I have no further intelligence about him than what the lieutenant
mentions: but it is extremely probable his accounts and conjectures are true.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I have enclosed a general return: -- and it may be certainly depended
on, that general How and fleet have failed from Halifax. Some of the men, on
board the prizes mentioned in the lieutenant's letter, were on board the
Greyhound, and saw general How.



New York, June 29, 1776. SIR,
I WAS last night honored with your favor of the twenty-sixth instant, and,
agreeable to your request, shall pay proper attention to the resolves it
enclosed.

I observe the augmentation Congress have resolved to make to the forces
destined to the northern department, and the bounty be allowed such soldiers as
will enlist for three years. I hope many good consequences will result from
these measures; and that, from the latter, a considerable number of men may be
induced to engage in the service.

I should esteem myself extremely happy to afford the least assistance to the
Canada department in compliance with the desire of Congress and your
requisition, were it in my power: but it is not. The return which I transmitted
yesterday will but too well convince Congress of my incapacity in this
instance, and point out to them that the force I now have is trifling,
considering the many and important posts that are necessary, and must be
supported, if possible. But few militia have yet come in, the whole being about
twelve hundred, including the two battalions of this city, and one company from
the Jerseys. I wish the delay may not be attended with disagreeable
consequences, and their aid may not come too late, or when it may not be
wanted. I have wrote, -- I have done every thing I could, to call them in: but
they have not come, though I am told that they are generally willing.

The accounts communicated yesterday through lieutenant Davison's letter are
partly confirmed, and, I dare say, will turn out to be true on the whole. For
two or three days past, three or four ships have been dropping in; and I just
now received an express from an officer appointed to keep a look-out on
Staten-Island, that forty-five arrived at the Hook today: -- some say more; --
and I suppose the whole fleet will be in, within a day or two. I am hopeful,
before they are prepared to attack, that I shall get some reinforcements. -- Be
this as it may, I shall attempt to make the best disposition I can of the
troops, in order to give them a proper reception, and to prevent the ruin and
destruction they are meditating against us.

As soon as the express arrived last night, I sent the letters for the northern
colonies, to the quarter-master-general, with orders to forward them
immediately.

When monsieur Wiebert comes -- (I have not seen him yet) -- I shall employ him
as Congress have directed. The terms upon which he offers his service seem to
promise something from him. I wish he may answer, and be skilled in the
business he says he is acquainted with.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, June 30, 1776. SIR,
I HAD the pleasure of receiving your favor of the twenty-ninth, early this
morning, with which you have been pleased to honor me, together with the
resolves for a further augmentation of the army.

The battalions of Germans, which Congress have ordered to be raised, will be a
corpse of much service: and I am hopeful that such persons will be appointed
officers, as will complete their enlistments with all possible expedition.

I shall communicate to colonel Sterenson and one of his field-officers what
you have requested, and direct them to repair immediately to Philadelphia. It
is an unlucky circumstance that the term of enlistment of these three
companies, and of the rifle battalion, should expire at this time, when a hot
campaign is, in all probability, about to commence.

Canada, it is certain, would have been an important acquisition, and well
worth the expenses incurred in the pursuit of it. But as we could not reduce it
to our possession, the retreat of our army with so little loss, under such a
variety of distresses, must be esteemed a most fortunate event. It is true, the
accounts we have received, do not fully authorize us to say that we have
sustained no loss: but they hold forth a probable ground for such conclusion.
-- I am anxious to hear it confirmed.

I have the honor of transmitting you an extract of a letter received last
night from general Ward. -- If the scheme the privateers had in view, and the
measures he had planned, have been carried into execution, the Highland corpse
will be tolerably well disposed of: but I fear the fortunate event has not
taken place.

In general Ward's letter, was enclosed one from lieutenant colonel Campbell,
who was made prisoner with the Highland troops. I have transmitted you a copy.
This will give you a full and exact account of the number of prisoners that
were on Board the four transports; and will prove, beyond a possibility of
doubt, that the evacuation of Boston by the British troops was a matter neither
known nor expected when he received his orders. Indeed so many facts had
concurred before to settle the matter, that no additional proofs were necessary.

When I had the honor of addressing you yesterday, I had only been informed of
the arrival of forty-five of the fleet in the morning. Since that, I have
received authentic intelligence from sundry persons (among them, from general
Green) that a hundred and ten sail came in before night, that were counted,
and that more were seen about dusk in the offing -- I have no doubt but the
whole that sailed from Halifax are now at the Hook.

Just as I was about to conclude my letter, I received one from a gentleman
upon the subject of calling the five regiments from Boston to the defense of
Canada or New York, and to have militia raised in their lieu. -- I have sent
you a copy, and shall only observe, that I know the author well; his
handwriting is quite familiar to me: he is a member of the general court, very
sensible, of great influence, and a warm and zealous friend to the cause of
America. -- The expedient proposed by him is submitted to Congress.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 3, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you, and on the same day, several ships
more arrived within the Hook, making the number that came in then a hundred and
ten; and there remains no doubt of the whole of the fleet from Halifax being
now here. Yesterday evening fifty of them came up the bay, and anchored on the
Staten-Island side. Their views I cannot precisely determine; but am extremely
apprehensive, as part of them only came, that they mean to surround the island,
and secure the stock upon it. I had consulted with a committee of the
provincial Congress upon the subject, before the arrival of the fleet; and they
appointed a person to superintend the busiuess, and to drive the stock off. I
also wrote to brigadier-general Heard, and directed him to the measure, lest it
might be neglected; but am fearful it has not been effected.

Our reinforcement of militia is yet but small: -- I cannot ascertain the
amount, not having got a return. However, I trust, if the enemy make an attack,
they will meet with a repulse, as I have the pleasure to inform you that an
agreeable spirit and willingness for action seem to animate and pervade the
whole of our troops.

As it is difficult to determine what objects the enemy may have in
contemplation, and whether they may not detach some part of their force to
Amboy, and to ravage that part of the country, if not extend their views
farther, I submit it to Congress whether it may not be expedient for them to
repeat and press home their requests to the different governments that are to
provide men for the flying camp, to furnish their quotas with all possible
dispatch. It is a matter of great importance, and will be of serious
consequence, to have the camp established in case the enemy should be able to
possess themselves of this river, and cut off the supplies of troops that might
be necessary on certain emergencies to be sent from hence.

I must entreat your attention to an application I made some time ago, for
flints. We are extremely deficient in this necessary article, and shall be
greatly distressed if we cannot obtain a supply. Of lead we have a sufficient
quantity for the whole campaign, taken off the houses here.

Estimating it of infinite advantage to prevent the enemy from getting fresh
provisions, and horses for their wagons, artillery, etc. I gave orders to a
party of our men on Staten-Island (since writing to general Heard) to drive the
stock off, without waiting for the assistance or direction of the committees
there, lest their slow mode of transacting business might produce too much
delay; -- and have sent this morning to know what they have done. -- I am this
morning informed by a gentleman, that the committee of Elizabeth-town sent
their company of lighthorse on monday to effect it, and that some of their
militia were to give their aid yesterday. He adds that he was credibly told
last night by a party of the militia coming to this place, that yessterday they
saw a good deal of stock driving off the island, and crossing to the Jerseys.
-- If the business is not executed before now, it will be impossible to do it.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 4, 1776. SIR,
This will be handed you by colonel Stevenson, whom I have ordered, with the
captains of the two rifle companies from Maryland, to wait on Congress. They
will point out such measures as they conceive most likely to advance the
raising of the new rifle battalion, and the persons they think worthy of
promotion, that have served in the three campanies here, agreeable to the
enclosed list. I am not acquainted with them myself, but from their report and
recommendation, which I doubt not to be just; and that, if Congress will please
to inquire of them, they will mention other proper persons for officers.

Only about forty of the three old companies have re-enlisted, whom I shall
form into one for the present, and place under an officer or two, till a
further and complete arrangement is made of the whole battalion.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 4, 1776. SIR,
WHEN I had the honor to address you on the thirtieth ultimo, I transmited a
copy of a letter I had received from a gentleman, a member of the honorable
general court [ of Massachusetts] suggesting the improbability of succors
coming from thence in any reasonable time, either for the defense of this
place, or to reinforce our troops engaged in the Canada expedition. I am sorry
to inform you, that from a variety of intelligence, his apprehensions appear to
be just, and to be fully confirmed: nor have I reason to expect but that the
supplies from the other two governments, Connecticut and New Hampshire, will be
extremely slow and greatly deficient in number.

As it now seems beyond question, and clear to demonstration, that the enemy
mean to direct their operations and bend their most vigorous efforts against
this colony, and will attempt to unite their two armies, that under general
Burgoyne, and the one arrived here, -- I cannot but think the expedient
proposed by that gentleman is excedingly just; and that the continental
regiments, now in the Massachusetts Bay, should be immediately called from
thence, and be employed where there is the strongest reason to believe their
aid will be indispensably necessary. The expediency of the measure I shall
submit to the consideratation of Congress, and will only observe, as my
opinion, that there is not the most distant prospect of an attempt being made,
where they now are, by the enemy; and, if there should, that the militia that
can be assembled upon the shortest notice will be more than equal to repel it.
They are well armed, resolute, and determined, and will instantly oppose any
invasion that may be made in their own colony.

I shall also take the liberty again to request Congress to interest themselves
in having the militia raised, and forwarded with all possible expedition, as
fast as any considerable number of them can be collected, that are to compose
the flying camp. This I mentioned in my letter yesterday but think proper to
repeat it, being more and more convinced of the necessity. The camp will be in
the neighborhood of Amboy: and I shall be glad that the conventions, or
committees of safety, of those governments from whence they come, may be
requested to give me previous notice of their marching, that I may form some
plan, and direct provision to be made for their reception.

The disaffection of the people at that place and others not far distant, is
exceedingly great; and, unless it is checked and overawed, it must become more
general, and be very alarming. The arrival of the enemy will encourage it.
They, or at least a part of them, are already landed on Staten-Island which is
quite contiguous; and about four thousand were marching about it yesterday, as
I have been advised, and are leaving no arts un-essayed to gain the inhabitants
to their side, who seem but too favorably disposed. It is not unlikely that in
a little time they may attempt to cross to the Jersey side, and induce many to
join them either from motives of interest or fear, unless there is a force to
oppose them.

As we are fully convinced that the ministerial army we shall have to oppose
this campaign, will be great and numerous, and well know that the utmost
industry will be used, as it already has been to excite the savages and every
body of people to arms against us whom they can influence, it certainly behooves
us to strain every nerve to counteract their designs. I would therefore submit
it to Congress whether, (especially as our schemes for employing the western
Indians do not seem to be attended with any great prospect of success, from
general Schuyler's accounts) it may not be advisable to take measures to
engage those of the eastward, the St. John's, Nova Scotia, Penobscot, etc. in
our favor. I have been told that several might be got, perhaps five or six
hundred or more, readily to join us. If they can, I should imagine it ought to
be done. It will prevent our enemies from securing their friendship; and
further they will be of infinite service in annoying and harrassing them,
should they ever attempt to penetrate the country. Congress will be pleased to
consider the measure: and if they determine to adopt it, I conceive it will be
necessary to authorize and request the general court of the Massachusetts Bay
to carry it into execution. Their situation and advantages will enable them to
negotiate a treaty and an alliance better than it can be done by any person
else.

I have been honored with your two favors of the first instant; and, agreeable
to the wishes of Congress, shall put monsieur Wiebert in the best place I can
to prove his abilities in the art he professes. I shall send him up immediately
to the works erecting toward Kingsbridge, under the direction of general
Mifflin, whom I shall request to employ him.

I this moment received a letter from general Green, an extract of which I
have enclosed. The intelligence it contains is of the most important nature,
and evinces the necessity of the most spirited and vigorous exertions on our
part.

The expectation of the fleet under admiral How is certainly the reason the
army already come have not begun their hostile operations. When that arrives,
we may look for the most interesting events, and such as, in all probability,
will have considerable weight in the present contest. It behooves us to be
prepared in the best manner: and I submit it again to Congress, whether the
accounts given by their prisoners do not show the propriety of calling the
several continental regiments from the Massachusetts government, raising the
flying camp with all possible dispatch, and engaging the eastern Indians.

July 5. -- General Mercer arrived here on tuesday, and the next morning was
ordered to Paulus-Hook, to make some arrangements of the militia as they come
in, and the best disposition he could to prevent the enemy crossing from
Staten-Island, if they should have any such views. The distressed situation of
the inhabitants of Elizabeth. Town and Newark has since induced me, upon their
application, to give up all the militia from the Jerseys, except those engaged
for six months. I am hopeful they will be able to repel any incursions that may
be attempted. Generals Mercer and Livingston are concerting plans for that
purpose. By a letter from the latter last night, I am informed the enemy are
throwing up small works at all the passes on the north side of Staten Island,
which it is probable they mean to secure.

None of the Connecticut militia are yet arrived: so that the reinforcement we
have received is very inconsiderable.

A letter from general Schuyler, with sundry enclosures (of which No. 1, 2, and
3, are exact copies), this moment came to hand, and will no doubt claim, as it
ought to do, the immediate attention of Congress. The evils which must
inevitably follow a disputed command are too obvious and alarming to admit a
moment's delay in your decision thereupon: and, although I do not presume to
advise in a matter, now, of this delicacy, yet as it appears evident that the
northern army has retreated to Crown-Point, and mean to act upon the defensive
only, I cannot help giving it as my opinion that one of the major-generals in
that quarter would be more usefully employed here, or in the flying camp, than
there: for it becomes my duty to observe, if another experienced officer is
taken from hence in order to command the flying camp, that your grand army will
be entirely stripped of generals who have seen service, -- being in a manner
already destitute of such. My distress on this account, -- the appointment of
general Whitcomb to the eastern regiments, -- a conviction in my own breast
that no troops will be sent to Boston, -- and the certainty of a number coming
to this place, -- occasioned by postponing, from time to time, sending any
general officer from hence to the eastward heretofore: and now I shall wait the
sentiments of Congress relative to the five regiments in Massachusetts Bay,
before I do any thing in this matter.

The commissary-general has been with me this morning, concerning the other
matter contained in general Schuyler's letter respecting the business of that
department. He has, I believe, (in order to remove difficulties), recalled Mr.
Avery, but seems to think it necessary in that case, that Mr. Livingston should
be left to himself, as he cannot be responsible for persons not of his own
appointment. -- This matter should also be clearly defined by Congress. -- I
have already giving my opinion of the necessity of these matters being under
one general direction, in so full and clear a manner, that I shall not take up
the time of Congress to repeat it in this place.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 8, 1776. SIR,
CONGRESS having resolved to raise a regiment of Germans to counteract the
designs of our enemies, I must beg leave to recommend to their notice John
David Wilpert, now a first lieutenant in colonel She Is battallion, to the
office of captain in said regiment. I am personally acquainted with him, and
know that he joined the Virginia forces under my command in the year 1754, and
continued in service the whole war, during which he conducted himself as an
active, vigilant, and brave officer. He is a German; and his merit, as a
soldier, entitles him much to the office he wishes for.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 10, 1776. SIR,
I AM now to acknowledge the receipt of your two favors of the fourth and fifth
instant, which came duly to hand, with their important enclosures.

I perceive that Congress have been employed in deliberating ^n measutes of the
most interesting nature. It is certain that it is not with us to determine in
many instances what consequences will flow from our councils; but yet it
behooves us to adopt such, as, under the smiles of a gracious and all-kind
providence, will be most likely to promote our happiness. I trust the late
decisive part they have taken is calculated for that end, and will secure us
that freedom and those privileges, which have been and are refused us,
contrary to the voice of nature and the British constitution. Agreeable to the
request of Congress, I caused "THE DECLARATION" to be proclaimed before all the
army under my immediate command; and have the pleasure to inform them that the
measure seemed to have their most hearty assent, -- the expressions and
behavior, both of officers and men, testifying their warmest approbation of it.
I have transmitted a copy to general Ward at Boston, requesting him to have it
proclaimed to the continental troops in that department.

It is with great pleasure that I hear the militia from Maryland, the Delaware
government, and Pennsylvania, will be in motion every day to form the flying
camp. It is of great importance, and should be accomplished with all possible
dispatch. The readiness and alacrity, with which the committee of safety of
Pennsylvania and the other conferees have acted in order to forward the
associated militia of that state to the Jerseys for service, till the men to
compose the flying camp arrive, strongly evidence their regard to the common
cause, and that nothing on their part will be wanting to support it. I hope,
and I doubt not, that the associated militia, impressed with the expediency of
the measure, will immediately carry it into execution, and furnish in this
instance a proof of the continuance of that zeal which has so eminently marked
their conduct. I have directed the commissary to make the necessary provision
for their reception, who will also supply the army for the flying camp with
rations. -- A proper officer will be appointed to command it.

In pursuance of the power given me by Congress, and the advice of my general
officers, I have wrote to general Ward, and desired him forthwith to detach
three of the fullest regiments from the Massachusetts Bay to join the northern
army, -- esteeming it a* matter of the greatest importance to have a sufficient
force there to prevent the enemy passing the lake and making an impression in
that quarter. -- The gondolas and galleys will be of great service; and I am
hopeful the carpenters you have sent from Philadelphia, and that will go from
the eastward on your application, will be able to build a sufficient number in
time to answer every exigency.

I have requested governor Cook, if the duck mentioned in Mr. Greene's letter
is proper for tents, to have it made up as early as possible and forwarded
here. I have also desired him to send the flints and small-arms, as I gave
general Ward those of the latter that were taken out of the Scotch transports,
-- our deficiency in these necessary articles being still great.

Observing that Congress have particularly mentioned a bounty of ten dollars to
be paid to men of some corpse directed to be raised in two or three instances
since their resolve of the twenty-sixth of June allowing such bounty, I have
been led to doubt how that resolve is to be construed; whether it is a general
regulation, and extends to all men that will engage for three years, -- for
instance, the soldiers of the present army, if they will enlist for that time.
If it is, and extends to them, it will be necessary to forward a large sum of
money: -- many perhaps would engage.

I also observe, by their resolve of the twenty-fifth of June for raising four
regiments of militia in the eastern governments to augment the troops in the
northern department, that the assemblies of those governments are empowered to
appoint paymasters to the said regiments. This appears, to me a regulation of
great use, and I could wish that it was made general, and one allowed to every
regiment in the service. Many advantages would result from it.

The Connecticut militia begin to come in: but from every account the
battalions will be very incomplete, -- owing, they say, to the busy season of
the year. That government, lest any inconvenience might result from their
militia not being here in time, ordered three regiments of their light horse to
my assistance, part of which have arrived. But, not having the means to support
them (and, if it could be done, the expense would be enormous), I have thanked
the gentlemen for their zeal, and the attachment they have manifested upon this
occasion, and informed them that I cannot consent to their keeping their
horses, -- at the same time wishing them to stay themselves. -- I am told they
or part of them mean to do so.

General Mercer is now in the Jerseys, for the purpose of receiving and
ordering the militia coming for the flying camp: and I have sent over our chief
engineer to view the ground within the neighborhood of Amboy, and to lay out
some necessary works for the encampment, and such as may be proper at the
different passes in Bergen-neck, and other places on the Jersey shore opposite
Staten Island, to prevent the making impressions, and committing depredations
on the property of the inhabitants.

The intelligence that we have from a few deserters that have come over to us,
and from others, is that general How has between nine and ten thousand men,
who are chiefly landed on the island, posted in different parts, and securing
the several communications from the Jerseys with small works and intrenchments,
to prevent our people from paying them a visit; -- that the islanders have all
joined them, seem well disposed to favor their cause, and have agreed to take
up arms in their behalf. They look for admiral Howe's arrival every day with
his fleet and a large reinforcement; are in high spirits, and talk confidently
of success, and carrying all before them when he comes. I trust, through divine
favor and our own exertions, they will be disappointed in their views; and at
all events, any advantages they may gain will cost them very dear. If our
troops will behave well (which I hope will be the case, having every thing to
contend for, that freemen hold dear), they will have to wade through much blood
and slaughter before they can carry any part of our works, if they carry them
at all, -- and, at best, be in possession of a melancholy and mournful victory.
-- May the sacredness of our cause inspire our soldiery with sentiments of
heroism, and lead them to the preformances of the noblest exploits!

With this wish, I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 11, 1776. SIR,
I WAS honored with your favor of the eighth instant by yesterday morning's
post, with the several resolves to which you referred my attention. I shall
duly regard them, and attempt their execution as far as I am able.

By virtue of the discretionary power that Congress were pleased to vest me
with, and by advice of such of my general officers as I have had an opportunity
of consulting, I have ordered the two remaining continental regiments in the
Massachusetts Bay to march immediately for the defense of this place, in full
confidence that nothing hostile will be attempted against that state in the
present campaign.

I have wrote to the general court of Massachusetts Bay, and transmitted a copy
of the resolve for employing the eastern Indians, entreating their good offices
in this instance, and their exertions to have them forthwith engaged and
marched to join this army. I have desired five or six hundred of them to be
enlisted for two or three years, if they will consent to it, -- subject to an
earlier discharge, if it shall be thought necessary, -- and upon the same terms
as the continental troops, if better cannot be had, -- though I am hopeful they
may.

In my letter of yesterday I mentioned the arrival of part of the Connecticut
light horse to assist in the defense of this place, and my objection to their
horses being kept. Four or five hundred of them are now come in: and, in
justice to their zeal and laudable attachment to the cause of their country, I
am to inform you that they have consented to stay as long as occasion may
require, though they should be at the expense of maintaining their horses
themselves. They have pastured them out about the neighborhood of Kingsbridge
(being unwilling to send them away) at the rate of half a dollar per week each,
meaning to leave it entirely with Congress either to allow or refuse it, as
they shall judge proper. I promised to make this representation, and thought it
my duty: and will only observe that the motives which induced them first to set
out were good and praiseworthy, and were to afford the most speedy and early
succor, which they apprehended would be wanted before the militia arrived.
Their services may be extremely important, -- being most of them, if not all,
men of reputation and of property.

The subject of the enclosed copy of a letter from governor Trumbull I beg
leave to submit to the consideration of Congress. They will perceive from his
representation, the disquieting apprehensions that have seized on the minds of
the people since the retreat of the northern army, and how exposed the northern
frontiers of New York and New Hampshire are to the ravages and incursions of
the Indians. How far it may be expedient to raise the battallion he conceives
necessary to prevent the calamities and distresses he points out, they will
determine, upon what he has said, and the necessity that may appear to them for
the measure; -- what I have done, being only to lay the matter before them in
compliance with his wishes.

I have also enclosed a memorial from the surgeons'-mate, setting forth the
inadequacy of their pay to their services and maintenance, and praying that it
may be increased. I shall observe that they have a long time complained in this
instance, and that some additional allowance may not be unnecessary.

As I am truly sensible the time of Congress is much taken up with a variety of
important matters, it is with unwillingness and pain I ever repeat a request
after having once made it, or take the liberty of enforcing any opinion of mine
after it is once given; but as the establishing of some office for auditing
accounts is a matter of exceeding importance to the public interest I would beg
leave once more to call the attention of Congress to an appointment competent
to the purpose. Two motives induce me to urge the matter; first, a conviction
of the utility of the measure; -- secondly, that I may stand exculpated if
hereafter it should appear that money has been improperly expended, and
necessaries for the army obtained upon unreasonable terms.

For me, whose time is employed from the hour of my rising till I retire to bed
again, to go into an examination of the accounts of such an army as this with
any degree of precision and exactness, without neglecting other matters of
equal importance, is utterly impracticable. All that I have been able to do
(and that, in fact, was doing nothing), was, when the commissary, and
quartermaster, and director-general of the hospital (for it is to these the
great advances are made) applied for warrants, -- to make them at times produce
a general account of their expenditures. But this answers no valuable purpose.
It is the minutiae that must be gone into, -- the propriety of each charge
examined, -- the vouchers looked into; -- and, with respect to the
commissary-general, his victualling returns and expenditures of provisions
should be compared with his purchases: otherwise a person in this department,
if he was inclined to be knavish, might purchase large quantities with the
public money, and sell one half of it again for private emolument; and yet his
accounts upon paper would appear fair, and be supported with vouchers for every
charge.

I do not urge this matter from a suspicion of any unfair practices in either
of the departments before mentioned; and sorry should I be if this construction
was put upon it, -- having a high opinion of the honor and integrity of these
gentlemen. But there should, nevertheless, be some control as well upon their
discretion as honesty: -- to which may be added, that accounts become perplexed
and confused by long standing, and the errors therein not so discoverable as if
they underwent an early revision and examination. I am well apprised that a
treasury-office of accounts has been resolved upon, and an auditor-general for
settling all public accounts; but, with all deference and submission to the
opinion of Congress, these institutions are not calculated to prevent the
inconveniences I have mentioned; nor can they be competent to the purposes,
circumstanced as they are.

We have intelligence from a deserter that came to us, that, on wednesday
morning, the Asia, Chatham, and Greyhound men-of-war weighed anchor, and (it
was said) intended to pass up the North-river above the city, to prevent the
communication with the Jerseys. They did not attempt it, nor does he know what
prevented them. -- A prisoner belonging to the tenth regiment, taken yesterday,
informs that they hourly expected admiral How and his fleet. He adds that a
vessel has arrived from them, and the prevailing opinion is, that an attack
will be made immediately on their arrival.

By a letter from general Ward, I am informed that the smallpox has broke out
at Boston, and infected some of the troops. I have wrote to him to place the
invalids under an officer, to remain till they are well; and to use every
possible precaution to prevent the troops from thence bringing the infection.
The distresses and calamities we have already suffered by this disorder in one
part of our army, I hope, will excite his utmost care that they may not be
increased.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 12, 1776. SIR,
THE design of this is to inform Congress, that, about half after three o'clock
this evening, two of the enemy's ships of war, one of forty and the other of
twenty guns, with three tenders, weighed anchor in the bay opposite
Staten-Island, and, availing themselves of a brisk and favorable breeze, with a
flowing tide, ran past our batteries up the North-river, without receiving any
certain damage that I could perceive, notwithstanding a heavy and incessant
cannonade was kept up from our several batteries here, as well as from that at
Paulus-Hook. They, on their part, returned and continued the fire as they ran
by. -- I dispatched an express to brigadier-general Mifflin at our encampment
toward the upper end of the Island; but have not heard whether they have got
by, or received any damage.

The account transmitted by this morning's post, respecting the arrival of one
of the fleet, seems to be confirmed. Several ships have come in today: among
them, one this evening with a Saint-George's flag at her fore-top-mast-head,
which we conclude to be admiral How from the circumstances of the flag, and
the several and general salutes that were paid. It is probable they will all
arrive in a day or two, and immediately begin their operations.

As it will be extremely necessary that the flying camp should be well provided
with powder and ball, and it may be impracticable to send supplies from hence
on account of our hurry and engagements (besides, the communication may be
uncertain), I must beg the attention of Congress to this matter, and request
that they will forward with all possible expedition such a quantity of
musket-powder and lead (if balls of different sizes cannot be had), as will be
sufficient for the militia to compose that camp.

By an express this minute arrived from general Mifflin, the ships have passed
his works.

I am, in haste, with sentiments of great regard, etc. G. W.
A quarter past eight, P. M.
New York, July 14, 1776. SIR,
MY last of friday evening, which I had the honor of addressing you, advised
that two of the enemy's ships of war and three tenders had run above our
batteries here and the works at the upper end of the Island. I am now to inform
you, that, yesterday afternoon, receiving intelligence from general Mifflin
that they had passed the Tappan-sea, and were trying to proceed higher up, --
by advice of R. R. Livingston, esquire, and other gentlemen, I dispatched
expresses to general Clinton of Ulster, and the committee of safety for
Dutchess-county, to take measures for securing the passes in the Highlands,
lest they might have designs of seizing them, and have a force concealed for
the purpose. I wrote the evening before to the commanding officer of the two
garrisons there to be vigilant and prepared against any attempts they or any
disaffected persons might make against them, and to forward expresses all the
way to Albany, that provision and other vessels might be secured and prevented
falling into their hands.

The information given general Mifflin was rather premature, as to their having
gone past the Sea. -- A letter from the committee of Orange-county, which come
to hand this morning, says they were there yesterday, and that a regiment of
their militia was under arms, to prevent their landing, and making an
incursion. The messenger who brought it, and to whom it refers for particulars,
adds that a party of them, in two or three boats, had approached the shore, but
were forced back by our people firing at them. Since the maneuver of friday,
there have been no other movements in the fleet.

General Sullivan, in a letter of the second instant, informs me of his arrival
with the army at Crown-Point, where he is fortifying and throwing up works. He
adds, that he has secured all the stores except three cannon left at Chamblee
which in part is made up by taking a fine twelve-pounder out of the lake. --
The army is sickly, -- many with the smallpox; and he is apprehensive, the
militia ordered to join them, will not escape the infection. -- An officer he
had sent to reconnoitre had reported that he saw at Saint John's about a
hundred and fifty tents, -- twenty at Saint Roy's, and fifteen at Chamblee; and
works at the first were busily carrying on.

I have enclosed a general return of the army here, which will show the whole
of our strength. All the detached posts are included.

A letter from the eastward, by last night's post to Mr. Hazard, postmaster in
this city, advises that two ships had been taken and carried into Cape-Ann, --
one from Autigua, consigned to general How, with four hundred and thirty-nine
puncheons of rum, -- the other a Jamaica-man, with four hundred hogsheads of
sugar, two hundred puncheons of rum, thirty-nine bales of cotton, pimento,
fustic, etc. etc. Each mounted two guns, six pounders.

About three o'clock this afternoon I was informed that a flag from lord How
was coming up, and waited with two of our whale-boats, until directions should
be given, I immediately convened such of the general officers as were not upon
other duty, who agreed in opinion that I ought not to receive any letters
directed to me as a private gentleman: but if otherwise, and the officer
desired to come up to deliver the letter himself, as was suggested, he should
come under a safe conduct. Upon this, I directed colonel Reed to go down and
manage the affair under the above general instruction.

On his return, he informed me, that after the common civilities, the officer
acquainted him that he had a letter from lord How to Mr. Washington, which he
showed under a subscription, " To George Washington, esquire." -- Colonel Reed
replied, there was no such person in the army, and that a letter intended for
the general, could not be received under such a direction. -- The officer
expressed great concern, -- said it was a letter rather of a civil than
military nature, -- that lord How regretted he had not arrived sooner, -- that
he (lord How) had great powers* -- The anxiety to have the letter received was
very evident, though the officer disclaimed all knowledge of its contents.
However, colonel Reed's instructions being positive, they parted. -- After they
had got some distance, the officer with the flag again put about and asked
under what direction Mr. Washington chose to be addressed: to which colonel
Reed answered, his station was well known, and that certainly they could be at
no loss how to direct to him. -- The officer said they knew it and lamented it;
and again repeated his wish that the letter could be received. -- Colonel Reed
told him a proper direction would obviate all difficulties, and that this was
no new matter, -- this subject having been fully discussed in the course of
last year; of which lord How could not be ignorant: -- upon which they parted.

I would not upon any occasion sacrifice essentials to punctilio: (...) in this
instance, the opinion of others concurring with my own, I deemed it a duty to
my country and my appointment, to insist upon that respect, which, in any other
than a public view, I would willingly have waved. Nor do I doubt, but from the
supposed nature of the message, and the anxiety expressed, they will either
repeat their flag, or fall upon some mode to communicate the import and [
contents] of it.

I have been duly honored with your two letters, -- that of the tenth by Mr.
Anderson, -- and the eleventh with its enclosures. I have directed the
quartermaster to provide him with every thing he wants to carry his scheme
into execution. It is an important one, and I wish it success; but am doubtful
that it will be better in theory than practice.

The passage of the ships of war and tenders up the river is a matter of great
importance, and has excited much conjecture and speculation. To me two things
have occurred as leading them to this proceeding, -- first a design to seize on
the narrow passes on both sides of the river, giving almost the only land
communication with Albany, and of consequence, with our northern army; for
which purpose, they might have troops concealed on board, which they deemed
competent of themselves, as the defiles are narrow, -- or; that they would be
joined by many disaffected persons in that quarter. Others have added a
probability of their having a large quantity of arms on board, to be in
readiness to put into the hands of the tories immediately on the arrival of the
fleet, or rather at the time they intend to make their attack. -- The second
is, to cut off entirely all intercourse between this and Albany, by water, and
the upper country, and to prevent supplies of every kind going and coming.

These matters are truly alarming, and of such importance, that I have wrote to
the provincial congress of New York, and recommended to their serious
consideration the adoption of every possible expedient to guard against the two
first; and have suggested the propriety of their employing the militia, or some
part of them, in the counties in which these defiles are, to keep the enemy
from possessing them, till further provision can be made; and to write to the
several leading persons on our side in that quarter, to be attentive to all the
movements of the ships and the disaffected, in order to discover and frustrate
whatever pernicious schemes they have in view.

In respect to the second conjecture of my own, and which seems to be generally
adopted, I have the pleasure to inform Congress, that, if their design is to
keep the armies from provision, the commissary has told me upon inquiry, he has
forwarded supplies to Albany snow there, and above it) sufficient for ten
thousand men for four months; -- that he has a sufficiency here for twenty
thousand men for three months, and an abundant quantity secured in different
parts of the Jerseys for the flying camp, besides having about four thousand
barrels of flour in some neighboring part of Connecticut. Upon this head,
there is but little occasion for any apprehensions, at least for a considerable
time.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
I have sent orders to the commanding officer of the Pennsylvania militia to
march to Amboy, as their remaining at Trenton can be of no service.



New York, July 15, 1776. SIR,
THIS will be handed you by Mr. Griffin, (...) has also taken upon him the
charge and delivery of two packers containing sundry letters which were sent to
Amboy yesterday by a flag, and forwarded to me today by general Mercer. -- The
letter addressed to governor Franklin came open to my hands.

I was this morning honored with yours of the thirteenth instant, with its
important and necessary enclosures; and, in obedience to the commands of
Congress, have transmitted general How the resolves intended for him. Those
for general Burgoyne I enclosed and sent to general Schuyler, with directions
immediately to forward them to him.

The inhuman treatment of the whole, and murder of part of our people, after
their surrender and capitulation, was certainly a flagrant violation of that
says which ought to be held sacred by all civilized nations, and founded in
the most savage barbarity. It highly deserved the severest reprobation; and I
trust the spirited measures Congress have adopted upon the occasion, will
prevent the like in future: but if they should not, and the claims of humanity
are disregarded, justice and policy will require recourse to be had to the law
of retaliation, however abhorrent and disagreeable to our natures in cases of
torture and capital punishments.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 17, 1776. SIR,
I WAS this morning honored with yours of the fifteenth instant, with sundry
resolves.

I perceive the measures Congress have taken to expedite the raising of the
flying camp, and providing it with articles of the greatest use. You will see
by a postscript to my letter of the fourteenth, I had wrote to the commanding
officer of the Pennsylvania militia, ordering them to be marched from Trenton
to Amboy, as their remaining there could not answer the least public good. For,
having consulted with sundry gentlemen, I was informed, if the enemy mean to
direct their views toward Pennsylvania, or penetrate the Jerseys, their route
will be from near Amboy, and either by way of Brunswick or Bound-Brook, -- the
lower road from South-Amboy being through a woody, sandy country. Besides, they
will be then able to throw in succor here, and to receive it from hence in
cases of emergency.

The Connecticut light horse, mentioned in my letter of the eleventh,
notwithstanding their then promise to continue here for the defense of this
place, are now discharged, and about to return home, -- having peremptorily
refused all kind of fatigue, duty, or even to mount guard, claiming an
exemption as troopers. Though their assistance is much needed, and might be of
essential service in case of an attack, yet I judged it advisable, on their
application and claim of such indulgences, to discharge them; as granting them
would set an example to others, and might produce many ill consequences. The
number of men included in the last return, by this, is lessened about five
hundred.

I last night received a letter from general Schuyler, with several enclosures,
copies of which I have herewith transmitted. They will give Congress every
information I have respecting our northern army and the situation of our
affairs in that quarter; -- to which I beg leave to refer their attention. -- I
cannot but express my surprise at the scarcity of provision which general
Schuyler mentions, after what the commissary assured me, and which formed a
part of my letter of the fourteenth. He still assures me of the same. -- This
is a distressing circumstance, as every article of provision, and every thing
necessary for that department, can have no other now than a landconveyence, the
water-communication from hence to Albany being entirely cut off.

Congress will please to consider the enclosure, No. 6, about raising six
companies out of the inhabitants about the lakes, to prevent the incursions of
the Indians. The general officers, in their minutes of council have determined
it a matter of much importance; -- and their attention to the price of goods
furnished the soldiery may be extremely necessary. They have complained much
upon this head.

The retreat from Crown-Point seems to be considered in opposite views by the
general and field-officers. The former (I am satisfied) have weighed the matter
well; and yet the reason assigned by the latter against it appears strong and
forcible. -- I hope whatever is done will be for the best.

By a letter from the committee of Orange-Country, received this morning, the
men-of-war and tenders were yesterday at Haversham-bay, about forty miles above
this. A number of men, in four barges from the tenders, attempted to land, with
a view (they suppose) of taking some sheep and cattle, that had been previously
removed. -- A small number of militia that were collected obliged them to
retreat, without their doing any damage, with their cannon. -- They were
sounding the water up toward the Highlands: by which it is probable they will
attempt to pass with part of the fleet, if possible.

Yesterday evening a flag came from general How, with a letter addressed " To
George Washington, esquire, etc. etc. etc." -- It was not received, upon the
same principle that the one from lord How was refused.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 19, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your favors of the sixteenth and seventeenth,
with the several resolves they contained; to the execution of which, so far as
shall be in my power, I will pay proper attention.

In my letter of the seventeenth I transmitted you a copy of one from general
Schuyler, and of its several enclosures. -- I confess the determination of the
council of general officers on the seventh, to retreat from Crown-Point,
surprised me much; and the more I consider it, the more striking does the
impropriety appear. The reason assigned against it by the field-officers, in
their remonstrance, coincide greatly with my own ideas and those of the other
general officers I have had an oppertunity of consulting with, and seem to be
of considerable weight, -- I may add, conclusive. -- I am not so fully
acquainted with the geography of that country and the situation of the
different posts, as to pronounce a peremptory judgment upon the matter; but, if
my ideas are right, the possession of Crown-Point is essential, to give us the
superiority and mastery upon the lake.

That the enemy will possess it as soon as abandoned by us, there can be no
doubt; and if they do, whatever galleys or force we keep on the lake will be
unquestionably in the rear. -- How they are to be supported there, or what
succor can be drawn from them there, is beyond my comprehension. -- Perhaps it
is only meant that they should be employed on the communication between that
and Tyconderoga. If this is the case, I fear the views of Congress will not be
answered, nor the salutary effects be derived from them, that were intended.

I have mentioned my surprise to general Schuyler, and would, by the advice of
the general officers here, have directed that that post should be maintained,
had it not been for two causes -- an apprehension that the works have been
destoyed, and that, if the army should be ordered from Tyconderoga, or the post
opposite to it (where I presume they are), to repossess it, they would have
neither one place nor another secure and in a defensible state: -- the other,
lest it might increase the jealousy and diversity of opinions which seem
already too prevalent in that army, and establish a precedent for the inferior
officers to set up their judgments whenever they would, in opposition to those
of their superiors, -- a matter of great delicacy, and that might lead to fatal
consequences, if countenanced; -- though in the present instance I could wish
their reasoning had prevailed.

If the army has not removed, what I have said to general Schuyler may perhaps
bring on a re-consideration of the matter; and it may not be too late to take
measures for maintaining that post. But of this I have no hope.

In consequence of the resolve of Congress for three of the eastern regiments
to reinforce the northern army, I wrote to general Ward, and, by advice of my
general officers, directed them to march to Norwich, and there to embark for
Albany; conceiving that two valuable purposes might result therefrom, -- first,
that they would sooner join the army by pursuing this route, and be saved from
the distress and fatigue that must attend every long march through the country
at this hot and uncomfortable season; -- and secondly, that they might give
succor here, in case the enemy should make an attack about the time of their
passing. But the enemy having now, with their ships of war and tenders, cut off
the water-communication from hence to Albany, I have wrote this day and
directed them to proceed by land across the country. -- If Congress disapprove
the route, or wish to give orders about them, you will please to certify me
thereof, that I may take measures accordingly.

Enclosed I have the honor to transmit you copies of a letter and sundry
resolutions which I received yesterday from the convention of this state. By
them you will perceive they have been acting upon matters of great importance,
and are exerting themselves in the most vigorous manner to defeat the wicked
designs of the enemy, and such disaffected persons as may incline to assist and
facilitate their views. -- In compliance with their request, and on account of
the scarcity of money for carrying their salutary views into execution, I have
agreed to lend them, out of the small stock now in hand (not more than sixty
thousand dollars), twenty thousand dollars, in part of what they want; which
they promise speedily to replace. -- Had there been money sufficient for paying
the whole of our troops, and no more, I could not have done it. But as it was
otherwise, and by no means proper to pay a part and not the whole, I could not
foresee any inconveniences that would attend the loan; -- on the contrary, that
it might contribute in some degree to forward their schemes. -- I hope my
conduct in this instance will not be disapproved.

I enclosed governor Trumbull a copy of their letter and of their several
resolves, today, by colonel Broom and Mr. Duer, two members of the convention,
who are going to wait on him; but did not think myself at liberty to urge or
request his interest in forming the camp of six thousand men, as the levies,
directed by Congress to be furnished the third of June, for the defense of this
place, by that government, are but little more than one third come in. At the
same time, the proposition I think a good one, if it could be carried into
execution. In case the enemy should attempt to effect a landing above
Kingsbridge, and to cut off the communication between this city and the
country, an army to hang on their rear would distress them exceedingly.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
The enclosed paper should have been sent before, but was omitted through hurry.

P. S. After I had closed my letter, I received one from general Ward, a copy
of which is herewith transmitted. -- I have wrote him to forward the two
regiments now at Boston, by the most direct road, to Tyconderoga, as soon as
they are well, with the utmost expedition; and consider their having had the
smallpox, as a fortunate circumstance. When the three arrive which have
marched for Norwich, I shall immediately send one of them on, if Congress shall
judge it expedient; -- of which you will please to inform me.



New York, July 21, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE just time to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of the nineteenth.
The interesting intelligence of the success of our arms in the southern
department gives me the highest satisfaction. Permit me to join my joy with the
congratulations of Congress upon this event. Tomorrow I will write more fully.

Two o'clock, P. M. I this moment had report made me, that ten ships were seen
in the offing, coming in, -- I suppose, part of admiral Howe's fleet.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 22, 1776. SIR,
YOUR favors of the eighteenth and nineteenth, with which you have been pleased
to honor me, have been duly received, with the several resolves alluded to.

When the letter and declaration from lord How to Mr. Franklin, and the other
late governors, come to be published, I should suppose the warmest advocates
for dependence on the British crown must be silent, and be convinced beyond all
possibility of doubt, that all that has been said about the commissioners was
illusory, and calculated expressly to deceive and unguard, not only the good
people of our own country, but those of the English nation that were averse to
the proceedings of the king and ministry. Hence we see the cause why a
specification of their powers was not given the mayor and city of London, on
their address requesting it. That would have been dangerous, because it would
then have been manifested that the line of conduct they were to pursue would be
totally variant from that they had industriously propagated, and amused the
public with. -- The uniting the civil and military offices in the same persons,
too, must be conclusive to every thinking one, that there is to be but little
negotiation of the civil kind.

I have enclosed for the satisfaction of Congress, the substance of what passed
between myself and lieutenant colonel Patterson, adjutant-general, at an
interview had yesterday, in consequence of a request from general How the day
before; -- to which I beg leave to refer them for particulars.

Colonel Knox of the train having often mentioned to me the necessity of having
a much more numerous body of artillerists than what there now is, in case the
present contest should continue longer, -- and knowing the deficiency in this
instance, and their extreme usefulness, -- I desired him to commit his ideas
upon the subject to writing, in order that I might transmit them to Congress
for their consideration. Agreeable to my request, he has done it; and the
propriety of his plan is now submitted for their decision. It is certain that
we have not more at this time than are sufficient for the several extensive
posts we now have, -- including draughts which he speaks of, and which, I
presume (not only from what he has informed me, but from the nature of the
thing,) can never be qualified to render the same service as if they were
regularly appointed and formed into a corpse for that particular purpose.

I beg leave to remind Congress that some time ago I laid before them the
proposals of some persons here, for forming a company of light horse; and the
president's answer a little time after, intimated that the plan seemed to be
approved of. -- As those who wanted to make up the troop are frequently
pressing me for an answer, I could wish to be favored with the decision of
Congress upon the subject.

By a letter from general Schuyler, of the fourteenth instantdated at Albany,
he informs me, that, the day before, some desperate designs of the tories in
that quarter had been discovered, the particulars of which he could not
divulge, being under an oath of secrecy; -- however, that such measures had
been taken, as to promise a prevention of the intended mischief: and that four
of the conspirators (among them a ringleader) were apprehended about one
o'clock that morning, not far from the town. What the plot was, or who were
concerned in it, is a matter I am ignorant of as yet.

With my best regards to Congress, I have the honor to be your and their most
obedient servant.

G. W.
P. S. Congress will please to observe what was proposed respecting the
exchange of Mr. Lovell, and signify their pleasure in your next. -- The last
week's return is also enclosed.



New York, July 22, 1776. SIR,
CONGRESS having been pleased to appoint Mr. Wilper to the command of a company
in the German battalion now raising, I have directed him to repair to
Philadelphia for their orders. From my acquaintance with him, I am persuaded
his conduct as an officer will merit their approbation: and, thanking them for
their kind attention to my recommendation of him, I have the honor to be, with
sentiments of the highest respect, etc.

G. W.

New York, July 23, 1776. SIR,
I WAS honored with your favor of the twentieth by yesterday's post, since
which, and my letter, nothing of moment has occurred.

The ships, mentioned in my letter of the twenty-first to have been in the
offing, got in that day, and are supposed to be part of the Scotch fleer,
having landed some Highlanders yesterday.

Enclosed I have the honor to transmit you copies of a letter and sundry
resolutions which I received last night from the convention of this state. They
will inform you of the computed number of inhabitants and stock upon
Nassau-Island, and their sentiments on the impracticability of removing the
latter, and also of the measures they think necessary and likely to secure them.

I have also enclosed a letter from Mr. Faesh to lord Sterling, upon the
subject of a cannon-furnace for the use of the states. Congress will see his
plan and proposals, and determine upon them as they shall judge proper.

I am, sir, with every sentiment of respect, etc. G. W.

New York, July 23, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I had the pleasure of writing you by this morning's post, I was favored
with a letter from governor Trumbull, a copy of which is enclosed, and to which
I beg leave to refer you. -- In regard to the stock he mentions, I wrote to
him, requesting that they might be removed from the islands on which they were,
as I conceived it of great importance to distress the enemy as much as possible
in the article of fresh provision. -- I wish the other governments may follow
his example, and have it removed from the Islands belonging to them
respectively.

When the ships of war and tenders went up the river, it was thought expedient
that application should be made for the Connecticut row-gallies and those
belonging to Rhode Island, in order to attempt something for their destruction.
As soon as they arrive we shall try to employ them in some useful way, -- but
in what, or how successfully, I cannot at present determine.

Congress will please to observe what Mr. Trumbull says respecting the
continental regiment raising under colonel Ward. If they incline to give any
orders about their destination, you will please to communicate them by the
earliest opportunity, as their march will be suspended till they are known.

The orders Mr. Trumbull has given to the officers of their cruisers, to stop
provision vessels, seem to be necessary. We have too much reason to believe
that some have gone voluntarily to the enemy, and that there are many persons
who would continue to furnish them with large supplies; and, however upright
the intentions of others may be, it will be a matter of the utmost difficulty,
if not an impossibility, -- for any to escape falling into their hands now, as
every part of the coast (it is probable) will swarm with their ships of war and
tenders. I had proposed writing to the convention of this state upon the
subject before I received his letter; and am now more persuaded of the
necessity of their taking some steps to prevent further exportations down the
Sound. In my next I shall inform them of the intelligence received from Mr.
Trumbull, and recommend the matter to their attention.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
It appears absolutely necessary that the exportation of provision should be
stopped. Our army is large, and otherwise may want. Nor can individuals be
injured, as they have a ready-money market for every thing they have to dispose
of in that way.



New York, July 25, 1776. SIR,
DISAGREEABLE as it is to me and unpleasing as it may be to Congress to
multiply officers, I find myself under the unavoidable necessity of asking an
increase of my aids-de-camp. -- The augmentation of my command, -- the increase
of my correspondence, -- the orders to give, -- the instructions to draw, --
cut out more business than I am able to execute in time with propriety. The
business of so many different departments centring with me, and by me to be
handed on to Congress for their information, -- added to the intercourse I am
obliged to keep up with the adjacent states, -- and incidental occurrences, --
all of which require confidential and not hack writers to execute, -- renders
it impossible, in the present state of things, for my family to discharge the
several duties expected of me, with that precision and dispatch that I could
wish. -- What will it be then, when we come into a more active scene, and I am
called upon from twenty different places perhaps at the same instant?

Congress will do me the justice to believe (I hope) that it is not my
inclination or wish to run the continent to any unnecessary expense; and those
who better know me will not suspect that show and parade can have any influence
on my mind in this instance. -- A conviction of the necessity of it, for the
regular discharge of the trust reposed in me, is the governing motive for the
application; and, as such, is submitted to Congress by, sir, your most
obedient, etc.

G. W.

New York, July 27, 1776. SIR,
I WAS yesterday morning honored with your favor of the twenty-fourth instant
with its several enclosures, to which I shall pay the strictest attention.

The confidence Congress are pleased to repose in my judgment demands my
warmest acknowledgments, and they may rest assured it shall be invariably
employed, so far as it shall be in my power, to promote their views and the
public weal.

Since my last, nothing material has occurred. -- Yesterday evening report was
made that eight ships were seen in the offing, standing toward the Hook. The
men-of-war and tenders are still up the river. They have never attempted to
pass the Highland fortifications; and a day or two ago, quitted their station,
and fell down the river eight or ten miles. The vigilance and activity of the
militia opposite where they were, have prevented their landing and doing much
injury. -- One poor peasant's cot they plundered and then burnt.

I would wish to know whether the allowance given to officers, the seventeenth
of January, of a dollar and one third for every man they enlist, Congress mean
to extend to the officers who enlist for the new army for three years. At first
it may appear wrong, or rather exorbitant, supposing that many will be
recruited out of the regiments now in service, and under them: but the
allowance will be of great use, as it will interest the officers, and call
forth their exertions which otherwise would be faint and languid. Indeed I am
fearful, from the enquiries I have made, that their utmost exertions will be
attended with but little success. It is objected that the bounty of ten dollars
is too low; and argued, -- "if the states furnish men for five or six months,
allow considerable more, why should that be accepted when the term of
enlistment is to be for three years?" -- I heartily wish a bounty in land had
been or could be given, as was proposed some time ago. I think it would be
attended with salutary consequences.

In consequence of my application to governor Trumbull, he has sent me two
row-gallies; and I expect another from him. None from governor Cook are yet
come; nor have I heard from him on the subject. -- One is complete here. -- The
fireships are going on under Mr. Anderson's direction, but rather slowly; and
I am preparing some obstructions for the channel nearly opposite the works at
the upper end of this island. -- When all things are ready, I intend to try, if
it shall seem practicable, to destroy the ships and tenders above, and to
employ the galleys, if they can be of advantage.

The militia for the flying camp come in but slowly. By a return from general
Mercer yesterday, they are but little more than three thousand. If they were
in, or can be there shortly, and the situation of the enemy remains the same, I
would make some efforts to annoy them, keeping our posts here well guarded, and
not putting too much to the hazard, or in any manner to the risk.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 29, 1776. SIR,
YOUR favor of the twenty-fourth I received on saturday evening, and, agreeable
to your request, shall expunge the preamble to the resolution subjecting the
property of subjects to the British crown to forfeiture and confiscation.

Our stock of musket-powder is entirely made up into cartridges. I therefore
request that Congress will order four or five tons more of that sort to be
immediately forwarded; it being not only necessary that we should have more for
that purpose, but also some stock to remain in barrels.

Yesterday evening Hutchinson's and Sergeant's regiments from Boston arrived:
also two row-gallies from Rhode Island. -- I am fearful the troops have not got
entirely clear of the smallpox. I shall use every possible precaution to
prevent the infection spreading; and, for that purpose, have ordered them to an
encampment separate and detached from the rest.

By saturday's report from Long Island camp, five ships, a brig, and five
schooners had got into the Hook; -- by yesterday's, two ships more, and a
sloop, were standing in. -- What they are, I have not been able to learn.

I have transmitted a general return herewith, by which Congress will perceive
the whole of our force at the time it was made.

I have enclosed you an account of the sundry prizes, which was transmitted to
several gentlemen here by saturday's post. The two last prizes I did not see
mentioned in the letters shown me; and I fear the report of the second
provision-vessel is premature. -- I was also this minute informed that captain
Biddle had taken a ship with sugars, for Britain, and, in bringing her in
unfortunately lost her on Fisher's-Island.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, July 30, 1776. SIR,
I WAS this morning honored with your two favors of yesterday's date; and,
agreeable to your request, have given Mr. Palfrey liberty to negociate your
claim with Mr. Brimmer, and wish it might be satisfied agreeably to you.

I last night received a letter from general Schuyler, a copy of which I do
myself the honor to transmit you. You will thereby perceive his reasons for
leaving Crown-Point, and prefering the post the council of officers determined
to take opposite to Tyconderoga. -- I am totally unacquainted with those
several posts and the country about them, and therefore cannot determine on the
validity of his observations, or think myself at liberty to give any direction
on the matter.

Congress will please to observe what he says of their distress for money. From
hence he can have no relief, there being only about three or four thousand
dollars in the paymaster's hands according to his return this morning, -- and
all but two months pay due to the army, besides many other demands, -- I could
wish that proper supplies of money could be always kept: -- the want may
occasion consequences of an alarming nature.

By a letter from him, of a prior date to the copy enclosed, he tells me that a
Mr. Ryckman, who has just returned through the country of the Six-Nations,
reports that the Indians who were at Philadelphia have gone home with very
favorable ideas of our strength and resources. This he heard in many of their
villages: -- a lucky circumstance, if it will either gain their friendship or
secure their neutrality.

In my letter of the twenty-seventh I informed Congress of my views to attempt
something against the troops on Staten-Island. I am now to acquaint them, that
by the advice of general Mercer and other officers at Amboy, it will be
impracticable to do any thing upon a large scale, for want of craft, and as the
enemy have the entire command of water all round the Island. -- I have desired
general Mercer to have nine or ten flat-bottomed boats built at Newark-bay and
Elizabeth-town, with a design principally to keep up the communication across
Hackinsac and Passaic rivers, which I deemed a matter of great importance, and
extremely necessary to be attended to.

Since I wrote you yesterday, eleven ships more, four brigs, and two sloops,
have come into the Hook. I have not yet received Intelligence what any of the
late arrivals are: but I suppose we shall not long remain in a state of
uncertainty.

Having reason to believe that lord How will readily come into an exchange of
such prisoners as may be more immediately under his command, and that something
will be offered on this subject within a day or two, or rather come in answer
to the propositions I have made general How, I should be glad to have
Congress's interpretation of the resolves of the twenty-second instant,
empowering the commanders to exchange, etc. -- whether, by the word 'sailor,'
they mean sailors generally, as well those taken in the vessels of private
adventurers by the enemy, as those belonging to the continental cruisers, or
vessels in the continent's employ; or whether they only design to extend the
exchange to the latter, -- those in their particular employ.

I would also observe, that, heretofore, sailors belonging to merchants ships
that have fallen into our hands, and those employed merely as transports, have
not generally been considered as prisoners. -- I submit it to Congress whether
it may not be now necessary to pass a resolve declaring their sentiments on
this subject, and, in general, who are to be treated as prisoners of war, that
are taken on board vessels belonging to the subjects of the British crown, etc.
-- The result of their opinion upon the first question proposed, you will
please to transmit me by the earliest opportunity.

I have enclosed, for the consideration of Congress, a memorial and petition by
captain Holdridge, praying to be relieved against the loss of money stolen from
him, -- not conceiving myself authorized to grant his request. The certificate
which attends it proves him to be a man of character; and his case is hard, on
his state of it. -- Whether making the loss good may not open a door to others,
and give rise to applications not so just as his may be, I cannot determine. --
That seems to be the only objection to relieve him.

I am informed by general Putnam that there are some of the Stockbridge Indians
here (I have not seen them myself) who express great uneasiness at their not
being employed by us, and have come to enquire into the cause. I am sensible
Congress had them not in contemplation when they resolved that Indians might be
engaged in our service. However, as they seem so anxious, -- as they were led
to expect it, from what general Schuyler and the other commissioners did, -- as
we are under difficulties in getting men, and there may be danger of their (or
some of them) taking an unfavorable part, I beg leave to submit it as my
opinion, under all these circumstances, that they had better be employed.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 2, 1776 SIR,
YOUR favor of the thirtieth ultimo, with its several inclo^^res, I was honored
with by wednesday's post.

Congress have been pleased to leave with me the direction of colonel Ward's
regiment, I have wrote to gevernor Trumbull, and requested him to order their
march to this place, being fully satisfied that the enemy mean to make their
grand push in this quarter, and that the good of the service requires every aid
here that can be obtained. I have also wrote to colonel Elmore, and directed
him to repair hither with his regiment. -- When it comes, I shall fill up
commissions for such officers as appear with their respective companies.

Colonel Holman, with a regiment from the Massachusetts state, is arrived.
Colonel Carry from thence is also here, waiting the arrival of his regiment
which he hourly expects. He adds when he left New London he heard that the
third regiment from the Massachusetts was almost ready, and would soon be in
motion.

The enemy's force is daily augmenting and becoming stronger by new arrivals.
Yesterday general Green reports that about forty sail, including tenders, came
into the Hook. What they are, or what those have brought that have lately got
in, I remain uninformed. However, I think it probable they are part of lord
Howe's fleet, with the Hessian troops: -- it is time to look for them.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I am extremely sorry to inform Congress our troops are very sickly.



New York, August 5, 1776. SIR,
I WAS honored with your favor of the thirty-first ultimo on friday, with
several enclosures; and return you my thanks for the agreeable intelligence you
were pleased to communicate, of the arrival of one of our ships with such
valuable articles as arms and ammunition; also of the capture made by a
privateer.

The mode for the exchange of prisoners, resolved on by Congress, is acceded to
by general How, so far as it comes within his command. A copy of my letter and
his answer upon this subject I have the honor to enclose you; to which I beg
leave to refer Congress.

The enclosed copy of a letter from colonel Tupper, who had the general command
of the galleys, will inform Congress of the engagement between them and the
ships of war up the North-river, on saturday evening, and of the damage we
sustained. What injury was done to the ships, I cannot ascertain. It is said
they were hulled several times by our shot. All accounts agree that our
officers and men, during the whole of the affair, behaved with great spirit and
bravery. The damage done the galleys shows beyond question, that they had a
warm time of it. -- The ships still remain up the river? and, before any thing
further can be attempted against them (should it be thought advisable,) the
galleys must be repaired.

I have also transmitted Congress a copy of a letter I received by saturday's
post from governor Cook, to which I refer them for the intelligence it
contains. The seizure of our vessels by the Portuguese is, I fear, an event too
true. Their dependence upon the British crown for aid against the Spaniards
must force them to comply with every thing required of them. -- I wish the
Morris may get safe in with her cargo. -- As to the ships captain Buchlin saw
on the twenty-fifth ultimo, they are probably arrived: for yesterday
twenty-five sail came into the Hook.

By a letter from general Ward, of the twenty-ninth ultimo, he informs me that
two of our armed vessels, the day before, had brought into Marblehead a ship
bound from Halifax to Staten-Island. She had in about fifteen hundred and nine
pounds worth of British goods, besides a good many belonging to tories. A
Halifax paper, found on board her, I have enclosed, as also an account sent me
by Mr. Hazard, transmitted him by some of his friends, as given by the tories
taken in her. The intelligence, I dare say, is true, respecting the arrival of
part of the Hessian troops. General Ward in his letter mentions, that, the day
this prize was taken, captain Burke, in another of our armed vessels, had an
engagement with a ship and a schooner which he thought were transports, and
would have taken them, had it not been for an unlucky accident in having his
quarter deck blown up. Two of his men were killed, and several more were
wounded.

The hulks and chevaux-de-frise, that have been preparing to obstruct the
channel* have got up to the place they are intended for, and will be sunk as
soon as possible.

I have transmitted Congress a general return of the army in and about this
place on the third instant, by which they will perceive the amount of our force.

Before I conclude, I would beg leave to remind Congress of the necessity there
is of having some major-generals appointed for this army, the duties of which
are great, extensive, and impossible to be discharged as they ought and the
good of the service requires, without a competent number of officers of this
rank. I mean to write more fully upon the subject: and, as things are drawing
fast to an issue, and it is necessary to make every proper disposition and
arrangement that we possibly can, I pray that this matter may be taken into
consideration, and claim their early attention. -- I well know what has
prevented appointments of this sort for some time past: but the situation of
our affairs will not justify longer delays in this instance. -- By the first
opportunity, I shall take the liberty of giving you my sentiments more at large
upon the propriety and necessity of the measure.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 7, 1776. SIR,
IN my letter of the fifth, which I had the honor of addressing you, I beg
leave to recall the attention of Congress to the absolute necessity there is
for appointing more general officers, -- promising at the same time, by the
first opportunity, to give my sentiments more at large upon the subject.

Confident I am that the postponing this measure has not proceeded from motives
of frugality: otherwise I should take liberty of attempting to prove that we
put too much to the hazard of such a saving. -- I am but too well apprised of
the difficulties that occur in the choice. They are, I acknowledge, great; but
at the same time it must be allowed, they are of such a nature as to present
themselves whenever the subject is thought of. Time on the one hand does not
remove them; on the other delay may be productive of fatal consequences.

This army, though far short as yet of the numbers intended by Congress, is by
much too unwieldy for the command of any one man, without several
major-generals to assist. For it is to be observed, that a brigadier-general at
the head of his brigade, is no more than a colonel at the head of a regiment,
except that he acts upon a larger scale. Officers of more general command are
at all times wanted for the good order and government of an army, especially
when the army is composed chiefly of raw troops: but in an action they are
indispensably necessary. -- At present there is but one major general for this
whole department and the flying camp; whereas, at this place alone, less than
three cannot discharge the duties with that regularity they ought to be.

If these major-generals are appointed, as undoubtedly they will, out of the
present brigadiers, you will want for this place three brigadiers at least. --
The northern department will require one, if not two (as general Thompson is a
prisoner, and the baron Woedtke reported to be dead o^ in a state not much
better,) there being at present only one brigadier-general (Arnold) in all that
department. -- For the eastern governments there ought to be one, or a
major general, to superintend the regiments there, and to prevent impositions
that might otherwise be practiced. -- These make the number wanted to be six or
seven: and who are to be appointed, Congress can best judge.

To make brigadiers of the oldest colonels would be the least exceptionable
way: but it is much to be questioned, whether by that mode the ablest men would
be appointed to office. And I would observe, though the rank of the colonels of
the eastern governments was settled at Cambridge last year, it only respected
themselves, and is still open as to officers of other governments. To pick a
colonel here and a colonel there through the army, according to the opinion
entertained of their abilities, would no doubt be the means of making a better
choice, and nominating the fittest persons: but then the senior officers would
get disgusted, and, more than probable, with their connexions, quit the
service. -- That might prove fatal at this time. -- To appoint gentlemen as
brigadiers that had not served in this army (in this part of it at least,)
would not wound any one in particular, but hurt the whole equally, and must be
considered in a very discouraging light by every officer of merit. -- View the
matter therefore in any point of light you will, there are inconveniences on
the one hand, and difficulties on the other, which ought to be avoided. --
Would they be remedied by appointing the oldest colonels from each state? -- If
this mode should be thought expedient, the enclosed list gives the names of the
colonels, from New Hampshire to Pennsylvania inclusive, specifying those who
rank first, as I am told, in the several colony lists.

I have transmitted a copy of a letter from Mr. John Glover, setting forth the
nature and grounds of a dispute between him and a Mr. Bradford, respecting
their agency, not conceiving myself authorized, nor having the smallest
inclination to interfere in any degree in the matter, it is referred to
Congress, who will determine and give direction upon it in such manner as they
shall judge best. I will only observe, that Mr. Glover was recommended to me as
a proper person for an agent, when we first fitted out armed vessels, and was
accordingly appointed one; and so far as I know, discharged his office with
fidelity and industry.

I received yesterday evening a letter from general Schuyler, containing
lieutenant M'Michael's report, who had been sent a scout to Oswego. A copy of
the report I have enclosed for the information of Congress, lest general
Schuyler should have omitted it in his letter which accompanies this. He was at
the German-Flatts when he wrote, which was the second instant, and the treaty
with the Indians not begun* nor had the whole expected, then arrived. -- But of
these things he will have advised you more fully, I make no doubt.

The paymaster informs me he received a supply of money yesterday. It came very
seasonably: for the applications and clamors of the troops had become incessant
and distressing beyond measure. -- There is now two months pay due to them.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

SIR,
SINCE closing the letter which I had the honor to write you this morning, two
deserters have come in, who left the Solebay man-of-war last evening. One of
them is a native of New York. Their account is that they were in the engagement
with colonel Moultrie at Sullivan's Island on the ninth of July -- (the
particulars they give nearly correspond with the narrative sent by general
Lee;) -- that they left Carolina three weeks ago as a convoy to forty-five
transports, having on board general Clinton, lord Cornwallis, and the whole
southern army, consisting of about three thousand men, all of whom were landed
last week on Staten-Island in tolerable health; -- that, on sunday, thirteen
transports, part of lord Howe's fleet, and having on board Hessians and
Highlanders, came to Staten-Island; -- that the remainder of the fleet, which
was reported to have, in the whole, twelve thousand men, had parted with these
troops off the banks of Newfoundland, and were expected to come in every
moment; -- that they were getting their heavy carriages and cannon on board,
had launched eight gondolas with flat-bottoms, and two rafts or stages to carry
cannon.

These men understand that the attack will soon be made if the other troops
arrive: -- that they give out they will lay the Jerseys waste with fire and
sword; -- that the computed strength of their army will be thirty thousand men.
They further add, that when they left Carolina, one transport got on shore, so
that they were not able to give her relief; upon which, she surrendered, with
five companies of Highlanders, to general Lee, who, after taking every thing
valuable out of her, burnt her; -- that the admiral turned general Clinton out
of his ship after the engagement with a great deal of abuse; -- great
differences between the principal naval and military gentlemen; -- that the
ships left in Carolina, are now in such a weakly distressed condition, they
would fall an easy prey.

I am, sir, with great respect, etc. G. W.
Headquarters, New York, August 7, 1776. one o'clock, P. M. The ships are
changing their position, and the men-of-war forming into a line: but I still
think they will wait the arrival of the remaining Hessians before any general
attack will be made. -- Monday's return will show our strength here.



New York, August 8, 1776. SIR,
BY yesterday morning's post, I was honored with your favor of the second
instant, with sundry resolutions of Congress, to which I shall pay strict
attention.

As the proposition for employing the Stockbridge Indians has been approved, I
have wrote to Mr. Edwards, one of the commissioners, and who lives among them,
requesting him to engage them, or such as are willing, to enter the service. I
have directed him to indulge them with liberty to join this or the northern
army, or both, as their inclinations may lead.

I wish the salutary consequences may result from the regulation respecting
seamen taken, that Congress have in view. From the nature of this kind of
people, and the privileges granted on their entering into our service, I should
suppose many of them will do it. -- We want them much.

I yesterday transmitted the intelligence I received from the deserters from
the Solebay man-of-war. -- The enclosed copy of a letter by last night's post,
from the honorable Mr. Bowdoin, with the information of a captain Kennedy
lately taken, corroborate their accounts respecting the Hessian troops. Indeed
his report makes the fleet and armament, to be employed against us, greater
then we have heard they would be. However, there remains no doubt of their
being both large and formidable, and such as will require our most vigorous
exertions to oppose them. Persuaded of this, and knowing how much inferior our
numbers are and will be to theirs when the whole of their troops arrive, -- of
the important consequences that may and will flow from the appeal that will
soon be made -- I have wrote to Connecticut and New Jersey, for all the succor
they can afford, and also to the convention of this state. -- What I may
receive, and in what time, the event must determine. But I would fain hope, the
situation and the exigency of our affairs will call forth the most strenuous
efforts and early assistance of those who are friends to the cause. I confess
there is but too much occasion for their exertions. I confidently trust they
will not be withheld.

I have enclosed a copy of a letter from Mr. Bowdoin respecting the eastern
Indians. Congress will thereby perceive that they profess themselves to be well
attached to our interest, -- and the summary of the measures taken to engage
them in our service. I have the treaty at large between the honorable council
of the Massachusetts, on behalf of the United States, with the delegates of the
St. John's and Mikmac tribes. The probability of a copy's being sent already,
and its great length, prevent one coming herewith. If Congress had it not
forwarded to them, I will send a copy by the first opp^rtunity after notice
that it has not been received.

August 9. -- By a report received from general Green last night, at sunset
and a little after, about a hundred boats were seen bringing troops from
Staten-Island to the ships, three of which had fallen down toward the Narrows,
having taken in soldiers from thirty of the boats. He adds, that, by the best
observations of several officers, there appeared to be a general embarkation.

I have wrote to general Mercer for two thousand men from the flying camp.
Colonel Smallwood's battalion, as part of them, I expect this forenoon: but
where the rest are to come from, I know not, as, by the general's last return,
not more than three or four hundred of the new levies had got in.

In my letter of the fifth I enclosed a general return of the army under my
immediate command, but I imagine the following state will give Congress a more
perfect idea, though not a more agreeable one, of our situation, For the
several posts on New York, Long and Governor's Islands, and Paulus-Hook, we
have, fit for duty, ten thousand five hundred and fourteen, -- sick present,
three thousand and thirty-nine -- sick absent, six hundred and twenty-nine, --
on command, two thousand nine hundred and forty six, -- on furlough,
ninety-seven, -- total, seventeen thousand two hundred and twenty-five. In
addition to these, we are only certain of colonel Smallwood's battalion in case
of an immediate attack. Our posts are too much divided, having waters between
many of them, and some distant from others, fifteen miles. These circumstances,
sufficiently distressing of themselves, are much aggravated by the sickness
that prevails through the army. Every day more or less are taken down; so that
the proportion of men that may come in cannot be considered as a real and
serviceable augmentation on the whole.

These things are melancholy; but they are nevertheless true. I hope for
better. -- Under every disadvantage, my utmost exertions shall be employed to
bring about the great end we have in view: and, so far as I can judge from the
professions and apparent disposition of my troops, I shall have their support.
The superiority of the enemy and the expected attack do not seem to have
depressed their spirits. These considerations lead me to think, that, though
the appeal may not terminate so happily in our favor as I could wish, yet they
will not succeed in their views without considerable loss. Any advantage they
may get, I trust, will cost them dear.

Eight o'clock, A. M.

By the reverend Mr. Madison and a Mr. Johnson, two gentlemen of Virginia who
came from Staten-Island yesterday, where they arrived the day before in the
packet with colonel Guy Johnson, I am informed that nothing material had taken
place in England when they left it; -- that there had been a change in the
French ministry, which, many people thought, foreboded a war: -- that it seemed
to be believed by many that Congress would attempt to buy off the foreign
troops, and that it might be effected without great difficulty. Their accounts
from Staten-Island nearly correspond with what we had before: they say that
every preparation is making for an attack; -- that the force now upon the
Island is about fifteen thousand; -- that they appear very impatient for the
arrival of the foreign troops, but a very small part having got in. Whether
they would attempt any thing before they come, they are uncertain: but they are
sure they will as soon as they arrive, if not before. -- They say, from what
they could collect from the conversation of officers, etc. they mean to hem us
in by getting above us and cutting off all communication with the country.

That this is their plan, seems to be corroborated and confirmed by the
circumstance of some ships of war going out at different times within a few
days past, and other vessels. It is probable that a part are to go round and
come up the Sound.

Mr. Madison says lord How Is powers were not known when he left England; --
that general Conway moved, before his departure, that they might be laid before
the commons; and had his motion rejected by a large majority.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 12, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your favors of the eighth and tenth instant,
with the several enclosures. I shall pay attention to the resolution respecting
lieutenant Josiah, and attempt to relieve him from his rigorous usage, -- Your
letters to such of the gentlemen as were here have been delivered. The rest
will be sent by the first opportunity.

Since my last of the eighth and ninth, the enemy have made no movements of
consequence. They remain nearly in the same state; nor have we any further
intelligence of their designs. They have not been yet joined by the remainder
of the fleet with the Hessian troops

Colonel Small wood and his battalion got in on friday; and colonel Miles is
also here with two battalions more of Pennsylvanian riflemen.

The convention of their state have been exerting themselves to call forth a
portion of their militia to an encampment forming above Kingsbridge, to remain
in service for the space of one month after their arrival there; and also half
of those in King and Queen's counties, to reinforce the troops on Long Island
till the first of September, unless sooner discharged. General Morris too is to
take post with his brigade on the Sound and Hudson's-river for ten days, to
annoy the enemy in case they attempt to land; and others of their militia are
directed to be in readiness, in case their aid should be required. Upon the
whole, from the information I have from the convention, the militia ordered are
now in motion, or will be in a little time, and will amount to about three
thousand or more. From Connecticut, I am not certain what succors are coming.
By one or two gentlemen who have come from thence, I am told some of the
militia are assembling, and, from the intelligence they had, would march this
week.

By a letter from governor Trumbull, of the fifth, I am advised that the troops
from that state, destined for the northern army, had marched for Skenesborough.
-- General Ward too, by a letter of the fourth, informs me that the regiments
would march from Boston last week, having been cleansed and generally recovered
from the smallpox. I have also countermanded my orders to colonel Elmore, and
directed him to join the northern army, having heard, after my orders to
Connecticut for his marching hither, that he and most of his regiment were at
Albany or within its vicinity, -- General Ward mentions that the council of the
Massachusetts state will have in from two or three thousand of their militia to
defend their lines and different posts, in lieu of the regiments ordered from
thence agreeable to the resolution of Congress.

The enclosed copy of a resolve of this state, passed the renth instant, will
discover the apprehension they are under of the defection of the inhabitants of
Kings' county from the common cause, and of the measures they have taken
thereupon. I have directed general Green to give the committee such assistance
as he can, and they may require, in the execution of their commission; though
at the same time, I wish the information the convention have received upon the
subject may prove groundless.

I would beg leave to mention to Congress, that, in a letter I received from
general Lee, he mentions the valuable consequences that would result from a
number of cavalry being employed in the southern department. Without them (to
use his own expressions) he can answer for nothing: -- with one thousand he
would ensure the safety of those states. -- I should have done myself the honor
of submitting this matter to Congress before, at his particular request, had it
not escaped my mind. -- From his acquaintance with that country, and the nature
of the grounds, I doubt not he has weighed the matter well and presume he has
fully represented the advantages that would arise from the establishment of
such a corpse -- all I mean, is, in compliance with his requisition, to mention
the matter, that such consideration may be had upon it (if not already
determined) as it may be deserving of.

I have transmitted a general return, whereby Congress will perceive the whole
of our strength, except the two battalions under colonel Miles, which, coming
since it was made out, are not included.

I have enclosed a letter just come to hand from Martinique. Congress will
please to consider of the purport, favoring me with their answer and a return
of the letter.

This moment (ten o'clock) report is made by general Green that a man-of-war
came in yesterday, and that sixty fail of ships are now standing in. -- No
doubt they are a further part of the Hessian fleet.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 12, 1776. SIR,
THIS will be handed to you by colonel * * * from the northern army, whom the
enclosed letter and proceedings of a general court martial will show to have
been in an arrest, and tried for sundry matters charged against him. As the
court martial was by order of the commander in that department, -- the facts
committed there, -- the trial there, -- I am much at loss to know why the
proceedings were referred to me to approve or disapprove. As my interfering in
the matter would carry much impropriety with it, and show a want of regard to
the rules and practice in such instances, -- and as colonel * * * is going to
Philadelphia, -- I have submitted the whole of the proceedings to the
consideration of Congress for their decision upon his case, -- perfectly
convinced that such determination will be had therein, as will be right and
just.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 13, 1776. SIR,
AS there is reason to believe that but little time will elapse before the
enemy make their attack, I have thought it advisable to remove all the papers
in my hands, respecting the affairs of the states, from this place. I hope the
event will show the precaution was necessary: but yet prudence required that it
should be done, lest by any accident they should fall into their hands. They
are all contained in a large box, nailed up, and committed to the care of
lieutenat-colonel Reed, brother of the adjutant-general, to be delivered to
Congress, in whose custody I would beg leave to deposit them until our affairs
shall be so circumstanced as to admit of their return.

The enemy, since my letter of yesterday, have received a furher augmentation
of thirty-six ships to their fleet, making the whole that have arrived since
yesterday morning, ninetysix.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I would observe that I have sent off the box privately, that it might
raise no disagreeable ideas; and have enjoined colonel Reed to secrecy.



New York, August 14, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on monday, nothing of importance has
occurred here, except that the enemy have received an augmentation to their
fleet, of ninety-six ships: -- some reports make them more. In a letter I wrote
you yesterday by lieutenant colonel Reed, I advised you of this: but presuming
it may not reach you so soon as this will, I have thought proper to mention the
intelligence again.

Enclosed I have the honor to transmit a copy of the examination of a deserter,
sent me this morning by general Mercer, to which I beg leave to refer Congress
for the latest accounts I have from the enemy. Whether the intelligence he has
given is literally true, I cannot determine: but as to the attack, we daily
expect it.

Your favor of the tenth, with its enclosures, was duly received; and I have
instructed the several officers who were promoted, to act in their stations as
you requested, though their commissions were not sent.

As we are in extreme want of tents and covering for this army, -- a great part
of those at the out-posts having nothing to shelter them, nor houses to go
into, -- I submit it to Congress whether it may not be prudent to remand those
that were lately sent to Boston, where there are no troops at present; and, if
there were, the necessity for them would not be great, as the town, and
barracks at several of the posts, would be sufficient to receive them.

The enclosed letter from lieutenant colonel Henshaw will discover to Congress
his views and wishes, which they will consider and determine on, in whatever
way they think right and conducive to the public good; meaning only to lay his
letter before them.

I take the liberty of mentioning that colonel Varnum of Rhode Island has been
with me this morning to resign his commission, conceiving himself to be greatly
injured in not having been noticed in the late arrangement and promotion of
general officers. -- I remonstrated against the impropriety of the measure at
this time; and he has consented to stay till affairs wear a different aspect
from what they do at present.

Eleven o'clock. -- By a report just come to hand from general Green, twenty
ships more are coming in.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 14, 1776. SIR,
This will be delivered you by captain Moeballe, a Dutch gentleman from
Surrinam, who has come to the continent with a view of entering into the
service of the states, as you will perceive by the enclosed letters from Mr.
Brown of Providence, and general Green. What other letters and credentials he
has, I know not, but, at his request, have given him this line to Congress, to
whom he wishes to be introduced, and where he will make his pretentions known.

I have ordered the quartermaster immediately to write to Mr. Brown for the
Russia duck he mentions, with directions to have it instantly made into tents
there, -- being in great distress for want of a sufficient number to cover our
troops.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 15, 1776. SIR,
As the situation of the two armies must engage the attention of Congress, and
lead them to expect that each returning day will produce some important events,
this is meant to inform them that nothing of moment has yet cast up. In the
evening of yesterday there were great movements among their boats; and, from
the number that appeared to be passing and repassing about the Narrows, we were
induced to believe they intended to land a part of their force upon
Long Island: but, having no report from general Green, I presume they have not
done it.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Your favor of the thirteenth was received by yesterday's post. -- I
wrote on monday by the return express, as you supposed.



New York, August 16, 1776. SIR,
I BEG leave to inform you, that, since I had the pleasure of addressing you
yesterday, nothing interesting between the two armies has happened. Things
remain nearly in the situation they then were.

It is with peculiar regret and concern that I have an opportunity of
mentioning to Congress the sickly condition of our troops. In some regiments
there are not any of the field-officers capable of doing duty; in others the
duty is extremely difficult for want of a sufficient number. I have been
obliged to nominate some till Congress transmit the appointments of those they
wish to succeed to the several vacancies occasioned by the late promotions.
This, being a matter of some consequence, I presume will have their early
attention, and that they will fill up the several vacancies also mentioned in
the list I had the honor of transmitting some few days ago to the board of war.

I am, sir, with the utmost respect, etc. G. W.

New York, August 17, 1776. SIR,
THE circumstances of the two armies having undergone no material alteration
since I had the honor of writing to you last, I have nothing particular or
important to communicate respecting them.

In my letter of yesterday I forget to mention the arrival of lord Dunmore
here. By the examination of captain Hunter (who escaped from the enemy, and
came to Amboy on the fourteenth) transmitted me by general Roberdeau, I am
certainly informed his lordship arrived on the thirteenth. The examination does
not say any thing about the ships he brought with him: it only extends to his
force, which it mentions to be weak.

I before now expected the enemy would have made their attack: nor can I
account for their deferring it, unless the intelligence, given by captain
Hunter and another person who escaped about the same time, is the cause, -- to
wit, that they are waiting the arrival of another division of the Hessian
troops, which (they say) is still out. Whether that is the reason of the delay,
I cannot undertake to determine: but I should suppose things will not long
remain in their present state. -- I have enclosed a copy of general Roberdeau's
letter, and of the examination of those two persons, which will show Congress
all the information they have given upon these subjects.

I am just now advised by Mr. Aires who came from Philadelphia to build the
row-gallies, that two of our fire-vessels attempted last night to burn the
enemy's ships and tenders up the river. He says that they burned one tender,
and one of them boarded the Phoenix, and was grappled with her for near ten
minutes; but she cleared herself. -- We lost both of the vessels. His account
is not so particular as I could wish; however, I am certain the attempt has not
succeeded to our wishes. In a little time it is probable the matter will be
more minutely reported.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 18, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE been honored with your favor of the sixteenth with the enclosure, and
am sorry it is not in my power to transmit Congress a copy of the treaty as
they require, having sent it away with the other papers that were in my hands.

The resolution they have entered into respecting the foreign troops, I am
pursuaded, would produce salutary effects, if it could be properly circulated
among them. I fear it will be a matter of difficulty. However I will take every
measure that shall appear probable to faciliate the end.

I have the honor to enclose you, for the perusal and consideration of
Congress, sundry papers marked No. 1 to No. 7 inclusive, the whole of which,
except No. 2 and 7 (my answers to lord Drummond and general How) I received
yesterday evening by a flag, and to which I beg leave to refer Congress.

I am exceedingly at a loss to know the motives and causes inducing a
proceeding of such a nature at this time, and why lord How has not attempted
some plan of negotiation before, as he seems so desirous of it. If I may be
allowed to conjecture and guess at the cause, it may be that part of the
Hessians have not arrived, as mentioned in the examination transmitted
yesterday, -- or that general Burgoyne has not made such progress as was
expected, to form a junction of their two armies, -- or, what I think equally
probable, they mean to procrastinate their operations for some time, trusting
that the militias which have come to our succor, will soon become tired and
return home, as is but too usual with them. -- Congress will make their
observations upon these several matters, and favor me with the result as soon
as they have done. -- They will observe my answer to lord Drummond, who (I am
pretty confident) has not attended to the terms of his parole, but has violated
it in several instances. It is with the rest of the papers: but, if my memory
serves me, he was not to hold any correspondence directly or indirectly with
those in arms against us, or to go into any port or harbor in America, where
the enemy themselves were or had a fleet, or to go on board their ships.

The treaty with the Indians is in the box which lieutenant colonel Reed, I
presume, has delivered before this. If Congress are desirous of seeing it, they
will be pleased to have the box opened. It contains a variety of papers, and
all the affairs of the army, from my first going to Cambridge, till it was sent
away.

This morning, the Phoenix and Rose men-of-war, with two tenders, availing
themselxes of a favorable and brisk wind, came down the river, and have joined
the fleet. Our several batteries fired at them in their passage, but without
any good effect that I could perceive.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 19, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE nothing of moment to communicate to Congress, as things are in the
situation they were in when I had last the honor of addressing them.

By a letter from general Ward, of the twelfth, I find that Whitcomb's
regiment, on the eighth, and Phinney's on the ninth, marched from Boston for
Tyconderoga.

Governor Trumbull also, in a letter of the thirteenth, advises me that Ward's
regiment in the service of the states was on the march to this army, and that
he and his council of safety had in the whole ordered fourteen militia
regiments to reinforce us. Three of them have arrived, and amount to about a
thousand and twenty men. When the whole come in, we shall be on a much more
respectable footing than we have been: but I greatly fear, if the enemy defer
their attempt for any considerable time, they will be extremely impatient to
return home; and if they should, we shall be reduced to distress again.

He also adds that captain Van Buren, who had been sent for that purpose had
procured a sufficient supply of sail-cloth for the vessels to be employed on
the lake, and a part of the cordage, in that state: and had a prospect of
getting the remainder.

As there will be a difficulty in all probability to circulate the papers
designed for the foreign troops, and many miscarriages may happen before it can
be effected, it may be proper to furnish me with a larger quantity than what I
already have.

Enclosed I have the honor to transmit you a general return of our whole force
at this time, in which are comprehended the three regiments of militia above
mentioned. I am sorry it should be so much weakened by sickness. The return
will show you how it distresses us.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. The post just now arrived has brought a further supply of papers for the
Hessians, which makes my requisition unnecessary.



New York, August 20, 1776. SIR,
I WAS yesterday morning favored with yours of the seventeenth, accompanied by
several resolutions of Congress, and commissions for officers appointed to the
late vacancies in this army.

I wrote some days ago to general Schuyler to propose to generals Carleton and
Burgoyne an exchange of prisoners in consequence of a former resolve of
Congress authorizing their commanders in each department to negociate one. That
of major Meigs for major French, and captain Dearborn's for any officer of
equal rank, I submitted to general Howe's consideration, by letter, on the
seventeenth, understanding their paroles had been sent him by general Carleton;
but have not yet received his answer upon the subject.

In respect to the exchange of the prisoners in Canada, if a proposition on
that head has not been already made (and I believe it has not), the enclosed
copy of general Carleton's orders (transmitted me under seal by major Bigelow,
who was sent with a flag to general Burgoyne from Tyconderoga, with the
proceedings of Congress on the breach of capitulation at the Cedars, and the
inhuman treatment of our people afterward) will show it is unnecessary, as he
has determined to send them to their own provinces, their to remain as
prisoners; interdicting at the same time all kind of intercourse between us and
his army, except such as may be for the purpose of imploring the king's mercy.
-- The assassination he mentions, of brigadier-general Gordon, is a fact
entirely new to me, and what I never heard of before. -- I shall not trouble
Congress with my strictures upon this * * * performance, * * * only observing
that its design is somewhat artful, and that each boatman with major Bigelow
was furnished with a copy.

I have also transmitted Congress a copy of the major's journal, to which I beg
leave to refer them for the intelligence reported by him on his return from the
truce.

By a letter from general Green yesterday evening, he informed me he had
received an express from Hog-Island inlet, advising that five of the enemy's
small vessels had appeared at the mouth of the creek, with some troops on
board; -- also that he had heard two periaguas were off Oyster-Bay, -- the
whole supposed to be after live stock: -- and, to prevent their getting it, he
had detached a party of horse, and two hundred and twenty men, among them
twenty riflemen. I have not received further intelligence upon the subject.

I am also advised by the examination of a captain Button (master of a vessel
that had been taken) transmitted me by general Mercer, that the general report
among the enemy's troops, when he came off, was, that they were to attack
Long Island, and to secure our works there if possible, at the same time
another part of their army was to land above this city. This information is
corroborated by many other accounts, and is probably true: nor will it be
possible to prevent them landing on the island, as its great extent affords a
variety of places favorable for that purpose, and the whole of our works on it
are at the end opposite to the city. However, we shall attempt to harrass them
as much as possible, which will be all that we can do. -- I have the honor to
be, etc.

G. W.

New York, August 21, 1776. SIR,
ENCLOSED I have the honor to transmit you a copy of my letter to lord How (as
well on the subject of a general exchange of prisoners in the naval line, as
that of lieutenant Josiah in particular) and of his lordship's answer, which,
for its matter and manner, is very different from general Carleton's orders
which were forwarded yesterday.

The situation of the armies being the same as when I had the pleasure of
addressing you last, I have nothing special to communicate on that head, nor
more to add, than that I am with all possible respect, etc.

G. W.

New York, August 22, 1776. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to transmit Congress a copy of a letter I received
yesterday from governor Livingston, also copies of three reports from colonel
Hand.

Though the intelligence reported by the spy on his return to governor
Livingston has not been confirmed by the event he mentions (an attack last
night,) there is every reason to believe that one is shortly designed. The
falling down of several ships yesterday evening to the Narrows, crowded with
men, -- those succeeded by many more this morning, -- and a great number of
boats parading around them (as I was just now informed) with troops, -- are all
circumstances indicating an attack: and it is not improbable it will be made
today. It could not have happened last night, by reason of a most violent gust.

We are making every preparation to receive them; and I trust, under the smiles
of Providence, with our own exertions, that my next, if they do attack, will
transmit an account that will be pleasing to every friend of America, and of
the rights of humanity.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 23, 1776. SIR,
I BEG leave to inform Congress, that, yesterday morning and in the course of
the preceding night, a considerable body of the enemy, amounting by report, to
eight or nine thousand, and these all British, landed from the transport-ships
mentioned in my last, at Gravesend-bay on Long Island, and have approached
within three miles of our lines, having marched across the low cleared grounds
near the woods at Flat-bush, where they are halted, since my last intelligence.

I have detached from hence six battalions as a reinforcement to our troops
there, which are all that I can spare at this time, not knowing but the fleet
may move up with the remainder of their army, and make an attack here, on the
next flood-tide. If they do not, I shall send a further reinforcement, should
it be necessary; and have ordered five battalions more to be in readiness for
that purpose.

I have no doubt but a little time will produce some important events. I hope
they will be happy. -- The reinforcement detached yesterday went off in high
spirits; and I have the pleasure to inform you that the whole of the army, that
are effective and capable of duty, discover the same, and great cheerfulness.
-- I have been obliged to appoint major general Sullivan to the command on the
island, owing to general Greene's indisposition; -- he has been extremely ill
for several days, and still continues bad.

By wednesday evening's post I received a letter from general Ward, enclosing a
copy of the invoice of the ordnance-stores taken by captain Manly, with the
appraisement of the same (made in pursuance of my direction, founded on the
order of Congress,) which I do myself the honor of transmitting. -- You will
also receive the treaty between the commissioners and the Indians of the
Six-Nations, and others, at the German-Flats, which general Schuyler requested
me to forward, by his letter of the eighteenth instant.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 24, 1776. SIR,
THE irregularity of the post prevents your receiving the early and constant
intelligence it is my wish to communicate. This is the third letter which you
will probably receive from me by the same post. The first was of little or no
consequence: but that of yesterday gave you the best information I had been
able to obtain, of the enemy's landing and movements upon Long Island. --
Having occasion to go over thither yesterday, I sent my letter to the
post office at the usual hour, being informed that the rider was expected every
moment, and would out again directly: but in the evening when I sent to
inquire, none had come in.

I now enclose you a report made to me by general Sullivan after I left
Long Island yesterday. I do not conceive that the enemy's whole force was in
motion, but a detached party rather. I have sent over four more regiments, with
boats, to be ready either to reinforce the troops under general Sullivan, or to
return to this place, if the remainder of the fleet at the watering-place
should push up to the city; which hitherto (I mean since the landing upon
Long Island) they have not had in their power to do, on account of the wind
which has either been ahead or too small when the tide has served. I have
nothing further to trouble the Congress with at present, than that I am theirs
and your most obedient humble servant,

G. W.

New York, August 26, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your favors of the twentieth and twenty-fourth,
and am happy to find my answer to lord Drummond has met the approbation of
Congress. Whatever his views were, most certainly his conduct respecting his
parole is highly reprehensible.

Since my letter of the twenty-fourth, almost the whole of the enemy's fleet
have fallen down to the Narrows; and, from this circumstance, and the striking
of their tents at their several encampments on Staten-Island from time to time,
previous to the departure of the ships from thence, we are led to think they
mean to land the main body of their army on Long Island, and to make their
grand push there. I have ordered over considerable reinforcements to our troops
there, and shall continue to send more as circumstances may require. There has
been a little skirmishing and irregular siring kept up between their and our
advanced guards, in which colonel Martin of the Jersey levies has received a
wound in his breast, which, it is apprehended, will prove mortal; a private has
had his leg broke by a cannon-ball, and another has received a shot in the
groin from their musketry. This is all the damage they have yet done us; --
what they have sustained, is not known.

The shifting and changing the regiments have undergone of late has prevented
their making proper returns, and of course put it out of my power to transmit a
general one of the army. However, I believe our strength is much the same as it
was when the last was made, with the addition of nine militia regiments come
from the state of Connecticut, averaging about three hundred and fifty men
each. These are nine of the fourteen regiments mentioned in my letter of the
nineteenth. -- Our people still continue to be very sickly.

The papers designed for the foreign troops have been put into several
channels, in order that they might be conveyed to them; and, from the
information I had yesterday, I have reason to believe many have fallen into
their hands.

I have enclosed a copy of lord Drummonds second letter (in answer to mine)
which I received since I transmitted his first, and which I have thought
necessary to lay before Congress, that they may possess the whole of the
corespondence between us, and see how far he has exculpated himself from the
charge alleged against him. The log-book he mentions to have sent colonel
Moylay proves nothing in his favor. That shows that he had been at Bermuda, and
from thence to some other island, on his passage from which to this place, the
vessel he was in was boarded by a pilot who brought her into the Hook, where he
found the British fleet, which his lordship avers he did not expect were there,
having understood their destination was to the southward.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

[The following letter is from one of the general's secretaries whose signature
will also appear to a few of the subsequent letters in this volume.]
New York, August 27, 1776, 8 o'clock, P. M. SIR,
I THIS minute return from our lines on Long Island, where I left his
excellency the general. From him I have it in command to inform Congress, that
yesterday he went there, and continued till evening, when from the enemy's
having landed a considerable part of their forces, -- and many of their
movements, -- there was reason to apprehend they would make in a little time a
general attack. -- As they would have a wood to pass through before they could
approach the lines, it was thought expedient to place a number of men there on
the different roads leading from where they were stationed, in order to harrass
and annoy them in their march. -- This being done, early this morning a smart
engagement ensued between the enemy and our detachments, which, being unequal
to the force they had to contend with, have sustained a pretty considerable
loss: at least many of our men are missing. Among those that have not returned,
are general Sullivan and lord Sterling. The enemy's loss is not known
certainly: but we are told by such of our troops as were in the engagement and
have come in that they had many killed and wounded. -- Our party brought off a
lieutenant, sergeant and corporal, with twenty privates, prisoners.

While these detachments were engaged, a column of the enemy descended from the
woods, and marched toward the center of our lines with a design to make an
impression, but were repulsed. This evening they appeared very numerous about
the skirts of the woods, where they have pitched several tents: and his
excellency inclines to think they mean to attack and force us from our lines by
way of regular approaches, rather than in any other manner.

Today five ships of the line came up toward the town, where they seemed
desirous of getting, as they turned a long time against an unfavorable wind:
and on my return this evening, I found a deserter from the twenty-third
regiment, who informed me that they design as soon as the wind will permit them
to come up to give us a severe cannonade, and to silence our batteries, if
possible.

I have the honor to be, in great haste, sir, your most obedient, ROBERT H.
HARRISON.

Long Island, Aug. 29, half after 4, A. M. SIR,
I WAS last night honored with your favor of the twentyseventh, accompanied by
sundry resolutions of Congress. Those respecting the officers, etc. that may be
wounded in the service of the states, are founded much in justice, and (I
should hope) may be productive of many salutary consequences. As to the
encouragement to the Hessian officers, I wish it may have the desired effect.
Perhaps it might have been better, had the offer been sooner made.

Before this you will probably have received a letter from Mr. Harrison, of the
twenty-seventh, advising of the engagement between a detachment of our men and
the enemy on that day. -- I am sorry to inform Congress that I have not heard
either of general Sullivan or lord Sterling, who (they would observe) were
among the missing after the engagement; nor can I ascertain our loss. I am
hopeful, part of our men will yet get in: several did yesterday morning. --
That of the enemy is also uncertain: the accounts are various. I incline to
think they suffered a good deal. Some deserters say five hundred were killed
and wounded.

There were some skirmishing, the greatest part of yesterday, between parties
from the enemy and our people: in the evening it was pretty smart. The event I
have not yet learned.

The weather of late has been extremely wet. Yesterday it rained severely the
whole afternoon, which distressed our people much, -- not having a sufficiency
of tents to cover them, and what we have, not being got over yet. I am in hopes
they will all be got to day, and that they will be more comfortably provided,
though the great scarcity of these articles distresses us beyond measure, not
having any thing like a sufficient number to protect our people from the
inclemency of the weather: -- which has occasioned much sickness, and the men
to be almost broken down.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, August 31, 1776. SIR,
INCLINATION as well as duty would have induced me to give Congress the
earliest information of my removal and that of the troops, from Long Island and
its dependencies, to this city, the night before last: but the extreme fatigue
which myself and family have undergone, as much from the weather since as the
engagement of the twenty-seventh, rendered me and them entirely unfit to take
pen in hand. Since monday, scarce any of us have been out of the lines till our
passage along the East-river was effected yesterday morning; and for
forty-eight hours preceding that I had hardly been off my horse, and never
closed my eyes: so that I was quite unfit to write or dictate till this morning.

Our retreat was made without any loss of men or ammunition, and in better
order than I expected from troops in the situation ours were. We brought off
all our cannon and stores, except a few heavy pieces, which in the condition
the earth was by a long-continued rain, we found, upon trial, impracticable.
The wheels of the carriages sinking up to the hobs, rendered it impossible for
our whole force to drag them. -- We left but little provisions on the island,
except some cattle which had been driven within our lines, and which after many
attempts to force across the water, we found impossible to effect,
circumstanced as we were.

I have enclosed a copy of the council of war held previous to the retreat, to
which I beg leave to refer Congress for the reasons, or many of them, that led
to the adoption of that measure.

Yesterday evening and last night, a party of our men were employed in bringing
our stores, cannon, tents, etc. from Governor's-Island, which they nearly
completed. Some of the heavy cannon remain there still, but (I expect) will be
got away today.

In the engagement on the twenty-seventh, generals Sullivan and Sterling were
made prisoners. The former has been permitted, on his parole, to return for a
little time. From my lord Sterling I had a letter by general Sullivan (a copy
of which I have the honor to transmit) that contains his formation of the
engagement with his brigade. It is not so full and certain as I could wish: --
he was hurried most probably, as his letter was unfinished: -- nor have I been
yet able to obtain an exact account of our loss: -- We suppose it from seven
hundred to a thousand killed and taken.

General Sullivan says lord How is extremely desirous of seeing some members
of Congress; for which purpose he was allowed to come out, and to communicate
to them what has passed between him and his lordship. I have consented to his
going to Philadelphia, as I do not mean, or conceive it right, to withhold, or
prevent him from giving, such information as he possesses in this instance.

I am much hurried and engaged in arranging and making new dispositions of our
forces; the movements of the enemy requiring them to be immediately had; -- and
therefore have only time to add, that I am, with my best regards to Congress,
their and your most obedient, etc.

G. W.

New York, September 12, 1776. SIR,
AS my intelligence of late has been rather unfavorable, and would be received
with anxiety and concern, peculiarly happy should I esteem myself, were it in
my power at this time to transmit such information to Congress, as would be
more pleasing and agreeable to their wishes: -- but, unfortunately for me, --
unfortunately for them, -- it is not.

Our situation is truly distressing. The check our detachment sustained on the
twenty-seventh ultimo has dispirited too great a proportion of our troops, and
filled their minds with apprehension and despair. The militia, instead of
calling forth their utmost efforts to a brave and manly opposition in order to
repair our losses, are dismayed, intractable, and impatient to return. Great
numbers of them have gone off, -- in some instances, almost by whole regiments,
by half ones and by companies at a time. This circumstance, of itself,
independent of others, when fronted by a well appointed army superior in number
to our whole collected force, would be sufficiently disagreeable: -- but, when
their example has infected another part of the army, when their want of
discipline, and refusal of almost every kind of restraint and government, have
produced a like conduct but too common to the whole, and an entire disregard of
that order and subordination necessary to the well doing of an army, and which
had been inculcated before, as well as the nature of our military establishment
would admit of, -- our condition is still more alarming: and with the deepest
concern I am obliged to confess my want of confidence in the generality of the
troops.

All these circumstances fully confirm the opinion I ever entertained, and
which I more than once in my letters took the liberty of mentioning to
Congress, that no dependence could be put in a militia, or other troops than
those enlisted and embodied for a longer period than our regulations heretofore
prescribed. I am persuaded, and as fully convinced as I am of any one fact that
has happened, that our liberties must of necessity be greatly hazarded if not
entirely lost, if their defense is left to any but a permanent standing army,
-- I mean, one to exist during the war. Nor would the expense, incident to the
support of such a body of troops as would be competent to almost every
exigency, far exceed that which is daily incurred by calling in succor, and
new enlistments, which, when effected, are not attended with any good
consequences. Men who have been free, and subject to no control, cannot be
reduced to order in an instant: and the privileges and exemptions, they claim
and will have, influence the conduct of others: and the aid derived from them
is nearly counterbalanced by the disorder, irregularity, and confusion they
occasion.

I cannot find that the bounty of ten dollars is likely to produce the desired
effect. When men can get double that sum to engage for a month or two in the
militia, and that militia frequently called out, it is hardly to be expected.
-- The addition of land might have a considerable influence on a permanent
enlistment.

Our number of men at present fit for duty is under twenty thousand; they were
so by the last returns and best accounts I could get after the engagement on
Long Island; since which, numbers have deserted. I have ordered general Mercer
to send the men intended for the flying camp at this place, about a thousand in
number, and to try with the militia, if practicable, to make a diversion on
Staten-Island.

Till of late, I had no doubt in my own mind, of defending this place; nor
should I have yet, if the men would do their duty; but this I despair of. It is
painful, and extremely grating to me, to give such unfavorable accounts; but it
would be criminal to conceal the truth at so critical a juncture. Every power I
possess shall be exerted to serve the cause; and my first wish is, that
whatever may be the event, the Congress will do me the justice to think so.

If we should be obliged to abandon the town, ought it to stand as winter
quarters for the enemy? They would derive great inconveniences from it on the
one hand; and much property would be destroyed on the other. -- It is an
important question, but will admit of but little time for deliberation. At
present I dare say the enemy mean to preserve it if they can. If Congress
therefore should resolve upon the destruction of it, the resolution should be a
profound secret, as the knowledge of it will make a capital change in their
plans.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, September 4, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the second, our affairs have not
undergone a change for the better, nor assumed a more agreeable aspect than
what they then wore. The militia under various pretenses, of sickness, etc. are
daily diminishing; and in a little time, I am persuaded, their number will be
very inconsiderable.

On monday night a forty-gun ship passed up the sound between Governor's and
Long Island, and anchored in Turtle-bay. In her passage she received a
discharge of cannon from our batteries, but without any damage; and having a
favorable wind and tide, soon got out of their reach. Yesterday morning I
dispatched major Crane of the artillery, with two twelve pounders and a
howitzer, to annoy her; who, hulling her several times, forced her from that
station, and to take shelter behind an island, where she still continues. There
are several other ships of war in the Sound, with a good many transports or
store-ships which came round Long Island, so that the communication is entirely
cut off. The admiral with the main body of the fleet, is close in with
Governor's-Island.

Judging it expedient to guard against every contingency as far as our peculiar
situation will admit, and that we may have resources left if obliged to abandon
this place, I have sent away and am removing above Kingsbridge all our stores
that are unnecessary, and that will not be immediately wanted.

I have enclosed several original letters from some of our officers prisoners
at Quebec, which fell into general Gate's hands, and were transmitted by him to
general Schuyler who sent them to me. General Gates adds, that the persons who
brought them said general Burgoyne had sent messages to the inhabitants upon
the lakes, inviting their continuance on their farms and assuring them that
they should remain in security.

The postmaster having removed his office from the city to Dobb's-ferry, as it
is said, makes it extremely inconvenient, and will be the means of my not
giving such constant and regular intelligence as I could wish. -- Cannot some
mode be devised, by which we may have a pretty constant and certain intercourse
and communication kept up? It is an enterprising matter, and of great
importance; and, as such, I am persuaded, will meet with due attention from
Congress.

I have transmitted the copy of general Gates's letter as sent me by general
Schuyler, from which Congress will discover all the information I have
respecting general Burgoyne's message, and my latest intelligence from
Tyconderoga, with the returns of the army there. -- Those of the army here it
is impossible to obtain, till the hurry and bustle we are now in are a little
over.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Congress will perceive, by general Gates's letter, his want of
musket-cartridge-paper. It is impossible to supply him from hence. They will
therefore be pleased to order what he wan^ (if it can be procured) to be
immediately sent him from Philadelphia.



New York, September 6, 1776.
I WAS last night honored with your favor of the third, with sundry resolutions
of Congress: and perceiving it to be their opinion and determination that no
damage shall be done the city in case we are obliged to abandon it, I shall
take every measure in my power to prevent it.

Since my letter on the fourth, nothing very material has occurred, unless it
is that the fleet seem to be drawing more together and all getting close in
with Governor's-Island. Their designs we cannot learn; nor have we been able to
procure the least information of late, of any of their plans or intended
operations.

As the enemy's movements are very different from what we expected, -- and from
their large encampments a considerable distance up the Sound, there is reason
to believe they intend to make a landing above or below Kingsbridge, and
thereby to hem in our army, and to cut off the communication with the country,
-- I mean to call a council of general officers today or tomorrow, and
endeavor to digest and fix upon some regular and certain system of conduct to
be pursued in order to baffle their efforts and counteract their schemes; and
also to determine of the expediency of evacuating or attempting to maintain the
city and the several posts on this island. The result of their opinion and
deliberations I shall advise Congress of by the earliest opportunity, which
will be by express, having it not in my power to communicate any intelligence
by post, as the office is removed to so great a distance, and entirely out of
the way.

I have enclosed a list of the officers who are prisoners, and from whom
letters have been received by a flag. -- We know there are others not included
in the list.

General Sullivan having informed me that general How was willing that an
exchange of him for general Prescot should take place, it will be proper to
send general Prescot immediately, that it may be effected.

As the militia regiments in all probability will be impatient to return, and
become pressing for their pay, I shall be glad of the direction of Congress,
whether they are to receive it here or from the conventions or assemblies of
the respective states to which they belong. On the one hand, the settlement of
their abstracts will be attended with trouble and difficulty: on the other,
they will go away much better satisfied, and be more ready to give their aid in
future, if they are paid before their departure.

Before I conclude, I must take the liberty of mentioning to Congress the great
distress we are in for want of money. Two months pay (and more to some
battalions) is now due the troops here, without any thing in the military chest
to satisfy it. This occasions much dissatisfaction, and almost a general
uneasiness. Not a day passes without complaints and the most importunate and
urgent demands on this head. -- As it may injure the service greatly, and the
want of a regular supply of cash produce consequences of the most fatal
tendency, I entreat the attention of Congress to this subject, and that we may
be provided as soon as can be, with a sum equal to every present claim.

I have wrote to general How, proposing an exchange of general M'Donald for
lord Sterling, and shall be extremely happy to obtain it, as well as that of
general Sullivan for general Prescot, -- being greatly in want of them, and
under the necessity of appointing, protempore, some of the colonels to command
brigades.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. As two regiments from North Carolina and three regiments more from
Virginia are ordered here, -- if they could embark at Norfolk, etc. and come up
the bay with security, it would expedite their arrival, and prevent the men
from a long fatiguing march. This however should not be attempted if the enemy
have vessels in the bay, which might probably intercept them.



New York, September 7, 1776. SIR,
THIS will be delivered you by captain Martindale and lieutenant Turner, who
were taken last fall in the armed brig Washington, and who, with Mr. Child's the
second lieutenant, have lately effected their escape from Halifax. Captain
Martindale and these two officers have applied to me for pay from the first of
January till this time: but, not conceiving myself authorized to grant it,
however reasonable it may be, as they were only engaged till the last of
December, -- at their instance I have mentioned the matter to Congress, and
submit their case to their consideration.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

New York, Headquarters, Sept. 8, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the sixth instant, I have called a
council of the general officers, in order to take a full and comprehensive view
of our situation, and thereupon form such a plan of future defense as may be
immediately pursued, and subject to no other alteration than a change of
operations on the enemy's side may occasion.

Before the landing of the enemy on Long Island, the point of attack could not
be known, or any satisfactory judgment formed of their intentions. It might be
on Long Island, on Bergen, or directly on the city. This made it necessary to
be prepared for each, and has occasioned an expense of labor which now seems
useless, and is regretted by those who form a judgment from after knowledge.
But I trust, men of disernment will think differently, and see that by such
works and preparations we have not only delayed the operations of the campaign
till it is too late to effect any capital incursion into the country, but have
drawn the enemy's forces to one point and obliged them to [ disclose] their
plan, so as to enable us to form our defense on some certainty.

It is now extremely obvious from all intelligence, -- from their movements,
and every other circumstance, -- that having landed their whole army on
Long Island (except about four thousand on Staten-Island), they mean to enclose
us on the island of New York by taking post in our rear while the shipping
effectually secure the front; and thus, either by cutting off our communication
with the country, oblige us to fight them on their own terms, or surrender at
discretion, -- or by a brilliant stroke endeavor to cut this army in pieces,
and secure the collection of arms and stores, which they well know we shall not
be able soon to replace.

Having therefore their system unfolded to us, it became an important
consideration how it could be most successfully opposed. On every side there is
a choice of difficulties: and every measure on our part (however painful the
reflection is from experience) to be formed with some apprehension that all our
troops will not do their duty. In deliberating on this great question, it was
impossible to forget, that history, our own experience, the advice of our
ablest friends in Europe, the fears of the ^^my, and even the declarations of
Congress, demonstrate, that on our side the war should be defensive -- (it has
ever been called a war of posts); -- that we should on all occasions avoid a
general action, nor put any thing to the risk, unless compelled by a necessity
into which we ought never to be drawn.

The arguments on which such a system was founded were deemed unanswerable; and
experience has given her sanction. With these views and being fully persuaded
that it would be presumption to draw out her young troops into open ground
against their superiors both in number and discipline, I have never spared the
spade and pickaxe. I confess I have not found that readiness to defend even
strong posts at all hazards, which is necessary to derive the greatest benefit
from them. The honor of making a brave defense does not seem to be a sufficient
stimulus when success is very doubtful, and the falling into the enemy's hands
probable: but I doubt not, this will be gradually attained. -- We are now in a
strong post, but not an impregnable one, nay, acknowledged by every man of
judgment to be untenable, unless the enemy will make the attack upon lines when
they can avoid it, and their movements indicate that they mean to do so.

To draw the whole army together in order to arrange the defense proportionate
to the extent of lines and works, would leave the country open for an approach,
and put the fate of this army and its stores on the hazard of making a
successful defense in the city, or the issue of an engagement out of it. On the
other hand, to abandon a city which has been by some deemed defensible, and on
whose works much labor has been bestowed, has a tendency to dispirit the troops
and enfeeble our cause. It has also been considered as the key to the northern
country. But as to that, I am fully of opinion that the establishing of strong
posts at Mount-Washington on the upper part of this island, and on the Jersey
side opposite to it, with the assistance of the obstruction already made (and
which may be improved) in the water, not only the navigation of Hudson's river,
but an easier and better communication may be effectually secured between the
northern and southern states. This, I believe, every one acquainted with the
situation of the country will readily agree to: and it will appear evident to
those who have an opportunity of recurring to good maps.

These and many other consequences, which will be involved in the determination
of our next measure, have given our minds full employ, and led every one to
form a judgment as various objects presented themselves to his view.

The post at Kingsbridge is naturally strong, and is pretty well fortified: the
heights about it are commanding, and might soon be made more so. These are
important objects, and I have attended to them accordingly. I have also removed
from the city all the store and ammunition except what was absolutely necessary
for its defense, and made every other disposition that did not essentially
interfere with the object, -- carefully keeping in view, until it should be
absolutely determined on full consideration, how far the city was to be
defended at all events.

In resolving points of such importance, many circumstances peculiar to our own
army also occur. Being only provided for a summer's campaign, their clothes,
shoes, and blankets, will soon be unfit for the change of weather which we
every day feel. At present we have not tents for more than two-thirds, many of
them old and worn out: but if we had a plentiful supply, the season will not
admit of continuing in them long. -- The case of our sick is also worthy of
much consideration. Their number, by the returns, forms at least one-fourth of
the army. Policy and humanity require they should be made as comfortable as
possible.

With these, and many other circumstances before them, the whole council of
general officers met yesterday in order to adopt some general line of conduct
to be pursued at this important crisis. I intended to have procured their
separate opinions on each point; but time would not admit. I was therefore
obliged to collect their sense more generally than I could have wished. -- All
agreed the town would not be tenable if the enemy resolved to bombard and
cannonade it; but the difficulty attending a removal operated so strongly, that
a course was taken between abandoning it totally and concentring our whole
strength for its defense: nor were some a little influenced in their opinions
to whom the determination of Congress was known, against an evacuation totally,
as they were led to suspect Congress wished it to be maintained at every hazard.

It was concluded to arrange the army under three divisions; -- five thousand
to remain for the defense of the city; -- nine thousand to Kingsbridge and its
dependencies, as well to possess and secure those posts, as to be ready to
attack the enemy who are moving eastward on Long Island, if they should attempt
to land on this side; -- the remainder to occupy the intermediate space, and
support either; -- that the sick should be immediately removed to Orange-town,
and barracks prepared at Kingsbridge with all expedition to cover the troops.

There were some general officers, in whose judgment and opinion much
confidence is to be reposed, that were for a total and immediate removal from
the city; -- urging the great danger of one part of the army being cut off
before the other can support it, the extremities being at least sixteen miles
apart; -- that our army, when collected, is inferior to the enemy; -- that they
can move with their whole force to any point of attack, and consequently must
succeed by weight of numbers, if they have only a part to oppose them; -- that,
by removing from hence, we deprive the enemy of the advantage of their ships,
which will make at least one half of the force to attack the town; -- that we
should keep the enemy at bay, put nothing to the hazard, but at all events keep
the army together, which may be recruited another year; -- that the unspent
stores will also be preserved; and, in this case, the heavy artillery can also
be secured. But they were overruled by a majority, who thought for the present
a part of our force might be kept here, and attempt to maintain the city a
while longer.

I am sensible a retreating army is incircled with difficulties: that the
declining an engagement subjects a general to reproach; and that the common
cause may be affected by the discouragement it may throw over the minds of
many. Nor am I insensible of the contrary effects, if a brilliant stroke could
be made with any probability of success, especially after our loss upon
LongIsland. But, when the fate of America may be at stake on the issue, -- when
the wisdom of cooler moments and experienced men have decided that we should
protract the war, if possible, -- I cannot think it safe or wise to adopt a
different system when the season for action draws so near a close.

That the enemy mean to winter in New York, there can be no doubt: -- that,
with such an armament they can drive us out, is equally clear. -- The Congress
having resolved that it should not be destroyed, nothing seems to remain, but
to determine the time of their taking possession. It is our interest and wish
to prolong it as much as possible, provided the delay does not affect our
future measures.

The militia of Connecticut is reduced, from six thousand, to less than two
thousand, and in a few days will be merely nominal. The arrival of some
Maryland troops, etc. from the flying camp, has in a great degree supplied the
loss of men: but the ammunition they have carried away will be a loss sensibly
felt. The impulse for going home was so irresistible, it answered no purpose to
oppose it. Though I would not discharge, I have been obliged to acquiesce; and
it affords me more melancholy proof, how delusive such dependencies are.

Enclosed I have the honor to transmit a general return, the first I have been
able to procure for some time; also a report of captain Newell from our works
at Horn's hook or Hellgate. Their situation is extremely low, and the Sound so
very narrow, that the enemy have them much within their command.

-- I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. The enclosed information this moment came to hand. -- I am in hopes we
shall hence forth get regular intelligence of the enemy's movements.



New York, September 11, 1776. SIR,
I WAS yesterday honored with your favor of the eighth instant, accompanied by
several resolutions of Congress, to which I shall pay the strictest attention,
and, in the instances required, make them the future rule of my conduct.

The mode of negotiation pursued by lord How I did not approve of: but as
general Sullivan was sent out upon the business, and with a message to
Congress, I could not conceive myself at liberty to interfere in the matter, as
he was in the character of a prisoner, and totally subject to their power and
direction.

The list of prisoners, before omitted through hurry, is now enclosed; though
it will probably have reached Congress before this. -- I shall write by the
first opportunity for major Hawsakse to repair to Philadelphia -- (he is in the
northern army); -- and will also mention the several appointments in
consequence of colonel St. Clair's promotion.

As soon as generals Prescot and M'Donald arrive, I shall take measures to
advise general How of it, that the proposed exchange for general Sullivan and
lord Sterling may be carried into execution.

Since my letter of the eighth, nothing material has occurred, except that the
enemy have possessed themselves of Montezore's-Island, and landed a
considerable number of troops upon it. This island lies in the mouth of
Hearlem-river, which runs out of the Sound into the North-river, and will give
the enemy an easy opportunity of landing either on the low grounds of
Morrisania, if their views are to seize and possess the passes above
Kingsbridge, or on the plains of Haerlem, if they design to intercept and cut
off the communication between our several posts. I am making every disposition
and arrangement that the divided state of our troops will admit of, and which
appear most likely and the best calculated to oppose their attacks; for I
presume there will be several. -- How the event will be, God only knows; but
you may be assured that nothing in my power, circumstanced as I am, shall be
wanting, to effect a favorable and happy issue.

By my letter of the eighth you would perceive that several of the council were
for holding the town, conceiving it practicable for some time. Many of them
now, upon seeing our divided state, have altered their opinion, and allow the
expediency and necessity of concentring our whole force, or drawing it more
together. Convinced of the propriety of this measure, I am ordering our stores
away, except such as may be absolutely necessary to keep as long as our troops
remain; that, if an evacuation of the city becomes inevitable (which certainly
must be the case), there may be as little to remove as possible.

The enclosed packet contains several letters for particular members of
Congress and for some gentlemen in Philadelphia. They came to hand yesterday,
and were brought from France by a captain Levez lately arrived at Bedford in
the Massachusetts state. I must request the favor of you to open the packet,
and to have the letters put in a proper channel of conveyance to the gentlemen
they are addressed to.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, New York, Sept. 12, 1776. SIR,
HIS excellency being called from headquarters today on business of
importance which prevents his writing, I therefore do myself the honor to
inform Congress of what has happened since his letter of yesterday.

Last evening the enemy transported a number of men from Buchanan's to
Montezore's island, and by their several movements, more strongly indicate
their intention to land somewhere about Haerlem or Morrisania, -- most likely,
at both at the same time. This morning one of the ships that have been for some
time in the Sound moved down toward Hell-gate; but, the tide leaving her, she
could not get near enough to bring her guns to bear upon our fortification. If
she means to attack it, it is probable she will warp in the next tide. Their
batteries have kept up a pretty constant fire against ours at that place, but
without any considerable effect. This morning they opened a new one.

I do not recollect any other material occurrence, and shall only add, that I
have the honor to be, etc.

R. H. HARRISON.

New York, September 14, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your favor of the tenth, with the resolution of
Congress which accompanied it, and thank them for the confidence they repose in
my judgment respecting the evacuation of the city. I could wish to maintain it,
because I know it to be of importance; but I am fully convinced that it cannot
be done, and that an attempt for that purpose, if persevered in, might and most
certainly would be attended with consequences the most fatal and alarming in
their nature.

Sensible of this, several of the general officers, since the determination of
the council mentioned in my last, petitioned that a second council might be
called to reconsider the propositions which had been before them upon the
subject. Accordingly I called one on the twelfth, when a large majority not
only determined a removal of the army prudent, but absolutely necessary, --
declaring they were entirely convinced from a full and minute enquiry into our
situation, that it was extremely perilous; and, from every movement of the
enemy, and the intelligence received, their plan of operations was to get in
our rear, and, by cutting off the communication with the main, oblige us to
force a passage through them on the terms they wish, or to become prisoners in
some short time for want of necessary supplies of provision.

We are now taking every method in our power to remove the stores, etc. in
which we find almost insuperable difficulties. They are so great and so
numerous, that I fear we shall not effect the whole before we meet with some
interruption. -- I fully expected that an attack somewhere would have been made
last night. In that I was disappointed; and happy shall I be, if my
apprehensions of one tonight, or in a day or two, are not confirmed by the
event. If it is deferred a little while longer, I flatter myself all will be
got away, and our force be more concentred, and of course more likely to resist
them with success.

Yesterday afternoon, four ships of war, two of forty and two of twenty-eight
guns went up the East-river, passing between Governor's and Long Island, and
anchored about a mile above the city, opposite Mr. Srivansent's, where the Rose
man-of-war was lying before. The design of their going not being certainly
known, gives rise to various conjectures, -- some supposing they are to cover
the landing of a party of the enemy above the city, -- others that they are to
assist in destroying our battery at Horn's-hook, that they may have a free and
un-interrupted navigation in the Sound. It is an object of great importance to
them, and what they are industriously trying to effect by a pretry constant
cannonade and bombardment.

Before I conclude, I would beg leave to mention to Congress, that the pay now
allowed to nurses for their attendance on the sick is by no means adequate to
their services; the consequence of which is, that they are extremely difficult
to procure; in^^ed they are not to be got; and we are under the necessity of
substituting in their place a number of men from the respective regiments,
whose service by that means is entirely lost in the proper line of their duty,
and but little benefit rendered to the sick. The officers I have talked with
upon the subject all agree that they should be allowed a dollar per week, and
that for less they cannot be had.

Our sick are extremely numerous, and we find their removal attended with the
greatest difficulty. It is a matter that employs much of our time and care; and
what makes it more distressing is the want of proper and convenient places for
their reception. -- I fear their sufferings will be great and many. However,
nothing on my part, that humanity or policy can require, shall be wanting to
make them comfortable, so far as the state of things will admit of.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters at col. Roger Morris's house, Sept. 16, 1776. SIR,
ON saturday, about sunset, six more of the enemy's ships, one or two of which
were men-of-war passed between Governor's-Island and Red-hook, and went up the
East-river to the station taken by those mentioned in my last. In half an hour
I received two expresses, -- one from colonel Sergeant at Horn'shook
[Hell-gate] giving an account that the enemy, to the amount of three or four
thousand, had marched to the river, and were embarking for Barns's or
Montezore's-island, where numbers of them were then encamped: -- the other from
general Misslin, that uncommon and formidable movements were discovered among
the enemy; which being confirmed by the scouts I had sent out, I proceeded to
Haerlem, where it was supposed (or at Morrisania opposite to it) the principal
attempt to land would be made. However, nothing remarkable happened that night:
but in the morning they began their operations. Three ships of war came up the
North-river as high as Bloomingdale, which put a total stop to the removal, by
water, of any more of our provision, etc. and about eleven o'clock those in the
East-river began a most severe and heavy cannonade, to scour the grounds, and
cover the landing of their troops between Turtle-bay and the city, where breast
works had been thrown up to oppose them.

As soon as I heard the siring, I rode with all possible dispatch toward the
place of landing, when, to my great surprise and mortification, I found the
troops that had been posted in the lines retreating with the utmost
precipitation, and those ordered to support them (Parsons and Fellows's
brigades) flying in every direction, and in the greatest confusion,
notwithstanding the exertions of the generals to form them. I used every means
in my power to rally and get them into some order: but my attempts were
fruitless and ineffectual; and on the appearance of a small party of the enemy,
not more than sixty or seventy, their disorder increased, and they ran away in
the greatest confusion, without firing a single shot.

Finding that no confidence was to be placed in these brigades, and
apprehending that another party of the enemy might pass over to Haerlem plains
and cut off the retreat to this place, I sent orders to secure the heights in
the best manner with the troops that were stationed on and near them; which
being done, the retreat was effected with but little or no loss of men, though
of a considerable part of our baggage, -- occasioned by this disgraceful and
dastardly conduct, Most of our heavy cannon, and a part of our stores and
provisions which we were about removing, was unavoidably left in the city,
though every means (after it had been determined in council to evacuate the
post) had been used to prevent it.

We are now encamped with the main body of the army on the heights of Haerlem,
where I should hope the enemy would meet with a defeat in case of an attack, if
the generality of our troops would behave with tolerable bravery. But
experience, to my extreme affliction, has convinced me that this is rather to
be wished for than expected. However, I trust that there are many who will act
like men, and show themselves worthy of the blessings of freedom.

I have sent out some reconnoitring parties to gain intelligence, if possible,
of the disposition of the enemy, and shall inform Congress of every material
event by the earliest opportunity. -- I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters at col. R, Morris's house, Sept. 18, 1776. SIR,
AS my letter of the sixteenth contained intelligence of an important nature,
and such as might lead Congress to expect that the evacuation of New York and
retreat to the heights of Haerlem, in the manner they were made, would be
succeeded by some other interesting event, I beg leave to inform them that as
yet nothing has been attempted upon a large and general plan of attack.

About the time of the post's departure with my letter, the enemy appeared in
several large bodies upon the plains about two and a half miles from hence. I
rode down to our advanced posts, to put matters in a proper situation if they
should attempt to come on, When I arrived there I heard a firing, which, I was
informed, was between a party of our rangers under the command of
lieutenant colonel Knolton, and an advanced party of the enemy. Our men came in
and told me that the body of the enemy, who kept themselves concealed,
consisted of about three hundred as near as they could guess, I immediately
ordered three companies of colonels Weedon's regiment from Virginia, under the
command of major Leitch, and colonel Knolton with his rangers composed of
volunteers from different New England regiments, to try to get in their rear,
while a disposition was making as if to attack them in front, and thereby draw
their whole attention that way.

This took effect as I wished on the part of the enemy. On the appearance of
our party in front, they immediately ran down the hill, took possession of some
fences and bushes, and a smart firing began, but at too great a distance to do
much execution on either side. The parties under colonel Knolton and major
Leitch unluckily began their attack too soon, as it was rather in flank than in
rear. -- In a little time major Leitch was brought off wounded, having received
three balls through his side; and, in a short time after, colonel Knolton got a
wound which proved mortal. Their men, however, persevered, and continued the
engagement with the greatest resolution.

Finding that they wanted a support, I advanced part of colonel Griffith's and
colonel Richardsons's Maryland regiments, with some detachments from the
eastern regiments who were nearest the place of action. These troops charged
the enemy with great intrepidity, and drove them from the wood into the plain,
and were pushing them from thence (having silenced their fire in a great
measure) when I judged it prndent to order a retreat, fearing the enemy (as I
have since found was really the case) were sending a large body to support
their party.

Major Leitch, I am in hopes, will recover: but colonel Knolton's fall is much
to be regretted, as that of a brave and good officer. -- We had about forty
wounded: the number of slain is not yet ascertained: but it is very
inconsiderable.

By a sergeant who deserted from the enemy and came in this morning, I find
that their party was greater than I imagined. It consisted of the second
battalion of light infantry, a battalion of the Royal Highlanders, and three
companies of Hessian riflemen, under the command of brigadier-general Leslie.
The deserter reports that their loss in wounded and missing was eighty-nine,
and eight killed. In the latter, his account is too small, as our people
discovered and buried double that number. This affair, I am in hopes, will be
attended with many salutary consequences, as it seems to have greatly inspired
the whole of our troops. -- The sergeant further adds that a considerable body
of men are now encamped from the East to the North river, between the seven and
eight mile stones, under the command of general Clinton. -- General How, he
believes, has his quarters at Mr. Apthorp's house.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I should have wrote to Congress by express before now, had I not
expected the po^t every minute; which, I flatter myself, will be a sufficient
apology for my delaying it. -- The late losses we have sustained in our baggage
and camp necessaries have added much to our distress which was very great
before. I must therefore take the liberty of requesting Congress to have
forwarded as soon as possible such a supply of tents, blankets, camp-kettles,
and other articles, as can be collected. -- We cannot be overstocked.



Headquarters, at col. R. Morris's house, Sept. 19, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you yesterday, nothing material has
occurred. However, it is probable in a little time the enemy will attempt to
force us from hence, as we are informed they are bringing many of their heavy
cannon toward the the heights and the works we have thrown up. They have also
eight or nine ships of war in the North-river, which (it is said) are to
cannonade our right flank when they open their batteries against our front.
Every disposition is making on our part for defense: and Congress may be
assured that I shall do every thing in my power to maintain the post so long as
it shall appear practicable, and conducive to the general good.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Heights of Haerlem, September 20, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE been honored with your favor of the sixteenth with its enclosures. --
To prevent the injury and abuses which would arise from the militia and other
troops carrying away ammunition and continental property, I have published the
substance of the resolves upon the subject in general orders.

Since my letter of yesterday, nothing of importance has cast up. The enemy are
forming a large and extensive encampment in the plains mentioned in my last,
and are busily employed in transporting their cannon and stores from
Long Island. As they advance them this way, we may reasonably expect their
operations will not long be deferred.

Enclosed are sundry letters, etc. to which Congress will be pleased to pay
such regard as they may think them deserving of. The letter from monsieur.....
came open under cover of one to me. -- Those from colonel Hand and colonel Ward
contain a list of vacancies in their regiments, and of the persons they esteem
proper to fill them. The former, I believe, returned no list before: the latter
says he never got any commissions. -- Generals How and Erskine's proclamation
show the measures that have been pursued, to force and seduce the inhabitants
of LongIsland from their allegiance to the states, and to assist in their
destruction.

As the period will soon arrive, when the troops composing the present army (a
few excepted) will be disbanded according to the tenor of their enlistments,
and the most fatal consequences may cause if a suitable and timely provision is
not made in this instance, I take the liberty of suggesting to Congress not
only the expediency but the absolute necessity there is that their earliest
attention should be had to this subject. In respect to the time that troops
should be engaged for, I have frequently given my sentiments; nor have I
omitted to express my opinion of the difficulties that will attend raising
them, nor of the impracticability of effecting it without the allowance of a
large and extraordinary bounty.

It is a melancholy and painful consideration to those who are concerned in the
work and have the command, to be forming armies constantly, and to be left by
troops just when they begin to deserve the name, or perhaps at a moment when an
important blow is expected. This, I am informed, will be the case at
Tyconderoga, with part of the troops there, unless some system is immediately
come into, by which they can be induced to stay. General Schuyler tells me in a
letter received yesterday, that De Haas's, Maxwell's, and Wind's Regiments
stand engaged only till the beginning of next month, and that the men, he is
fearful, will not remain longer than the time of their enlistments.

I would also beg leave to mention to Congress, that the season is fast
approaching when clothes of every kind will be wanted for the army. Their
distress is already great, and will be increased as the weather becomes more
severe. Our situation is now bad, but it is much better than that of the
militia that are coming to join us from the states of the Massachusetts Bay and
Connecticut, in consequence of the requisition of Congress. They, I am
informed, have not a single tent, or a necessary of any kind; nor can I
conceive how it will be possible to support them. These circumstances are
extremely alarming, and oblige me to wish Congress to have all the tents,
clothing of every kind, and camp necessaries, provided and forwarded, that are
to be procured. These eastern reinforcements have not a single necessary, not a
pan or a kettle, -- in which we are now greatly deficient. -- It is with
reluctance that I trouble Congress with these matters: but to whom can I resort
for relief unless to them? The necessity therefore, which urges the
application, will excuse it, I am persuaded.

I have not been able to transmit Congress a general return of the army this
week, owing to the peculiar situation of our affairs, and the great shifting
and changing among the troops. As soon as I can procure one, a copy shall be
forwarded to Congress.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. -- September 21, 1776. -- Things with us remain in the situation they
were yesterday.



Headquarters, Haerlem Heights, Sept. 22, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE nothing in particular to communicate to Congress respecting the
situation of our affairs: it is much the same as when I had the honor of
addressing you last.

On friday night, about eleven or twelve o'clock, a fire broke out in the city
of New York, near the new or St. Paul's church, as it is said, which continued
to burn pretty rapidly till after sunrise the next morning. I have not been
informed how the accident happened, nor received any certain account of the
damage. Report says many of the houses between Broadway and the river were
consumed.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Haerlem Heights, Sept. 24, 1776. SIR,
THE post being about to depart, I have only time to add that no event of
importance has taken place on this side Hudson'sriver since my last of the
twenty-second instant.

The enclosed letter, received last night from general Green who now commands
in the Jerseys, will give Congress all the information I have respecting the
evacuation of Paulus-Hook and the landing of the enemy to possess it.

I this minute obtained a copy of the general return of our force, the first I
have been able to procure for some time past, which I do myself the honor of
transmitting for the satisfaction of Congress.

I am, sir, with the greatest respect, etc. G. W.
P. S. The thirteen militia regiments from Connecticut being reduced to little
more than seven hundred men rank and file fit for duty, I have thought proper
to discharge the whole, to save the states the immense charge that would arise
for officers' pay. There are many militia, too, that have just come in, and on
their way from that state, none of whom are provided with a tent, or a single
camp utensil. This distresses me beyond measure.



Colonel Morris's on the heights of Haerlem, Sept. 24, 1776. SIR,
FROM the hours alloted to sleep I will borrow a few moments to convey my
thoughts on sundry important matters to Congress. I shall offer them with the
sincerity which ought to characterize a man of candor, and with the freedom
which may be used in giving useful information without incurring the imputation
of presumption.

We are now, as it were, upon the eve of another dissolution of our army. The
remembrance of the difficulties which happened upon the occasion last year, --
the consequences which might have followed the change if proper advantages had
been taken by the enemy, -- added to a knowledge of the present temper and
situation of the troops, -- reflect but a very gloomy prospect upon the
appearances of things now, and satisfy me beyond the possibility of doubt,
that, unless some speedy and effectual measures are adopted by Congress, our
cause will be lost.

It is in vain to expect that any or more than a trifling part of this army
will again engage in the service on the encouragement offered by Congress. When
men find that their townsmen and companions are receiving twenty, thirty, and
more dollars, for a few months' service (which is truly the case), it cannot be
expected, without using compulsion: and to force them into the service would
answer no valuable purpose. When men are irritated, and the passions inflamed,
they fly hastily and cheerfully to arms: but after the first emotions are over
* * *, a soldier, reasoned with upon the goodness of the cause he is engaged in
and the inestimable rights he is contending for, hears you with patience, and
acknowledges the truth of your observations, but adds that it is of no more
importance to him than others. The officer makes you the same reply, with this
further remark, that his pay will not support him, and he cannot ruin himself
and family to serve his country, when every member of the community is equally
interested, and benefitted by his labors. * * *

It becomes evidently clear then, that, as this contest is not likely to be the
work of a day, as the war must be carried on systematically, -- and to do it
you must have good officers, -- there are, in my judgment, no other possible
means to obtain them but by establishing your army upon a permanent footing,
and giving your officers good pay. This will induce gentlemen and men of
character to engage: and till the bulk of your officers are composed of such
persons as are actuated by principles of honor and a spirit of enterprise, you
have little to expect from them. They ought to have such allowances as will
enable them to live like and support the character of gentleman. * * * Besides
something is due to a man who puts his life in [ your] hands, hazards his
health, and forsakes the sweets of domestic enjoyment. -- Why a captain in the
continental service should receive no more than five shillings currency per day
for performing the same duties that an officer of the same rank in the British
service receives ten shillings sterling for, I never could conceive, especially
when the latter is provided with every necessary he requires upon the best
terms, and the former can scarce procure them at any rate. There is nothing
that gives a man consequence and renders him fit for command, like a support
that renders him independent of every body but the state he serves.

With respect to the men, nothing but a good bounty can obtain them upon a
permanent establishment: and for no shorter time than the continuance of the
war, ought they to be engaged; as facts incontestibly prove that the difficulty
and cost of enlistments increase with time. -- When the army was first raised
at Cambridge, I am persuaded the men might have been got, without a bounty for
the war. After this, they began to see that the contest was not likely to end
so speedily as was imagined, and to feel their consequence by remarking, that,
to get in the militia in the course of the last year, many towns were induced
to give them a bounty.

Foreseeing the evils resulting from this, and the destructive consequences
which unavoidably would follow short enlistments, I took the liberty in a long
letter (date not now recollected, as my letter-book is not here) to recommend
the enlistments for and during the war, assigning such reasons for it as
experience has since convinced me were well founded. At that time, twenty
dollars would, I am persuaded, have engaged the men for this term. But it would
not do to look back: and, if the present opportunity is slipped, I am persuaded
that twelve months more will increase our difficulties fourfold. I shall
therefore take the freedom of giving it as my opinion, that a good bounty be
immediately offered, aided by the proffer of at least a hundred or a hundred
and fifty acres of land, and a suit of clothes and blanket to each
non-commissioned officer and soldier; as I have good athority for saying, that,
however high the men's pay may appear, it is barely sufficient, in the present
scarcity and dearness of all kinds of goods, to keep them in clothes, much less
afford support to their families.

If this encouragement then is given to the men, and such pay allowed the
officers as will induce gentlemen of character and liberal sentiments to
engage, and proper care and precaution used in the nomination (having more
regard to the characters of persons than the number of men they can enlist), we
should in a little time have an army able to cope with any that can be opposed
to it, as there are excellent materials to form one out of. But while the only
merit an officer possesses is his ability to raise men, while those men
consider and treat him as an equal, (and in the character of an officer) regard
him no more than a broom-stick, being mixed together as one common herd, -- no
order nor discipline can prevail; nor will the officer ever meet with that
respect which is essentially necessary to due subordination.

To place any dependence upon a militia is assuredly resting upon a broken
staff, -- men just dragged from the tender scenes of domestic life, --
unaccustomed to the din of arms, -- totally unacquainted with every kind of
military skill; which being followed by a want of confidence in themselves,
when opposed to troops regularly trained, disciplined, and appointed, superior
in knowledge and superior in arms, makes them timid and ready to fly from their
own shadows. Besides, the sudden change in their manner of living (particularly
in the lodging) brings on sickness in many, impatience in all, and such an
unconquerable desire of returning to their respective homes, that it not only
produces shameful and scandalous desertions among themselves, but infuses the
like spirit into others.

Again, men accustomed to unbounded freedom and no control, cannot brook the
restraint which is indispensably necessary to the good order and government of
an army; without which, licentiousness and every kind of disorder triumphantly
reign. -- To bring men to a proper degree of subordination is not the work of a
day, a month, or even a year: and, unhappily for us and the cause we are
engaged in, the little discipline I have been laboring to establish in the army
under my immediate command is in a manner done away by having such a mixture of
troops as have been called together within these few months.

Relaxed and unfit as our rules and regulations of war are for the government
of an army, the militia (those properly so called; for of these we have two
sorts, the six-months-men and those sent in as a temporary aid) do not think
themselves subject to them, and therefore take liberties which the soldier is
punished for. This creates jealousy: jealousy begets dissatisfaction; and these
by degrees ripen into mutiny, keeping the whole army in a confused and
disordered state, -- rendering the time of those who wish to see regularity and
good order prevail, more unhappy than words can describe. Besides this, such
repeated changes take place, that all arrangement is set at naught, and the
constant fluctuation of things deranges every plan as fast as adopted.

These, sir, Congress may be assured, are but a small part of the
inconveniences which might be enumerated, and attributed to militia: but there
is one that merits particular attention, and that is the expense. Certain I am,
that it would be cheaper to keep fifty or a hundred thousand in constant pay,
than to depend upon half the number and supply the other half occasionally by
militia. The time the latter are in pay before and after they are in camp,
assembling and marching -- The waste of ammunition, the consumption of stores,
which in spite of every resolution or requisition of Congress, they must be
furnished with, or sent home, -- added to other incidental expenses consequent
upon their coming and conduct in camp, -- surpasses all idea, and destroys
every kind of regularity and economy which you could establish among fixed and
settled troops, and will, in my opinion prove (if the scheme is adhered to) the
ruin of our cause.

The jealousies of a standing army, and the evils to be apprehended from one,
are remote, and, in my judgment, situated and circumstanced as we are, not at
all to be dreaded: but the consequence of wanting one, according to my ideas
formed from the present view of things, is certain and inevitable ruin. For, if
I was called upon to declare upon oath, whether the militia have been most
serviceable or hurtful upon the whole, I should subscribe to the latter. I do
not mean by this, however, to arraign the conduct of Congress: in so doing I
shall equally condemn my own measures, if I did not my judgment: but
experience, which is the best criterion to work by, so fully, clearly and
decisively reprobates the practice of trusting to militia, that no man who
regards order, regularity and economy, or who has any regard for his own honor,
character, or peace of mind, will risk them upon this issue. * * *

An army formed of good officers moves like clock-work; but there is no
situation upon earth less enviable nor more distressing than that person's who
is at the head of troops who are regardless of order and discipline, and who
are unprovided with almost every necessary. In a word the difficulties which
have for ever surrounded me since I have been in the service, and kept my mind
constantly upon the stretch, -- the wounds which my feelings (as an officer)
have received by a thousand things which have happened contrary to my
expectation and wishes, * * * -- added to a consciousness of my inability to
govern an army composed of such discordant parts, and under such a variety of
intricate and perplexing circumstances, -- induce not only a belief, but a
thorough conviction in my mind, that it will be impossible (unless there is a
thorough change in our military system) for me to conduct matters in such a
manner as to give satisfaction to the public, which is all the recompense I aim
at, or even wished for.

Before I conclude, I must apoligise for the liberties taken in this letter,
and for the blots and scratchings therein, not having time to give it more
correctly. -- With truth I can add, that, with every sentiment of respect and
esteem, I am yours and the Congress's most obedient, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, Haerlem Heights, September 25, 1776. SIR,
HAVING wrote you fully on sundry important subjects this morning, as you will
perceive by the letter which accompanies this, I mean principally now to
enclose a copy of a letter received from general How on sunday morning, with
the lists of the prisoners in his hands, -- of those in our possession
belonging to the army immediately under his command, -- and of my answer, which
were omitted to be put in the other. His letter will discover to congress his
refusal to exchange lord Sterling for Mr. M'Donald, considering the latter only
as a major. They will please to determine how he is to be ranked in future.

The number of prisoners according to these returns is greater than what we
expected. However, I am inclined to believe, that, among those in the list from
Long Island, are several militia of general Woodhull's party, who were never
arranged in this army. -- As to those taken on the fifteenth, they greatly
exceed the number that I supposed fell into their hands in the retreat from the
city. At the time that I transmitted an account of that affair, I had not
obtained returns, and took the matter upon the officers' reports. They are
difficult to get with certainty at any time. -- In the skirmish of monday
se'nnight, they could have taken but very few.

Before I conclude, I shall take occasion to mention that those returns made
with such precision, and the difficulty that will attend the proposed exchange
on account of the dispersed and scattered state of the prisoners in our hands,
will clearly evince the necessity of appointing commissaries and proper persons
to superintend and conduct in such instances. This I took the liberty of urging
more than once, as well on account of the propriety of the measure and the
saving that would have resulted from it, as that the prisoners might be treated
with humanity, and have their wants particularly attended to.

I would also observe, (as I esteem it my duty) that this army is in want of
almost every necessary, -- tents, camp kettles, blankets, and clothes of all
kinds. But what is to be done with respect to the two last articles, I know
not, as the term of enlistment will be nearly expired by the time they can be
provided. This may be exhibited as a further proof of the disadvantages
attending the levying of an army upon such a footing as never to know how to
keep them without injuring the public or incommoding the men. -- I have
directed the colonel or commanding officer of each corpse to use his endeavors
to procure such clothing as is absolutely necessary: but at the same time I
confess, that I do not know how they are to be got.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Heights of Haerlem, September 27, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE nothing in particular to communicate to Congress by this day's post, as
our situation is the same as when I last wrote.

We are now sitting upon the business the committee came upon, which, it is
probable, will be finished this evening. The result they will duly report upon
their return.

I received yesterday the enclosed declaration by a gentleman from
Elizabeth-Town, who told me many copies were found in the possession of the
soldiers from Canada, that were landed there a day or two ago by general Howe's
permission. I shall not comment upon it. It seems to be founded on the plan
that has been artfully pursued for some time past.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
The account of the troops, etc. in Canada, comes from a person who is among
the prisoners sent from Canada. It was anonymous, nor do I know the
intelligencer. According to him, the enemy in that quarter are stronger than we
supposed, and their naval force much greater on the lakes than we had any idea
of. I trust he has taken the matter up on the enemy's report.



Headquarters, Heights of Haerlem, September 28, 1776. SIR,
BEING about to cross the North river this morning in order to view the post
opposite, and the grounds between that and Paulus Hook, I shall not add much
more than that I have been honored with your favor of the twenty-fourth and its
several enclosures; and that since my letter of yesterday, no important event
has taken place.

As colonel Hugh Stephenson, of the rifle regiment ordered lately to be raised,
is dead, according to the information I have received, I would beg leave to
recommend to the particular notice of Congress captain Daniel Morgan just
returned among the prisoners from Canada, as a fit and proper person to succeed
to the vacancy occasioned by his death. Ths present field-officers of the
regiment cannot claim any right in preference to him, because he ranked above
them, and as a captain, when he first entered the service. His conduct as an
officer, on the expedition with general Arnold last fall, -- his intrepid
behavior in the assault upon Quebec, when the brave Montgomery fell, -- the
inflexible attachment he professed to our cause during his imprisonment, and
which he perseveres in, -- added to these, his residence in the place colonel
Stephenson came from, and his interest and influence in the same circle, and
with such men as are to compose such a regiment, -- all, in my opinion, entitle
him to the favor of Congress, and lead me to believe that in his promotion the
states will gain a good and valuable officer for the sort of troops he is
particularly recommended to command.

* * * -- I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Heights of Haerlem, September 30, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you last, nothing of importance has
transpired; though, from some movements yesterday on the part of the enemy, it
would seem as if something was intended.

The enclosed memorial, from lieutenant colonel Shephard of the fourth
regiment, I beg leave to submit to the consideration of Congress, and shall
only add, that I could wish they would promote him to the command of the
regiment and send him a commission, being a good and valuable officer, and
especially as the vacancy is of a pretty long standing, and I have not had (nor
has he) any intelligence from Colonel Learned himself (who had the command, and
who obtained a discharge on account of his indisposition), of his design to
return. -- I have also enclosed a letter from captain Ballard, which Congress
will please to determine on, the subject being new and not within my authority.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. A commission was sent for colonel Learned, which is now in my hands,
having received no application, or heard from him since it came.



Headquarters, Haerlem Heights, Oct. 2, 1776. SIR,
I DO myself the honor of transmitting to you the enclosed letter from
lieutenant colonel Livingston, with sundry copies of general Delancey's orders,
which discover the measures the enemy are pursuing on Long Island for raising
recruits and obtaining supplies of provisions. In consequence of the
intelligence they contain, and authentic advices through other channels
respecting these matters, I have sent brigadier-general George Clinton to meet
general Lincoln who has got as far as Fairfield with part of the troops lately
ordered by the Massachusetts assembly, to concert with him and others an
expedition across the Sound with those troops, three companies under colonel
Livingston, and such further aid as governor Trumbull can afford, in order to
prevent if possible their effecting those important objects, and to assist the
inhabiants in the removal of their stock, grain, etc. or in destroying them,
that the enemy may not derive any advantage or benefit from them.

The recruiting scheme they are prosecuting with uncommon industry; nor is it
confined to Long Island alone. Having just now received a letter from the
committee of West-Chester county, advising that there are several companies of
men in that and Duchess county preparing to go off and join the king's army, I
have given directions to our guard-boats and the centries at our works at
Mount-Washington to keep a strict look-out in case they attempt to come down
the North-river; also to general Heath at Kingsbridge, that the utmost
vigilance may be observed by the regiments and troops stationed above there and
down toward the East-river, that they may intercept them, should they take
that rout with a view of crossing to Long Island. -- I will use every
precaution in my power, to prevent those parricides from accomplishing their
designs; but I have but little hopes of success, as it will be no difficult
matter for them to procure a passage over some part or other of the Sound.

I have been applied to lately by colonel Weedon of Virginia, for permission to
recruit the deficiency of men in his regiment out of the troops composing the
flying camp, -- informing me at the same time that some of those from Maryland
had offered to engage. Colonel Hand of the rifle battalion made a similar
application today. If the enlistments could be made, they would have this good
consequence, -- the securing of so many in the service. However, as the measure
might occasion some uneasiness in their own corpse, and be considered as a
hardship by the states to which they belong, and the means of their furnishing
more than the quota exacted from them in the general arrangement, and would
make it more difficult for them to complete their own levies, I did not
conceive myself at liberty to authorize it without submitting the propriety of
it to the consideration of Congress, and obtaining their opinion whether it
should be allowed or not.

I have enclosed a list of warrants granted from the second to the thirteenth
ultimo inclusive, the only return of that sort that I have been able to make
since the resolution for that purpose, -- owing to the unsettled state of our
affairs, and my having sent my papers away. You will also receive sundry
letters, etc. from general Schuyler, which came under cover to me, and which I
have the honor of forwarding.

By a letter just received from the committee of safety of the state of
New Hampshire, I find a thousand of their militia were about to march on the
twenty-fourth ultimo to reinforce this army in consequence of the requisition
of Congress. Previous to their march, general Ward writes me he was obliged to
furnish them with five hundred pounds of powder, and a thousand pounds of
musket-ball; and I have little reason to expect that they are better provided
with other articles than they were with ammunition. In such case they will only
add to our present distress, which is already far too great, and become
disgusted with the service, though the time they are engaged for is only till
the first of December. -- This will injure their enlisting for a longer term if
not wholly prevent it.

By three deserters who came from the Galatea man-of-war about five days ago,
we are informed that several transports had sailed, before they left her, from
England, as it was generally reported, in order to return with a supply of
provisions, of which they say there is a want. -- General Mercer, in a letter,
informed me that general Thompson said he had heard they were going to dismiss
about a hundred of the ships from the service. -- I am also advised by a letter
from Mr. Derby at Boston, of the twenty-sixth ultimo, that, the day before, a
transport snow had been taken and sent into Piscataway by a privateer, in her
passage from New York to the West Indies. She sailed with five more under the
convoy of a man-of-war in order to bring from thence the troops that are there,
to join general How. -- They were all victualled for four months. -- From this
intelligence it would seem as if they did not apprehend any thing to be
meditated against them by the court of France.

October 3. -- I have nothing in particular to communicate respecting our
situation, it being much the same as when I wrote last. -- We had an alarm this
morning a little before four o'clock, from some of our out-centries, who
reported that a large body of the enemy was advancing toward our lines. --
This put us in motion: however, it turned out entirely premature; or at least
we saw nothing of them.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Haerlem, October 4, 1776. SIR,
BEFORE I knew of the late resolutions of Congress which you did me the honor
to enclose in your letter of the twenty-fourth, and before I was favored with
the visit of your committee, I took the liberty of giving you my sentiments on
several points which seemed to be of importance. -- I have no doubt but that
the committee will make such report of the state and condition of the army, as
will induce Congress to believe that nothing but the most vigorous exertions
can put matters upon such a footing as to give this continent a fair prospect
of success. Give me leave to say, sir -- I say it with due deference and
respect (and my knowledge of the facts, added to the importance of the cause,
and the stake I hold in it, must justify the freedom, -- that your affairs are
in a more unpromising way than you seem to apprehend.

Your army, as I mentioned in my last, is on the eve of its political
dissolution. True it is, you have voted a larger one in lieu of it; but the
season is late; and there is a material difference between voting of battalions
and raising of men. In the latter there are more difficulties than Congress are
aware of; which makes it my duty (as I have been informed of the prevailing
sentiments of this army) to inform them, that, unless the pay of the officers,
especially that of the field officers is raised, the chief part of those that
are worth retaining will leave the service at the expiration of the present
term, as the soldiers will also, if some greater encourrgement is not offered
them than twenty dollars and a hundred acres of land.

Nothing less, in my opinion, than a suit of clothes annually given to each
non-commissioned officer and soldier, in addition to the pay and bounty, will
avail; and I question whether that will do, as the enemy (from the information
of one John Mash, who, with six others, was taken by our guards) are giving ten
pounds bounty for recruits, and have got a battalion under major Rogers nearly
completed upon Long Island.

Nor will less pay, according to my judgment, than I have taken the liberty of
mentioning in the enclosed estimate, retain such officers as we could wish to
have continued. The difference per month in each battalion will amount to
better than a hundred pounds. To this may be added the pay of the
staffofficers; for it is presumable they will not require an augmentation: but,
being few in number, the sum will not be greatly increased by them, and
consequently is a matter of no great moment: but it is a matter of no small
importance to make the several officers desirable. When the pay and
establishment of an officer once becomes objects of interested attention, the
sloth, negligence, and even disobedience of orders, which at this time but too
generally prevail, will be purged off. But while the service is viewed with
indifference, -- while the officer conceives that he is rather conferring than
receiving an obligation, -- there will be a total relaxation of all order and
discipline, and every thing will move heavily on, to the great detriment of the
service, and inexpressible trouble and vexation of the general.

The critical situation of our affairs at this time will justify my saying that
no time is to be lost in making of fruitless experiments. An unavailing trial
of a month to get an army upon the terms proposed may render it impracticable
to do it at all, and prove fatal to our cause; as I am not sure whether any
rubs in the way of our enlistments, or unfavorable turn in our affairs, may not
prove the means of the enemy recruiting men faster than we do. To this may be
added the inextricable difficulty of forming one corpse out of another, and
arranging matters with any degree of order, in the face of an enemy who are
watching for advantages.

At Cambridge, last year, where the officers, (and more than a sufficiency of
them) were all upon the spot, we found it a work of such extreme difficulty to
know their sentiments (each having some terms to propose) that I despaired once
of getting the arrangements completed: and I do suppose, that at least a
hundred alterations took place before matters were finally adjusted. What must
it be then under the present regulation, where the officer is to negotiate this
matter with the state he comes from, distant perhaps, two or three hundred
miles? -- some of whom, without leave or license from me, set out to make
personal application, the moment the resolve got to their hands. What kind of
officers these are I leave Congress to judge.

If an officer of reputation (for none other should be applied to) is asked to
stay, what answer can he give, but in the first place, that he does not know
whether it is at his option to do so, no provision being made in the resolution
of Congress, even recommendatory of this measure; consequently, that it rests
with the state he comes from (surrounded perhaps with a variety of
applications, and influenced probably by local attachments) to determine
whether he can be provided for or not? In the next place, if he is an officer
of merit, and knows that the state he comes from is to furnish more battalions
than it at present has in the service, he will scarcely, after two years'
faithful services, think of continuing in the rank he now bears, when new
creations are to be made, and men appointed to offices (no wise superior in
merit, and ignorant perhaps, of service) over his head. A committee, sent to
the army from each state, may upon the spot fix things with a degree of
propriety and certainty, and is the only method I can see of bringing matters
to a decision with respect to the officers of the army. But what can be done in
the mean while toward the arrangment in the country, I know not. In the one
case you run the hazard of loosing your officers; in the other, of encountering
delay, unless some method could be devised of forwarding both at the same
instant.

Upon the present plan, I plainly foresee an intervention of time between the
old and new army, which must be filled up with militia (if to be had), with
whom no man who has any regard for his own reputation can undertake to be
answerable for consequences. I shall also be mistaken in my conjectures, if we
do not lose the most valuable officers in this army, under the present mode of
appointing them: consequently, if we have an army at all, it will be composed
of materials not only entirely raw, but, (if uncommon pains are not taken)
entirely unfit; and I see such a distrust and jealousy of military power, that
the commander-in-chief has not an opportunity, even by recommendation, to give
the least assurances of reward for the most essential services. In a word, such
a cloud of perplexing circumstances appear before me, without one flattering
hope, that I am thoroughly convinced, unless the most vigorous and decisive
exertions are immediately adopted to remedy these evils, that the certain and
absolute loss of our liberties will be the inevitable consequence; as one
unhappy stroke will throw a powerful weight into the scale against us, enabling
general How to recruit his army as fast as we shall ours, -- numbers being
disposed [ to join him], and many actually doing so already. Some of the most
probable remedies, and such as experience has brought to my more intimate
knowlede, I have taken the liberty to point out: the rest I beg leave to submit
to the consideration of Congress.

I ask pardon for taking up so much of their time with my opinions. But I
should betray that trust which they and my country have reposed in me, were I
to be silent upon a matter so extremely interesting.

With the most perfect esteem, I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Haerlem Heights, Oct. 5, 1776. SIR,
I WAS last night honored with your favor of the second, with sundry
resolutions of Congress. * * *

In respect to the exchange of prisoners, I fear it will be a work of great
difficulty, owing to their dispersed and scattered situation throughout the
states. In order to effect it, I have wrote to the eastern governments to have
them collected, and to transmit me an account of their number, distinguishing
the names and ranks of the field and commissioned officers, and the corpse they
belong to. I have also wrote to governor Livingston of the Jerseys upon the
subject, and must take the liberty of requesting congress to give directions
that a similar return may be made of those in Pennsylvania and Maryland, and
for their being brought to Brunswick, that they may be ready to be exchanged
for an equal number of those of the same rank.

I observe, by the resolve of the twenty-sixth ultimo, that the exchange is
particularly directed to be made of the officers and soldiers taken on
Long Island. But should not that follow the exchange of those officers and men
who have lately returned from Quebec, whose imprisonment has been much longer,
and whose service has not been less severe, and, in many instances, conducted
with great intrepidity? I have had many applications since their arrival, by
which they claim a kind of preference as far as their number and the
circumstance of their rank will allow, and which I thought it my duty to
mention, that I may obtain some direction upon the subject.

You will observe by a paragraph of a letter received yesterday from general
How, a copy of which you have at length, that the nonperformance of the
agreement between captain Forster and general Arnold, by which the latter
stipulated for the return of an equal number of officers and prisoners in our
hands for those delivered him, is considered in an unfavorable light, and
entirely imputed to me, as having the chief command of the armies of the
states, and a controling power over general Arnold. -- The pointed manner in
which Mr. How is pleased to express himself could not personally effect me,
supposing there had been no good grounds for the treaty not being ratified,
having been nothing more than an instrument conveying to him the resolutions
formed upon the subject. * * *

However I would beg leave to observe, from the letters from the hostages, --
from what has been reported by others respecting captain Forster's having used
his endeavors to restrain the savages from exercising their wonted barbarities,
though in some instances they did, -- his purchasing some of the prisoners for
a pretty considerable premium, -- but, above all, from the delicate nature of
such treaties, and because the non-observance of them must damp the spirits of
the officers who make them, and add affliction to the misfortunes of those whom
necessity and the nature of the case force into captivity to give them a
sanction by a long and irksome confinement, -- for these reasons and many more
that will readily occur, I could wish Congress to reconsider the matter, and to
carry it into execution.

I am sensible the wrong was originally in their employing savages, and that
whatever cruelties were committed by them should be esteemed their own acts:
yet perhaps, in point of policy, it may not be improper to overlook these
infractions on their part, and to pursue that mode which will be the most
likely to render the hardships incident to war most tolerable, and the greatest
benefits to the state.

I have ventured to say thus much on the subject, from a regard to the service,
and because such gentlemen of the army as I have heard mention it, seem to wish
the treaty had been ratified rather than disallowed.

Enclosed is a list of vacancies in the third regiment of Virginia troops, in
part occasioned by the death of major Leitch who died of his wounds on tuesday
morning, -- and of the gentlemen who stand next in regimental order, and who
are recommended to succeed to them. -- You will observe that captain John
Fitzgerald is said to be appointed to the duty of major. This I have done in
order, being the oldest captain in the regiment, and, I believe, an officer of
unexceptionable merit, and as it was highly necessary at this time to have the
corpse as well and fully officered as possible. There is also a vacancy in the
first continental battalion, by the promotion of lieutenant Clarke to a
majority in the flying camp, to which colonel Hand has recommended William
Patton to succeed, as you will perceive by his letter enclosed.

I have taken the liberty to transmit a plan for establishing a corpse of
engineers, artificers, etc. sketched out by colonel Putnam, and which is
proposed for the consideration of Congress. How far they may incline to adopt
it, or whether they may ch^^^ to proceed upon such an extensive scale, they
will be pleased to determine. However, I conceive it a matter well worthy of
their consideration, being convinced from experience, and from the reasons
suggested by colonel Putnam who has acted with great diligence and reputation
in the business, that some establishment of the sort is highly necessary, and
will be productive of the most beneficial consequences.

If the proposition is approved by Congress, I am informed by good authority
that there is a gentleman in Virginia, in the colony service, John Stadler,
esquire, a native of Germany, whose abilities in this way are by no means
inconsiderable. I am told he was an engineer in the army under general Stanwix,
and is reputed to be of skill and ingenuity in the profession. In this capacity
I do not know him myself, but am intimately acquainted with him in his private
character, as a man of understanding and of good behavior. I would submit his
merit to the inquiry of Congress; and if he should answer the report I have had
of him, I make no doubt but he will be suitably provided for.

The convention of this state have lately seized and had appraised two new
ships, valued at six thousand two hundred and twenty-nine pounds York currency,
which they have sent down for the purpose of sinking, and obstructing the
channel opposite Mount-Washington. The price being high, and the opinions
various as to the necessity of the measure, some conceiving the obstruction
nearly sufficient already, and others that they would render it secure, I would
wish to have the direction of Congress upon the subject by the earliest
opportunity, thinking myself, that, if the enemy should attempt to come up,
they should be used, sooner than to hazard their passing. -- I must be governed
by circumstances, yet hope for their sentiments before any thing is necessary
to be done.

Sundry disputes having arisen of late between officers of different regiments
and of the same rank, respecting the right of succession to such vacancies as
happen from death or other causes, -- some suggestion that it should be in a
colonial line and governed by the priority of their commissions, -- others,
that it should be regimentally, -- and there being an instance now before me,
between the officers of the Virginia regiments, occasioned by the death of
major Leitch, -- it has become absolutely necessary that Congress should
determine the mode by which promotions are to be regulated, -- whether
colonially and by priority of commissions, or regimentally, reserving a right
out of the general rule they adopt, to reward for particular merit, or of
withholding from office such as may not be worthy to succeed.

I have only proposed two modes for their consideration, being satisfied that
promotions through the line (as they are called) can never take place without
producing discord, jealousy, distrust, and the most fatal consequences. In some
of my letters upon the subject of promotions, and one which I had the honor of
addressing to the board of war on the thirtieth ultimo, I advised that the mode
should be rather practiced than resolved: but I am fully convinced now of the
necessity there is of settling it in one of the two ways I have taken the
liberty to point out, and under the restrictions I have mentioned; or the
disputes and applications will be endless, and attended with great
inconveniences.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Heights of Haerlem, October 7, 1776. SIR,
I DO myself the honor of transmitting to you a copy of a letter from the comte
D'Emery, governor-general of the French part of St. Domingo, which I received
yesterday, and also my answer, which I have enclosed and left open for the
consideration of Congress, wishing that it may be sealed if they approve of the
sieur De Chambeau's releasement, which I think may be attended with many
valuable consequences. If Congress concur in sentiment with me, they will be
pleased to give direction for his passage by the first opportunity to the
French islands: if they do not, I shall be obliged by your returning my letter.

I have also the pleasure of enclosing a copy of a letter from monsieur P.
Pennel, which came to hand last night, and which contains intelligence of an
agreeable and interesting nature, for which I beg leave to refer you to the
copy. The polite manner in which monsieur Pennel has requested to be one of my
aids-de-camp demands my acknowledgments. As the appointment will not be
attended with any expense, and will show a proper regard for his complaisance
and the attachment he is pleased to express for the service of the American
states, I shall take the liberty of complying with his requisition, and
transmit him a brevet commission, provided the fame shall be agreeable to
Congress. -- Their sentiments upon this subject you will be kind enough to
favor me with by the first opportunity. The enclosed letter for the sieur De
Chambeau you will please to forward to him (if he is to be enlarged) after
closing it.

Before I conclude, I must take the liberty to observe that I am under no small
difficulties on account of the French gentlemen that are here in consequence of
the commissions they have received, -- having no means to employ them, or to
afford them an opportunity of rendering that service they themselves wish to
give, or which perhaps is expected by the public. Their want of our language is
an objection to their being joined to any of the regiments here at this time,
were there vacancies, and not other obstacles. These considerations induce me
to wish that Congress would adopt and point out some particular mode to be
observed respecting them. What it should be, they will be best able to
determine. But to me it appears that their being here now can be attended with
no valuable consequences, and that, as the power of appointing officers for the
new army is vested in the conventions, etc. of the several states, it will be
necessary for Congress to direct them to be provided for in the regiments to be
raised, according to the ranks they would wish them to bear -- (or I am
convinced they will never be taken in, let their merit be what it may); or to
form them into a distinct corpse which may be increased in time. They seem to be
genteel, sensible men; and I have no doubt of their making good officers as
soon as they can learn as much of our language as to make themselves well
understood: but, unless Congress interfere by their particular direction to the
states, they will never be incorporated in any of the regiments to be raised;
and, without they are, they will be entirely at a loss, and in the most irksome
situation, for something to do, as they now are. -- I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, Haerlem Heights, October 8, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of writing you yesterday, I have been favored with a
letter from the honorable council of Massachusetts Bay, covering one from
Richard Derby, esquire, a copy of which is herewith transmitted, as it contains
intelligence of an important and interesting nature.

As an exchange of prisoners is about to take place, I am induced, from a
question stated in a letter I received from governor Trumbull this morning, to
ask the opinion of Congress in what manner the states that have had the care of
them are to be reimbursed the expenses incurred on their account. My want of
information in this instance, or whether any account is to be sent in with the
prisoners, would not allow me to give him an answer, as nothing that I
recollect has ever been said upon the subject. -- He also mentions another
matter, viz. whether such privates as are mechanics, and others who may desire
to remain with us, should be obliged to return. -- In respect to the latter, I
conceive there can be no doubt of our being under a necessity of returning the
whole, a proposition having been made on our part for a general exchange, and
that agreed to; besides, the balance of prisoners is greatly against us; and I
am informed it was particularly stipulated by general Montgomery, that all
those that were taken in Canada should be exchanged whenever a cartel was
settled for the purpose.

Under these circumstances, I should suppose the several committees having the
care of them should be instructed to make the most exact returns of the whole,
however willing a part should be to continue with us. At the same time I should
think it not improper to inform them of the reasons leading to the measure, and
that they should be invited to escape afterward, which, in all probability,
they may effect without much difficulty if they are attached to us, extending
their influence to many more, and bringing them away also.

The situation of our affairs and the present establishment of the army
requiring our most vigorous exertions to engage a new one, I presume it will be
necessary to furnish the paymaster-general as early as possible with money to
pay the bounty, lately resolved on, to such men as will enlist. Prompt pay,
perhaps may have a happy effect, and induce the continuance of some who are
here: but, without it, I am certain that nothing can be done; nor have we time
to lose in making the experiment. But then it may be asked, who is to recruit?
or who can consider themselves as officers for that purpose, till the
conventions of the different states have made the appointments?

Yesterday afternoon the exchange between lord Sterling and governor Brown was
carried into execution; and his lordship is now here. He confirms the
intelligence mentioned by captain Souther, about the transports he met, by the
arrival of the Daphne man-of-war (a twenty gun ship) a few days ago, with
twelve ships under her convoy, having light horse on board. They sailed with
about twenty in each, and lost about eighteen in their passage, besides those
in the vessel taken by captain Souther. -- He further adds that he had heard it
acknowledged more than once, that, in the action of the sixteenth ultimo, the
enemy had a hundred men killed, -- about sixty Highlanders of the forty-second
regiment, and forty of the light infantry. This confession coming from
themselves, we may reasonably conclude, did not exaggerate the number, * * *

October 9. -- About eight o'clock this morning, two ships, of forty-four guns
each (supposed to be the Roebuck and Phoenix), and a frigate of twenty guns,
with three or four tenders, got under way from about Bloomingdale where they
had been lying some time, and stood with an easy southerly breeze toward our
chevaux-de-frise, which we hoped would have intercepted their passage while our
batteries played upon them: but, to our surprise and mortification, they ran
through without the least difficulty, and without receiving any apparent damage
from our forts, though they kept up a heavy fire from both sides of the river.
Their destination or views cannot be known with certainty: but most probably
they are sent to stop the navigation, and cut off the supplies of boards, etc.
which we should have received, and of which we are in great need. They are
standing up, and I have dispatched an express to the convention of this state,
that notice may be immediately communicated to general Clinton at the Highland
fortifications, to put him on his guard in case they should have any designs
against them, and that precautions should be taken to prevent the craft
belonging to the river falling into their hands.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Haerlem-Heights, Oct. 11, 1776. SIR,
I BEG leave to inform you, that, since my letter of the eighth and ninth
instant which I had the honor of addressing you, nothing of importance has
occurred, except of that the ships of war which I then mentioned, in their
passage up the river, took a sloop that was at anchor off the mouth of
Spitendevil, and two of our row-gallies which they out-sailed. The crews,
finding that they could not prevent them falling into the enemy's hands, ran
them near the shore and effected their own escape. From the intelligence I have
received, the ships are now lying at Tarrytown, without having landed any men
(which seemed to be apprehended by some), or attempted any thing else. Their
principal views in all probability are, to interrupt our navigation, and to
receive such disaffected persons as incline to take part against us. The former
they will effect beyond all question; and I fear that their expectations
respecting the latter will be but too fully answered.

October 12. -- The enclosed copy of a letter received last night from the
convention of this state will show you the apprehensions they are under on
account of the disaffected among them. -- I have ordered up a part of the
militia from the Massachusetts under general (...), to prevent, if possible,
the consequences which they suggest may happen, and which there is reason to
believe the conspirators have in contemplation. I am pursuaded that they are
upon the eve of breaking out, and that they will leave nothing un-essayed that
will distress us and favor the designs of the enemy, as soon as their schemes
are ripe for it.

October 13. -- Yesterday the enemy landed at Frog's-Point, about nine miles
from hence, further up the sound. Their number we cannot ascertain, as they
have not advanced from the point, -- which is a kind of island, -- but the
water that surrounds it is favorable at low tide. I have ordered works to be
thrown up at the passes from the point to the main. From the great number of
sloops, schooners, and nine ships, that went up the Sound in the evening, full
of men, and from the information of two deserters who came over last night, I
have reason to believe that the greatest part of their army has moved upwards,
or is about to do it, pursuing their original plan of getting in our rear and
cutting off our communication with the country.

The grounds from Frog's-Point are strong and defensible, being full of stone
fences both along the road and across the adjacent fields, which will render it
difficult for artillery, or indeed a large body of foot, to advance in any
regular order, except through the main road. -- Our men who are posted on the
passes seemed to be in great spirits when I left them last night.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Haerlem Heights, October 14, 1776. SIR,
HIS excellency having gone this morning to visit our posts beyond Kingsbridge
and the several passes leading from Frog'sPoint and the necks adjacent, I have
the honor to inform you by his command, that no interesting event has taken
place since his letter by yesterday's post.

Every day's intelligence from the convention of this state holds forth
discoveries of new plots and of new conspiracies. Some of the members seem to
apprehend that insurrections are upon the eve of breaking out, and have
suggested the necessity of seizing and securing the passes through the
Highlands, lest the disaffected should do it. Their preservation being a matter
of great importance, his excellency, notwithstanding the situation we are in
with respect to troops, has detached colonel Tash with his regiment, lately
from New Hampshire, in addition to the militia mentioned in his last, with
directions to receive orders from the convention, as to the station and posts
he is to occupy.

There are now in our possession several (...) inhabitants of this state, who
had engaged to join the enemy, and were intercepted in going to them. There are
also two who confess they have been with them, and that they had actually
engaged in their service: but, finding the terms (the bounty, pay, etc.) not so
advantageous as they expected from the information they had received, they were
induced to ^^turn. -- As the affairs of this government are in a precarious
situation, and such as, the convention themselves seem to think, forbid their
interposition farther than taking measures to apprehend them, his excellency
would wish to obtain the sentiments of Congress, and their direction upon a
subject so extremely critical and delicate, and which, in the consideration of
it, involves many important consequences.

Your favor of the ninth, with its several enclosures, his excellency received
yesterday morning by the express, who proceeded immediately on his journey.

October 17. -- I am directed by his excellency to acquaint you that we are
again obliged to change our disposition, to counteract the operations of the
enemy. Declining an attack upon our front, they have drawn the main body of
their army to Frog's-Point, with a design of hemming us in, and drawing a line
in our rear. To prevent the consequences which would but too probably follow
the execution of their scheme, the general officers determined yesterday that
our forces must be taken from hence, and extended toward East and West
Chester, so as to out-flank them. General Lee, who arrived on monday, has
strongly urged the absolute necessity of the measure. It is proposed to leave a
garrison at Fort Washington, and to maintain it if possible, in order to
preserve the communication with the Jerseys. -- They are landing their
artillery and wagons upon the point; and there are now several boats passing
up the Sound, full of men.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.
P. S. The post having not come in since sunday, till today, has been the
occasion of not writing to you since that time. He was expected as usual; which
prevented an express being sent.



Haerlem Heights, October 18, 1776. SIR,
I WAS yesterday morning honored with your favor of the fifteenth, with the
resolutions of the eleventh and fourteenth. The latter, by which Congress have
authorized me to appoint monsieur Pennel a brevet aid-de-camp, claims a return
of my acknowledgments.

Last night I received a letter from Mr. Varick, secretary to general Schuyler
enclosing a copy of one from general Arnold to general Gates. The intelligence
transmitted by general Arnold being of an extremely interesting and important
nature, I thought it advisable to forward the same immediately by express. You
have a copy herewith, which contains the particulars, and to which I beg leave
to refer you.

The accounts transmitted you yesterday by post will inform you of the
movements of the enemy, and of the measures judged necessary to be pursued by
us, to counteract their designs. I have nothing to add on this head, except
that ten or eleven ships, which have been prevented passing Hell-gate for two
or three days for want of wind, are now under way, and proceeding up the Sound.
Amongst them there appear to be two frigates: the rest probably have in stores,
etc.

Enclosed is a copy of the last general return I have been able to obtain. It
only comes down to the fifth instant: the situation of our affairs, and the
almost constant necessity of sending detachments from one place to another to
watch the enemy's motions, have prevented the officers from making them with
regularity.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Kingsbridge, October 20, 1776, half after one o'clock, P. M. SIR,
I HAVE it in command from his excellency to transmit you the enclosed copies
of dispatches which just now came to hand, and which contain intelligence of
the most interesting and important nature respecting our affairs in the
northern department. His excellency would have wrote himself, but was going to
our several posts, when the express arrived.

The enemy are pursuing with great industry their plan of penetrating the
country from the Sound, and of forming a line in our rear. They are now
extended from Frog's-Point to New-Rochelle. from whence it is generally
conjectured they mean to take their route by way of the White-Plains, and from
thence to draw a line to the North-river. We on our part have drawn our whole
force, except the regiments intended to garrison FortWashington, from the
island of New York, and have possessed ourselves of the heights, passes, and
advantageous grounds between New-Rochelle, where the van of their army now
lies, and the North-River. -- They will in all probability attempt to effect
their purpose by moving higher up. If they do, our forces wi^^ move
accordingly, it being a principal object to prevent their outflanking us.

On friday, one of their advanced parties, near East-Chester, fell in with part
of colonel Glover's brigade, and a smart and close skirmish ensued, in which, I
have the pleasure to inform you, our men behaved with great coolness and
intrepidity, and drove the enemy back to their main body.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.

Headquarters, Valentine's Hill, Oct. 21, 1776. SIR,
HIS excellency being absent on a visit to the several posts on the left of our
lines and at White-Plains, I have the honor to inform you, by the favor of
colonel Whipple, that, since my letter of yesterday, no event of importance has
occurred.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.

To the Board of War.
Camp, at Valentine's Hill, Oct. 22, 1776. GENTLEMEN,
I AM directed by his excellency, whose business has called him from hence, to
acknowledge his receipt of your favors of the twelfth and fifteenth instant,
and to inform you in answer to the first, that he will mention the case of the
French gentlemen to general Lee, and obtain his opinion as to the best mode of
providing for them in a useful way. The horses belonging to the light dragoons
who were taken, he thinks, will be very serviceable; and he will write to
general Ward or one of the agents to purchase them.

In respect to your requisition for an immediate return of ordnance stores, his
excellency says it cannot possibly be complied with in the present unsettled
state of the army. In order to effect the good purposes you have in view, he
would take the liberty to recommend the establishing of magazines of ammunition
and other ordnance stores in proper places of security, from whence supplies
could be occasionally drawn. As large quantities are constantly in demand in
time of war, he does not conceive your provision in these instances can be too
great.

He will direct the regimental returns in future to include arms and
accoutrements, and the commissary-general to transmit monthly lists of rations.
He thinks the regulation extremely proper, though he apprehends the information
to be premature respecting the over-quantity suggested to have been drawn,
having heard no suspicion of the sort in this army of late.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.

Headquarters, White-Plains, Oct. 25, 1776. SIR,
THE whole of our army is now here and on the neighboring heights, except the
troops left at Mount-Washington and Kingsbridge (about fourteen hundred at the
former, and six hundred at the latter), and general Lee's division which now
forms the rear, and which is on their march. Our removal, and that of the
stores, have been attended with a great deal of trouble, owing to the scarcity
and difficulty of procuring wagons. However, they are nearly effected, and
without any loss. -- The general officers are now reconnoitering the several
passes leading from the enemy, that the most important may be immediately
secured. -- The situation of their army remains nearly the same as when I had
the honor of addressing you on the twenty-first instant. It differs in nothing
unless it is that their main body is more collected about New-Rochelle. A few
of their troops are extended as far as Momarioneck.

On monday night a detachment of our men, under the command of colonel Hazlet,
was sent out to surprise and cut off major Rogers, if possible, with his
regiment which was posted there. By some accident or other the expedition did
not succeed so well as I could have wished. However, our advanced party, led on
by major Green of the first Virginia regiment, fell in with their out-guard,
and brought off thirty-six prisoners, sixty muskets, and some blankets. The
number killed is not certainly known: but it is reported by an officer who was
there, that he counted about twenty-five. -- Our loss, two killed, and ten or
twelve wounded; among the latter, major Green, whose recovery is very doubtful.

On wednesday there was also a smart skirmish between a party of colonel Hands'
riflemen, -- about two hundred and forty, -- and nearly the same number of
Hessian chasseurs, in which the latter were put to the rout. Our men buried ten
of them on the field, and took two prisoners, one badly wounded. We sustained
no other loss than having one lad wounded, supposed mortally.

The ships of war that are in the North-river, fell down yesterday morning or
the evening before, to Dobbs's ferry, to prevent our bringing stores from below
by water, and the removal of those that are landed there. As soon as the
wagons, employed in bringing the baggage and stores of general Lee's division,
are disengaged, they will be immediately sent to assist those already there to
remove them.

On saturday night we had the misfortune to lose one of the new ships intended
to be sunk for obstructing the channel. She parted her cables in a severe
squall, ^hen properly ballasted, and bilged as soon as she struck the shore.
The other ship was sunk well; and yesterday morning two brigs, both ready, were
sent down for the same purpose.

About two o'clock this afternoon, intelligence was brought to headquarters
that three or four detachments of the enemy were on their march, and had
advanced within about four miles of this place. It has been fully confirmed
since by a variety of persons who have been out to reconnoitre. -- Their number
cannot be ascertained: but it is generally conjectured that the detachments are
or will be succeeded by as many columns composing their main body. Our drums
have beat to arms, and the men are ordered to their several posts. -- Most
probably some important event is upon the eve of taking place; I hope it will
be victory in favor of our arms. -- General Lee, with his division, has not got
up; but I hear he is on his march.

Experiment having proved it difficult, if not impossible, to prevent the enemy
from possessing the navigation of the Northriver, and to rendering the
communication and intercourse between the states divided by it extremely
hazardous and precarious by means of their ships of war, it has become a matter
of important consideration how to remedy the evil, and to guard against the
consequences which may result from it. I am charged by his excellency to
mention it to Congress is a matter that has employed much of his thought, and
that seems worthy of the most serious attention. He has communicated it to
several of the general and other officers, and to many gentlemen of sense and
discernment, who all agree with him, not only upon the propriety, but the
absolute necessity that two distinct armies should be formed, -- one to act
particularly in the states which lie on the east, the other in those that are
on the south of the river; -- the whole however to be raised on a general plan,
and not to be confined to any particular place by the terms of enlistment.
These matters, -- the apparent difficulty and perhaps impracticability of
succors being thrown across the river while the enemy can command it, -- have
induced his excellency to submit the measures to their consideration, not
knowing how their operations may be directed, and foreseeing that innumerable
evils may arise if a respectable force is not appointed to oppose their arms,
wherever they are carried.

I have the honor to be, in great haste, etc. R. H. HARRISON.

White-Plains, October 29, 1776. SIR,
THE situation of of our affairs not permitting his excellency to write
himself, I have it in charge to inform you, that, on yesterday morning about
ten o'clock, the enemy appeared in several large columns in our front, and,
from their first movements, seemed as if they meant an attack there. However,
halting for a little time, their main body filed off to the left, and presently
began a most severe and incessant cannonade, at a part of our troops who had
taken post on a hill, with a view of throwing up some lines. At the same time
they advanced in two divisions, and, after a smart engagement for about a
quarter of an hour, obliged our men to give way.

Our loss is not certainly known; but, from conjecture, is between four and
five hundred in killed, wounded, and missing. -- What theirs was, we have not
heard.

After gaining the hill (upon which they are intrenching) and leaving a
sufficient number of men and artillery to prevent our repossessing it, they
proceeded to advance by our left: and, as far as I can discover, their posts or
encampments now form nearly a semicircle. It is evident their design is to get
in our rear according to their original plan. -- Every measure is taking to
prevent them: but the removal of our baggage, etc. is attended with infinite
difficulty and delays.

Our post, from its situation, is not so advantageous as could be wi^hed, and
was only intended as temporary and occasional, till the stores belonging to the
army, which had been deposited here, could be removed. The enemy coming on so
suddenly has distressed us much. They are now close at hand, and most probably
will in a little time commence their second attack; we expect it every hour: --
perhaps it is beginning: I have just heard the report of some cannon.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.

White.Plains, October 31, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the twentyninth instant, no event
of importance has occurred. The enemy are throwing up some lines and redoubts
in our front, with a view of cannonading as soon as they are ready; and at the
same time are extending their wings farther by our right and left. It is
supposed that one of their objects is to advance a part of their troops, and
seize on the bridge over Croton river, that the communication may be cut off
with the upper country. To prevent this, a part of our force is detached, with
orders to proceed with the utmost expedition, and to secure the pass if
possible.

We are trying to remove, to guard against their designs, but are greatly
impeded by reason of the scarcity of wagons in proportion to our baggage and
stores. Every exertion has been employed to obtain a sufficiency; but they
cannot be had in this part of the country. The quartermaster has sent to
Connecticut to get a supply if possible.

Our army is decreasing fast. Several gentlemen, who have come to camp within a
few days, have observed large numbers of militia returning home on the
different roads: nor are any measures taken as yet to raise the new army, no
commissions having come from the states to appoint or signify the nomination of
their officers. If this was done, perhaps many who are now here might be
induced to engage: but at present there are none authorized to recruit.

His excellency would have wrote himself by the person who carries this (to the
care of general Green); but his attention is totally engaged in ordering the
affairs of the army, and the best mode for its removal.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.

White-Plains, November 1, 1776. SIR,
I AM directed by his excellency to acknowledge his receipt of your favor of
the twenty-eighth ultimo, which came to hand yesterday evening, and to transmit
you a copy of the letter I had the honor of writing you by the Boston express,
by his command. Had the express been charged with no other letter, the loss
would not have been attended with any material injury to us, or advantage to
the enemy, provided it should come to their hands; but there were others from
his excellency, of a very interesting nature, the miscarriage of which gives
him much concern. As the bundle was taken away in so sudden and secret a
manner, I fear there is but little hope of recovering it, -- being done most
probably for the express purpose of furnishing the enemy with intelligence, and
a state of our army. Besides his excellency's letters, the most material of
which was to Mr. Rutledge, there were five or six more from the gentlemen of
his family.

My letters of the twenty-ninth and of yesterday, which I had the honor of
addressing you, will give a pretty full account of our situation, and of every
matter respecting this army, antecedent to this date. I only omitted to mention
that we have taken thirteen of the Waldeckers, and that, for several days past,
our scouting parties have brought in one, two, or three prisoners. In addition
to these, we have every day a deserter or two.

About six o'clock this morning, a messenger arrived from lord Sterling (who is
with his brigade between two and three miles from White-Plains, on our right,
and rather nearer the Northriver) with intelligence that the enemy were
advancing toward him in two columns. This information has carried his
excellency and aids out. The result of their movement I have not heard: but
most likely they are pursuing their original design of getting by our flanks
and seizing the heights above us. Every precaution is taking to prevent them,
and to hurry away our stores to a more interior part of the country.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.
P. S. His excellency has just returned, and says the alarm was premature. It
arose from some of lord Sterling's advanced guards seeing a body of our men who
had been ordered to reinforce him, who were supposed to be the enemy. His
excellency is very apprehensive that the army will be greatly distressed for
want of provision, particularly in the article of flour, owing to the
water-conveyance, both in the North and Eastriver being in the enemy's
possession. He has wrote to the convention of this state, and directed Mr.
Trumbull, that their utmost exertions in this instance may be used. There is a
good deal of flour on the Jersey side: but there is no other way to get it, but
by carting and ferrying it over to Peekskill. This I have wrote to general
Green to have done, by his excellency's direction.



White-Plains, November 3, 1776. SIR,
BY command of his excellency, I have the honor to inform you that our
situation is nearly the same as when I had the pleasure of writing you last. It
is altered in no instance, unless in the number of our troops, which is every
day decreasing by their most scandalous desertion and return home. The enclosed
letter from general Parsons, who is stationed near the Saw-pits, and which his
excellency directed me to transmit, will inform you of the prevalency of this
disgraceful practice.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.

To the Board of War.
White-Plains, Nov. 4, 1776. GENTLEMEN,
BY command of his excellency, I have the honor to acknowledge his receipt of
your favor of the twenty-fourth ultimo, and to inform you that he esteems the
plan you propose to lay before Congress, for preventing more rations being
drawn than may be due, well calculated to answer the end. That respecting the
sick seems to him not entirely perfect. The captains or commanders of companies
are prohibited from drawing pay for such sick as may be discharged from the
hospitals as unfit for service. If, during their stay, and before it can be
known whether their case will or will not admit of their return, it should
become necessary to make up a regimental pay-abstract, in what manner are the
officers to make up their rolls? are they to include the sick or not?

As this is a case which may and must of necessity frequently happen, it
appears to his excellency that the intended regulations should be more general,
and restrain the officers from including in their pay-abstracts or rolls all
the sick they send to the hospitals, and the pay due them previous to their
going. In such case, those who are discharged as unfit for service may receive
their pay as intended; and those who return to duty can obtain what was due to
them when the regiment was paid, by applying to the paymaster with the officer
and surgeon's certificates, or be included in a subsequent abstract. The
inconveniences and abuses which are designed to be remedied by these
regulations, his excellency does not apprehend to arise so much from necessity
(as incident to the nature of armies), as from the imperfect institution of the
present, and the great mixture and diversity of troops composing it, and also
from the inattention of the officers. * * *

The defenseless state of Pennsylvania, as communicated by the committee of
safety to your honorable body, is a matter of much concern to his excellency,
who is not a little aggravated by the part too many seem ready to take in favor
of the enemy. He trusts, however, the defection will be too inconsiderale to
threaten any alarming consequences.

Before the receipt of your letter, his excellency had wrote to the commanding
officer of the Virginia regiments at Trenton, directing him to march them
forward toward general Greene's post, and there remain under his command till
further orders, unless special instructions had been or should be given to the
contrary by Congress, or for their particular destination.

Agreeable to your request, his excellency has consulted with general Lee upon
the best mode for employing the French gentlemen, and making them serviceable.
The result is that they should be appointed to regiments by Congress according
to the ranks they have been pleased to give them, and with the same pay as is
allowed other officers in such cases. Their want of our language is rather an
objection: but it is hoped they will attain a sufficient knowledge of it, ere
it be long, to be of great service; and that, in the interim, their advice and
assistance in directing of works may be of use where they may be stationed. --
With great respect, I have the honor to be, etc.

R. H. HARRISON.

White-Plains, November 6, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to inform you that on yesterday morning the enemy made a
sudden and unexpected movement from the several posts they had taken in our
front. They broke up their whole encampments the preceding night, and have
advanced toward Kingsbridge and the North-river. The design of this maneuver
is a matter of much conjecture and speculation, and cannot be accounted for
with any degree of certainty. The grounds we had taken possession of were
strong and advantageous, and such as they could not have gained without much
loss of blood in case an attempt had been made. I had taken every precaution to
prevent their out-flanking us; -- which may have led to the present measure.
They may still have in view their original plan, and, by a sudden wheel, try to
accomplish it. Detachments are constantly out to observe their motions, and to
harrass them as much as possible.

In consequence of this movement I called a council of general officers today,
to consult of such measures as should be adopted in case they pursued their
retreat to New York; the result of which is herewith transmitted. In respect to
myself, I cannot indulge an idea that general How, supposing he is going to
New York, means to close the campaign, and to sit down without attempting
something more. I think it highly probable, and almost certain, that he will
make a descent with a part of his troops into Jersey; and, as soon as I am
satisfied that the present maneuver is real and not a feint, I shall use every
means in my power to forward a part of our force to counteract his designs; nor
shall I be disappointed if he sends a detachment to the southward for the
purpose of making a winter campaign.

From the information I have received, there is now a number of transports at
Red-Hook, with about three thousand troops on board. Their destination, as
given out, is to Rhode Island; but this seems altogether improbable for various
reasons; among others, the season is much against it. In the southern states
they will find it milder, and much more favorable for their purposes. I shall
take the liberty of mentioning that it may not be improper to suggest the
probability of such a measure to the assemblies and conventions in those
states, that they may be on their guard, -- and the propriety of their
establishing and laying up magazines of provisions and other necessaries in
suitable places. This is a matter of exceeding importance, and what cannot be
too much attended to.

From the approaching dissolution of the army, and the departure of the new
levies which is on the eve of taking place, and the little prospect of levying
a new one in time, I have wrote to the eastern states by the unanimous advice
of the general officers, to forward supplies of militia in the room of those
that are now here, and who, it is feared, will not be prevailed on to stay any
longer than the time they are engaged for. The propriety of this application, I
trust, will appear, when it is known that not a single officer is yet
commissioned to recruit, and when it is considered how essential it is to keep
up some show of force and shadow of an army.

I expect the enemy will bend their force against Fort-Washington, and invest
it immediately. From some advices it is an object that will attract their
earliest attention.

I am happy to inform you, that, in the engagement on monday se'nnight, I have
reason to believe our loss was by no means so considerable as was conjectured
at first. By some deserters and prisoners we are told, that of the enemy was
tolerably great; some accounts make it about four hundred in killed and
wounded: all agree that among the former there was a colonel Carr of the
thirty-fifth regiment.

The force that will be sent to Jersey after I am satisfied of Mr. Howe's
retreat, in addition to those now there, according to my present opinion, will
make it necessary for me to go with them, to put things in a proper channel,
and such a way of defense as shall seem most probable to check the progress of
the enemy, in case they should attempt a descent there, or a move toward
Philadelphia.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

To the Board of War.
White-Plains, November 8, 1776. GENTLEMEN,
I HAVE been favored with yours of the thirty-first ultimo, by monsieur
Laytaniac, and must take the liberty of referring you to my former letters on
the subject of providing for the French gentlemen who shall incline to enter
the service of the states. To me it appears that one or two modes must be
adopted; they must either be appointed to places in some of the regiments, or
formed into a distinct corpse. The former was advised as the most eligible in
respect to the gentlemen who were here before. It requires time to form an
accurate opinion of the merits of an officer; and the present situation of the
army will not allow me to pay a particular attention to monsieur Laytaniac, or
such notice as he may wish to receive, or I to give: nor is there any way of
making his stay here agreeable.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

White-Plains, November 9, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to transmit you a copy of a letter from general Gates to
general Schuyler, and of another paper containing intelligence respecting the
northern army and the situation of the enemy in that department. They this
minute came to hand; and to them I beg leave to refer you for particulars.

By every information I can obtain, and the accounts I had last night by two
deserters who were very intelligent and particular, general How still has in
view an expedition to the Jerseys, and is preparing for it with the greatest
industry. I have detached the first division of our troops which was thought
necessary to be sent, and which I hope will cross the river at Peekskill
today. The second, I expect, will all march this evening; and tomorrow
morning I propose to follow myself, in order to put things in the best train I
can, and to give him every possible opposition. -- I hope (when the two
divisions arrive, and are joined to such other force as I expect to collect) to
check his progress and prevent him from penetrating any distance from the
river, if not to oblige him to return immediately with some loss. Whatever is
in my power to effect, shall be done.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Peekskill, November 11, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE only time to acknowledge the honor of your letter of the fifth instant,
and its several enclosures, and to inform you, that, agreeable to the resolves
of Congress, I shall use every measure in my power that the moving and present
confused state of the army will admit of, to appoint officers for recruiting.

You will have been advised, before this, of the arrival of commissioners from
the Massachusetts. Others have come from Connecticut: but, from the present
appearance of things, we seem but little if any nearer to levying an army. I
had anticipated the resolve respecting the militia, by writing to the eastern
states and to the Jersey, by the advice of my general officers, and from a
consciousness of the necessity of getting in a number of men if possible, to
keep up the appearance of an army. How my application will succeed, the event
must determine. I have little or no reason to expect that the militia now here
will remain a day longer than the time they first engaged for. I have
recommended their stay, and requested it in general orders. General Lincoln and
the Massachusetts commissioners are using their interest with those from that
state: but, as far as I can judge, we cannot rely on their staying.

I left White-Plains about eleven o'clock yesterday; -- all peace then. The
enemy appeared to be preparing for their expedition to Jersey according to
every information. What their designs are, or whether their present conduct is
not a feint, I cannot determine.

The Maryland and Virginia troops under lord Sterling have crossed the river,
as have part of these from the Jersey: the remainder are now embarking. The
troops, judged necessary to secure the several posts through the Highlands,
have also got up. I am going to examine the passes, and direct such works as
may appear necessary; after which, and making the best disposition I can of
things in this quarter, I intend to proceed to Jersey, which I expect to do
tomorrow.

The Assemblies of Massachusetts and Connecticut, to induce their men more
readily to en^age in the service, have voted an advance pay of twenty shillings
per month, in addition to that allowed by the Congress to privates. It may
perhaps be the means of their levying the quotas exacted from them sooner than
they could otherwise have been raised: but I am of opinion, a more fatal and
mistaken policy could not have entered their councils, or one more detrimental
to the general cause. The influence of the vote will become continental, and
materially effect the other states in making up their levies. If they could do
it, I am certain, when the troops come to act together, that jealousy,
impatience and mutiny, would necessarily arise. A different pay cannot exist in
the same army. The reasons are obvious, and experience has proved their force
in the case of the eastern and southern troops last spring. Sensible of this,
and of the pernicious consequences that would inevitably result from the
advance, I have prevented the commissioners from proceeding or publishing their
terms till they could obtain the sense of Congress upon the subject, and
remonstrated against it in a letter to governor Trumbull. I am not singular in
opinion: I have the concurrence of all the general officers, of its fatal
tendency.

I congratulate you and Congress upon the news from Ticonderoga, and that
general Carleton and his army have been obliged to return to Canada without
attempting any thing.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

General Greene's Quarters, Nov. 14, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to inform you of my arrival here yesterday, and that the
whole of the troops belonging to the states, which lay south of Hudson's river,
and which were in NewYork government, have passed over to this side, except the
regiment, lately colonel Smallwood's, which I expect is now on their march.

That they may be ready to check any incursion the enemy may attempt in this
neighborhood, I intend to quarter them at Brunswick, Amboy, Elizabeth-Town,
Newark, and about this place, unless Congress should conceive it necessary for
any of them to be stationed at or more contiguous to Philadelphia. In such case
they will be pleased to signify their pleasure. There will be very few of them
after the departure of those who were engaged for the flying camp, which is
fast approaching. The disposition I have mentioned seems to me well calculated
for the end proposed, and also for their acccommodation.

The movements and designs of the enemy are not yet understood. Various are the
opinions and reports on this head. From every information, the whole have
removed from Dobbs's ferry toward Kingsbridge: and it seems to be generally
believed on all hands, that the investing of Fort-Washington is one object they
have in view; but that can employ but a small part of their force. Whether they
intend a southern expedition, must be determined by time: to me there appears a
probability of it, which seems to be favored by the advices we have that many
transports are wooding and watering. General Greene's letter would give you the
substance of the intelligence brought by Mr. Mersereau from Staten-Island in
this instance, which he received before it came to me.

Enclosed you have copies of two letters from general How, and of my answer to
the first of them. The letter alluded to, and returned in his last, was one
from myself to Mrs. Washington, of the twenty-fifth ultimo, from whence I
conclude that all the letters which went by the Boston express have come to his
possession. You will also perceive that general How has requested the return
of Peter Jack, a servant to major Stewart, to which I have consented, as he was
not in the military line, and the requisition agreeable to the custom of war.
This servant having been sent to Philadelphia with the Waldeckers and other
prisoners, I must request the favor of you to have him conveyed to general
Green by the earliest opportunity, in order that he may be returned to his
master.

Before I conclude, I beg leave not only to suggest but to urge the necessity
of increasing our field artillery very considerbly. Experience has convinced
me, as it has every gentleman of discernment in this army, that, while we
remain so much inferior to the enemy in this instance, we must carry on the war
under infinite disadvantages, and without the smallest probability of success.
It has been peculiarly owing to the situation of the country where their
operations have been conducted, and to the rough and strong grounds we
possessed ourselves of, and over which they had to pass, that they have not
carried their arms, by means of their artillery, to a much greater extent. When
these difficulties cease by changing the scene of action to a level campaign
country, the worst of consequences are to be apprehended. I would therefore,
with the concurrence of all the officers whom I have spoken to upon the
subject, submit to the consideration of Congress whether immediate measures
ought not to be taken for procuring a respectable train.

It is agreed on all hands that each battalion should be furnished at least
with two pieces, and that a smaller number than a hundred of three pounds,
fifty of six pounds, and fifty of twelve pounds, should not be provided, in
addition to those we now have. Besides these, if some eighteen and
twenty-four-pounders are ordered, the train will be more serviceable and
complete. The whole should be of brass, for the most obvious reasons; they will
be much more portable, not half so liable to burst; and, when they do, no
damage is occasioned by it, and they may be cast over again. The sizes before
described should be particularly attended to: if they are not, there will be
great reason to expect mistakes and confusion in the charges in time of action,
as it has frequently happened in the best-regulated armies. The disparity
between those I have mentioned and such as are of an intermediate size is
difficult to discern.

It is also agreed that a regiment of artillerists, with approved and
experienced officers, should be obtained if possible, and some engineers of
known reputation and abilities. I am sorry to say, too ready an indulgence has
been had to several appointments in the latter instance, and that men have been
promoted, who seem to me to know but very little if any thing of the business.

Perhaps this train, etc. may be looked upon by some as large and expensive.
True, it will be so: but when it is considered that the enemy, having effected
but little in the course of the present campaign, will use their utmost efforts
to subjugate us in the next; every consideration of that sort should be
disregarded, and every possible preparation made to frustrate their * * *
attempts. How they are to be procured, is to be enquired into. -- That we
cannot provide them among ourselves, or more than a very small proportion, so
trifling as not to deserve our notice, is evident. Therefore I would advise,
with all imaginable deference, that, without any abatement of our own internal
exertions, application should be immediately made to such powers as can and may
be willing to supply them. They cannot be obtained too early if soon enough;
and I am told they may be easily had from France and Holland.

Mr. Trumbull the commissary-general has frequently mentioned to me of late the
inadequacy of his pay to his trouble and the great risk he is subject to on
account of the large sums of money which pass through his hands. He has stated
his case with a view of laying it before Congress and obtaining a more adequate
compensation. My sentiments upon the subject are already known: but yet I shall
take the liberty to add that I think his complaint to be well founded, and his
pay, considering the important duties and risks of his office, by no means
sufficient, and that the footing he seems to think it should be upon, himself,
appears just and reasonable.

A proposition having been made long since to general How and agreed to by
him, for an exchange of prisoners in consequence of the resolutions of Congress
to that effect, I shall be extremely happy if you will give directions to the
committees and those having the charge of prisoners in the several states south
of Jersey, to transmit me proper lists of the names of all the commissioned
officers, and of their ranks and the corpse they belong to; also the number of
non-commissioned and privates, and their respective regiments. You will
perceive by his letter, he supposes me to have affected some delay, or to have
been unmindful of the proposition I had made.

I propose to stay in this neighborhood a few days, in which time I expect the
designs of the enemy will be more disclosed, and their incursions be made in
this quarter, or their investiture of Fort Washington, if they are intended.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

To the Board of War.
General Greene's Quarters, November 15, 1776. GENTLEMEN,
ON wednesday evening I received the favor of your letter of the eighth
instant, in consequence of which I stopped the flag that was going in with the
ladies you mention, pointing out to them the necessity of the measure, and
recommending to them to write to their husbands and connections to obtain
general Howe's assurances for the release of Mrs. Lewis, and Mrs. Robinson and
her children, with their baggage, as the condition on which they will be
permitted to go in themselves. These terms I can only extend to Mrs. Barrow and
Mrs. Kemp who had never obtained my leave: Mrs. Watts had, and my promise that
she should go in. The whole however were prepared to go, when the letter
reached Newark. -- The mode I have adopted seems most likely, and the only
proper one, to procure the enlargement of our ladies, which I wish for much.

I am, gentlemen, with great respect, etc. G. W.

To the Board of War.
Hackinsac, November 15, 1776. GENTLEMEN,
HAVING given my promise to general How, on his application, that Peter Jack,
a servant of major Stewart, who was sent to Philadelphia with the Waldeckers
and other prisoners and who has nothing to do in the military line, should be
returned to his master agreeable to the usage of war in such cases, -- I must
take the liberty to request the favor of you to have him conveyed to general
Green by the earliest opportunity, that he may be forwarded to his master in
compliance with my promise.

I also wish that you would have all the British prisoners collected that you
conveniently can, and sent to me as soon as possible with the Hessian
prisoners, that I may exchange them. The return of the letter I think will be
attended with many salutary consequences: but, should it be made without that
of a large proportion of other troops, it will carry the marks of design, and
occasion precautions to be taken to prevent the ends we have in view. -- I have
the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

General Greene's Quarters, Nov. 16, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you last, an important event has taken
place, of which I wish to give you the earliest intelligence.

The preservation of the passage of the North-river was an object of so much
consequence that I thought no pains or expense too great for that purpose: and
therefore, after sending off all the valuable stores except such as were
necessary for its defense, I determined, agreeable to the advice of most of the
general officers, to risk something to defend the post on the east side, called
Mount-Washington.

When the army moved up in consequence of general Howe's landing at Frog-Point,
colonel Magaw was left on that command, with about twelve hundred men, and
orders given to defend it to the last. Afterward, reflecting upon the
smallness of the garrison, and the difficulty of their holding it if general
How should fall down upon it with his whole force, I wrote to general Green
who had the command on the Jersey shore, directing him to govern himself by
circumstances, and to retain or evacuate the post as he should think best, and
revoking the absolute order to colonel Magaw to defend the post to the last
extremity. -- General Green, struck with the importance of the post, and the
disengagement which our evacuation of posts must necessarily have given,
reinforced colonel Magaw with detachments from several regiments of the flying
camp, but chiefly of Pennsylvania, so as to make up the number about two
thousand.

In this situation things were yesterday, when general How demanded the
surrendry of the garrison, to which colonel Magaw returned a spirited refusal.
Immediately upon receiving an account of this transaction, I came from
Hackinsac to this place, and had partly crossed the North-river when I met
general Putnam and general Green, who were just returning from thence, and
informed me that the troops were in high spirits, and would make a good
defense: and it being late at night, I returned.

Early this morning colonel Magaw posted his troops partly in the lines thrown
up by our army on our first coming thither from New York, and partly on a
commanding hill lying north of Mount-Washington, -- the lines being all to the
southward. In this position the attack began about ten o'clock, which our
troops stood, and returned the fire in such a manner as gave me great hopes the
enemy was entirely repulsed. But at this time a body of troops crossed
Haerlem-river in boats and landed inside of the second lines, our troops being
then engaged in the first.

Colonel Cadwallader, who commanded in the lines, sent off a detachment to
oppose them: but they, being overpowered by numbers, gave way; upon which,
colonel Cadwallader ordered his troops to retreat in order to gain the fort. It
was done with much confusion; and the enemy crossing over came in upon them in
such a manner, that a number of them surrendered.

At this time the Hessians advanced on the north side of the fort in a very
large body. They were received by the troops posted there, with proper spirit,
and kept back a considerable time: but at length they were also obliged to
submit to a superiority of numbers, and retire under the cannon of the fort.

The enemy, having advanced thus far, halted; and immediately a flag went in,
with a repetition of the demand of the fortress, as I suppose. At this time I
sent a billet to colonel Magaw, directing him to hold out, and I would endeavor
this evening to bring off the garrison, if the fortress could not be
maintained, as I did not expect it could, the enemy being possessed of the
adjacent ground. But, before this reached him he had entered too far into a
treaty, to retract; after which, colonel Cadwallader told another messenger who
went over, that they had been able to obtain no other terms than to surrender
as prisoners of war. In this situation matters now stand. I have stopped
general Beall's and general Heard's brigades to preserve the post and stores
here; which, with the other troops, I hope we shall be able to effect.

I do not yet know the numbers killed or wounded on either side: but, from the
heaviness and continuance of the fire in some places, I imagine there must have
been considerable execution.

The loss of such a number of officers and men, many of whom have been trained
with more than common attention, will, I fear, be severely felt; but, when that
of the arms and accoutrements is added, much more so; and must be a further
incentive to procure as considerable a supply as possible for the new troops,
as soon as it can be done.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Hackinsac, November 19, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE not yet been able to obtain a particular account of the unhappy affair
of the sixteenth, nor of the terms on which the garrison surrendered. The
intelligence that has come to hand is not so full and accurate as I could wish.
One of the artillery, whose information is most direct, and who escaped on
sunday night, says the enemy's loss was very considerable, especially in the
attack made above the fort by the division of Hessians that marched from
Kingsbridge, and where lieutenant colonel Rawlins, of the late colonel
Stephenson's regiment, was posted.

They burned yesterday one or two houses on the heights, and contiguous to the
fort, and appeared, by advices from general Green, to be moving in the evening
their main body down toward the city Whether they will close the campaign
without attempting something more, or make an incursion into jersey, must be
determined by the events themselves.

As Fort-Lee was always considered as only necessary in conjunction with that
on the east side of the river, to preserve the communication across, and to
prevent the enemy from a free navigation, it has become of no importance by the
loss of the other, or not so material as to employ force for its defense. Being
viewed in this light, and apprehending that the stores there would be
precariously situated, their removal has been determined on to Boundbrook above
Brunswic, Princeton, Springfield, and Aquackenunk-bridge, as places that will
not be subject to sudden danger in case the enemy should pass the river, and
which have been thought proper as repositories for some of our stores of
provision and forage.

The troops belonging to the flying camp under generals Heard and Beall, with
what remains of general Ewing's brigade, are now at Fort-Lee, where they will
continue till the stores are got away. By the time that is effected, their term
of enlistment will be near expiring; and, if the enemy should make a push in
this quarter, the only troops that there will be to oppose them, will be
Hand's, Hazlett's, the regiment from Virginia, and that, lately Smallwood's, --
the latter greatly reduced by the losses it sustained on Long Island, etc. and
sickness: nor are the rest by any means complete. In addition to these, I am
told there are a few of the militia of this state, who have been called in by
governor Livingston. I shall make such a disposition of the whole at Brunswic
and at the intermediate posts, as shall seem most likely to guard against the
designs of the enemy, and to prevent them making an irruption or foraging with
detached parties.

The enclosed letter from colonels Miles and Atlee will show Congress the
distressed situation of our prisoners in New York; and their distress will
become greater every day by the cold inclement season that is approaching. It
will be happy if some expedient can be adopted, by which they may be furnished
with necessary blankets and clothing. Humanity and the good of the service
require it. -- I think the mode suggested by these gentlemen, for establishing
a credit, appears as likely to succeed, and as eligible, as any that occurs to
me. It is probable many articles that may be wanted can be obtained there, and
upon better terms than elsewhere. In respect to provision, their allowance
perhaps is as good as the situation of general Howe's stores will admit of: it
has been said of late by deserters and others that they were rather scant.

By a letter from the pay-master-general, of the seventeenth, he says there
will be a necessity that large and early remittances should be made. The
demands, when the troops now in service are dismissed, will be extremely great.
Besides, the bounty recruits will require a large supply; and he adds that the
commissary general has informed him, that, between this and the last of
December, he shall have occasion for a million of dollars.

November 21. -- The unhappy affair of the sixteenth has been succeeded by
further misfortunes. Yesterday morning a large body of the enemy landed between
Dobbs's ferry and Fort-Lee. Their object was, evidently, to enclose the whole
of our troops and stores that lay between the North and Hackinsac rivers, which
form a very narrow neck of land. For this purpose they formed and marched as
soon as they had ascended the high grounds toward the fort. Upon the first
information of their having landed, and of their movements, our men were
ordered to meet them; but finding their numbers greatly superior, and that they
were extending themselves to seize on the passes over the river, it was thought
prudent to withdraw our men; which was effected, and their retreat secured. We
lost the whole of the cannon that was at the fort (except two twelve-pounders)
and a great deal of baggage, between two and three hundred tents, about a
thousand barrels of flour, and other stores in the quarter-master's department.
This loss was inevitable. As many of the stores had been removed as
circumstances and time would admit of. The ammunition had been happily got away.

Our present situation between Hackinsac and Passaic rivers being exactly
similar to our late one, and our force here by no means adequate to an
opposition that will promise the smallest probability of success, we are taking
measures to retire over the waters of the latter, when the best disposition
will be formed that circumstances will admit of.

By colonel Cadwallader, who has been permitted by general How to return to
his friends, I am informed the surrender of the garrison on the sixteenth was
on the common terms as prisoners of war; the loss of the Hessians, about three
hundred privates and twenty-seven officers killed and wounded; about forty of
the British troops, and two or three officers: the loss on our side but
inconsiderable. I beg leave to refer you to him for a more particular account,
and also for his relation of the distresses of our prisoners. -- Colonels Miles
and Atlee's letter, mentioned above upon this subject, was through mistake sent
from hence yesterday morning. The mode of relief proposed by them was a credit
or supply of cash through the means of Mr. Franks. This seems to be doubtful,
as he is said to be in confinement by colonel Cadwallader, -- provided it would
have been otherwise practicable.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Your favor of the sixteenth was duly received. -- My letter to the board
of war, on the subject of the return of the Waldeckers, I presume you will have
seen.



Newark, November 23, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE not yet heard that any provisions is making to supply the place of the
troops composing the flying camp, whose departure is now at hand. The situation
of our affairs is truly critical, and such as requires uncommon exertions on
our part. From the movements of the enemy, and the information we have
received, they certainly will make a push to possess themselves of this part of
the Jersey. -- In order that you may be fully apprised of our weakness, and of
the necessity there is of our obtaining early succors, I have by the advice of
the general officers here, directed general Mifflin to wait on you. He is
intimately acquainted with our circumstances, and will represent them better
than my hurried state will allow.

I have wrote to general Lee to come over with the continental regiments
immediately under his command: those with general Heath I have ordered to
secure the passes through the Highlands. I have also wrote to governor
Livingston requesting of him such aid as may be in his power; and would submit
it to the consideration of Congress whether application should not be made for
part of Pennsylvania militia to step forth at this pressing time.

Before I conclude, I would mention, if an early and immediate supply of money
could be sent to Mr. Dalham to pay the flying-camp troops, it might have a
happy effect. They would subsist themselves comfortably on their return,
provide many necessaries of which they are in great want; and moreover it might
be the means of inducing many, after seeing their friends, to engage again.

I expected, on coming here, to have met with many of the militia, but find
from inquiry that there are not more than from four to five hundred at the
different posts.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Newark, November 27, 1776. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of the
twenty-first and twenty-fourth, with their several enclosures. The execution of
the resolves has been and will be attended to as far as in my power.

I have wrote to general Schuyler to send down as early as possible the troops
in the northern department from this and the state of Pennsylvania. The
proposition for exchanging Mr. Franklin for general Thompson I shall submit to
general How, as soon as circumstances will allow me.

I have nothing in particular to advise you of, respecting the enemy, more than
they are advancing this way. Part of them have passed the Passaic; and I
suppose the main body that they have on this side the North-river would have
done the same before now (as they are coming on), had their progress not been
retarded by the weather which has been rainy for several days past, I have
scouts and detachments constantly out to harrass them and watch their motions,
and to gain, if possible, intelligence of their designs.

Colonel Miles, who has been permitted to go to Philadelphia for a few days by
general How, will deliver you this, and inform you of the distresses of our
prisoners, and the necessity of effecting their exchange as far as we have
prisoners to give in return.

By a letter from the board of war on the subject of an exchange they mention
that several of the prisoners in our hands have enlisted. It is a measure, I
think, that cannot be justified though the precedent is furnished on the side
of the enemy: nor do I conceive it good in point of policy. But, as it has been
done, I shall leave it with Congress to order them to be returned or not, as
they shall judge fit.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Brunswic, November 30, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE been honored with your favor of the twenty-sixth, and with its
enclosures, by which I perceive the measures that have been adopted for
forwarding a reinforcement of militia. Their arrival is much to be wished, the
situation of our affairs being truly alarming, and such as demands the earliest
aids. As general Mifflin's presence may have a happy influence on the
disposition and temper of many of the associators, I shall not direct his
return so long as he can be done without, and till it becomes indispensably
necessary.

On thursday morning I left Newark, and arrived here yesterday with the troops
that were there. It was the opinion of all the generals who were with me, that
a retreat to this place was requisite, and founded in necessity, as our force
was by no means sufficient to make a stand, with the least probability of
success, against an enemy much superior in number, and whose advanced guards
were entering the town by the time our rear got out. It was the wish of all to
have remained there longer, and to have halted before we came thus far; but,
upon due consideration of our strength, the circumstances attending the
enlistment of a great part of our little force, and the frequent advices that
the enemy were embarking or about to embark another detachment for
Staten-Island with a view of landing at Amboy to cooperate with this, which
seemed to be confirmed by the information of some persons who came from the
island, that they were collecting and impressing all the wagons they could
find, -- it was judged necessary to proceed till we came here, not only to
prevent their bringing a force to act upon our front and rear, but also that we
might be more convenient to oppose any troops they might land at South-Amboy,
which many conjectured to be an object they had in view. This conjecture too
had probability and some advices to support it.

I hoped we should have met with large and early succors by this time; but as
yet no great number of the militia of this state has come in; nor have I much
reason to expect that any considerable aid will be derived from the counties
which lie beyond this river, and in which the enemy are. Their situation will
prevent it in a great measure from those parts where they are, provided the
inclinations of the people were good. Added to this, I have no assurances that
more than a very few of the troops composing the flying camp will remain after
the time of their engagement is out: so far from it, I am told that some of
general Ewing's brigade, who stand engaged to the first of January, are now
going away. If those go whose service expires this day, our force will be
reduced to a mere handful.

From intelligence received this morning, one division of the enemy was
advancing last night as far as Elizabeth-town, and some of their
quarter masters had proceeded about four or five miles, on this side, to
provide barns, etc. for their accommodation. Other accounts say another
division, composed of Hessians, are on the road through Springfield, and are
reported to have reached that place last night. I do not know how far their
views extend; but I doubt not, they mean to push every advantage resulting from
the small number and state of our troops.

I early began to forward part of the stores from this place toward
Philadelphia. Many are gone: the rest we are removing, and hope to secure.

I am sir, very respectfully, etc. G. W.
P. S. I have wrote to governor Livingston, who is exerting himself to throw in
every assistance, and to have guards placed at the ferries to prevent the
return of the soldiers who are not discharged.



To the Board of War.
Headquarters, Brunswic, Nov. 30, 1776. GENTLEMEN,
I AM to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of the eighteenth, nineteenth,
and twenty-third instant, which, from the unsettled situation of our affairs, I
have not been able to answer before. That of the eighteenth incloses a list of
stores [ imported] in the Hancock-and-Adams continental ship, and carried into
Dartmouth in New England, -- with a resolve of Congress to deliver the muskets,
powder, lead, and flints, to my order. As the other articles of the cargo will
be full as useful to the army as those included in the resolve, I would advise
that directions be given to have the whole cargo removed from Dartmouth to some
secure place in the neighborhood of Philadelphia, and there deposited till
called for. It is by no means proper that so great a quantity of military
stores should be lodged with the army, especially at present, as we know not
today where we shall be obliged to remove tomorrow: and that will in all
probability be the case while the enemy continue with a light army on this side
the North-River.

In answer to that part of yours of the nineteenth in which you ask my advice
as to the propriety of enlisting prisoners of war, I would just observe, that,
in my opinion, it is neither consistent with the rules of war, nor politic: nor
can I think, that because our enemies have committed an unjustifiable action,
by enticing, and, in some instances, intimidating our men in their service, we
ought to follow their example. Before I had the honor of yours on this subject,
I had determined to remonstrate to general How on this head. As to those few
who have already enlisted, I would not have them again withdrawn and sent in,
because they might be subjected to punishment: but I would have the practice
discontinued in future. If you will revert to the capitulation of St. John's
and Chamblee, you will find an express stipulation against the enlisting the
prisoners taken there.

I remarked that the enlistment of prisoners was not a politic step: -- my
reason is this, that in time of danger I have always observed such persons most
backward, for fear (I suppose) of falling into the hands of their former
masters, from whom they expect no mercy: and this fear they are apt to
communicate to their fellow soldiers. They are also most ready to desert when
any action is expected, hoping, by carrying intelligence, to secure their peace.

I met captain Hesketh on the road; and as the situation of his family did not
admit of delay, I permitted him to go immediately to New York, not having the
least doubt but general How will make a return of any officer of equal rank
who shall be required.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Brunswic, December 1, 1776. SIR,
I YESTERDAY had the honor of writing you, and to advise you of our arrival
here. I am now to inform you that the enemy are still advancing, and that their
vanguard had proceeded as far as Bonem, a small town about four miles this
side of Woodbridge, according to my last intelligence. As to their number,
reports are various. Some say they were joined yesterday by a considerable
reinforcement from Staten-Island. How far this fact may be true, I cannot
determine: but, from every information, before, they were between six and seven
thousand strong.

I have for some time past supposed Philadelphia to be the object of their
movement, and have every reason to believe my opinion well founded, -- the
advices of sundry persons, who have had an opportunity of mixing and conversing
with them on the march, agreeing that such is the report. I have wrote to
governor Livingston upon the subject, requesting his utmost exertions to
forward on every succor in his power. The same, I trust, will be attended to
in Pennsylvania. Without a sufficient number of men and arms, their progress
cannot be checked: -- at present our force is totally inadequate to any attempt.

Several officers belonging to the enemy, who were prisoners, have obtained
permission to return. I have not yet sent in the names of those belonging to
us, that are to be exchanged for them. By a Virginia paper, I perceive that
captain Morgan and lieutenant Heath, who were taken prisoners at Quebec, and
now on parole, are promoted in the late arrangement of officers in that state,
-- the former to a regiment, the latter to a majority. It would be well if they
were released: but being Virginians, and not knowing that any gentleman who
were taken at the same time are so circumstanced, I have declined claiming
their return without the opinion of Congress, lest I should incur the charge of
partiality.

I have sent forward colonel Humpton, to collect proper boats and crafts at the
ferry, for transporting our troops: and it will be of infinite importance to
have every other craft, besides what he takes for the above purpose, secured on
the west side of Delaware: otherwise they may fall into the enemy's hands and
facilitate their views.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Half after one o'clock, P. M. -- The enemy are fast advancing: some of
them are now in sight. All the men of the Jersey flying camp under general
Heard, being applied to, have refused to continue longer in service.



December 1, 1776, half after seven, P. M. SIR,
IN a little time after I wrote you this evening, the enemy appeared in several
parties on the heights opposite Brunswic, and were advancing in a large body
toward the crossing-place. We had a smart cannonade whilst we were parading
our men, but without any or but little loss on either side. It being impossible
to oppose them with our present force with the least prospect of success, we
shall retreat to the west side of Delaware (and have advanced about eight
miles) where it is hoped we shall meet a reinforcement sufficient to check
their progress. I have sent colonel Humpton forward to collect the necessary
boats for our transportation, and conceive it proper that the militia from
Pennsylvania should be ordered toward Trenton, that they may be ready to join
us, and act as occasion may require.

I am, sir, your most obedient servant, G. W.
P. S. I wish my letters of yesterday may arrive safe, being informed that the
return express who had them was idling his time, and showing them on the road.



Princeton, December 2, 1776. SIR,
I ARRIVED here this morning with our troops between eight and nine o'clock,
when I received the honor of your letter of the first, with its enclosures.

When the enemy first landed on this side the North-river, I apprehended that
they meant to make a push this way: and knowing that the force which I had was
not sufficient to oppose them, I wrote to general Lee to cross with the several
continental regiments in his division, and hoped he would have arrived before
now. -- By some means or other he has been delayed. -- I suppose he has passed
the river, as his letter of the twenty-sixth ultimo mentioned that he had
marched a brigade the day before, and should follow the next himself. The
remainder of the troops I conceived necessary to guard the several passes
through the Highlands; nor do I think they can be called from thence. Their
number is very small, being reduced to very few by the departure of the troops
who stood engaged till the thirttieth ultimo.

I understand there are now at Bristol several prisoners. As their exchange at
this time cannot be effected with propriety, I think it will be necessary,
under the present situation of affairs, fairs, to have them removed immediately
to some more interior place, upon their paroles. If they remain, they may be of
infinite disadvantage.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

[On the outside of the foregoing letter, which is, as usual, addressed to the
president of Congress, appears the following line, to Mr. Peter's, secretary to
the board of war.]
SIR, dispatch an express immediately, to have the prisoners at Bristol removed.

R. H. HARRISON.

Headquarters, Trenton, Dec. 3, 1776. SIR,
I ARRIVED here myself yesterday morning with the main body of the army, having
left lord Sterling with two brigades at Princeton and that neighborhood, to
watch the motions of the enemy, and give notice of their approach. I am
informed that they had not entered Brunswic yesterday morning at nine o'clock,
but were on the opposite side of the Rariton.

Immediately on my arrival here, I ordered the removal of all the military and
other stores and baggage over the Delaware: a great quantity are already got
over; and as soon as boats come up from Philadelphia, we shall load them; by
which means I hope to have every thing secured this night and tomorrow, if we
are not disturbed. After being disencumbered of my baggage and stores, my
future situation will depend entirely upon circumstances.

I have not heard a word from General Lee since the twenty-sixth of last month;
which surprises me not a little, as I have dispatched daily expresses to him,
desiring to know when I might look for him. This makes me fearful that my
letters have not reached him. I am informed by report that general St. Clair
has joined him with three or four regiments from the northward. To know the
truth of this, and also when I may expect him, and with what numbers, I have
this minute dispatched colonel Stewart (General Gates's aid-de-camp) to meet
general Lee and bring me an account.

I look out earnestly for the reinforcement from Philadelphia. I am in hopes,
that, if we can draw a good head of men together, it will give spirits to the
militia of this state, who have as yet afforded me little or no assistance; nor
can I find they are likely to do much.

General Heard just informs me that a person, on whose veracity he can depend,
has reported to him that on sunday last he counted a hundred and seventeen sail
of ships going out of the Hook. You may depend upon being advised instantly of
any further movement in the enemy's army or mine.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Trenton, December 4, 1776.
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you yesterday, I received a letter from
General Lee. On the thirtieth ultimo he was at Peekskill, and expected to pass
the river with his division two days after. From this intelligence you will
readily conclude that he will not be able to afford us any aid for several
days. The report of general St. Clair's having joined them with three or four
regiments, I believe to be altogether premature, as he mentions nothing of it.
It has arisen, as I am informed, from the return of some of the Jersey and
Pennsylvania troops from Tyconderoga, whose time of service is expired. They
have reached Pluckemin where I have wrote to have them halted and kept
together, if they can be prevailed on, till further orders.

The enclosed is a copy of a letter which came to hand last night from major
Clark, to which I beg leave to refer you for the intelligence it contains. --
The number of the enemy said to be embarked is supposed to be rather
exaggerated. That there has been an embarkation, is not to be doubted, it being
confirmed through various channels. By colonel Griffin, who went from Brunswic
on sunday morning with a captain Sims, to pass him by our guards, and who was
detained by lord Cornwallis till monday evening, on account of his situation,
the amount of general Clinton's force, from what he could collect from the
officers, was about six thousand: as to their destination, he could not obtain
the least information. By him I also learn the enemy were in Brunswic, and that
some of their advanced parties had proceeded two miles on this side. The heavy
rain that has fallen has probably checked their progress, and may prevent their
frther movement for some time,

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

To Richard Peter's, Esquire, Secretary to the Board of War.
Headquarters, Trenton, Dec. 4, 1776. SIR,
YOURS of the twentieth of last month was delivered to me by the brigadier La
Roche de Fermoy, who is now here, but unable to render me that service, which,
I dare say, from his character, he would, were he better acquainted with our
language.

I yesterday received a letter from you without a date, mentioning that the
prisoners from York-town were directed to halt at Newtown for my orders. On
hearing they were there, I sent colonel Moylan to conduct them, and the
prisoners from Reading, who arrived nearly at the same time, over toward
Brunswic, and deliver them in.

I hope you have not sent captain Price, lieutenant Peacock, and major
Campbell, on to this place, as it is highly improper they should see and know
the situation of our army here and at Princeton. They had better be sent up,
under the care of some person, to Newtown or that neighborhood, and there wait
the arrival of some larger party, who, I imagine, will be soon forwarded from
Lancaster, and go in with them.

Lieutenant Symes came over to me at Brunswic from Bethlehem without the least
guard or escort; and a lieutenant of the seventh regiment went through our
whole army, and was at last discovered by a mere accident. He had a pass from
the council of safety, and that was all. Such an irregular mode of suffering
prisoners to go in alone must be put a stop to, or the enemy will be as well
acquainted with our situation as we are ourselves. If they are left at liberty
to choose their own route, they will always take that through our army, for
reasons too obvious to mention.

I am, sir, your most obedient servant. G. W.
I have been obliged to send down a number of our sick to Philadelphia, to make
room for the troops, and to remove them out of the way. Be pleased to have some
care taken to have them properly accommodated. I should think part of the
House-of-employment might be procured for that purpose. I have sent down an
officer from each regiment, and a surgeon's mate, if they can be spared: but I
hope they will not want the assistance of the visiting physicians of the
hospital.



Trenton, December 5, 1776. SIR,
AS nothing but necessity obliged me to retire before the enemy and leave so
much of the Jerseys unprotected, I conceive it my duty, and it corresponds with
my inclination, to make head against them so soon as there shall be the least
probability of doing it with propriety. That the country might in some measure
be covered, I left two brigades consisting of the five Virginia regiments and
that of Delaware, containing in the whole about twelve hundred men fit for
duty, under the command of lord Sterling and general Stephen, at Princeton,
till the baggage and stores could cross the Delaware, or the troops under their
respective commands should be forced from thence. I shall now, having removed
the greatest part of the above articles, face about with such troops as are
here fit for service, and march back to Princeton, and there govern myself by
circumstances and the movements of general Lee. At any event, the enemy's
progress may be retarded by this means, if they intend to come on, and the
people's fears in some measure quieted, if they do not. Sorry I am to observe,
however, that the frequent calls upon the militia of this state, the want of
exertion in the principal gentlemen of the country, or a fatal supineness and
insensibility of danger till it is too late to prevent an evil that was not
only foreseen but foretold, have been the causes of our late disgraces.

If the militia of this state had stepped forth in season (and timely notice
they had), we might have prevented the enemy's crossing the Hackinsac, although
without some previous notice of the time and place it was impossible to have
done this at the North-river. We might with equal probability of success have
made a stand at Brunswic on the Rariton. But as both these rivers were fordable
in a variety of places (knee-deep only), it required many men to defend the
passes; and these we had not. At Hackinsac our force was insufficient, because
a part was at Elizabeth-town, Amboy, and Brunswic, ^uarding a coast which I
thought most exposed to danger; and at Brunswic, because I was disappointed in
my expectation of militia, and because on the day of the enemy's approach (and
probably the occasion of it) the term of the Jersey and Maryland brigade'
service expired; neither of which would consent to stay an hour longer.

These among ten thousand other instances, might be adduced to show the
disadvantages of short enlistments, and the little dependence upon militia in
times of real danger. But, as yesterday cannot be recalled, I will not dwell
upon a subject which, no doubt, has given much uneasiness to Congress, as well
as extreme pain and anxiety to myself. My first wish is that Congress may be
convinced of the impropriety of relying upon the militia, and of the necessity
of raising a larger standing army than what they have voted. The saving in the
articles of stores, provisions, and in a thousand other things, by having
nothing to do with the militia unless in case of extraordinary exigency, and
such as could not be expected in the common course of events, would amply
support a large army, which, well officered, would be daily improving, instead
of continuing a destructive, expensive, and disorderly mob.

I am clear in opinion, that, if forty thousand men had been kept in constant
pay since the first commencement of hostilities, and the militia had been
excused doing duty during that period, the continent would have saved money.
When I reflect on the losses we have sustained for want of good troops, the
certainty of this is placed beyond a doubt of my mind. In such case, the
militia, who have been harrassed and tired by repeated calls upon them (and
farming and manufactures in a manner suspended), would, upon any pressing
emergency, have ran with alacrity to arms; whereas the cry now is, "they may be
as well ruined one way as another;" and with difficulty they are obtained.

I mention these things, to show, that, in my opinion, if any dependence is
placed in the militia another year, Congress will be deceived. When danger is a
little removed from them, they will not turn out at all. When it comes home to
them, the well-affected; instead of flying to arms to defend themselves, are
busily employed in removing their families and effects, -- whilst the
disaffected are concerting measures to make their submission, and spread terror
and dismay all around, to induce others to follow the example. -- Daily
experience and abundant proofs warrant this information.

I shall this day reinforce lord Sterling with about twelve hundred men, which
will make his number about two thousand four hundred. Tomorrow I mean to
repair to Princeton myself, and shall order the Pennsylvania troops (who are
not yet arrived, except part of the German battalion and a company of light
infantry) to the same place.

By my last advices, the enemy are still at Brunswic; and the account adds that
general How was expected at Elizabethtown with a reinforcement, to erect the
king's standard, and demand a submission of this state. I can only give this as
a report brought from the enemy's camp by some of the country people. -- I have
the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Trenton, December 6, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE not received any intelligence of the enemy's movements since my letter
of yesterday. From every information, they still remain at Brunswic, except
some of their parties who are advanced a small distance on this side. Today I
shall set out for Princeton myself, unless something should occur to prevent
me, which I do not expect.

By a letter of the fourteenth ultimo from a Mr. Caldwell, a clergyman, and a
staunch friend to the cause, who has fled from Elizabeth-town, and taken refuge
in the mountains about ten miles from hence, I am informed that general or lord
How was expected in* that town to publish pardon and peace. His words are "I
have not seen his proclamation, but can only say he gives sixty days of grace,
and pardons from the Congress down to the committee. No one man in the
continent is to be denied his mercy. -- In the language of this good man, the
lord deliver us from his mercy!"

Your letter of the third, by major Livingston, was duly received. Before it
came to hand, I had wrote to general How about governor Franklin's exchange,
but am not certain whether the letter could not be recovered. I dispatched a
messenger instantly for that purpose.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Mr. Berkley's Summer Seat, Dec. 8, 1776. SIR,
COLONEL Reed would inform you of the intelligence which I first met with on
the road from Trenton to Princeton yesterday. Before I got to the latter, I
received a second express informing me, that as the enemy were advancing by
different routes, and attempting by one to get in the rear of our troops which
were there (and whose numbers were small, and the place by no means
defensible), they had judged it prudent to retreat to Trenton. The retreat was
accordingly made, and since to this side of the river.

This information I thought it my duty to communicate as soon as possible, as
there is not a moment's time to be lost in assembling such force as can be
collected; and as the object of the enemy cannot now be doubted in the smallest
degree. Indeed I shall be out of my conjecture (for it is only conjecture) if
the late embarkation at New York is not for Deleware river, to cooperate with
the army under the immediate command of general How, who I am informed from
good authority, is with the British troops and his whole force upon this route.

I have no certain intelligence of general Lee, although I have sent frequent
expresses to him, and lately a colonel Humpton to bring me some accurate
accounts of his situation. I last night dispatched another gentleman to him
(major Hoops) desiring he would hasten his march to the Deleware, in which I
would provide boats near a place called Alexandria, for the transportation of
his troops. -- I cannot account for the slowness of his march.

In the disordered and moving state of the army, I cannot get returns: but from
the best accounts, we had between three thousand and three thousand five
hundred men, before the Philadelphia militia and German battallion arrived:
they amount to about two thousand.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Trenton Falls, December 9, 1776. SIR,
I did myself the honor of writing to you yesterday, and informing you that I
had removed the troops to this side of the Delaware. Soon after the enemy made
their appearance, and their van entered just as our rear guard quitted. We had
removed all our stores, except a few boards. -- From the best information, they
are in two bodies, one at and near Trenton, the other some miles higher up, and
inclining toward Delaware; but whether with intent to cross there, or throw
themselves between general Lee and me, is yet uncertain.

I have this morning detached lord Stirling with his brigade, to take post at
the different landing places, and prevent them from stealing a march upon us
from above; for I am informed, if they cross at Coryel's ferry or thereabouts,
they are as near to Philadelphia, as we are here. From several accounts I am
led to think that the enemy are bringing boats with them: if so it will be
impossible for our small force to give them any considerable opposition in the
passage of the river, [ as they may] make a feint at one place, and, by a
sudden removal, carry their boats higher or lower before we can bring our
cannon to play upon them.

Under these circumstances, the security of Philadelphia should be our next
object. From my own remembrance, but more from information (for I never viewed
the ground) I should think that a communication of lines and redoubts might
soon be formed from the Delaware to Schuylkill on the north entrance of the
city, the lines to begin on the Schuylkill ^ide, about the heights of
Springatebury, and run eastward to Delaware, upon the most advantageous and
commanding grounds. If something of this kind is not done, the enemy might, in
case any misfortune should befall us, march directly, in and take possession. We
have ever found that lines, however slight, are very formidable to them: they
would at least give a check till people could recover of the fright and
consternation that naturally attends the first appearance of an enemy.

In the mean time every step should be taken to collect force, not only from
Pennsylvania, but from the most neighborly states. If we can keep the enemy
from entering Philadelphia, and keep the communication by water open for
supplies, we may yet make a stand, if the country will come to our assistance
till our new levies can be collected.

If the measure of fortifying the city should be adopted, some skilful person
should immediately view the grounds, and begin to trace out the lines and
works. I am informed there is a French engineer of eminence in Philadelphia at
this time: if so he will be the most proper.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I have just received the enclosed from general Heath. -- General Mifflin
is this moment come up, and tells me that all the military stores yet remain in
Philadelphia. This makes the immediate fortifying of the city necessary, that I
have desired general Mifflin to return to take charge of the stores, and have
ordered major general Putnam immediately down to superintend the works and give
the necessary directions.



Headquarters, Falls of Delaware, Dec. 10, 1776. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you yesterday, nothing of importance has
occurred. -- In respect to the enemy's movements, I have obtained no other
information than that they have a number of parties patrolling up and down the
river, particularly above. As yet they have not attempted to pass; nor do any
of their patroles, though some are exceeding small, meet with the least
interruption from the inhabitants of Jersey.

By a letter received last night from general Lee, of the eighth instant, he
was then at Morristown, where he entertained thoughts of establishing a post:
but, on receiving my dispatches by major Hoops, I should suppose he would be
convinced of the necessity of his proceeding this way with all the force he can
bring.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Nine of clock, A. M. -- I this minute received information that the
enemy are preparing the bridges three or four miles below Trenton; which seems
to indicate an intention of their passing lower down, and suggests to me the
necessity that some attention should be had to the fort at Billingsport, lest
they should possess themselves of it; the consideration of which I beg leave to
submit to Congress. -- I have wrote to the council of safety on the subject.



Headquarters, Falls of Delaware, Dec. 11, 1776. SIR,
AFTER I had wrote you yesterday, I received certain information that the
enemy, after repairing Crofwix's bridge, had advanced a party of about five
hundred to Bordentown. By their taking this route, it confirms me in my
opinion, that they have an intention to land between this and Philadelphia, as
well as above, if they can procure boats for that purpose.

I last night directed commodore Seymour to station all his galleys betweed
Bordentown and Philadelphia, to give the earliest intelligence of any
appearance of the enemy or the Jersey shore.

I yesterday rode up the river about eleven miles, to lord Sterling's post,
where I found a prisoner of the forty-second regiment who had been just brought
in. He informed me that lord Cornwallis was at Pennytown with two battalions of
grenadiers, and three of light infantry, all British, the Hessian grenadiers,
the forty-second Highland regiment, and two other battalions, the names of
which he did not remember. He knew nothing of the reasons of their being
assembled there, nor what were their future intentions. But I last night
received information from lord Sterling, which had been brought in by his
scouts, which in some measure accounted for there being there. They had made a
forced march from Trenton on sunday night, to Coryel's ferry, in hopes of
surprising a sufficient number of boats to transport them; but, finding
themselves disappointed, had marched back to Pennytown, where they remained
yesterday. From their several attempts to seize boats, it does not look as if
they had brought any with them, as I was at one time informed. I last night
sent a person over to Trenton, to learn whether there was any appearance of
building any: but he could not perceive any preparations for a work of that
kind; so that I am in hopes, if proper care is taken to keep all the craft out
of their way, they will find the crossing Delaware a matter of considerable
difficulty.

I received another letter from general Lee last evening; it was dated at
Chatham (which I take to be near Morristown) the eighth of this month. He had
then received my letter sent by major Hoops, but seemed still inclined to hang
upon the enemy's rear, to which I should have no objection, had I a sufficient
force to oppose them in front: but as I have not at present, nor do I see much
probability of further reinforcement, I have wrote to him in the most pressing
terms, to join me with all expedition.

Major Shelden, who commands the volunteer horse from Connecticut, waits upon
Congress to establish some mode of pay. I can only say that the service of
himself and his troop has been such as merits the warmest thanks of the public,
and deserves a handsome compensation for their trouble. Whatever is settled
now, will serve for a precedent in future. -- From the experience I have had,
this campaign, of the utility of horse, I am convinced there is no carrying on
the war without them; and I would therefore recommend the establishment of one
or more corpse (in proportion to the number of foot) in addition to those
already raised in Virginia. If major Shelden would undertake the command of a
regiment of horse on the continental establishment, I believe he could very
soon raise them; and I can recommend him as a man of activity and spirit, from
what I have seen of him.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Trenton Falls, December 12, 1776. SIR,
I LAST night received the favor of Mr. Thompson's letter enclosing the
proceedings of Congress, of the eleventh instant. -- As the publication of
their resolve, in my opinion, will not lead to any good end, but, on the
contrary, may be attended with some bad consequences, I shall take the liberty
to decline inserting it in this day's orders. I am persuaded, if the subject is
taken up and reconsidered, that Congress will concur with me in sentiment. I
doubt not but there are some who have propagated the report: but what if they
have? -- Their remaining in or leaving Philadelphia must be governed by
circumstances and events. If their departure should become necessary, it will
be right: on the other hand if there should not be a necessity for it, they
will remain, and their continuance will show the report to be the production of
calumny and falsehood. In a word, sir, I conceive it a matter that may be as
well disregarded; and that the removal or staying of Congress, depending
entirely upon events, should not have been the subject of a resolve.

The intelligence we obtain respecting the movements and situation of the enemy
is far from being so certain and satisfactory as I could wish, though every
probable means in my power, and that I can devise, are adopted for that
purpose. The latest I have received was from lord Sterling, last night. He says
that two grenadiers of the Inniskillen regiments, who were taken and brought in
by some countrymen, inform that generals How, Cornwallis, Vaughan, etc. with
about six thousand of the flying army, were at Pennytown, waiting for pontoons
to come up, with which they mean to pass the river near the Blue Mountains, or
at Coryel's ferry, -- they believe the latter: -- that the two battallions of
guards were at Brunswic, and the Hessian grenadiers, chasseurs, and a regiment
or two of the British troops, are at Trenton.

Captain Miller of colonel Hand's regiment also informs me, that a body of the
enemy were marching to Burlington yesterday morning. He had been sent over with
a strong scouting party, and, at daybreak, fell in with their advanced guards
consisting of about four hundred Hessian troops, who fired upon him before they
were discovered, but without any loss, and obliged him to retreat with his
party and to take boat. The number of the whole he could not ascertain: but it
appeared to be considerable. Captain Miller's account is partly confirmed by
commodore Seymour, who reports that four or five hundred of the enemy had
entered the town. Upon the whole, there can be no doubt but that Philadelphia
is their object, and that they will pass the Delaware as soon as possible.
Happy should I be if I could see the means of preventing them: at present, I
confess, I do not. All military writers agree that it is a work of great
difficulty, nay, impracticable, where there is any extent of coast to guard.
This is the case with us; and we have to do it with a force, small and
inconsiderable, and much inferior to that of the enemy. Perhaps Congress have
some hope and prospect of reinforcements: I have no intelligence of the sort,
and wish to be informed on the subject. Our little handful is daily decreasing
by sickness and other causes: and, without aid, without considerable succors
and exertions on the part of the people, what can we reasonably look for or
expect, but an event that will be severely felt by the common cause, and that
will wound the heart of every virtuous American, -- the loss of Philadelphia?
The subject is disagreeable, but yet it is true. I leave it, wishing that our
situation may become such as to do away the apprehensions which at this time
seem to fill the minds of too many, and with too much justice.

By a letter from general Heath, dated at Peekskill, the eighth, I am advised
that lieutenant colonel Vose was then there with Greaton's, Bond's, and
Porter's regiments, amounting in the whole to between five and six hundred men,
who were coming this way. He adds that generals Gates and Arnold would be at
Goshen that night, with Stark's, Poor's, and Read's regiments; but for what
purpose, he does not mention.

The enclosed extract of a letter which I received last night contains
intelligence of an agreeable nature. I wish to hear its confirmation by the
arrival of the several prizes: that with clothing and arms will be an
invaluable acquisition.

I shall be glad to be advised of the mode I am to observe in paying the
officers; whether they are to be allowed to draw the pay lately established,
and from what time, or how long they are to be paid under the old
establishment. A pay-roll which was presented yesterday, being made up for the
new, has given rise to these propositions. Upon my objecting to it, I was told
that Congress or the board of war had established the precedent, by paying the
sixth regiment of Virginia troops commanded by colonel Buckner, agreeable to
the latter, as they came through Philadelphia.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Trenton Falls, Dec. 13, 1776. SIR,
THE apparent designs of the enemy being to avoid this ferry, and land their
troops above and below us, have induced me to remove from this place the
greater part of the troops, and throw them into a different disposition on the
river, whereby I hope not only to be more able to impede their passage, but,
also to avoid the danger of being enclosed in this angle of the river. And
notwithstanding the extended appearances of the enemy on the other side, made,
at least in part, to divert our attention from any particular point as well as
to harrass us by fatigue, I cannot divest myself of the opinion that their
principal design is to ford the river somewhere above Trenton; to which design
I have had particular respect in the new arrangement, wherein I am so far happy
as to have the concurrence of the general officers at this place.

Four brigades of the army, under generals lord Sterling, Mercer, Stephen and
De Fermoy, extend from Yardley's up to Coryel's ferry, posted in such a manner
as to guard every suspicious part of the river, and to afford assistance to
each other in case of attack. General Ewing, with the flying camp of
Pennsylvania and a few Jersey troops under general Dickinson, are posted from
Yardley's ferry down to the ferry opposite Bordentown. Colonel Cadwalladar,
with the Pennsylvania militia, occupies the ground above and below the mouth of
Neshaminy river as far down as Dunk's ferry, at which place colonel Nixon is
posted with the third battalion of [ Pennsylvania]. A proper quantity of
artillery is appointed to each brigade; and I have ordered small redoubts to be
thrown up opposite every place where there is a possibility of fording. -- I
shall remove further up the river to be near the main body of my small army,
with which every possible opposition shall be given to any further approach of
the enemy toward Philadelphia.

As general Armstrong has a good deal of influence in this state, and our
present force is small and inconsiderable, I think he cannot be better employed
than to repair to the counties where his interest lies, to animate the people,
promote the recruiting service, and encourage the militia to come in. He will
also be able to form a proper judgment of the places suitable for magazines of
provision to be collected. I have requested him to wait upon Congress on this
subject; and if general Smallwood should go to Maryland on the same business, I
think it will have a happy effect: he is popular and of great influence, and, I
am persuaded, would contribute greatly to that state's furnishing her quota of
men in a little time. He is now in Philadelphia.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters at Keith's, Dec. 15, 1776. SIR,
ABOUT one o'clock today I received a letter from general Sullivan, a copy of
which you have enclosed. I will not comment on the melancholy intelligence
which it contains, only adding that I sincerely regret general Lee's unhappy
fate, and feel much for the loss of my country in his captivity.

In respect to the enemy, they have been industrious in their attempts to
procure boats and small craft: but as yet their efforts have not succeeded.
From the latest advices that I have of their movements by some prisoners and
others, they appear to be leaving Trenton, and to be filing off toward
Princeton and Allentown. What their designs are, whether they mean to retreat,
or only a feint, cannot be determined. I have parties out to watch their
motions, and to form if possible, an accurate opinion of their plans.

Our force, since my last, has received no augmentation, -- of course, by
sickness and other causes, has diminished: but I am advised by a letter from
the council of safety, which just came to hand, that colonels Burd and
Gilbreath are marching with their battalions of militia, and also that some
small parties are assembling in Cumberland county.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters at Keith's, Dec. 16, 1776. SIR,
IN a letter which I had the honor of addressing you, I took the liberty to
recommend that more battalions should be raised for the new army than what had
been voted. Having fully considered the matter, I am more and more convinced
not only of the propriety but of the necessity of the measure. That the enemy
will leave nothing unessayed in the course of the next campaign to reduce these
states to the rule of the most * * *, must be obvious to every one; and that
the militia is not to be depended on, or aid expected from them but in cases of
the most pressing emergency, is not to be doubted. The first of these
propositions is unquestionable, and fatal experience has given her sanction to
the truth of the latter: indeed their lethargy of late, and backwardness to
turn out at this alarming crisis, seem to justify an apprehension that nothing
can bring them from their homes. For want of their assistance, a large part of
Jersey has been exposed to ravage and to plunder; nor do I know that
Pennsylvania would share a better fate, could general How effect a passage
across the Delaware with a respectable force. These considerations have induced
me to wish that no reliance, except such as may arise from necessity, should
ever be had in them again; and to make further mention to Congress of the
expediency of increasing their army. -- I trust the measures will meet the
earliest attention.

Had I leisure and were it necessary, I could say much upon this head: but, as
I have not, and the matter is well understood I will not add much. By
augmenting the number of your battalions, you will augment your force: the
officers of each will have their interest and influence; and, upon the whole,
their numbers will be much greater, though they should not be complete. Added
to this, from the present confused state of Jersey, and the improper
appointment of officers in many instances, I have little or no expectation that
she will be able to raise all the troops exacted from her, though I think it
might be done, were suitable spirited gentlemen commissioned, who would exert
themselves, and encourage the people, many of whom (for a failure in this
instance, and who are well disposed) are making their submissions. -- In a
word, the next will be a trying campaign: and as all that is dear and valuable
may depend upon the issue of it, I would advise that nothing should be omitted,
that shall seem necessary to our success. Let us have a respectable army, and
such as will be competent to every exigency.

I will also add that the critical situation of our affairs, and the
dissolution of our present force (now at hand), require that every nerve and
exertion be employed for recruiting the new battalions. One part of general
Howe's movements at this time, I believe, is with a design to distract us and
prevent this business. If the inclemency of the weather should force him into
winter quarters, he will not remain there longer than necessity shall oblige
him: he will commence his operations in a short space of time: and in that time
our levies must be made up, to oppose him, or I fear the most melancholy of all
events must take place.

The enclosed extract of a letter from the commissary-general will show his
demands for money, and his plans for procuring salted provisions and a quantity
of flour from the southward. The whole is submitted to the consideration of
Congress: and I wish the result of their opinion to be transmitted him, with
such supplies of money as may be necessary for himself and the departments he
mentions.

The clothing of the troops is a matter of infinite importance, and, if it
could be accomplished, would have a happy effect. Their distresses are
extremely great, many of them being entirely naked, and most so thinly clad as
to be unfit for service. I must entreat Congress to write to the agents and
contractors upon this subject, that every possible supply may be procured and
forwarded with the utmost expedition. I cannot attend to the business myself,
having more than I can possibly do besides.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, above Trenton Falls, Dec. 20, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE waited with much impatience to know the determinations of Congress on
the propositions made some time in October last for augmenting our corpse of
artillery and establishing a corpse of engineers. The time is come when the
first cannot be delayed without the greatest injury to the safety of these
states; and therefore, under the resolution of Congress bearing date the
twelfth instant, at the repeated instances of colonel Knox, and by the pressing
advice of all the general officers now here, I have ventured to order three
battalions of artillery to be immediately recruited. These are two less than
colonel Knox recommends, as you will see by his plan enclosed: but then this
scheme comprehends all the United States, whereas some of the states have corpse
already established, and these three battalions are indispensably necessary for
the operations in this quarter, including the northern department.

The pay of our artillerists bearing no proportion with that in the English or
French service, -- the murmuring and disatisfaction thereby occasioned, and the
absolute impossibility (as I am told) of getting them upon the old terms, --
and the unavoidable necessity of obtaining them at all events, -- have induced
me (also by advice) to promise officers and men that their pay should be
augmented twenty-five per cent, or that their engagements should become null
and void. This may appear to Congress premature and unwarrantable. But, sir, if
they view our situation in the light it strikes their officers, they will be
convinced of the utility of the measure, and that the execution could not be
delayed till after their meeting at Baltimore. In short, the present exigency
of our affairs will not admit of delay either in council or the field: for well
convinced I am, that if the enemy go into quarters at all, it will be for a
short season. But I rather think the design of general How is to possess
himself of Philadelphia this winter if possible; and in truth I do not see what
is to prevent him, as ten days more will put an end to the existence of our
army. That one great point is to keep us as much harrassed as possible, with a
view to injure the recruiting service and hinder a collection of stores and
other necessaries for the next campaign, I am as clear in, as I am of my
existence. If therefore, [ when] we have to provide this short interval, and
make these great and ardent preparations, -- every matter that in its nature is
self-evident is to be referred to Congress at the distance of a hundred and
thirty or forty miles, so much time must necessarily elapse, as to defeat the
end in view.

It may be said that this is an application for powers that are too dangerous
to be entrusted. I can only add that desperate diseases require desperate
remedies; and with truth declare that I have no lust after power, but wish with
as much fervency as any man upon this wide-extended continent, for an
opportunity of turning the sword into a plough-share. But my feelings, as an
officer and a man, have been such as to force me to say that no person ever had
a greater choice of difficulties to contend with than I have. -- It is needless
to add, that short enlistments, and a mistaken dependence upon militia, have
been the origin of all our misfortunes and the great accumulation of our debt.

We find, sir, that the enemy are daily gathering strength from the
dissaffected. This strength, like a snow-ball, by rolling, will increase,
unless some means can be devised to check effectually the progress of the
enemy's arms. Militia may possibly do it for a little while: but in a little
while also, the militia of those states which have been frequently called upon
will not turn out at all; or, if they do, it will be with so much reluctance
and sloth, as to amount to the same thing: -- instance, NewJersey! -- witness
Pennsylvania! -- Could any thing but the river Delaware have saved
Philadelphia? -- Can any thing (the exige^^^ of the case indeed may justify it)
be more destructive to the recr^^^ing service, than giving ten dollars bounty
for six weeks' service of the militia, who come in, you cannot tell how, -- go,
you can not tell when, -- and act, you cannot tell where -- consume you^
provisions, exhaust your stores, and leave you at last at a critical moment?

These, sir, are the men I am to depend upon, ten days hence: this is the basis
on which your cause will and must forever depend, till you get a large standing
army sufficient of itself to oppose the enemy. I therefore beg leave to give it
as my humble opinion, that eighty-eight battalions are by no means equal to the
opposition you can make, and that a moment's time is not to be lost in raising
a greater number, -- not less in my opinion and the opinion of my officers,
than a hundred and ten. It may be urged that it will be found difficult enough
to complete the first number. This may be true, and yet the officers of a
hundred and ten battalions will recruit a great many more men, than those of
eighty-eight. In my judgment this is not a time to stand upon expense: our
funds are the only object of consideration. The state of New York have added
one battalion (I wish they had made it two) to their quota. -- If any good
officers offer to raise men upon continental pay and establishment in this
quarter, I shall encourage them to do so, and regiment them when they have done
it. If Congress disapprove of this proceeding, they will please to signify it,
as I mean it for the best.

It may be thought that I am going a good deal out of the line of my duty, to
adopt these measures, or to advise thus freely. A character to lose, -- an
estate to forfeit, -- the inestimable blessings of liberty at stake, -- and a
life devoted, -- must be my excuse.

I have heard nothing of the light horse from Virginia, nor the regiment from
the Eastern-Shore. I wish to know what troops are to act in the different
departments, and to have those from the southward (designed for this place)
ordered on as fast as they shall be raised. The route should be pointed out by
which they are to march; assistant-commissaries and quartermasters upon the
communication, to supply their wants: the first or second officer of each
battalion to forward them, and the other to come on, receive and form them at
their place of destination. Unless this is immediately set about, the campaign,
if it should be closed, will be opened in the spring before we have any men in
the field.

Every exertion should be used to procure tents: a clothier-general should be
appointed without loss of time, for supplying the army with every article in
that way: -- he should be a man of business and abilities. A commissary of
prisoners must be appointed to attend the army: -- for want of an officer of
this kind, the exchange of prisoners has been conducted in a shameful and
injurious manner. We have had them from all quarters pushed into our camps at
the most critical junctures, and without the least previous notice. We have had
them traveling through the different states in all directions by certificates
from committees, without any kind of control; and have had instances of some
going into the enemy's camp without my privity or knowledge, after passing in
the manner before mentioned. -- There may be other officers necessary which I
do not recollect at this time, and which, when thought of, must be provided:
for this, sir, you may rely on, that the commanding officer, under the present
establishment, is obliged to attend to the business of so many different
departments, as to render it impossible to conduct that of his own with the
attention necessary; -- than which, nothing can be more injurious.

In a former letter, I intimated my opinion of the necessity of having a
brigadier for every three regiments, and a major general to every three
brigades, at most. I think no time is to be lost in making the appointments,
that the arrangements may be consequent. This will not aid the recruiting
service, but will be the readiest means of forming and disciplining the army
afterward, which, in the short time we have to do it, is of amazing
consequence. I have labored ever since I have been in the service, to
discourage all kinds of local attachments and distinctions of country,
denominating the whole by the greater name of ' American:' but I found it
impossible to overcome prejudices: and, under the new establishment, I conceive
it best to stir up an emulation; in order to do which, would it not be better
for each state to furnish (though not to appoint) their own brigadiers? --
This, if known to be part of the establishment, might prevent a good deal of
contention and jealousy; and would, I believe, be the means of promotions going
forward with more satisfaction, and quiet the higher officers.

Whilst I am speaking of promotions, I cannot help giving it as my opinion,
that, if Congress think proper to confirm what I have done with respect to the
corpse of artillery, colonel Knox (at present at the head of that department,
but who, without promotion, will resign) ought to be appointed to the command
of it, with the rank and pay of brigadier. I have also to mention, that, for
want of some establishment in the department of engineers agreeable to the plan
laid before Congress in October last, colonel Putnam, who was at the head of
it, has quitted, and taken a regiment in the state of Massachusetts. I know of
no other man tolerable well qualified for the conducting of that business. None
of the French gentlemen whom I have seen with appointments in that way appear
to me to know any thing of the matter. There is one in Philadelphia, who I am
told, is clever: but him I have never seen.

I must also once more beg leave to mention to Congress the expediency of
letting promotions be in a regimental line. The want of this has already driven
some of the best officers that were in your army, out of the service. From
repeated and strict enquiry I am convinced you can adopt no mode of promotion
that will be better received, or that will give more general satisfaction. I
wish therefore to have it announced.

The casting of cannon is a matter that ought not to be one moment delayed: and
therefore I shall send colonel Knox to put this in a train, as also to have
traveling carriages and shot provided, -- elaboratories to be established, one
in Hartford, and another in York. Magazines of provisions should also be laid
in. These I shall fix with the commissary. As our great loss last year
proceeded from a want of teams, I shall direct the quarter-master-general to
furnish a certain number to each regiment to answer the common purposes
thereof, that the army may be enabled to remove from place to place differently
from what we have done, or could do, this campaign. Ammunition carts, and
proper carts for entrenching tools, should also be provided, and I shall direct
about them accordingly. Above all a store of small arms should be provided, or
men will be of little use. The consumption and waste of these, this year, has
been great: -- militia, flying-camp men, etc. coming in without, were obliged
to be furnished, or become useless. Many of these threw their arms away: some
lost them, whilst others deserted, and took them away. In a word, although I
used every precaution to preserve them, the loss has been great; and this will
forever be the case in such a mixed and irregular army as ours has been.

If no part of the troops already embarked at New York has appeared in
Virginia, their destination doubtless must be to some other quarter; and that
state must, I should think be freed from any invasion, if general How can be
effectually opposed in this. I therefore enclose a memorandum given me by
brigadier Stephen of Virginia, which Congress will please to adopt in the
whole, -- in part, -- or reject, -- as may be consistent with their plans and
intelligence.

The division of the army, late under the command of general Lee, now general
Sullivan, is just upon the point of joining us. A strange kind of fatality has
attended it. They had orders on the seventeenth of November to join, now more
than a month. General Gates, with four eastern regiments, is also near at hand:
three others from those states were coming on, by his order, by the way of
Peekskill, and had joined general Heath whom I had ordered on with Parson's
brigade, to join me, leaving Clinton's brigade and some militia (that were at
Forts Montgomery and Constitution) to guard those important passes of the
Highlands. But the convention of the state of New York seeming to be much
alarmed at Heath's coming away, -- a fleet appearing off New London, -- and
some part of the enemy's troops retiring toward Brunswic, -- induced me to
countermand the order for the march of Parsons's brigade, and to direct the
three regiments from Tyconderoga to halt at Morristown in Jersey (where I
understand about eight hundred militia had collected), in order to inspirit the
inhabitants, and, as far as possible, cover that part of the country. I shall
send general Maxwell this day to take the command of them, and, if to be done,
to harrass and annoy the enemy in their quarters, and cut off their convoys.

The care and vigilance, which were used in securing the boats on this river,
have hitherto baffled every attempt of the enemy to cross: but, from concurring
reports and appearances, they are waiting for ice to afford them a passage.

Since writing the foregoing, I have received a letter from governor Cook of
Rhode Island, of which the enclosed is a copy. Previous to this, and
immediately upon the first intelligence obtained of a fleet's going through the
Sound, I dispatched orders to generals Spencer and Arnold to proceed without
the least delay to the eastward. The first, I presume, is gone: the latter, not
getting my letter till he came to a place called Easton, was, by advice of
general Gates, who also met my letter at the same place, induced to come on
hither before he proceeded to the eastward. -- Most of our brigadiers are laid
up: not one has come on with the division under general Sullivan, but they are
left sick at different places on the road.

By accounts from the eastward, a large body of men had assembled in
Rhode Island, from the states of Massacusetts and Connecticut. I presume (but I
have no advice of it) that the militia ordered from the first, to rendezvous at
Danbury (six thousand in number) under the command of major general Lincoln,
for supplying the place of the disbanded men of that state in the continental
army, will now be ordered to Rhode Island.

In speaking of general Lincoln, I should not do him justice, were I not to add
that he is a gentleman well worthy of notice in the military line. He commanded
the militia from Massachusetts last summer, or fall rather, and much to my
satisfaction, -- having proved himself on all occasions an active, spirited,
sensible man. I do not know whether it his wish to remain in the military line,
or whether, if he should, any thing under the rank he now holds in the state he
comes from would satisfy him. How far an appointment of this kind might offend
the continental brigadiers, I cannot undertake to say: -- many there are, over
whom he ought not to be placed; but I know of no way to discriminate. --
Brigadier Reed of New-Hamshire does not, I presume, mean to continue in
service: he ought not, -- as I am told, by the severity of the smallpox, he is
become both blind and deaf.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Generals Gates and Sullivan have this instant come in. By them I learn
that few or no men are recruited out of the regiments coming on with them, and
that there is very little reason to expect that these regiments will be
prevailed upon to continue after their term of service expires. If militia then
do not come in, the consequences are but too evident.



Camp above Trenton Falls, December 24, 1776. SIR,
THAT I should dwell upon the subject of our distresses, cannot be more
disagreeable to Congress than it is painful to myself. The alarming situation
to which our affairs are reduced, impels me to the measure. Inquiry and
investigation, -- which in most cases serve to develope and point out a remedy,
-- in ours, present more and greater difficulties. Till of late I was led to
hope from report that no inconsiderable part of the troops composing the
regiments that were with general Lee, and those from Tyconderogo under general
Gates, had enlisted again. This intelligence, I confess, gave me reason to
expect that I should have at the expiration of the present year, a force
somewhat more respectable than what I find will be the case.

Having examined into the state of those regiments, I am authorized to say,
from the information of their officers, that but very few of the men have
enlisted. Those who have, are of the troops from Tyconderoga, and were
permitted to visit their friends and homes, as part of the terms on which they
would reengage. In respect to those who marched with general Lee, I cannot
learn that any have. Their refusal, I am told, has not proceeded more from an
aversion to the service, or any fixed determination not to engage again, than
from their wishes to return home, -- the non-appointment of officers in some
instances, -- the turning out of good, and appointing of bad, -- in others, and
the incomplete or rather no arrangement of them, -- a work unhappily committed
to the management of their states: nor have I the most distant prospect of
retaining them a moment longer than the last of this instant, notwithstanding
the most pressing solicitations and the obvious necessity for it.

By the departure of these regiments I shall be left with five from Virginia,
Smallwood's from Maryland, a small part of Rawlin's, Hand's from Pennsylvania,
a part of Ward's from Connecticut, and the German battalion, amounting in the
whole at this time from fourteen to fifteen hundred effective men. This
handful, and such militia as may choose to join me, will then compose our army.

When I reflect upon these things they fill me with much concern, knowing that
general How has a number of troops cantoned in the towns bordering on and near
the Delaware, -- his intentions to pass, as soon as the ice is sufficiently
formed, to invade Pennsylvania and to possess himself of Philadelphia, if
possible. To guard against his designs and the execution of them, shall employ
my every exertion: but how is this to be done? As yet but few militia have gone
to Philadelphia, and they are to be our support at this alarming crisis. Had I
entertained a doubt of general Howe's intentions to pass the Delaware on the
dissolution of our army, and as soon as the ice is made, it would now be done
away. An intercepted letter from a gentleman of Philadelphia, (who has joined
the enemy), to his friend and partner in the city, declares that to be their
design, -- that the army would be there in ten or twenty days from the
sixteenth instant, the time of his writing, if the ice should be made; --
advises him by no means to remove their stores, -- that they would be safe.

The obstacles which have arisen to the raising of the new army, from the mode
of appointing the officers, induce me to hope, if Congress resolve on an
additional number of battalions to those already voted, that they will devise
some other rule by which the officers, especially the field-officers, should be
appointed. In case an augmentation should be made to the eastern regiments, a
deviation from the former mode will operate more strongly as to them than to
other battalions, because there have been many more officers in service from
those states, than the regiments voted to be raised would admit of; by which
means several deserving men could not have been provided for, had the utmost
pains been used for the purpose; and many others of merit have been neglected
in the late appointments, and those of little worth and less experience put in
their places or promoted over their heads. This has been the case with many of
the best officers.

The enclosed letter from the paymaster-general will show the state of the
military chest, and the necessity of a large and immediate supply of cash. The
advances to the officers, for bounty and the recruiting service, are great:
besides, the regiments, at the expiration of this month, will require pay of
their claims. * * *

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. If the public papers have been removed from Philadelphia, I hope those
which I sent by lieutenant colonel Reed before we left New York, have not been
forgot. If they have not, I beg the favor of you to break open the chest, and
send me the several letter-books, sealed up, having frequent occasion to refer
to them.



To ROBERT MORRIS, esquire.
Headquarters, December 25, 1776. DEAR SIR,
I HAVE your obliging favors of the twenty-first and twenty-third. The blankets
are come to hand; but I would not have any of the other goods sent on till you
hear again from me.

I agree with you that it is vain to ruminate upon, or even reflect upon the
authors or causes of, our present misfortunes: we should rather exert
ourselves, and look forward with hopes that some lucky chance may yet turn up
in our favor. Bad as our prospects are, I should not have the least doubt of
success in the end, did not the late treachery and defection of those, who
stood foremost in the opposition while fortune smiled upon us, make me fearful
that many more will follow their example, who, by using their influence with
some and working upon the fears of others, may extend the circle so as to take
in whole towns, counties, nay, provinces. Of this we have a recent instance in
Jersey; and I wish many parts in Pennsylvania may not be ready to receive the
yoke.

The security of the continental ships of war in Delaware is certainly a
capital object; and yet to draught the many hands, necessary to fit them out,
from the militia, might be dangerous just now: perhaps in a little time hence
their places may be supplied with country militia; and then, if the exigency of
affairs requires it, they certainly ought to be spared. -- I will just hint to
you a proposition that was made, or rather talked of, a few days ago by the
officers of two New England regiments whose time of service will expire on the
first of January. They are most of them watermen: and they say their men would
willingly go on board the frigates, and navigate them round to any of the ports
in New England, if it was thought they would be safer there than in Delaware.
You may think of this, and let me hear from you on the subject, if the
proposition pleases you.

Lieutenant Roger of the navy is already gone in, and I have made a demand of
lieutenant Josiah in exchange; but I have not heard whether Lord How accedes
to it. I will procure the release of doctor Hodge as soon as it can be done
without injuring others by giving him the preference, as I have always made it
a rule to demand those first who have been longest in captivity. I will take
the same steps in regard to Mr. Jones, commander of the sloop taken by the
Andrew Doria.

I shall take the earliest opportunity of sending in your letter to general
Lee, with the bill drawn upon major Small.

From an intercepted letter from a person in the secrets of the enemy, I find
their intentions are to cross Delaware as soon as the ice is sufficiently
strong. I mention this, that you may take the necessary steps for the security
of such public and private property as ought not to fall into their hands,
should they make themselves masters of Philadelphia, of which they do not seem
to entertain the least doubt.

I hope the next christmas will prove happier than the present, to you, and to,
dear sir, your sincere friend and humble servant,

G. W.
P. S. I would just ask you whether you think Christiana a safe place for our
stores. Do not you think they would be safer at Lancaster, or some where more
inland?



Headquarters, Morristown, Dec. 27, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE the pleasure of congratulating you upon the success of an enterprise
which I had formed against a detachment of the enemy lying in Trenton, and
which was executed yesterday morning.

The evening of the twenty-fifth I ordered the troops intended for this purpose
to parade back of M'Konkey's ferry, that they might begin to pass as soon as it
grew dark, imagining that we should be able to throw them all over, with the
necessary artillery, by twelve o'clock, and that we might easily arrive at
Trenton by five in the morning, the distance being about nine miles. But the
quantity of ice, made that night, impeded the passage of the boats ^o much,
that it was three o'clock before the artillery could be all got over; and near
four, before the troops took up their line of march.

This made me despair of surprising the town, as I well knew we could not reach
it before the day was fairly broke. But as I was certain there was no making a
retreat without being discovered, and harrassed on repassing the river, I
determined to push on at all events. I formed my detachment in two divisions,
one to march by the lower or river road, the other by the upper or Pennington
road. As the divisions had nearly the same distance to march, I ordered each of
them, immediately upon forcing the out guards, to push directly into the town,
that they might charge the enemy before they had time to form.

The upper division arrived at the enemy's advanced post exactly at eight
o'clock; and in three minutes after, I found, from the fire on the lower road,
that that division had also got up. The out guards made but small opposition,
though for their numbers, they behaved very well, keeping up a constant
retreating fire from behind houses. We presently saw their main body formed;
but from their motions, they seemed undetermined how to act.

Being hard pressed by our troops who had already got possession of their
artillery, they attempted to file off by a road on their right, leading to
Princeton. But perceiving their intention, I threw a body of troops in their
way; which immediately checked them. Finding from our disposition, that they
were surrounded, and that they must inevitably be cut to pieces if they made
any further resistance, they agreed to lay down their arms. The number that
submitted in this manner was twentythree officers and eight hundred and
eighty-six men. Colonel Rahl the commanding officer, and seven others, were
found wounded in the town. I do not exactly know how many they had killed; but
I faney, not above twenty or thirty, as they never made any regular stand. Our
loss is very trifling indeed -- only two officers and one or two privates
wounded.

I find that the detachment of the enemy consisted of the three Hessian
regiments of Lanspach, Kniphausen, and Rhal, amounting to about fifteen hundred
men, and a troop of British lighthorse: but, immediately upon the beginning of
the attack, all those who were not killed or taken, pushed directly down the
road toward Bordentown. These would likewise have fallen into our hands, could
my plan have been completely carried into execution. General Ewing was to have
crossed before day at Trenton ferry, and taken possession of the bridge leading
out of town: but the quantity of ice was so great, that, though he did every
thing in his power to effect it, he could not get over. This difficulty also
hindered general Cadwallader from crossing with the Pennsylvania militia from
Bristol. He got part of his foot over: but finding it impossible to embark his
artillery, he was obliged to desist.

I am fully confident, that, could the troops under generals Ewing and
Cadwallader have passed the river, I should have been able with their
assistance to have driven the enemy from all their posts below Trenton. But the
numbers I had with me being inferior to theirs below me, and a strong battalion
of light infantry being at Princeton above me, I thought it most prudent to
return the same evening with the prisoners and the artillery we had taken. We
found no stores of any consequence in the town.

In justice to the officers and men, I must add that their behavior upon this
occasion, reflects the highest honor upon them. The difficulty in passing the
river in a very severe night, and their march through a violent storm of snow
and hail, did not in the least abate their ardor: but when they came to the
charge, each seemed to vie with the other in pressing forward: and were I to
give a preference to any particular corpse, I should do great injustice to the
others.

Colonel Baylor, my first aid-de-camp, will have the honor of delivering this
to you; and from him you may be made acquainted with many other particulars.
His spirited behavior upon every occasion requires me to recommend him to your
particular notice.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
Enclosed you have a particular list of the prisoners, artillery and other
stores.



Newtown, December 29, 1776. SIR,
I AM just setting out to attempt a second passage over the Delaware with the
troops that were with me on the morning of the twenty-sixth. I am determined to
effect it if possible; but know that it will be attended with much fatigue and
difficulty on account of the ice, which will neither allow us to cross on foot,
nor give us an easy passage with boats. General Cadwallader crossed from
Bristol on the twenty-seventh, and, by his letter of yesterday, was at
Bordentown with about eighteen hundred men. In addition to these, general
Mifflin sent over five hundred from Philadelphia on friday, three hundred
yesterday evening from Burlington, and will follow today with seven or eight
hundred more. I have taken every precaution in my power for subsisting the
troops, and shall, without loss of time, and as soon as circumstances will
admit of it, pursue the enemy in their retreat, -- try to beat up more of their
quarters, and, in a word, in every instance, adopt such measures as the
exigency of our affairs requires, and our situation will justify.

Had it not been for the unhappy failure of generals Ewing and Cadwallader in
their attempts to pass on the night of the twenty-fifth, -- and if the several
concerted attacks could have been made, -- I have no doubt but that our views
would have succeeded to our warmest expectations. What was done occasioned the
enemy to leave their several posts on the Delaware with great precipitation.
The peculiar distresses to which the troops who were with me were reduced by
the severities of cold, rain, snow, and storm, -- the charge of the prisoners
they had taken, -- and another reason that might me mentioned, -- and the
little prospect of receiving succors on account of the season and situation of
the river, -- would not authorize a further pursuit at that time.

Since transmitting the list of prisoners, a few more have been discovered and
taken in Trenton, -- among them a lieutenant colonel, and a
deputy-adjutant-general, -- the whole amounting to about a thousand.

I have been honored with your letter of the twenty-third and its several
enclosures, to which I shall pay due attention. -- A flag goes in this morning
with a letter to general How, and another to general Lee. For the latter,
Robert Morris, esquire has transmitted a bill of exchange, drawn by two British
officers, for a hundred and sixteen pounds, nine shillings, and three pence, on
major Small, for money furnished them in South Carolina, which I trust will be
paid. This supply is exclusive of the sum you have resolved to be sent him, and
which Mr. Morris will procure in time.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I am under great apprehensions about obtaining proper supplies of
provision for our troops: I fear it will be extremely difficult, if not
impracticable, as the enemy, from every account, have taken and collected every
thing they could find.



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
OFFICIAL LETTERS TO THE HONORABLE AMERICAN CONGRESS, Written, during the WAR
between the UNITED COLONIES AND GREAT BRITAIN, BY HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE
WASHINGTON, COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE CONTINENTAL FORCES: NOW PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES.

Copied, by Special Permission, from the Original Papers preserved in the
Office of the Secretary of State, Philadelphia.

VOL. II.

NEW YORK: PRINTED AND SOLD BY SAMUEL CAMPBELL, NO. 124, PEARL-STREET.
M,DCC,XCVI.

OFFICIAL LETTERS FROM GENERAL WASHINGTON TO CONGRESS.
Trenton, January 1, 1777. SIR,
YOUR resolves of the twenty-seventh ultimo were transmitted me last night by
messieurs Clymer, Morris, and Walton. The confidence which Congress have
honored me with by these proceedings, has a claim to my warmest
acknowledgments. At the same time I beg leave to assure them that all my
faculties shall be employed to direct properly the powers they have been
pleased to vest me with, and to adva^^ (...), and only those, which gave rise
to this honor^^ (...) distinction. If ^y exertions should not be attended with
the desired success, I trust the failure will be imputed on the true cause, --
the peculiarly distressed situation of (...) and the difficulties I have to
combat, -- rather than to (...) of zeal for my country, and the closest
attention to (...), to promote which has ever been my study.

On monday morning I (...) the Delaware myself; the whole of our troops and
artillery, (...) till yesterday, owing to the ice which rendered their passage
extremely difficult and fatiguing. Since their arrival, we have been parading
the regiments whose time of service is now expired, in order to know what force
we should have to depend on, and how to regulate our views accordingly. After
much persuasion and the exertions of their officers, half or a greater
proportion of those from the eastward have consented to stay six weeks on a
bounty of ten dollars. I feel the inconvenience of this advance, and I know the
consequences which will result from it: -- but what could be done? --
Pennsylvania had allowed the same to her militia: -- the troops felt their
importance, and would have their price. Indeed, as their aid is so essential,
and not to be dispensed with, it is to be wondered they had not estimated it at
a higher rate. I perceive that Congress, apprehensive of this event, had made
unlimitted provision for it.

General Mifflin is at Bordentown with about eighteen hundred men, and general
Cadwallader at Croswix's, with about the same number. -- We are now making our
arrangements, and concerting a plan of operations, which I shall attempt to
execute as soon as possible, and which I hope will be attended with some
success.

As to the number and situation of the enemy, I cannot obtain certain
intelligence: but, from the accounts most to be relied on, they have collected
the principal part of their force, from Brunswic and the neighboring posts, at
Princeton, where they are throwing up some works. The number there is reported
to be from five to six thousand; and it is confidently said they have sent the
chief part of their baggage to Brunswic. It is added, that general How landed
at Amboy a day or two ago with a thousand light troops, and is on his march
from thence.

I have sent into different parts of Jersey, men of influence to spirit up the
militia, and flatter myself that the many injuries they have received will
induce some to give their aid. If what they have (...) not rouse their
resentment, they must not possess (...) of humanity. To oppression, ravage, and
a (...) property, they have had the more mortifying circumstance (...) insult
added: -- after being stripped of all they had without the (...) compensation,
protections have been granted them for the (...) of their effects.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I have not been able (...) returns of our force, owing to our situation,
I suppose (...) about two or three and twenty hundred passed with me, (...)
number is now reduced to fifteen or sixteen hundred. (...) estimate of our
force can be formed from the number of regiments: many of them, by reason of
sickness, cannot turn out more than a hundred men.



Pluckemin, Jauuary 5, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to inform you, that, since the date of my last from Trenton,
I have removed with the army under my command to this place. The difficulty of
crossing the Delaware on account of the ice made our passage over it tedious,
and gave the enemy an opportunity of drawing in their several cantonments and
assembling their whole force at Princeton. Their large picquets, advanced
toward Trenton, -- their great preparations, and some intelligence I had
received, -- added to their knowledge that the first of January brought on a
dissolution of the best part of our army, -- gave me the strongest reasons to
conclude that an attack upon us was meditating.

Our situation was most critical, and our force small. To remove immediately
was again destroying every dawn of hope which had begun to revive in the
breasts of the Jersey militia; and to bring those troops which had first
crossed the Delaware and were lying at Croswix's under general Cadwallader, and
those under general Mifflin at Bordentown (amounting in the whole to about
three thousand six-hundred), to Trenton, was to bring them to an exposed place.
One or the other however was unavoidable: -- the latter was preferred, and they
were ordered to join us at Trenton, which they did, by a night-march, on the
first instant.

On the second, according to my expectation, the enemy began to advance upon
us; and, after some skirmishing, the head of their column reached Trenton about
four o'clock, whilst their rear was as far back as Maidenhead. They attempted
to pass Sanpink creek which runs through Trenton, at different places; but,
finding the fords guard (...) and kindled their fires. -- We were drawn up on
the (...) creek. -- In this situation we remained till dark, (...) the enemy,
and receiving the fire of their field (...) which did us but little damage.

Having by this time (...) that the enemy were greatly superior in number, and
that their design was to surround us, I ordered all our bagg^^e to be removed
silently to Burlington soon after dark; and (...) o'clock, after renewing our
fires and leaving guards at the bridge in Trenton, and other passes on the same
stream above, marched by a round-about road to Princeton where I knew they
could not have much force left, and might have stores. One thing I was certain
of, -- that it would avoid the appearance of a retreat (which was of course, --
or to run the hazard of the whole army being cut off) -- whilst we might by a
fortunate stroke withdraw general How from Trenton, and give some reputation
to our arms. -- Happily we succeeded. -- We found Princeton about sunrise with
only three regiments and three troops of light horse in it, two of which were
on their march to Trenton. These three regiments, especially the two first*
made a galiant resistance, and, in killed, wounded, and prisoners, must have
lost five hundred men: upwards of one hundred of them were left dead in the
field; and, with what I have with me, and what were taken in the pursuit and
carried across the Delaware, there are near three hundred prisoners, fourteen
of whom are officers, all British.

This piece of good fortune is counterbalanced by the loss of the brave and
worthy general Mercer, colonels Hazlet and Potter, captain Neal of the
artillery, captain Fleming who commanded the first Virginia regiment, and four
or five other valuable officers, who, with about twenty-five or thirty privates
were slain in the field. Our whole loss cannot be ascertained, as many who are
in the pursuit of the enemy (who were chased three or four miles) are not yet
come in.

The rear of the enemy's army lying at Maidenhead (not more than five or six
miles from Princeton) was up with us before our pursuit was over: but as I had
the precaution to destroy the bridge over Stoney-brook (about half a mile from
the field of action), they were so long retarded there as to give us time to
move off in good order for this place. We took two brass field pieces; but for
want of horses could not bring them away. We also took some blankets, shoes,
and a few other triffling articles, burned the hay, and destroyed such other
things as the shortness of the (...) would admit of.

My original (...) out from Trenton, was, to have pushed on to Brunswic: (...)
the harrassed state of our troops (many of them having had (...) for two nights
and a day), and the danger of losing the (...) we had gained by aiming at too
much, induced me by the (...) of my officers, to relin^uish the attempts: but,
in my (...) six or eight hundred fresh troops upon a forced march would (...)
destroyed all their stores and magazines, -- taken (as we (...) since learned)
their military chest, containing seventy thousand pounds, -- and put an end to
the war. The enemy from the best intelligence I have been able to get, were so
much alarmed at the apprehension of this, that they marched immediately to
Brunswic without halting, except at the bridges (for I also took up those on
Millstone, on the different routs to Brunswic), and got there before day.

From the best information I have received, general How has left no men either
at Trenton or Princeton. The truth of this I am endeavoring to ascertain, that
I may regulate my movements accordingly.

The militia are taking spirits, and, I am told, are coming in fast from this
state: but I fear those from Philadelphia will scarcely submit to the hardships
of a winter campaign much longer, especially as they very unluckily sent their
blankets with their baggage to Burlington. I must do them the justice however,
to add that they have undergone more fatigue and hardship, than I expected
militia (especially citizens) would have done at this inclement season. -- I am
just moving toward Morristown, where I shall endeavor to put them under the
best cover I can: -- hitherto we have been without any; and many of our poor
soldiers barefoot, and ill clad in other respects.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, January 7, 1777. SIR,
I AM happy to inform you that the account of general Mercer's death,
transmitted in my last, was premature, though it was mentioned as certain by
many who saw him after he was wounded. By intelligence from Princeton yesterday
evening, he was alive, and seemed as if he would do well: -- unhappily he is a
prisoner. Had it not been for the information I had of his death, I would have
tried to have brought him away, though I believe it could not have beeen
effected.

The enemy have totally evacuated. Trent and Princetowns, and are now at
Brunswic on the several posts on the communication between that and Hudso^^
river, but chiefly at Brunswic. Their numbers and movements are variously
reported: but all agree that their for (...). There have been two or three
little skirmishe^ (...) their parties and some detachments of militia, (...)
the latter has been successful, and made a few pri^^^. The most considerable
was on sunday morning near Spring-field, when eight or ten Waldecker^ were
killed and woun^^^, and the remainder of the party (thirty-nine or forty) made
prisoners, with two officers, by a force not superior in number, and without
receiving the lea^^ damage.

The severity of the season has made our troops, especially the militia,
extremely impatient, and has reduced the number ver^ considerably. Every day
more or less leave us. Their complaints, and the great fatigues they had
undergone, induced (...) to come to this places, as the best calculated of any
in this quarter to accommodate and refresh them. The situation is by (...)
means favorable to our views: and, as soon as the purposes are answered for
which we came, I think to remove, though I confess I do not know how we shall
procure covering for our men elsewhere.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Jan. 9, 1777. SIR,
I AM honored with yours of the first instant, enclosing sundry resolves
relating to this and the northern army. Those that respect my department shall
be properly attended to.

I am obliged by your notice of colonel Baylor, on whom I shall confer the
command of horse to which you recommend him. -- When the uniform for the
regiment is fixed upon, a horse properly caparisoned shall be provided and
presented to colonel Baylor. -- There were no horses of any figure or value
taken at Trenton.

Since I wrote you last, the enemy have withdrawn all their out-garrisons, and
centured their whole force at and near Brunswic; but whether with an intention
to make a stand there or make another push toward Philadelphia, I cannot yet
determine. -- Upon the evacuation of Elizabeth-town, general Maxwell fell upon
the enemy's rear, and made seventy prisoners and took a parcel of baggage.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Jan. 12, 1777. SIR,
I AM honored with your (...) sixth, enclosing several resolves of Congress
respecting an exchange to be proposed between general Lee and the Hessia^ field
(...) taken at Trenton. Colonel Ralle died the day (...) ^he action; and we
left one of the majors so ill of his wound, that I am in doubt of his recovery.
I can however make an offer of all that remain, in exchange for general Lee,
except one whom you order to be proposed for colonel Allen. If the offer is
rejected by general How, I shall think myself then at liberty to remonstrate
to him on his treatment of general Lee. If he will not exchange him, he should
at least admit him to his parole, as we have ever done their prisoners who have
fallen into our hands.

I understand from undoubted authority that they intend to try the general by a
court martial, as a deserter from their service, pretending that his
resignation was never accepted of. But I shall inform general How, that, if
any such step is taken under so shallow and illegal a pretext, and their
sentence should extend either to affect his life or liberty, they may depend
upon the most severe and adequate retaliation upon our part.

The enemy have made no move since my last. By every account, they begin to be
distressed particularly for forage, of which there is little or none remaining
in the small circle they possess, except salt hay.

By letters from general Heath, of the ninth, he was beginning to move down
toward Kingsbridge with the troops from New England. This must add to the
distress of the enemy, who will, by this measure, be deprived of the
subsistence they formerly drew from West-Chester and the counties to the
northward of York-Island.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Jan. 14, 1777. SIR,
I Embrace this opportunity, by Mr. Hopkins, of informing you that the enemy
remain upon their old ground at Amboy and Brunswic. Our accounts still confirm
their want of forage, which I hope will increase. -- If their horses are
reduced this winter, it will be impossible for them to take the field in the
spring.

General Warner, with two regiments from Massachusetts, is arrived here:
general Heath, with the remainder of the troops from that state, has by this
time began to move down toward Kingsbridge.

I this day intend to send in a flag with letters to lord and general How upon
the subject of general Lee's exchange, and remonstrating against the severe
treatment of our prisoners. I enclose you copies of both, for your inspection
and approbation. -- I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Jan. 17, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE not had the honor of any of your favors since I wrote to you on the
fourteenth instant. -- No material alterations have happened in this quarter.
-- The enemy, from every account, mean to make Brunswic their advanced post for
this Pennsylvania had allowed the same to her militia: -- the troops felt their
importance, and would have their price. Indeed, as their aid is so essential,
and not to be dispensed with, it is to be wondered they had not estimated it at
a higher rate. I perceive that Congress, apprehensive of this event, had made
unlimitted provision for it.

General Mifflin is at Bordentown with about eighteen hundred men, and general
Cadwallader at Croswix's, with about the same number. -- We are now making our
arrangements, and concerting a plan of operations, which I shall attempt to
execute as soon as possible, and which I hope will be attended with some
success.

As to the number and situation of the enemy, I cannot obtain certain
intelligence: but, from the accounts most to be relied on, they have collected
the principal part of their force, from Brunswic and the neighboring posts, at
Princeton, where they are throwing up some works. The number there is reported
to be from five to six thousand; and it is confidently said they have sent the
chief part of their baggage to Brunswic. It is added, that general How landed
at Amboy a day or two ago with a thousand light troops, and is on his march
from thence.

I have sent into different parts of Jersey, men of influence to spirit up the
militia, and flatter myself that the many injuries they have received will
induce some to give their aid. If what they (...) ^^ffered (...) not rouse
their resentment, they must not possess (...) of humanity. To oppression,
ravage, and a (...) property, they have had the more mortifying circumstance
(...) insult added: -- after being stripped of all they had without (...)
compensation, protections have been granted them for the (...) of their effects.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I have not been able (...) returns of our force, owing to our situation,
I suppose (...) about two or three and twenty hundred passed with me, (...)
number is now reduced to fifteen or sixteen hundred. (...) estimate of our
force can be formed from the number of regiments: many of them, by reason of
sickness, cannot turn out more than a hundred men.



Pluckemin, Ja^uary 5, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to inform you, that, since the date of my last from Trenton,
I have removed with the army under my of men, as are colonel Hand's,
Smallwood's and the German battalion. -- A few days ago general Warner arrived
with about seven hundred Massachusetts militia engaged to the fifteenth of
March.

Thus you have a sketch of our present army, with which we are obliged to keep
up appearances before an enemy already double to us in numbers, and who, from
every account are withdrawing their troops from Rhode Island, to form a
junction of their whole army, and make another attempt either to break up ours,
or penetrate toward Philadelphia, -- a thing by no means difficult now, as the
ice affords an easy passage over the Delaware.

I do not yet know what effect general Heath's moving down toward New York
will have. -- Yesterday morning a considerable firing was heard, which seemed
to be about Kingsbridge. I am in hopes that his appearance on that quarter with
a pretty large force will oblige them to withdraw part of theirs from Jersey,
to secure the city of New York, which, by late accounts, is weakly garrisoned.
-- General Heath has all the eastern and York militia with him, except the
small brigade under general Warner which I mentioned before, one regiment of
Connecticut, stopped at Providence in Rhode Island, and a number (how many I do
not know) requested by general Schuyler to be sent to Tyconderoga. -- If it
should appear that they are regardless of the diversion made by general Heath,
and presist in their plan of drawing their whole army together in Jersey, I
must order him over with all his troops, except as many as are necessary to
garrison the forts and guard the passes in the Highlands.

I have ordered away every officer that could be spared, -- some to recruit,
and some to collect the scattered men of the different regiments, who are
dispersed almost over the continent: for, the vast numbers sent to the
hospitals at different times, few ever returned after they got well.

As militia must be our dependence till we can get the new army raised and
properly arranged, I must entreat you to continue your endeavors with the
state of Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia, to turn out every man they
possibly can, and for some longer time than they have generally stipulated for.
If they agree for a month or any limited time, it should commence from the
time they actually join the army, and not from the time they leave their homes:
otherwise the marching backwards and forwards consumes the term of engagement.

I think these demands of aid should be made as quietly as the nature of the
case will admit of, especially at this time when we are deceiving our enemies
with false opinions of our numbers: for, to boast of our superiority in that
respect on one hand, and to call publicly on the people for assistance on the
other, is an impropriety too glaring: -- indeed it has been already noticed in
some publications that I have seen from New York.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Jan. 20, 1777. SIR,
I AM favored with yours of the fifteenth instant, with the sundry resolves
enclosed in it. If that respecting the continental currency is carried strictly
into execution, it cannot fail of sully re-establishing its credit.

I have no objection to the three gentlemen who are recommended for
field-officers in the new Hampshire regiment: they seem fully entitled to it,
as they have raised the regiment. I will furnish them with commissions from the
date of their appointment, when applied to for that purpose.

There is something particular in the application of colonel Dubois and his
officers for the sum of five hundred and thirteen dollars and two-thirds. They
have been commissioned provided they should raise the men; but, from their own
pay-abstract, it appears that fourteen officers only brought twenty-five men
into the field. As they certainly did not comply with their agreement, I would,
after stating the matter as it really was, submit it to Congress who have the
disposal of the public money.

I have perused the petition of monsieur Faneuil and other French gentlemen. If
they could raise such a regiment as they propose, it would certainly be useful:
but I have no conception that there are Canadians enough to be sound even for a
regiment of the common number, much less of two thousand three hundred and
forty-seven, which is the number proposed. I know, neither colonel Livingston
nor colonel Hazen could ever complete their Canadian regiments when they had
the country open to them. As I would give encouragement to foreigners of real
merit, I would put the thing upon this footing: -- if monsieur Faneuil can
procure a sufficient number of officers to fill a regiment of the common size,
and they can give any assurances of being able to raise the men I would grant
them commissions.

I would beg leave to remark here, that, except we can throw the many
foreigners who have been commissioned in our army, into a corpse together, they
will be entirely useless, as they can neither converse with officers nor men in
any other kind of regiment.

I am so well assured that you would not recommend doctor Potts to succeed
doctor Stringer in the northern department except you had sufficient proof of
his abilities in the medical line that I readily concur with you in the
appointment.

I have received a piece of information which I am afraid is true, -- and that
is, that the British cruisers have taken a French vessel with a large parcel of
cannon and mortars on board. I know such a one was expected, and therefore more
readily credit the account.

I am, sir, with respect and esteem, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Jan. 22, 1777. SIR,
MY last to you was on the twentieth instant. Since that, I have the pleasure
to inform you that general Dickinson, with about four hundred militia, has
defeated a foraging party of the enemy of an equal number, and has taken forty
wagons, and upwards of a hundred horses, most of them of the English draft
breed, and a number of sheep and cattle which they had collected. The enemy
retreated with so much precipitation, that general Dickinson had only an
opportunity of making nine prisoners. They were observed to carry off a good
many dead and wounded in light wagons. -- This action happened near Somerset
courthouse on Millstone river. General Dickinson's behavior reflects the
highest honor upon him: for, though his troops were all raw, he led them
through the river middle-deep, and gave the enemy so severe a charge, that,
although supported by three fieldpieces, they gave way, and left their convoy.

I have not heard from general Heath, since the firing near Kingsbridge last
saturday; which I cannot account for, unless the North-river should have been
rendered impassible by the ice. But the account of his having surprised and
taken Fort-Independence on friday night last comes so well authenticated by
different ways, that I cannot doubt it. It is said that he took four hundred
prisoners in that fort, and that he invested Fort-Washington on saturday, which
occasioned the firing. -- This is brought out by three of our officers who made
their escape from New York on sunday, and is confirmed by a spy who went into
Amboy, who says an express had arrived at Amboy from New York, with an account
of the loss of Fort-Independence, and calling for a reinforcement to protect
the city: in consequence of which, a number of troops had gone over. -- I have
sent in spies to Brunswic and Amboy to know the truth of this: and if it
appears that they have weakened themselves to reinforce New York, I shall
probably make some attempt upon them, if we have men enough left to do it.

I shall be glad to know what stock of small-arms you at present have, and what
are your expectations shortly. The necessity that we have been and are now
under, of calling in and arming the militia scatters our armory all over the
world in a manner: their officers are so irregular that they generally suffer
their men to carry home every thing that is put into their hands, which is
forever lost to the public. The new-raised regiments will call for a great
number of arms; and I do not at present see how they are to be supplied.

I would again beg leave to recall the attention of Congress to the appointment
of general officers. I will not suppose the nomination of them is postponed
upon a saving principle, because the advantage in having proper officers to
examine the pay-rolls of their several regiments, and compare them with the
returns of their brigades, -- to see that the regiments are provided with what
is proper, and that no more than a sufficiency is allowed, -- to keep officers
to their duty, and not, while the spirited officer is encountering all the
fatigues and hardships of a rigorous campaign, suffer a number of others, under
various frivolous pretenses and imaginary sicknesses, to enjoy themselves at
the public expense at their own firesides: -- I say, if the appointments are
withheld upon parsimonious principles, the Congress are mistaken: for I am
convinced, that, by the correction of many abuses which it is impossible for me
to attend to, the public will be benefited in a great degree in the article of
expense. -- But this is not all. -- We have a very little time to do a very
great work in. The arranging, providing for, and disciplining a hundred and odd
battalions is not to be accomplished in a day; nor is it to be done at all with
any degree of propriety, when we have once entered upon the active part of a
campaign. These duties must be branched out, or they will be neglected, and the
public injured. Besides, were the brigadiers appointed, they might be
facilitating the recruiting service; they would have time to get a little
acquainted with their brigades, the wants of them, and case me of the great
weight and burden which I at present feel.

On whom the choice will or ought to light, I cannot undertake to say. In a
former letter I took the liberty of submitting to the consideration of Congress
the propriety of appointing, out of each state, brigadiers to command the
troops of that state, -- thinking, as a distinction is now fixed, a spirit of
emulation might arise by this means. At any rate I shall take the liberty of
recommending general Cadwallader as one of the first for the new appointments.
I have found him a man of ability, a good disciplinarian, firm in his
principles, and of intrepid bravery. I shall also beg leave to recommend
colonel Reed to the command of the horse, as a person, in my opinion, every way
qualified: for he is extremely active and enterprising: many signal proofs of
which he has given this campaign. For the rest, the members of Congress can
judge better than I can: I can only say, that, as the army will probably be
divided in the course of the next campaign, there ought, in my opinion, to be
three lieutenant-generals, nine major-generals, and twenty-seven brigadiers: --
in other words, there ought, at least to be a brigadier to every four
regiments, and a major general to every three brigades. -- The
lieutenant-generals will, I presume, be appointed out of the oldest
major-generals, and the major-generals from the oldest brigadiers. Nine
brigadiers will then be to nominate.

I forgot before this to inform Congress, that, including the regiment of light
dragoons from Virginia, and colonel Sheldon's to be raised in Connecticut, I
have only commissioned officers for four regiments. I was willing to try how
these could be equipped before I put more officers into commission. It is
apprehended we shall find difficulty in providing necessaries or even horses
for these four regiments: if we should not, I shall immediately set about the
residue. Colonel Baylor, colonel Moylan (who, as volunteer has remained
constantly with the army since his discontinuance in the quarter-master's
department, and colonel Sheldon, command the three new regiments of light
dragoons.

The treasury has been for some time empty, and the army has labored under the
greatest inconvenience for the want of money. The recruiting service is
particularly injured by this, as many officers are now waiting only for
bounty-money. I have also complaints from the eastward of the want of money to
carry on their recruiting service. -- If we are not supplied with that
necessary article, all matters must be at a stand. I must therefore, beg that,
if Mr. Palfrey has not been already supplied with a large sum, it may be done
with the utmost expedition, and that you will endeavor to keep up the supply by
constantly sending on smaller parcels.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I did not recollect major general Lincoln in the provincial service of
Massachusetts. He is an excellent officer, and worthy of your notice in the
continental line.



Headquarters, Morristown, Jan. 26, 1777. SIR,
I WAS last night honored with yours of the eighteenth instant, enclosing a
letter from the state of New York to Congress. From the particular situation of
their state in regard to their being totally deprived of commerce, they
certainly must stand in need of the assistance of the other states to provide
them with clothing and every thing necessary for the equipment of their forces;
and it ever was my intention to allow them a full proportion of the clothing
purchased to the eastward, whenever it came to hand. Little or none of it has
reached this army, though in the greatest want, and exposed to the severities
of a winter campaign.

The convention have in one instance already provided for themselves out of the
public stock by stopping and making use of twenty-six bales of clothing coming
on from the eastward to the army here. As this was done without consulting me,
I took the liberty of desiring them not to do the like in future; not that I
meant to deprive them of their share, but because it disappointed me of many
articles which I stood in immediate want of, and had not provided from other
quarters. But you may be assured, that, whenever returns are to be made of the
whole stock of clothing, they shall have their proportion, and more than that
-- allowance for their peculiar situation.

I am amazed to hear complaints of the hospital on the east side of
Hudson's-river. Doctor Morgan, with most of his mates has been constantly there
since I left it with the main body of the army. It is in vain however to look
back upon past misfortunes. I will not pretend to point out the causes; but I
know matters have been strangely conducted in the medical line. I hope your new
appointment, when it is made, will make the necessary reform in the hospital,
and that I shall not, the next campaign, have my ears, and eyes too, shocked
with the complaints and looks of poor creatures perishing for want of proper
care either in the regimental or hospital surgeons.

I agree with the convention in the expediency of obstructing the passage of
the North-river in some, place between the mouth and the Highlands. We have
found that our labor and expense has been thrown away in endeavoring to do it
below, where the channel is amazingly wide and deep: but, from the slight view
I have had of the river above, I think the passage may be easily obstructed,
and defended by proper fortifications, as the river is so narrow that no vessel
going up could possibly escape the fire. I am no judge of what can be done
toward fitting out the frigates at Poughkeepsie: -- that must be left to the
gentlemen of the marine committee.

The hint given by the convention of New York, of the necessity and utility of
a commissary of forage, had struck me before, and had been mentioned by general
Mifflin, whose department of quarter-master-general must be eased of part of
the load which is at present thrown upon it. He is obliged in many instances to
act entirely out of his proper line; and instead of being confined to the duty
of quarter-master-general, is also waggon-master, and forage-master-general, --
I have wrote to two persons that I think qualified to fill the office of
waggon-master; and I hope one of them will accept. -- That of commissary of
forage shall be attended to.

The want of accurate maps of the country which has hitherto been the scene of
war has been of great disadvantage to me. I have in vain endeavored to procure
them, and have been obliged to make shift with such sketches as I could trace
out from my own observation and that of gentlemen around me. I really think, if
gentlemen of known character and probity could be employed in making maps (from
actual survey) of the roads, -- the rivers, and bridges and fords over them, --
the mountains, and passes through them, -- it would be of the greatest
advantage.

I had, previous to the receipt of your letter, wrote to general How, and
proposed the fixing an agent for prisoners at New York. I have not received an
answer: but if he accedes to the proposal, I shall appoint Mr. Lewis Pintard.

I am sorry that I am obliged to contradict the report of the taking of
Fort-Independence as mentioned in my last. I believe the evacuation of some
detached redoubts gave rise to the report. -- I have not heard from general
Heath since the fourteenth instant, which I am amazed at. I am quite in the
dark as to his numbers, and what progress he has made.

On the twenty-third, a party of four hundred of our men, under colonel * * *,
fell in with two of the regiments of the enemy, convoying a number of wagons
from Brunswic to Amboy. Our advanced party under colonel Parker engaged them
with great bravery upwards of twenty minutes, during which time the colonel
commandant was killed, and the second in command mortally wounded. The people
living near the field of action say their killed and wounded were considerable.
We lost only two men, who were made prisoners. Had colonel * * * come up with
the main body, colonel Parker and the other officers think we should have put
them to the rout, as their confusion was very great and their ground
disadvantageous. I have ordered * * * under arrest, and shall bring him to
trial to answer for so extraordinary a piece of conduct.

Reinforcements come up so extremely slow, that I am afraid I shall be left
without any men before they arrive. The enemy must be ignorant of our numbers,
or they have not horses to remove their artillery, or they would not suffer us
to remain undisturbed. I have repeatedly wrote to all the recruiting officers,
to forward on their men as fast as they could arm and clothe them: but they are
so extremely averse to turning out of comfortable quarters, that I cannot get a
man to come near me, though I hear from all parts that the recruiting service
goes on with great success. It would be well if the board of war, in whose
department it is, would issue orders for all officers to equip and forward
their recruits to headquarters with the greatest expedition.

By a resolve of Congress passed some time ago, general Schuyler is directed to
apply to me for ninety-four tons of powder, -- a quantity which it is
impossible I should have by me, and for which I do not know where to direct him
to apply. I could wish that returns were made to me of the quantity of powder
on hand, and where it is to be found, that I may not be at a loss at any time
of emergency.

Since the resignation of colonel Reed, the important office of
adjutant-general has been left unfilled (I mean as to a principal), and I am
much at a loss how or where to find a person in every way capable and proper to
execute the office. My inclinations lead me to confer the appointment upon a
major Morris: but ample testimonials should be produced, and full proof of
fidelity ought to be made, before an office of so high trust should be
conferred upon a person in a manner a stranger to me. I only know major Morris
from a short personal acquaintance, and from report: he never even brought a
letter of recommendation to me. From his conversation and from the accounts I
have received from others, he is a man of considerable military abilities; and,
from his behavior in two instances, he is a man of bravery and conduct. His
story is simply this, -- that he left the British service in disgust, upon not
receiving a promotion to which he was justly entitled. Perhaps some gentlemen
of Congress may know more about him, or may be able to make such inquiries as
might satisfy them as to the safety and propriety of appointing him. I have no
other motive for wishing him a preference than that I think him the properest
person that has come under my notice, provided all matters before mentioned
were cleared up. -- I shall wait the result of a determination of Congress
before I proceed further in this appointment; and I wish to be favored with
their advice as speedily as possible; for the remains of the old army is much
disarranged for want of a good adjutant-general, and the formation of the new
in a great measure depends upon an able officer in that line.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Jan. 31, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE none of your favors un-answered at present. -- There is such a demand
upon me from all quarters for money, which I am unable to answer, that I cannot
help again pressing you to send on a supply. The recruiting service is almost
at a stop here for want of money; and governor Trumbull writes me word that it
is totally so in Connecticut. He adds that their loan officers cannot proceed
in their business for want of proper check-books and notes: but that, if they
were furnished with them, they could soon take in a sufficient quantity to
answer their purposes.

I shall be glad to be informed whether I have a right to draw warrants upon
the loan-officers in the different states. -- The states of Connecticut
advanced colonel Sheldon, at my request, ten thousand pounds lawful, to raise
his regiment of horse. For their reimbursement they desired me to give them a
draught upon the loan-office: but, not knowing whether I had a right to draw
upon that fund, I deferred it till I heard from you.

I must beg you to write to the assemblies of the different states, and insist
upon the passing a law to inflict a severe and heavy penalty upon those who
harbor deserters, knowing them to be such. Our army is shamefully reduced by
desertion; and, except the people in the country can be forced to give
information when deserters return to their old neighborhoods, we shall be
obliged to detach one half of the army to bring back the other.

I have a letter from general Heath, of the twenty-fourth instant. He was at
and near Kingsbridge with his army. I do not find that he is likely to do more
than to draw the attention of the enemy that way, and to cut them off from
forage, of which they are in great want. -- The troops had not returned from
Rhode Island, by the last accounts, but were daily expected.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters Morristown, Feb. 5, 1777. SIR,
I AM honored with yours of the twenty-fourth of January, with sundry resolves
of Congress, and a petition of monsieur Pellisier's enclosed. I am not the
proper [ person] to refer the petition to, as I am no judge of his merit as an
engineer, having never had an opportunity of seeing any of his performances. At
any rate I do not see the necessity of appointing him or any other person
principal engineer at Ticonderoga: for that would exclude any other, though of
superior abilities, from being sent there. Besides, as a corpse of engineers
will in all probability be soon established, monsieur Pellisier's rank can then
be settled with more propriety.

I forgot to mention in any of my former letters that I had appointed captain
Nathaniel Guest of Virginia to the command of a regiment to be raised upon the
frontiers of Virginia and Carolina; and I have directed him, if possible, to
bring a company or two of Cherokee Indians. If they can be procured, they will
answer two valuable purposes, -- one, as excellent scouts, the other that they
will be in fact hostages, and will secure the good behavior of their nation.

Major Bland, commandant of the Virginia horse, has desired to know whether
there is not a necessity of giving a bounty and re-enlisting his regiment as
continental troops. They were enlisted to serve in the colony; and the men were
with some difficulty prevailed upon to march hither: but the major thinks they
would be entirely reconciled upon receiving the bounty.

I received a letter from Mr. Chase, desiring I would appoint proper persons to
make inquiry into and take dispositions concerning the behavior of the British
and foreign troops in Jersey. This would be an endless task, as their line of
march is marked with devastation, and is a thing of such public notoriety that
it demands no further proof.

I remonstrated with general How upon the treatment of our wounded at
Princeton. You will see by the enclosed letter from him, that he disavows and
detests the proceeding: but I fear that too much encouragement is given to such
barbarous behavior by the British officers; for, in a late skirmish, in which
sir William Erskine commanded, lieutenant Kelly of the fifth Virginia regiment
was slightly wounded in the thigh; but, before he could get off the field, he
was overtaken and murdered in a most cruel manner. General Stephen informed me
that he would write to sir William, and inform him, that, unless such practices
were put a stop to, our soldiers would not be restrained from making
retaliation.

By a letter from general Heath, of the thirtieth of last month, I find that he
had decamped from the neighborhood of Kingsbridge, and removed back toward the
White-Plains. His reasons for doing so were that the troops could not stand the
inclemency of the weather, and that he feared the troops expected from
Rhode Island would land upon his back. I have however directed him to leave a
body of light troops under an active officer, in order to harrass their
foraging parties, and to cover our own who are to remove as much of the forage
from West-Chester county as they can: and, after leaving as many men as will
secure the passes in the Highlands, the remainder are to be sent over here to
join me; for I am apprehensive that the enemy are reinforcing themselves at
Brunswic.

I shall tomorrow send out parties from every quarter, to remove all the
wagons, horses, cattle and sheep, or as many as possible, from the
neighborhood of the enemy's lines. They are to attend particularly to the
horses: for if we can reduce those that they at present have, and can hinder
them from getting fresh ones from the adjacent country it will be impossible
for them to move their artillery and wagons forward, should they incline to
make another push toward Philadelphia.

I observe by your last resolves that the militia of Baltimore, Hartford, and
Cecil counties in Maryland, are ordered out and to march this way. Let me
entreat you to suffer none to go forward to Philadelphia but what are equipped
with arms, accoutrements and blankets: they hurt the service much by taking
those things only for a short time from the continental troops, many of whom
would otherwise be enabled to take the field.

The secretary of the board of war has transmitted me extracts of general
Schuyler's letters in which he calls pressingly for some general officers to be
sent to his assistance. This will show you the necessity of immediately making
the promotions recommended in mine of the twenty second of January: for at
present I cannot spare a general officer from this quarter without injuring the
service.

Nothing of consequence has happened since I wrote to you last, except a
skirmish on the first of this month, five or six miles from Brunswic-landing,
between our advanced parties (about seven hundred in the whole) and upwards of
two thousand of the enemy, under sir William Erskine. The heat of the
engagement was [ borne by] colonel Scott of the first Virginia regiment, who,
with about a hundred men, beat back two hundred of the British grenadiers.
Several other officers behaved with great spirit; but there is some reason to
suspect that colonel * * *, who commanded our main body, did not behave
altogether as he ought. I have ordered a court upon him, that the matter may be
fairly canvassed, and that he may stand condemned or acquitted by the evidence
of those who were present.

Colonel * * *, who was under arrest upon a charge of cowardice, broke his
parole and went over to Bucks-county, I suppose with an intent to make his
escape: but I dispatched a troop of light horse after him, who brought him back
yesterday: and he is to take his trial on friday.

The smallpox has made such head in every quarter, that I find it impossible
to keep it from spreading through the whole army in the natural way. I have
therefore determined, not only to inoculate all the troops now here that have
not had it, but shall order Dr. Shippen to inoculate the recruits as fast as
they come in to Philadelphia. They will lose no time, because they will go
through the disorder while their clothing, arms and accoutrements are getting
ready.

From the first institution of civil government, it has been the national
policy of every precedent state to endeavor to engage its members to the
discharge of their public duty by the obligation of some oath: its force and
happy influence has been felt in too many instances, to need any arguments to
support the policy or prove its utility. I have often thought the states have
been too negligent in this particular, and am more fully convinced of it from
the effect general Howe's excurtion has produced in New Jersey. -- An oath is
the only substitute that can be adopted to supply the defect of principle. --
By our inattention in this article, we lose a considerable cement to our own
force, and give the enemy an opportunity to make the first tender to the oath
of allegiance to the king. Its baneful influence is but too severely felt at
this time. The people generally co^sess that they were compelled to take
protection, and subscribe the Declaration: yet it furnishes many with arguments
to refuse taking any active part: and further they allege themselves bound to
a neutrality at least. Many conscientious people who were well-wishers to the
cause, had they been bound to the states by an oath, would have suffered any
punishment rather than have taken the oath of allegiance to the king; and are
now lost to our interest for want of this necessary tie. -- Notwithstanding the
obligation of the Association, they do not conceive it to have the same effect
as an oath. -- The more united the inhabitants appear, the greater difficulty
general How will have in reconciling them to regal government, and
consequently the less hope of conquering them. -- For these reasons and many
more that might be urged, I should strongly recommend every state to fix upon
some oath or affirmation of allegiance to be tendered to all the inhabitants
without exception, and to outlaw those that refuse it.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Feb. 11, 1777. SIR,
I WAS yesterday waited upon by two French gentlemen, monsieur Romand de Lisle,
and Robillard. The first produced a commission signed by you in November last,
appointing him a major of artillery: but, by the enclosed letter from him to
me, he claims much higher rank under the promise of Congress, -- that of
commandant of the continental artillery. -- Whether any such promise was made,
I leave you to determine.

Robillard claims a captaincy of artillery: but, upon what he grounds his
pretentions, I do not know. I never saw him but once before; and that was upon
his way from Boston to Philadelphia.

You cannot conceive what a weight these kind of people are upon the service,
and upon me in particular. Few of them have any knowledge of the branches which
they profess to understand; and those that have, are entirely useless as
officers, from their ignorance of the English language. -- I wish it were
possible to make them understand, when commissions are granted to them, that
they are to make themselves masters of the English language in some degree
before they can be attached to any particular corpse.

I am, sir, with the greatest respect, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Feb. 14, 1777. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the fifth instant, no event of an
important and interesting nature has occurred, unless the successes of our
parties in foraging and bringing off horses, wagons, and some fat cattle and
sheep, which were contiguous to and around the enemy's lines, are considered as
such. I then mentioned that I had such a scheme in contemplation, which was
happily accomplished the next day without any loss. The enemy in turn have made
frequent efforts in that way, but with little success. Whenever they made the
attempt, it never failed to produce a skirmish. They have been common of late,
but with little damage to either side.

We have certain intelligence that they have drawn the greatest part of their
troops from Rhode Island, and are told that part of them have landed on
Staten-Island and at Amboy, with a view of augmenting their force at Brunswic.

Colonel * * *, agreeable to the information contained in my last, has been
tried by a court martial, and cashiered. The proceedings and sentence I
directed to be transmitted to the secretary of the war-office, and to the
printers of this state and Virginia, to be published.

General Lincoln is just arrived with a regiment of Massachusetts militia,
about two hundred and fifty. This, he says, is succeeded by three more, which
will make in the whole near eighteen hundred: but in this I think he must be
mistaken, unless those on the march are much fuller and larger than what they
usually are. The whole are of the troops that were with general Heath.

General Knox, by a letter of the first instant, informs me, that, on mature
inquiry and examination, he finds Springfield to be more convenient and much
better calculated for an elaboratory and cannon-foundery, than any other part
of the New England states. He adds that a quantity of copper, tin, and other
useful materials, can be had there; and that the necessary works and
preparations, from these and other advantages, can be accomplished at least
three or four months sooner there than any where else. In consequence of his
opinion, which I esteem of weight, particularly in this instance, -- and
knowing the importance of, and how essential these establishments are, -- I
have ventured to order the works to be begun there, without regard to what had
been done at Brookfield, which was of but little consequence. The former,
besides the many advantages mentioned by general Knox, stands on
Connecticut-river, and has a good navigation: yet is entirely secure against
any attempts of the enemy, being twenty miles above Hartford, where the river
is narrow, and too shoal to admit vessels that can give the least annoyance. --
As nothing but the good of the service could have led to this measure, I trust
it will be approved.

I have wrote to the assembly of Massachusetts state and the convention of
New Hampshire, requesting their good offices and exertions to promote the
raising of their regiments as expeditiously as possible, and to forward the
whole of the quotas first exacted from them, to Ticonderoga. Their contiguity
to that post more than to any other, -- the importance of it, and general
Schuyler's apprehensions that the enemy may attempt to pass the lake (if not on
the ice) as soon as it is open, -- added to the great trouble, expense, and
loss of time it will save in marching them elsewhere, and others there, who are
much more distant and remote, -- induced me to determine so. I find the council
of the former, on general Schuyler's earnest application, before my letter
reached them, had determined to send four regiments as soon as they could be
completed. I only wish the whole may be made up in a short time, and that their
arrival may be early enough to prevent those inconveniences and fatal
consequences which the want of a sufficient force in that quarter would subject
us to, were the enemy to pass the lakes at this time.

Mr. James Mease is now here in consequence of being appointed
clothier-general. He is adjusting a plan for answering the end of his
appointment, and making an estimate, to be laid before Congress or their secret
committee, of such clothes as may be necessary to import for the army.

It is with much concern that the situation of our affairs obliges me to
mention so frequently the want of money, especially when I am persuaded every
means are used to furnish it. Our distress on this account is great indeed; and
the injury the service receives, almost inconceivable: -- not a day, an hour,
or scarcely a minute passes, without complaints and applications on this head.
The recruiting the regiments is most materially retarded by it.

Ten o'clock, P. M. -- Just now a flag returned, that went to Brunswic today,
who brought the enclosed letters from general Lee, which I do myself the honor
to transmit you, with a copy of one to myself.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Feb. 14, 1777. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to enclose you a plan drawn up by doctor Shippen in
concert with doctor Cochran, for the arrangement and future regulation of the
general hospital. As this plan is very extensive, the appointments numerous,
and the salaries affixed to them at present, large, I did not think myself at
liberty to adopt any part of it before I laid it before Congress for their
approbation. I will just remark, that, though the expense attending an hospital
upon the enclosed plan will be very great, it will in the end not only be
saving to the public, but the only possible method of keeping an army a foot.

We are now, at an enormous bounty, and with no small difficulty, recruiting an
army of upwards of a hundred battalions. The ensuing campaign may, from the
same causes, prove as sickly as the last: and if the hospitals are in no better
condition for the reception of the sick, our regiments will be reduced to
companies by the end of the campaign; and those poor wretches who escape with
life will be either scattered up and down the country, and not to be found, or
if found, totally enervated and unfit for further duty. By these means not only
the bounty is lost, but the man is lost also: and I leave you to judge whether
we have men enough to allow of such a consumption of lives and constitutions as
have been lost the last compaign. For my own part I am certain, that, if the
army which I hope we shall have in the field this year is suffered to moulder
away by sickness as it did the last, we must look for reinforcements to some
other places than our own states.

The number of officers mentioned in the enclosed plan I presume are necessary
for us, because they are found so in the British hospitals: and, as they are
established on the surest basis, -- that of long experience under the ablest
physicians and surgeons, -- we should not hesitate a moment in adopting their
regulations, when they so plainly tend to correct and improve our former want
of method and knowledge in this important department.

The pay affixed to the different appointments is, as I said before, great, and
perhaps more than you may think adequate to the service. In determining upon
the sum that is to be allowed to each, you ought to consider that it should be
such as will induce gentlemen of character and skill in their profession to
step forth, and in some manner adequate to the practice which they have at
home: for, unless such gentlemen are induced to take the care and management of
our hospitals, we had better trust to the force of nature and constitution,
than suffer persons entirely ignorant of medicine to destroy us by ill-directed
applications.

I hear from every quarter that the dread of undergoing the same miseries for
want of proper care and attention when sick, has much retarded the new
enlistments, particularly to the southward. This is another reason for
establishing our hospitals upon a large and generous plan: for we ought to make
the service as agreeable and enticing as possible to the soldiery, many of whom
(especially when we call forth the militia) not only quit the comforts but the
luxuries of life.

A few days ago doctor * * * sent me the enclosed manuscript, which is a
vindication of his conduct, upon which he desires a court of inquiry may be
held. I transmit it to you by his direction. As I do not know what particular
charges were alleged against him, I can say nothing to it or about it. You
will find a plan of his also enclosed, for the better regulation of the
hospital: but I think all his hints are included in doctor Shippen's plan.

As no time is to be lost in appointing the necessary officers, fixing upon the
proper places for hospitals, and many other preparations. I could wish that
Congress would take this matter under their immediate consideration, and favor
me with their sentiments thereon as soon as possible.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Feb. 20, 1777. SIR,
THE principal design of this is to inform you that we have strong reasons to
believe that the enemy are on the point of making some push. What their object
is, -- whether to beat up our quarters and to extend their own, to make a large
forage and collection of provender of which they are in great want, or to turn
their views toward the Delaware, -- is a matter of uncertainty; but it seems
probable that one of these things they have in contemplation. Such of their
troops as have returned from Rhode Island have landed at Amboy, and, with them
several pieces of heavy artillery General How is come over too, and, it is
said lord Percy. Their number at Brunswic and the landing-place, before the
arrival of this last reinforcement, was estimated from seven to eight thousand.

I have ordered the utmost vigilance and attention to be observed at our
several posts, to guard against surprises, and every preparation to be made
that the weak and feeble state of our little army will admit of. At this time
we are only about four thousand strong, -- a force, you will suppose, unequal
to a successful opposition, if they were not militia, and far too small for the
exigencies of our affairs. It is impossible to obtain exact returns, though
they are daily called for, -- owing to the frequent and almost constant
departure of some of the corpse.

Colonel Neilson of Brunswic, with a detachment of militia, on the morning of
the eighteenth, surprised major Stockdon, whom he took with fifty-nine privates
of general Skinner's corpse, killing four, and bringing away the arms of the
whole, with some blankets. This about balances the loss of a militia guard
which a party of British troops took last week in Monmouth, near the Hook.

I wish to be informed how the regiments that are raising are to be armed, and
of the provision that has been made for the same. I have reason to fear, indeed
I am convinced, that there is a great deficiency in many, if not in the whole
of the states, in this article: every letter that I receive from them mentions
their want, and calls for supplies.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Feb. 20, 1777. SIR,
MONSIEUR Faneuil, who some time ago laid a plan before you for raising and
officering a corpse of Frenchmen, waited upon me yesterday. His success, as I
expected, has been small in enlisting or rather engaging Canadians. I cannot
find that he has met with more than thirty or forty who would be willing to
serve with him. He is now upon another scheme, -- that of raising, arming, and
clothing a number of men in the French islands. -- To grant a commission of
that kind is without the extent of my powers, and I have therefore desired him
to go forward, and lay his proposals before Congress. If they appear feasible
they may be adopted: but I would beg leave to observe that one precaution will
be necessary, that is, that the commissions of monsieur Eaneuil and his
officers should depend upon the performance of their agreement for raising any
certain number of men.

I have often mentioned to you the distress I am every now and then laid under
by the application of French officers for commissions in our service. This
evil, if I may call it so, is a growing one: for, from what I learn, they are
coming in swarms from old France and the islands. There will therefore be a
necessity of providing for them or discountenancing them. To do the first is
difficult; and the last, disagreeable, and perhaps impolitic if they are men of
merit: -- and it is impossible to distinguish these from mere adventurers, of
whom. I am convinced, there are the greatest number. They seldom bring more
than a commission and passport, which, we know, may belong to a bad as well as
a good officer.

Their ignorance of our language, and their inability to recruit men, are
unsurmountable obstacles to their being ingrafted into our continental
battalions: for our officers, who have raised their men, and have served
through the war upon pay that has hitherto not borne their expenses, would be
disgusted if foreigners were put over their heads: -- and I assure you, few or
none of these gentlemen look lower than field-officers' commissions. To give
them all brevets, by which they have rank and draw pay without doing any
service, is saddling the continent with a vast expense: and to form them into
corpse, would be only establishing corpse of officers; for, as I said before,
they cannot possibly raise any men.

Some general mode of disposing of them must be adopted; for it is ungenerous
to keep them in suspense, and at great charge to themselves: but I am at a loss
how to point out this mode. -- Suppose they were told in general, that no man
could obtain a commission, except he could raise a number of men in proportion
to his rank. This would effectually stop the mouths of common appliers, and
would leave us at liberty to make provision for gentlemen of undoubted military
character and merit, who would be very useful to us as soon as they acquired
our language.

If you approve of this, or can think of any better method, be pleased to
inform me as soon as you possibly can: for, if I had a decisive answer to give
them, it would not only save me much trouble, but much time, which I am now
obliged to bestow in hearing their different pretentions to merit, and their
expectations thereupon.

I enclose you the papers which monsieur Faneuil originally (...)

Headquarters, Morristown Feb. 23, 1777. SIR,
CONGRESS having resolved that several regiments of cavalry should be raised to
form a part of their army, I beg leave, through you, to lay before them the
enclosed list of officers which appear necessary to be appointed to each corpse,
and which they will be pleased to establish. At the same time I should suppose
it highly expedient to fix their pay and that of the privates. There is now one
regiment in service, and three more recruiting: this makes it indispensably
necessary that it should be done. Applications are constantly making, to know
what the pay is, and objections raised against the service for want of due
information.

I have transmitted a list of such pay as seemed to be thought reasonable for
part of the officers to receive when colonel Sheldon's regiment was directed to
be levied, and a copy of the memorandum made at that time. This, colonel
Sheldon conceived, would not be more than adequate to their services, trouble,
and expense, and which in some degree was founded on the opinions of other
gentlemen of whom inquiry was made upon the subject. I did not fix it in the
instances where it is set down with certainty, as the memorandum will show. A
criterion, by which I was also governed upon that occasion, was the resolve
appointing Mr. Sheldon lieutenant colonel commandant with the rank and pay of
colonel. From thence I attempted to proportion that of some other officers. --
Upon the whole I think it should be settled without further loss of time, and
wish the earliest attention of Congress to be had to it.

Our delicate and truly critical situation, for want of a sufficient force to
oppose the enemy who are now ready, and, before many days elapse, will take the
field, induced me to expect that the troops raising in the southern states, and
intended for this army, would march in companies or half companies as they were
made up, without waiting for their regiments to be complete. Policy strongly
suggested the propriety of the measure, and I requested it: but, to my great
anxiety and surprise, I am told that this line of conduct is totally neglected,
though a great number of recruits are actually engaged. I must entreat Congress
to interpose again with their most pressing applications, and commands that
this expedient may be adopted without a moment's delay. No injury can result
from it, because a sufficient number of proper officers can and must be left,
to recruit the corpse to their full complement.

Nor will my fears respecting the state of our arms allow me to be silent on
that head. Let the states be urged to send their men equipped with them, and
every other necessary, if possible. I know not what supplies may be in store
elsewhere, or in the power of Congress: but they must not depend upon their
being furnished here with any, or but with very few: -- no human prudence or
precaution could secure but a small part of those belonging to the public, and
in the hands of the soldiery, from being embezzled and carried off when their
time of service expired; nor can the same abuses be restrained in the militia.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, Feb. 9, 1777. SIR,
NO military operation of any consequence has occurred since I had the honor of
writing to you last, except that on sunday I received information that the
enemy were advancing in a manner and in numbers so much greater than usual,
that it looked like a prelude to an attack upon our posts, which were
immediately put in the best preparation to receive them. It turned out to be
only a stronger foraging party than usual. They were however opposed in so
spirited a manner by our advanced parties, that they were checked, and retired
in the afternoon toward Amboy, from whence they came. Their loss in the course
of the day from the best accounts I can get, amounts to about one hundred in
killed, wounded, prisoners, and deserters. Some people who were near the scene
of action, and who have picked up accounts from those who have since been in
Amboy, are sanguine enough to suppose that they lost five hundred altogether:
but of this I have no conception. -- Our loss was only two killed and ten
wounded.

I was in hopes, that, by the time the militia who are now in service would be
discharged, we should have a considerable number of the new levies in the
field: but, though I have reports from all quarters of the great success of
recruiting, I cannot get a man of them into service. General Johnson's militia
all go the fifth of March (many are gone already), and general Lincoln's on the
fifteenth. These two bodies form so considerable a part of our force, that,
unless they are replaced I shall be left in a manner destitute: for I have no
great hopes of seeing an equal number of continental troops by that time.

I have wrote to Pennsylvania, to endeavor to get a reinforcement of militia
from thence; and I am told the militia from the counties of Baltimore,
Hartford, and Cecil, in Maryland, are on their march: but as I have it not from
any authority, I know not when to expect them, or in what numbers. They are
about passing a militia-law in this state, which may perhaps have some effect:
but at present they are under no regulation at all.

I have in my late letters recommended several things to your consideration,
particularly that of a promotion of general officers. The very well-being of
the new army depends upon its being done speedily. Not only this, but we are
now suffering for want of brigadiers. General Scuyler has wrote most pressingly
for the assistance of general officers; and I have none to send him without
injuring the service in this quarter. -- The hospital plan too requires an
answer, as nothing can be done in the nomination of the proper officers till I
have your determination. There are several other matters of consequence before
you, to which I am waiting your answers before I can proceed upon the
respective points to which they refer.

Enclosed you have a letter from the widow of a brave officer, who was killed
at Princeton. If any provision is made, I do not recollect what it is: if there
is any, please to inform me: if there is not, I can venture to recommend her as
a proper object, to make some reparation for her great loss.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Mine of the twentieth mentioned that lord Percy had arrived with the
troops from Rhode Island: but I find he remains there. By some gentlemen just
arrived from Boston, doctor Franklin's arrival in France is mentioned with
certainty. A ship come to Salem brings the intelligence, the captain of which
says the doctor had got in five days before his departure; also that captain
Weeks made two prizes in his passage, and they were condemned and sold at
Bordeaux.



Headquarters, Morristown, March 1, 1777. SIR,
I WAS this evening honored with your favor of the twenty-third ultimo,
accompanied by sundry proceedings of Congress. Those respecting general Lee,
and which prescribe the treatment of lieutenant colonel Campbell and the five
Hessian field-officers, are the cause of this letter.

Though I sincerely commiserate the misfortunes of general Lee, and feel much
for his present unhappy situation, yet, with all possible deference to the
opinion of Congress, I fear that these resolutions would not have the desired
effect, -- are founded in impolicy, -- and will, if adhered to, produce
consequences of an extensive and melancholy nature, Retaliation is certainly
just, and sometimes necessary, even where attended with the severest penalties:
but, when the evils which may and must result from it exceed those intended to
be redressed, prudence and policy require that it should be avoided. -- Having
premised thus much, I beg leave to examine the justice and expediency of it in
the instances now before us.

From the best information I have been able to obtain, general Lee's usage has
not been so disgraceful and dishonorable as to authorize the treatment decreed
to those gentlemen, was it not prohibited by many other important
considerations. His confinement, I believe, has been more rigorous than has
been generally experienced by the rest of our officers, or those of the enemy
who have been in our possession: but if the reports be true (received on that
head), he has been provided with a decent apartment and with most things
necessary to render him comfortable. This is not the case with one of the
officers comprehended in the resolves, if his letter, of which a copy is
transmitted, deserves your credit. Here retaliation seems to have been
prematurely begun; or, to speak with more propriety, severities have been and
are exercised toward colonel Campbell, not justified by any that general Lee
has yet received.

In point of policy, under the present situation of our affairs, this doctrine
cannot be supported. The balance of prisoners is greatly against us; and a
general regard to the happiness of the whole should mark our conduct. Can we
imagine that our enemies will not mete the same punishments, the same
indignities, the same cruelties, to those belonging to us, in their possession,
that we impose on theirs in our power? Why should we suppose them to possess
more humanity than we have ourselves? or why should an ineffectual attempt to
relieve the distresses of one brave unfortunate man involve many more in the
same calamities?

However disagreeable the fact may be, the enemy at this time have in their
power, and subject to their call, near three hundred officers belonging to the
army of the United States. In this number, there are some of high rank; and
most of them are men of bravery and merit. The quota of theirs in our hands
bears no proportion, being not more than fifty at most. Under these
circumstances, we should certainly do no act to draw upon the gentlemen
belonging to us, and who have already suffered a long captivity, greater
punishments than they have and now experience. If we should, what will their
feelings be, and those of their numerous and extensive connexions? -- Suppose
the treatment prescribed for the Hessians should be pursued, will it not
establish what the enemy have been aiming to effect by every artifice and the
grossest misrepresentations, -- I mean, an opinion of our enmity toward them,
and the cruel conduct they experience when they fall into our hands, -- a
prejudice which we on our part have heretofore thought it politic to suppress
and to root out by every act of lenity and of kindness? It certainly will: --
the Hessians would hear of the punishment with all the circumstances of
heightened exaggeration, -- would feel the injury, without investigating the
cause, or reasoning upon the justice or necessity of it. The mischiefs, which
may and must inevitably flow from the execution of the resolves, appear to be
endless and innumerable.

On my own part, I have been much embarrassed on the subject of exchanges
already. Applications are daily made by both friends and enemies, to complete
them as far as circumstances of number and rank will apply. Some of the former
have complained that a discrimination is about to be adopted, perhaps injurious
to their reputation, and certainly depriving them of their right of exchange in
due course, as established upon the principles of equality proposed last year,
acceded to by both parties, and now subsisting. The latter charge me with a
breech of faith, and call upon me to perform the agreement.

Many more objections might be subjoined, were they material: -- I shall only
observe, that the present state of our army (if it deserves that name) will not
authorize the language of retaliation or the style of menace. This will be
conceded by all who know that the whole of our force is weak and trifling, and
composed of militia (a very few regular troops excepted) whose service is on
the eve of expiring.

There are several other matters which might be mentioned upon this subject,
would time and opportunity permit: but, as they will not, I beg leave to refer
you to colonel Walker, who will deliver this, and give satisfaction to any
enquiries that may be deemed necessary. Persuading myself that Congress will
indulge the liberty I have taken upon this occasion, I have only to wish for
the result of their deliberations after they have reconsidered the resolves,
and to assure them that -- I have the honor to be. etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, March 6, 1777. SIR,
I do myself the honor to transmit you the enclosed copy of a letter from
general Lee, received by a flag on Tuesday last. You will perceive from thence
his wishes and expectations of seeing some members of Congress in consequence
of his letter upon that subject. None of the passports which he mentions were
sent out, though the letter came by general Howe's permission as the others
did. I should be happy to relieve his anxiety as far as I could, by sending in
major Morris: but this I cannot do till a safe conduct is granted.

The more I consider the resolves respecting lieutenant colonel Campbell and
the Hessian officers, the more convinced I am of their impolicy. The
proposition made by Congress for the exchange of prisoners, and which by their
direction was transmitted to general How, was founded on principles of
equality in number and in rank. From hence no demand, as a matter of right, can
be made of general Lee's releasement for any officer or number of officers of
inferior rank: whatever is or might be done in such instance, would be of favor
and indulgence. The only cartel that now subsists is the one I have mentioned.
This, so far as it goes, is a beneficial one: it recognizes the rank of our
officers, and insures their discharge from captivity whenever we are possessed
of a like number belonging to them, and of the same rank. If on our part it
should be violated, -- if it is not observed, -- surely it will and must cease
to be obligatory on general How. What consequences may then ensue, I leave to
your conjecture.

If it be objected that the above observations, and what I said in my former
letter, prove that no treatment received by our officers should be retaliated
on theirs, -- my answer is, that the proportion of officers in their hands is
at least six to one in ours. This consideration, supposing we had a right to
demand general Lee's liberty, would be of great weight, and sufficient to
prevent, in my opinion, the execution of the resolves. -- I have the honor to
be, in haste, your most obedient servant.

G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, March 14, 1777. SIR,
I WAS honored several days ago with your letter of the twenty-fifth ultimo,
with its enclosures, the receipt of which was omitted to be acknowledged in my
last.

Could I accomplish the important objects so eagerly wished by Congress, --
"confining the enemy within their present quarters, -- preventing their getting
supplies from the country, and totally subduing them before they are
reinforced," -- I should be happy indeed. But what prospect or hope can there
be of my effecting so desirable a work at this time? The enclosed return, to
which I solicit the most serious attention of Congress, comprehends the whole
force I have in Jersey. It is but a handful, and bears no proportion, on the
scale of numbers, to that of the enemy. Added to this, the major part is made
up of militia. The most sanguine in speculation cannot deem it more than
adequate to the least valuable purposes of war.

The reinforcements mentioned to be drawn from general Heath were merely ideal,
-- nearly the whole of the eastern troops which were with him being here
before. They were only engaged till today: and today they leave the camp.
Their service has been of pretty long continuance, and almost the whole of the
winter months. What prospect there may be of immediate succors from other
quarters, I know not: but from the militia of this state I cannot expect to
derive much more aid. Those who are well effected have been so frequently
called from their home, that they are tired out, and almost profess an
abhorrence of the service: nor have I heard as yet that any continental troops
are on the way. I have wrote to the brigadiers-general in most of the states
upon the subject, and also to the colonels, urging them by every motive to
exert themselves in filling the regiments and to forward them on.

I confess, sir, I feel the most painful anxiety when I reflect on our
situation and that of the enemy. Unless the levies arrive soon, we must, before
it be long, experience some interesting and melancholy event. I believe the
enemy have fixed their object, and the execution will surely be attempted as
soon as the roads are passable. The unprepared state in which we are, favors
all their designs; and it is much to be wished that they may not succeed to
their warmest expectations.

On recurring to the late promotions of brigadiers, I find the number appointed
to be short of what I took the liberty to recommend, and not competent to the
exigencies of the service supposing the whole in office before, and those
lately created, onsent to act, which I have reason to believe will not be the
case. I shall only beg leave to refer you to my former letters upon this
subject, and to assure you that many disadvantages will result from not having
a sufficient number of officers of this rank. We have always been deficient in
this instance; and certain I am that the service is greatly injured by it. The
proportion I mentioned was full small, and, in my opinion, should not be
dispensed with.

I would also take the liberty of mentioning again (having received no answer
upon the subject) that settling the hospital plan and establishment becomes
more and more necessary. It is an object of infinite importance; and the
difficulties of doing it on a proper foundation will be great, if not almost
insurmountable, should it be deferred till the campaign opens, and the enemy
begin their operations. The benefits of the institution will soon be known: --
the want was severely felt in the course of the last year.

There is one thing more which claims, in my opinion, the earliest attention of
Congress, -- I mean the pay of the regimental surgeons, and that of the mates.
These appointments are so essential, that they cannot be done without. The pay,
in the first instance, is so low, so inadequate to the services which should be
performed, that no man sustaining the character of a gentlemen, and who has the
least medical abilities or skill in the profession, can think of accepting it:
that in the latter is so paltry and trifling, that none, of the least
generosity of sentiment or pretentions to merit, can consent to act for it. In
a word, these are inconveniences of an interesting nature: -- they amount to
an exclusion of persons who could discharge the duties of those offices; and,
if not redressed, there is not the smallest probability that any can be
prevailed on to enter them again.

There are several matters also which I refered to Congress some time since,
and upon which I have not received the result of their diliberations. -- one
enquiry, about the state of arms and ammunition, I am peculiarly anxious to be
satisfied in.

From the inconveniences and injuries to the service of late for want of money,
I am induced to request that the strictest regard should be had to furnishing
the paymaster with constant and sufficient supplies. On sunday he received five
hundred thousand dollars, half of which is already expended, and the balance in
a day or two will be entirely swept away, without discharging the several
claims. By his report, the commissary here requires an immediate draught for a
hundred thousand; and the militia returning and about to leave camp, a hundred
and twenty thousand -- more. The expense incurred by calling on them so
frequently is almost incredible. Besides these, there are several arrears due
to the old troops, and to most of the general and staff officers.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
I fully intended to transmit you a general return, but am not able to make it
out with precision. However, from the most accurate estimate that I can form,
the whole of our numbers in Jersey, fit for duty at this time, is under three
thousand. These (nine hundred and eighty-one excepted) are militia, and stand
engaged only till the last of this month. The troops under inoculation,
including their attendants, amount to about one thousand.



Headquarters, Morristown, March 18, 1777. SIR,
THE difficulty if not impossibility of giving Congress a just idea of our
situation (and of several other important matters requiring their earliest
attention) by letter, has induced me to prevail on major general Green to wait
upon them for that purpose. This gentleman is so much in my confidence, so
intimately acquainted with my ideas, -- with our strength and our weaknesses,
-- with every thing respecting the army, -- that I have thought it necessary to
particularise or prescribe any certain line of duty or inquiries for him. I
shall only say, from the rank he holds as an able and good officer in the
estimation of all who knew him, he deserves the greatest respect; and much
regard is due to his opinions in the line of his profession. He has upon his
mind such matters as appear to me most material to be immediately considered
of; and many more will probably arise during the intercourse you may think
proper to honor him with; -- on all which I wish to have the sense of Congress,
and the relult of such a deliberation as may be formed thereupon.

I have enclosed an extract of a letter received yesterday from governor
Trumbull, with a copy of one intercepted, going from the late governor
Wentworth to his sister. The information contained in the letter, if true, is
important and interesting: how far it is to be relied on, I cannot determine:
but there can be no doubt of the British court's straining every nerve and
interest at home and abroad, to bend us to their * * * yoke.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, March 21, 1777. SIR,
I was last night honored with your letter of the seventeenth instant, covering
sundry, resolutions of Congress which shall have my attention.

Having charged major general Green, who will probably be in Philadelphia
today, with such matters as I wished to refer to the consideration of
Congress, I have nothing to trouble them with at this time, or material to
inform them of.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, March 23, 1777. SIR,
COLONEL Palfrey, having expressed a desire to settle the accounts of his
office to this time, has obtained my permission to repair to Philadelphia, and
now waits on Congress with his books and vouchers, hoping that a committee will
be appointed to examine and adjust the same.

The disadvantages which have arisen to the service, and which have been
severely felt, for want of constant supplies in the military chest, are almost
incredible, and are not to be described but with great difficulty to those who
are not immediately in the army, and privy to the frequent and importunate
applications that are made. To prevent inconveniences of the like nature in
future, I have thought it proper that an estimate of the monthly advances
should be formed and laid before Congress. This colonel Palfrey will do; and,
though it cannot be effected with a degree of scrupulous exactness and
precision, yet from his intimate knowledge of the incidental charges and
expenses in the common course of things, the calculation, I apprehend, will be
attended with many benefits. It will show Congress the necessary provisions of
money to be made for ordinary contingencies, and enable them to form a rule for
their government in the instance of supplies for the army.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, March 26, 1777. SIR,
YESTERDAY a letter, of which the enclosed is a copy, came to my hands. The
account is confirmed by a countryman who is since come in: but nothing distinct
has yet been received.

The aid required of me in colonel Hay's letter cannot be given: I have no men
to oppose the ennemy's designs in any one quarter, although called upon from
every quarter. All that was possible for me to do toward collecting a force at
Peekskill, I had attempted before: -- I had in peremptory terms called upon the
officers of Rhode Island and Connecticut to forward on their recruits under
proper officers as fast as possible to that place: I had directed such of the
New York regiments as had been ordered to Ticonderoga, to repair thither: I had
requested eight of the Massachusetts regiments to be marched to that post: and,
lest these should not arrive in time, I urged governor Trumbull, in a letter of
the sixth instant, to send two thousand of his militia to the same place. But
sorry I am to observe, the militia have got tired; and the colonels of the
continental regiments have been greatly deceived themselves, -- have greatly
deceived me, -- or the most unheard of desertions * * * have prevailed * * *:
for regiments, reported two or three months ago to be half completed, are, upon
the colonels being called upon in positive terms for a just state of them,
found to contain less than one hundred men; and this not the case of a single
regiment only, but of many. In Connecticut alone, by a letter from general
Parsons, of the sixth instant, four regiments are mentioned as not having more
than eighty rank and file, each.

These, sir, are melancholy truths: but facts they are, and necessary to be
known to Congress, however prudent it may be to conceal them from the
observation of others.

To superintend the business of recruiting, -- to see that the officers were
diligent, -- to prevent impositions if possible, -- to appoint fit places of
rendezvous, -- to see that the recruits were actually brought to those places,
and there equipped and trained for the field, -- were among the great objects
which early and repeatedly induced me to press the appointment of general
officers: but unfortunately the delay of appointing, being followed by the
resignation of some officers and non-acceptance of others, will involve the
army in a mere chaos of confusion at a time when the utmost order and
regularity should prevail, and when all our arrangements ought to be completely
established. The medical department will, it is much to be seared, be in the
same situation: -- not an officer yet appointed to it.

For want of proper and coercive powers, -- from disaffection and other causes,
-- the militia of this state are not to be depended upon. They are drawn out
with difficulty, and at a most enormous expense, as their accounts will show:
they come, you can scarce tell how; they go, you hardly know when. In the same
predicament are those of Pennsylvania.

Numbers from this state have joined the enemy; and many more are disposed to
do so, as the letter from Mr. Hoff (a copy of which is enclosed, corresponding
with several others of the same tenor) sufficiently evinces.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Small as our present force is, it will be reduced in a few days by the
going off of the Jersey three-months men, the Cecil-county militia, and the
Virginia volunteers, all of whom claim discharges the first of next month. I
have sent an officer express toward Peekskill to inquire into the
circumstances and consequence of the enemy's descent upon that place, -- not
being able to account for general M'Dougal's (who commands there) and general
Clinton's (who is at the forts in the Highlands) their silence upon this
occasion.



Morristown, March 29, 1777. SIR,
I LAST night had the honor to receive your leter of the twenty-sixth instant,
accompanied by sundry resolves of Congress, and some other papers.

The arrival of the arms, locks, and flints, you have been pleased to mention,
is a most fortunate and happy event. I join you most sincerely in
congratulations upon the occasion.

I have not yet obtained a certain account of the expedition against and
destruction or Peekskill. Information of those events has not been yet
transmitted by generals M'Dougal or Clinton, or the convention of the state.
There is no doubt but that the town is destroyed, and, with it, some stores: --
neither the quality nor amount of them is known. It is said that it was done in
part by our own people when they found that they could not prevent them falling
into the enemy's hands. -- The ships and troops have gone down the river again.

Mr. Kirkland, the Oneida missionary, arrived here this week with a chief
warrior and five other Indians of that nation. They had been to Boston, and
came from thence to this place to inquire into the true state of matters, that
they might report them to a grand council to be shortly held. They said things
were so falsely and variously represented by our enemies through their agents,
that they did not know what to depend on. I invited them to go to Philadelphia:
but they declined it, declaring they were well satisfied with what they had
seen, and that they were authorized to tell their nation, all they had heard
from the enemy was false. Being told that France was assisting us, and about to
join in the war, they seemed highly pleased; and Mr. Kirkland said he was
persuaded it would have a considerable effect on the minds of several of the
nations, and secure to us their neutrality, if not a declaration and
commencement of hostilities in our favor. I showed them every civility in my
power, and every thing that I thought material to excite in them an idea of our
strength and independence. After staying two days, they set off for their
nation expressing their desire of the most speedy return to the council, and
professing the most friendly sentiments toward us.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, March 29, 1777. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you this morning by the return express the
eastern post arrived. The intelligence he brought is agreeable and interesting,
as you will perceive by the enclosed letter from Mr. Hazard, which I do myself
the pleasure of transmitting. I am happy to say the arrival of the ship at
Portsmouth and the capture of the two prizes is confirmed by other letters from
gentlemen of note in and about Boston. Upon these events I give you my most
hearty congratulations. Some of the letters add that a French general, colonel,
and major, came passengers in the ship, who are highly recommended by doctor
Franklin.

The affair of Peekskill has not been transmitted me with certainty: but I am
informed, the relation of it in Loudon's paper which I have enclosed, is nearly
as it happened.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, March 31, 1777. SIR,
CAPTAIN Deshields, of Mr. Buchanan's ship from Baltemore, who was taken by the
enemy and carried into York, made his escape from thence on saturday evening.
He informs that three thousand troops British and Hessian, embarked about ten
days ago from the city and Staten-Island, on board transports which were lying
at the latter when he came away. He adds that the enemy have built and are
building a number of light flat bottomed boats, about seventy of which are
finished.

Captain Deshields says it seemed to be the general opinion and conversation
that this embarkation was for Chesapeak-bay, with a view of making a descent on
the Eastern-Shore, or that the troops were to proceed to the Head of Elk,
taking Annapolis and Baltimore in their way. There were some who thought it
probable they mean to go up the North-river and attempt the Highland
fortifications. -- I have written to generals M'Dougal and Clinton, desiring
them to make the best preparation that circumstances will admit of, for their
reception, in case the latter should be their object.

Captain Deshields being in company with the captain of the packet, but unknown
to him, heard him say that a war with France was much expected when he left
England, which was about the beginning of February.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, April 2, 1777. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of writing to you last, I have received the enclosed
from general M'Dougal, which contains a full account of the late affair at
Peekskill. Every prudential step appears to have been taken by the general, and
as good a disposition made as his small number of men would admit of.

I have heard nothing further respecting the embarkation of troops which I
mentioned in my last. -- I am in hopes the Connecticut militia will arrive at
Peekskill before another expedition is made up the North-river. I have wrote to
hasten them as much as possible, lest such another design should be really in
agitation. -- In my opinion, Delaware bay is their object, and Chesapeak only
thrown out by way of blind: their late attempt to procure Delaware pilots seems
to confirm it.

I observe by your late promotions that a foreign gentleman is appointed to the
command of the German batallion. I could wish that he was ordered to join
immediately, as that regiment much wants an officer of experienc^ at the head
of it.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I have ordered the deputy quarter-master-general to establish proper
relays of expresses between this and Philadelphia, that intelligence may be
occasionally conveyed in the most expeditious manner. If there should be any
appearance of a fleet in Delaware-bay, it will be known in a very few hours in
Philadelphia, by hoisting the signals; and I beg I may have the earliest notice
of it. -- The quartermaster will inform you who his rider in Philadelphia is,
that you may know where to apply.



Headquarters, Morristown, April 9, 1777. SIR,
I AM honored with yours of the fourth, enclosing sundry resolves of Congress
from the twenty-ninth of March to the fifth instant. -- I am extremely glad to
see the resolve for the immediate removal of military stores from Baltimore and
Annapolis; for, although I do not imagine that the enemy intend an expedition
of any great consequence in Chesapeak-bay yet while the stores lay at the
abovementioned places, they were always subject to be destroyed by a sudden
attack of a ship of war with a few land forces.

The regulations for the paymaster-general's department are very salutary, and,
if carried strictly into execution, will make a vast saving to the public. It
may be easily done when the army is put upon a regular footing: but, while we
are obliged to make use of militia, we must submit to all the irregularities
that naturally attend them, and must not therefore expect to have the rule as
scrupulously complied with by them as could be wished. * * *

The muster-master-general complained that the duty required of him was more
than he could perform: but by the late resolves there is an ample allowance for
deputies; and therefore no further excuse can be made upon that head.

I most ardently wish to see the hospital established. I am afraid too much
time has been lost in the consideration of the plan: but the gentlemen who
shall be appointed to the superintendence must endeavor to make up for lost
time by their diligence.

By the latest accounts from Brunswic, it looks as if the enemy were projecting
an embarkation. They have been stripping the buildings of boards, and cutting
small timber, and transporting them from Brunswic to Amboy. It is imagined this
is to build births in their transports. -- I shall keep a constant look-out
upon the motions of the vessels, and shall endeavor to obtain every
intelligence by sending people into their quarters. -- I think Delaware-bay
must be their destination if they move by water.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, April 10, 1777. SIR,
I WAS just now honored with your letter of the ninth instant, covering sundry
resolutions of Congress. Those for regulating the hospital and medical
department, I trust, will prove of the most salutary consequences. It is only
to be regretted that this necessary and liberal institution had not been gone
into and completed at an earlier period.

The honors Congress have decreed to the memory of generals Warren and Mercer,
afford me the highest pleasure: their character and merit had a just claim to
every mark on respect; and I heartily wish that every officer of the United
States, emulating their virtues, may by their actions secure to themselves the
same right to the grateful tributes of their country.

Since writing to you yesterday I have received further intelligence of the
enemy's preparations in York, indicating a movement before long. It is
contained in the enclosed letter, No. 1, and corroborates the opinion I have
long entertained that they would make a push against Philadelphia. The tory
regiments mentioned, we are told, are at Hackinsac, and are about five hundred
strong, exclusive of a company of Highlanders which is with them.

The enclosed letter from le chevalier count De Vrecourt came to hand this
morning, -- which I have thought proper to transmit to Congress, that they may
consider his case, and adopt such measures respecting him as his character and
testimonials deserve. I never heard of him before: but if he is a skilful
engineer, he will be extremely useful, and should be employed, though he may
not understand our language. At this time we have not one with the army, nor
one to join it, of the least reputation or pretensions to skill. If this
gentleman came in consequence of an agreement with doctor Franklin, and brought
credentials from him, I should suppose him to be acquainted with what he was
recommended for.

The cartel, proposed to be settled, and so long in agitation, is not
accomplished yet: the last meeting on that business was the second instant,
when nothing was done; nor is a further interview appointed respecting it. I
have transmitted a copy of lord Cornwallis's letter which came out the next
day, with that of the paper alluded to by him, which Mr. Harrison refused to
receive from colonel Walcot, and of my answer to the latter in a letter to
general How. The objections or articles mentioned by colonel Walcot were those
general Green had with him, and which he left when he came from Philadelphia:
the original I have by me. Those points were insisted on again, and rejected,
and a tender made of the paper by colonel Walcot, which he brought with him
prepared.

I have appointed John Wilkins, John Steel, Matthew Irvin, and Samuel Kersley,
esquires, captains of companies to be raised by them, in consequence of the
recommendation of general Armstrong. As the interest of those gentlemen lies in
Pennsylvania chiefly, and it would be drawing money from the paymaster here to
carry to Philadelphia (supposing there was a supply in the chest, which is not
the case), I shall be obliged by Congress's ordering six hundred dollars to be
advanced to each of them on account of the recruiting service; the first of
whom I imagine is in Philadelphia. If this requisition can be complied with,
he, I presume, will give notice to the rest; or, if general Armstrong is
informed of it, he will do it.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, April 12, 1777. SIR,
HAVING seen a letter from doctor Franklin, and many other credentials in favor
of monsieur le chevalier Du Plussis, he appears to me to be a person worthy of
the notice and encouragement of Congress. He has served in the French
artillery; and both his inclination and qualifications make it proper he should
have an appointment in ours. There are some vacancies in the artillery for
captains, one of which may be offered him as a beginning. The superior ranks
are all completed.

I am, sir, your most humble servant, G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, April 12, 1777. SIR,
I AM honored with yours of the tenth, accompanied with one from the committee
of Congress to whom I have wrote very fully upon the subject of the resolve for
forming an army upon the west side of Delaware, and to which I refer you. -- I
wish I could see any prospect of an army, fit to make proper opposition, formed
any where. You will perhaps be surprised at this after the public reports of
the great success of recruiting in all the states; but, to convince you that
these are but bare reports, I will give you the best information I have been
able to collect from actual returns and other accounts.

New Hampshire. -- No returns: but a letter from general Heath says they are
tolerably forward. -- All their regiments go to the northward.

Massachusetts. -- About four hundred men raised to a regiment; many of these
yet to undergo inoculation. Seven of their regiments go to the northward, and
eight are to come to Peekskill for the present.

Rhode Island. -- Only three hundred and sixty men enlisted in both regiments
the first of April. Two hundred of these are yet to be inocualted. -- General
Varnum writes me that he despairs of filling up the regiments.

Connecticut. -- By a return from general Parsons, of the fourth of April,
about eighteen hundred men were recruited through the whole state, -- they,
much dispersed; -- many to have the smallpox; and recruiting at a stand.

New York. -- About two hundred men to a regiment: and, from the peculiar
situation of that province, it will be almost impossible for them to fill up
their regiments though they exert themselves very much.

New-Jersew. -- Between two and three hundred to a regiment. They also lie
under many difficulties on account of the disaffection of their state: but
their officers are active and diligent.

Pennsylvania. -- Most of her regiments are very backward, -- those most so,
who have been longest recruiting.

Delaware state. -- No return of their regiment.

Maryland. -- I have only the return of one regiment, which consists of two
hundred men: but I do not believe the others are in more forwardness. The
disputes about the rank of officers have prevailed so much, that the recruiting
service has been in a manner neglected.

Virginia. -- The nine old regiments will not exceed eighteen hundred effective
men: and governor Henry, in a letter which I received yesterday, informs me
that he did not think that more than four of the six new ones would be filled.
He proposes the expediency of raising volunteer companies to serve seven or
eight months, to make up the deficiency: but this I shall object to on many
accounts, particularly that it would be introducing a body of men who would
look upon themselves at liberty to do what they pleased, and, the moment their
time expired would leave us, though at the most critical juncture.

If the men that are raised, few as they are, could be got into the field, it
would be a matter of some consolation: but every method that I have been able
to devise has proved ineffectual. If I send an officer to collect the sick and
scattered of his regiment, it is ten to one but he neglects his duty, goes home
on pleasure or business, and the next that I hear of him is that he has
resigned: -- furloughs are not more attended to than if there was no limitation
of time: -- and in short, sir, there is such a total depression of that
military ardor which I hoped would have inspired every officer when he found
his pay genteelly augmented and the army put upon a respectable footing, that
it seems to me as if all public spirit was sunk * * *

I shall as soon as possible transmit to the board of war a list of the
appointments I have made in consequence of the powers vested in me.

If the appointments in the hospital are not filled up before the receipt of
this, I would take the liberty of mentioning a gentleman whom I think highly
deserving of notice, not only on account of his abilities, but for the very
great assistance which he has afforded in the course of this winter, merely in
the nature of a volunteer. The gentlemen is doctor John Cochran, well known to
all the faculty, and particularly to doctor Shippen, who, I suppose, has
mentioned him among the candidates. The place for which the doctor is well
fitted, and which will be most agreeable to him, is surgeon general to the
middle department. In this line he served all the last war in the British
service, and has distinguished himself this winter, particularly in his
attention to the smallpox patients and the wounded, who, but for him and
doctor Bond, must have suffered much, if not been totally neglected, as there
were no other medical gentlemen to be found. -- If the appointment of
surgeon-general is filled up, that of deputy-director of the middle department
would be acceptable.

I have been thus full in my recommendation because doctor Cochran in my manner
had my promise of one of the capital appointments in the hospital, upon a
presumption that I should have had some hand in the nomination by the
resolution of Congress empowering me to fill all commissions under the rank of
brigadiers-general.

April 13. -- I have this moment received a line from general Lincoln,
informing me that the enemy attempted to surprise him early this morning at his
post at Boundbrook; but he made good his retreat to the pass of the mountains
just in his rear, with trifling loss.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, April. 15, 1777. SIR,
THE enclosed from monsieur le chevalier De Dreudhomme de Borre, with the
papers annexed to it, were received this day by the eastern mail. It appears
that by an agreement with Mr. Deane he is to have the rank and pay of a
brigadiergeneral in our service. I imagine by this that he is a man of real
merit. If you think proper to confirm Mr. Deane's appointment be pleased to
inform me of it and return the letter, that I may give a suitable answer, If,
as I imagine, he does not understant English, it will be some time before he
can be of any use at the head of a brigade.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, April 18, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE nothing of importance to transmit Congress, no event in the military
line having happened since my last, except the surprising a small picquet guard
of the enemy on monday night at Bonemtown, and bringing off thirteen prisoners
by one of our parties. An enterprise of a similar nature was formed against
that at Amboy, in which the party sent to effect it did not succeed so well,
though the most advanced of them seized and secured three of their
out-centuries without giving an alarm.

By a letter from general M'Dougal, of yesterday, I am informed that he had
received accounts of thirty-six sail of transports having left Newport on
friday last, with troops on board. Other reports he had were that a number of
ships were coming up the sound, so that we may reasonably conclude general How
is drawing his forces from the eastward. General Arnold, in a letter of the
sixth, mentioned, that, from the preparation of transports, and other
circumstances, he thought it probable an embarkation was about to take place.

There are grounds to suspect from information received, that some unfair
practices have been and are meant to be used in certain exports from
Philadelphia. It is said that a vessel navigated by Frenchmen loaded there,
belong to * * * of NewYork, which carried her cargo to general How; also that
* * * and * * * of Monmouth-county intend to load one or more for the same
purpose, under the idea of sending them to foreign markets. I have written to
the board of war for Pennsylvania upon the subject, and doubt not but these
hints will be properly improved, and such frauds guarded against as well as
circumstances will admit.

I have enclosed a copy of an advertisement published in Gaine's paper of the
fourteenth, which shows that no artifices are left untried by the enemy to
injure us. Before the appearance of this unparralleled piece, I had heard that
a person was gone from York to Rhode Island with a quantity of counterfeit
money.

There is one thing which I beg leave to mention to Congress, and which I think
highly deserving their attention, that is, that supplies of hard money, or
bills of exchange to procure it, should, if possible be sent our prisoners in
the hands of the enemy, at least to the officers, to relieve their wants. By
letters which I have received from them of late, I find they are in great
distress, and such as ought to be removed, if it can be done. -- No
inconvenience will result to the public from such supplies, if they can be
furnished, as proper stoppages and deductions can be made from their pay.

April 19. -- I was honored with your letter of the sixteenth between twelve
and one o'clock yesterday, accompanied by sundry resolutions. I hope the
measures Congress have adopted will produce the salutary consequences they had
in view: but I fear that the states, unless they are delicate in exercising the
powers they are invested with for filling vacancies in instances of removal
from office, and pay strict attention to a proper line of succession where
there are no capital objections, will renew much of that confusion and disorder
we have been endeavoring to extricate ourselves from. Nor will this be of small
difficulty if they displace many officers: for, supposing them to have kept the
most accurate lists of their original appointments, changes have taken place in
several instances from various causes unknown to them, and of which they cannot
be apprised.

I can assure Congress the appellation given to the regiments officered by me
was without my consent or privity. As soon as I heard it, I wrote to several of
the officers in terms of severe reprehension, and expressly charged them to
suppress the distinction, adding that all the battalions were on the same
footing, and all under the general name of Continental.

An attack upon the king's troops of Rhode Island was certainly a desirable
event, could it have been conducted with success, or upon equal terms. It being
an object of great moment, and involving in its issue many important
consequences, I am led to believe the practicability of it has had much
consideration, and the measure was found to be unadvisable under the
circumstances of the troops collected for the purpose. If the enemy have not
evacuated the Island, I suppose the matter will be further weighed.

I do not find in the medical arrangement any mention of regimental
surgeons'-mates, or provision made for their payment. Whether Congress mean to
dispense with such officers or not, I cannot tell: I have heard that they do:
but they appear to me to be absolutely necessary. We are often obliged to
divide regiments and send a part to a distant post: when this is the case, it
is essential that there should be some person with them to take charge of the
sick or wounded, if such there should be. -- I have only mentioned this of many
reasons that might be urged to show the expediency of such appointments.

Notwithstanding the many circumstances inducing a belief that Philadelphia
will be the first object of the enemy's attention, -- yet, as the stratagems of
war are various, and they may be easily changed, especially when they have the
entire command of the water, -- I cannot but consider the detention of the
troops at Philadelphia, farther than mentioned in my letter in answer to that
from the board of war, as expedient, and subject to great inconvenience and
injury. In the present divided, separted state of the army, we are weak at all
points, and not able to make the least opposition promising success, Supposing
they were collected here, they would be ready to act as necessity and
circumstances might require. If the enemy pushed for Philadelphia, we should
have notice of it, and could hang upon their flank and rear: nor is it likely
they would undertake such an expedition without attempting the destruction or
dispersion of the army first. If they embarked and should go to sea, we should
have information of it, and could be there in time. On the other hand, should
all they have done prove a feint, and they should turn their views to the
North-river, we should be in a much better situation to counteract their
designs, and to check the progress of their arms in that quarter. Added to
this, several of the rigiments, especially those which came first from Virginia
and Pennsylvania, are so broken that it is impossible to do any thing with the
parts that are here; and that spirit which is always derived from a corpse being
full, or as much so as circumstances of number will admit of, is entirely done
away.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, April 21, 1777. SIR,
I WAS this morning honored with your favor of the twentieth, enclosing sundry
proceedings of Congress. -- The removal of provisions, etc. from the
communication between Brunswic and Trenton has been pretty well effected
already. It was an object early attended to, and what I recommended to the
assembly of this state as deserving their interposition and aid: but finding
that it had not their immediate consideration, and that they seemed to decline
interfering in the matter, I directed the quartermaster and commissaries to
purchase their first supplies of those necessaries from such places as appeared
to be most exposed to the enemy's incursions and through which it is most
probable they will take their route toward the Delaware, in case an enterprise
that way should be in contemplation. I have transmitted copies of the resolve
upon this subject to general Putnam and colonel Forman (the latter of whom is
in Monmouthcounty), with orders to execute the same agreeable to the directions
therein prescribed, where it may be necessary on the road leading from
South-Amboy across the country.

I have nothing of importance to communicate to Congress. The advices they will
receive today, which passed through this town yesterday, will tell them that
the enemy remained at Rhode Island on the fifteenth instant, notwithstanding
the accounts we had received of their embarkation before.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, April 23, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to transmit you the enclosed pieces of intelligence which I
received this day from general Stephens, who by my desire employed persons to
go into New York and Brunswic. I do not put entire confidence in the whole: but
the principal reason of sending the intelligence forward is, that proper
measures may be fallen upon to find out and apprehend Thomas * * * mentioned in
general Stephens letter of this date.

If the enemy should move, I have taken steps to make as good an opposition as
my small force is capable of.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, April 26, 1777. SIR,
I WAS last night honored with your letter of the twentyfifth, with sundry
resolves of Congress. Such of them as are necessary for my government and
conduct I shall strictly attend to.

The money and bill for our prisoners had better be transmitted to Elias
Boudinot, esquire, to whom I shall give directions to adopt ways and means for
sending the same, and for a proper appropriation and distribution of the money
amongst them. Bills, I think will be most eligible, provided they are duly
paid. As to procuring clothes in New York, I have reason to believe that it
will not be allowed, and that the prisoners will obtain no supplies but what we
send them.

I heard of Mr. Franklin's practices some time ago, and advised governor
Trumbull of the same, that his conduct might be properly attended to. It is
very unhappy for us, that, through the intrigues of such men, the enemy have
found means to raise a spirit of disaffection but too generally in many of the
states. In this, I have strong assurances that it has arisen to a great height;
and I shall not be disappointed if a large number of the inhabitants in some of
the counties should openly appear in arms as soon as the enemy begin their
operations. I have taken every measure in my power to suppress it; but
nevertheless several from Sussex and Bergan have joined their army, and the
spirit becomes more and more daring every day.

You will be pleased to direct general Misslin to remain in Philadelphia as
long as Congress shall think his presence there essential.

I have inlcosed a copy of general Howe's letter which I received last night in
answer to mine of the ninth instant.

Nothing of an interesting nature has occurred since my last: which leaves me
only to add, that I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the greatest
respect, etc.

G. W.

Morristown, April 28, 1777. SIR,
I LAST night received the favor of your letter of the twenty-sixth, with the
resolves to which it alludes.

The views of Congress, in sending general officers to the eastward to hasten
on the troops, have been long antiscipated: general Poor is in New Hampshire
for the purpose, -- general Heath in Massachusetts Bay, with the brigadiers,
Nixon Glover and Patterson, -- general Varnum in Rhode Island, and general
Parsons in Connecticut. Generals Spencer and Arnold too have been desired to
attend to the business. To these gentlemen I have wrote repeatedly in the most
pressing terms upon the subject, and I have no reason to doubt but every
exertion on their part has been employed to promote the end. The delay of those
who have enlisted has arisen from the late period when they engaged, and from
their being inoculated since, which could not be dispensed with, without
subjecting them to the calamities and ravage of the smallpox in the natural
way.

At three o'clock this morning I received a letter from general M'Dougal
enclosing three from colonel Huntington, copies of the whole of which I have
transmitted. By these, you will perceive the impression which a part of general
Howe's army has made into Connecticut, and the prospect they had of destroying
such of our stores as were deposited in Danbury, which unfortunately were but
too large and considerable, if the event has taken place. A circumstance,
perhaps more to be regretted, is that the enemy marched through a strong and
rough country, and were near that place, without the smallest opposition. I
have no other information upon the subject than what these papers contain: but
we have little ground to expect that they have not accomplished their purpose.
Further intelligence will be probably received today or tomorrow, when I
shall be happy to hear that they have paid for their enterprise. Of this, I
confess however, I am not very sanguine in my expectations.

This post had been considered as a proper depository for stores, by gentlemen,
acquinted with it; and its security not thought questionable whilst troops were
passing through it. I had also directed that as many of the draughts in
Connecticut as the place was capable of accommodating, should be collected
there and inoculated, to answer the purpose of a guard, hoping, by the time of
their recovery, that the situation of the army would be such as to admit a
strong one to be stationed there, and continued; but, unhappily for us, such
languor and supineness prevails every where, that we seem unable to effect any
point we wish, though never so important and interesting. So early as the sixth
of March, I wrote to governor Trumbull, earnestly requesting two thousand
militia to be sent to general M'Dougal to be employed at Peekskill and on the
communication in West-Chester county for six weeks. With this requisition he
most readily complied so far as his orders were necessary, and (I am certain)
his influence would extend. This I have repeated, and this supply he has
exerted himself to furnish: yet so ineffectual have his endeavors been, that
not more than eight hundred had come out, by general M'Dougal's return on the
seventeenth instant; nor did he expect more, from the accounts he had. In a
word, sir, no expedient or pains have been un-attempted by me to bring on
troops, and to keep our affairs on a favorable footing.

I would again mention the case of our prisoners with the enemy, and pray that
the secret committee would send to Mr. Boudinot supplies of money for them as
early as possible. They are in great distress, and many officers have lately
escaped, contrary to the tenor of their parole; some of whom are now here,
urging that necessity compelled them to the measure.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, April 30, 1777, half after 8 o'clock P. M. SIR,
I HAVE been waiting with much anxiety to hear the result of the expedition
against Danbury, which I never was informed of till this minute. The enclosed
copy of a letter from general M'Dougal, and of several others which he
transmitted, will give Congress all the intelligence I have upon the subject. I
have only to add and to lament that this enterprise has been attended with but
too much success on the part of the enemy.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, May 3, 1777. SIR,
I WAS yesterstay honored with your letter of the twenty-ninth ultimo,
enclosing sundry resolves. -- Agreeable to the directions of Congress, I have
written to the states of New Hampshire and Massachusetts, and urged them to
complete and forward their troops destined for Ticonderoga, with all possible
expedition. The brigadiers gone there for the present are Fermoy, Poor,
Patterson, and Learned. Nixon and Glover were also intended for that post under
my first plan, which was, that all the regiments to be raised in those states
by the resolve in September, should compose that army. But having by the advice
of my officers directed the route of eight regiments from the latter to
Peekskill, to wait till the designs of general How were unfolded, these two
officers were to follow them. -- I did not particularise the brigadiers who
were to go first, or the regiments; but left the matter to major general Heath,
who was instructed in general terms to pursue such measures as seemed most
likely to promote the service.

The colonels appointed to the New-Hamshire regiments I never knew. Those
ordered to Ticonderoga from Massachusetts by general Heath, and who I presume
have marched, were Bailey, Wesson, Jackson, Marshall, Brewer, Bradford, and
Francis. What proportions of their regiments have marched, I cannot ascertain:
but I am persuaded they were detached as fast as they were raised, and
circumstances would admit. Francis's, the first of April, was returned five
hundred strong; and, by a letter from colonel Marshall about the fifteenth of
last month, he expected to march in a day or two with the last division of his
regiment that was ready, which would make about four hundred, including those
who had gone. The remainder (about sixty) were to follow with the proper
officers as soon as they were fit, -- the having been inoculated.

I have written to generals M'Dougal and Clinton to have the provision removed
from Derby, etc. and directed that they should point out proper places for its
reception in Ulster; also that small works and guards of militia will be
essential for its protection. * * *

The damage we sustained at Danbury, nor the enemy's loss, have not been
transmitted with any accuracy: but, from the latest accounts from thence, the
former was not so great, and and the latter more considerable, than was
apprehended at first.

I congratulate Congress upon the fortunate arrival of the Amphitrite with
military and ordnance stores: -- it is an important event. That of the French
ship at Boston, and of the sloop from Martinique, added to the capture of the
two provision ships, are to be regarded as interesting too. I would here take
the liberty to mention that I think all the military and ordnance stores should
be moved without a moment's delay to Springfield or some interior part of the
country. Springfield should be the place, because the elaboratory is there, and
they will be more convenient to use as exigencies require. In their present
situation their security is questionable; and, if an attack should be made in
the eastern quarter, their loss is much to be apprehended. Before I quit this
subject, I would beg leave to observe also that the disposal and direction of
military stores should be only with one body or with one person. At present
this power is exercised through so many channels, that much confusion is
introduced; and it cannot be avoided: nor will it be possible that matters in
this line should be conducted with any degree of propriety, unless Congress
come into some regulations respecting them. The enclosed extract of a letter
from general Heath will prove the expediency. Many other ininstances might be
mentioned, were it necessary.

The desertions from our army of late has been very considerable. General
Howe's proclamation, and the bounty allowed to those who carry in their arms,
have had an unhappy influence on two many of the soldiery; in a particular
manner on those who are not natives. * * *

I could wish some means could be devised to cause more frequent desertions of
[ the enemy's] troops. Congress may think of some expedient: a larger bounty
might have some effect, and money to the foreigners in lieu of land. The bounty
given by general How to those who carry in arms, is sixteen dollars as we are
told, though his proclamation only expresses that they shall have the full
value. To the inhabitants who will take up arms and join him, he promises land.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, May 5, 1777. SIR,
I WAS this morning honored with your letter of the third instant, with its
enclosures. -- General Arnold's promotion gives me much pleasure. He has
certainly discovered in every instance where he has had an opportunity, much
bravery, activity, and enterprise. But what will be done about his rank? -- he
will not act most probably under those he commanded but a few weeks ago.

I trust the appointment of Mr. Ludwick as superintendant of bakers will have
the salutary consequence you mention; I have been long assured that many abuses
have been committed for want of some proper regulations in that department.

By major Troop, one of general Gates's aides, and who left Albany on tuesday
last, I am informed the accounts of general Carleton's approach toward
Ticonderoga were premature. He says general Gates received a letter before he
came away, from brigadier-general Wayne, of the twenty-fourth ult. in which he
mentioned nothing of it; -- that three thousand troops had arrived there, all
in high spirits and health, except nine; -- and that that post could never be
carried without the loss of much blood. The proceedings of Congress and your
letter of the twenty-ninth ultimo were the first and only information I had of
Mr. Carleton's being on the lake, having heard nothing upon the subject from
general Gates or any other person.

In my last I mentioned that sixteen dollars bounty were given by general How
to deserters with arms. I have reason to believe from information received
since, and which seems to be generally credited, that he has advanced the
bounty to twentyfour dollars.

It is much to be wished that our printers were more discreet in many of their
publications. We see, almost in every paper, proclamations or accounts
transmitted by the enemy, of an injurious nature. If some hint or caution could
be given them on the subject, it might be of material service.

By a person who has just arrived here, it is reported that general Wooster is
dead of his wounds.

I would mention to Congress that in a day or two our military chest will be
exhausted. I beg that a supply may be forwarded as soon as possible: if there
should be a failure, we shall have many things to apprehend.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
I have enclosed a list of stores lost at Danbury. You will also receive a
New York paper, by which you will see the enemy's account of that affair, and
how little they have regarded a true state. We are told certainly they had
fortyseven men killed: and, from the accounts that have been received, I think
it may be fairly concluded that their loss was much more considerable than they
make it.



Morristown, May 9, 1777. SIR,
THIS will be delivered you by colonel Conway, an Irish gentleman in the
service of France, who came passenger in the Amphitrite, and was introduced to
me yesterday by a letter from Mr. Deane and one from general Heath, copies of
which are transmitted.

This gentleman waits on Congress to obtain an appointment in the army of the
states, and, from Mr. Deane's recommendation, is an officer of merit. He says
no particular command was agreed on between him and Mr. Deane; nor does he wish
otherwise than that Congress should exercise their own discretion; at the same
time he observes that it will be mortifying to him to hold a rank under that of
messieurs De Fermoy and De Borre, who were inferior officers in their own
service, and subject to his command. -- He can give the character of several of
the officers who were passengers with him.

I cannot pretend to speak of colonel Conway's merits or abilities, of my own
knowledge, having had but little opportunity to be acquainted with him. From
what I can discover, he appears to be a man of candor: and if he has been in
service as long as he says he has. I should suppose him infinitely better
qualified to serve us, than many who have been promoted, as he speaks our
language. He seems extremely anxious to return to camp, as the campaign may be
expected to become active every day; and wishes Congress to determine whatever
command they may think proper to honor him with, as soon as they shall think it
expedient.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, May 9, 1777. SIR,
THE enclosed is a copy of a letter which was handed to me by monsieur Mottin
de la Balm, from Silas Deane, esquire. For a more particular account of his
merit and services, I must refer you to himself. I have sounded him as to his
expectations, and find that nothing under a lieutenant-colonelcy of horse will
content him. If you should, from his own account, or from what you can collect
from others, think proper to confer this rank upon him, there is no vacancy in
any other corpse except that of colonel Sheldon.

I am afraid we shall never be able to find places vacant, equal to the
expectations of the French gentlemen who are now her^, much less for those that
will follow. The high rank conferred upon those who first came over, many of
whom had no pretensions either from their services or merit, has naturally
raised the expectations of those who come properly recommended, to such a
pitch, that I know not what will satisfy them. Indeed it is not to be imagined
that a gentleman and an old soldier can submit to be commanded by a person in
this country, whom he remembers to have been his inferior in France. I know not
how we can remedy this evil, or put a stop to the growth of it, but by being
very circumspect for the future, on whom we confer rank above that of a
subaltern.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, May 10, 1777. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the fifth instant, nothing material
has occurred.

Enclosed you will be pleased to receive a general return of our forces in
Jersey, the sixth instant, which is the first I have been able to obtain with
any degree of accuracy.

I have not heard from general De Haas since his promotion. As soon as I was
informed of it, I wrote and requested him to repair to camp: but, having
received no answer, I am apprehensive my letter miscarried. I wish Congress to
give him notice of his appointment, and directions to join the army, if he
accepts his commission and is not prevented by indisposition.

Through the board of war I have been favored with a copy of general Gate's
letter of the twenty-ninth ultimo. Hudson'sriver and the passes in the
Highlands I always consider as objects of great importance, and accordingly
have provided for their security in the best manner my judgment could direct,
and the circumstances of the army admit. If they are less secure than we wish
them to be, it is owing to our inability and not to inattention. I have written
to general M'Dougal, and will do it again, to employ much of his care upon this
subject. War, in theory, and the modes of defense, are obvious and easy; but,
in practice, they are more difficult. Unhappily for us, the means in our power
do not always accord with our wishes or what would be our interest to pursue.

As yet none of the eastern troops have passed the Northriver, except two small
detachments from Connecticut and Rhode Island, amounting to about two hundred
and seventy, which missed my orders till they had got over. These I shall send
back after we are more reinforced, unless the movements of the enemy in this
quarter make their detention necessary. The rest of the eastern troops which
have marched (except the seven regiments from Massachusetts and three from
New Hampshire, ordered immediately to Ticonderoga) are at and on their way to
Peekskill, as mentioned in my letter of the third, -- where they are to remain
with all the York troops except Vanschaick's and Gansevoorts now at the
northward, till general Howe's designs and intended operations are better
understood. This disposition appearing to me and my general officers the best
that could be made in our state of uncertainty, was adopted. The two troops of
horse, recommended by Congress to be sent to general Gates, shall go as soon as
circumstances will admit. At present we have not more than are constantly
employed at the different posts.

General Heath, in a letter of the thirtieth ultimo, mentions that the military
chest at the eastward is exhausted, and that a supply will be wanted much to
defray the expenses which will arise on the removal of the military and
ordnance stores to Springfield. He says Mr. Hancock was to write upon the
subject, and requested I would also mention it to Congress in my first letter.

Accounts have been frequently exhibited of late by the officers, respecting
subsistence while recruiting and on their march. As I do not recollect the
provision Congress have made in such cases, I wish to be informed, and to be
favored with a copy of their several resolves upon the subject.

A consideration of the return transmitted, and of the several detachments that
have joined, and which form it, will show Congress what our situation has been.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, May 12, 1777. SIR,
THIS will be delivered you by general Arnold who arrived here today in his
way to Philadelphia. He seems to be anxious to settle his public accounts which
are of considerable amount, and waits on Congress, hoping they will appoint a
committee of their body, or of such gentlemen as they shall judge proper, to
take the matter into consideration. This he considers the more necessary, as he
has heard some reports have been propagated, injurious to his character as a
man of integrity. If any such aspersions lie against him, it is but reasonable
he should have an opportunity of vindicating himself and evincing his innocence.

I find he does not consider the promotion Congress have been pleased to confer
upon him sufficient to obviate the neglect arising from their having omitted
him in their late appointments of major-generals. He observes it does not give
him the rank he had a claim to from seniority in the line of brigadiers, and
that he is subject to be commanded by those who had been inferior to him. He
further adds, that Congress, in their last resolve respecting him, have
acknowledged him competent to the station of major general, and therefore have
done away every objection implied by their former omission. These
considerations are not without their weight, though I pretend not to judge what
motives may have influenced the conduct of Congress upon this occasion. It is
needless to say any thing of this gentleman's military character: it is
universally known that he has always distinguished himself as a judicious,
brave officer, of great activity, enterprise and perseverance.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, May 12, 1777. SIR,
I WAS this morning honored with your letter of the tenth instant, accompanied
by the proceedings of Congress of the day before.

The conduct of too many officers in withholding the pay of their soldiers, I
am persuaded, is reprehensible, and has been the cause of uneasiness and of
many desertions. Every measure in my power will be exerted to prevent such
abuses in future, and every aid given to punish the offenders in an exemplary
manner. But Congress will excuse me when I tell them it will be impossible to
comply with their recommendation upon this subject, unless the general officers
withdraw their attention from matters of the utmost importance, and such as
require their constant care. Were this not the case, the dispersed situation of
the officers at this time through the different states on the recruiting
service would prohibit the enquiry. Nor do I apprehend the regulations
empowering and enjoining the regimental paymasters to bring them to an account
will be found competent to the end. Such officers will be proper to state the
accounts in the first instance, and to receive vouchers, etc. but will not do
to settle them finally, as their connexions with the regiments will subject
them much to the influence of the officers.

I should suppose, if two or three gentlemen of integrity, and of ability in
accounts, were appointed auditors to attend the army till the business is
finished, it would be the best expedient that could be fallen on. They would be
a check on the paymasters, and, I am persuaded, will be the means of the
accounts being fairly and justly liquidated. If a settlement can be once
obtained, I trust the same confusion will never take place again, as the
paymasters will receive and pay all money due to the regiments, and account for
it, and as the army is on a more permanent footing than it ever was before: for
this, l^^e most other inconveniences and difficulties which we have
experienced, is to be imputed in a great measure to short enlistments and the
frequent dissolution of our troops.

A return of the army in Jersey, as late as the sixth instant, I transmitted
yesterday morning in a letter by Mr. Randolph of Chesnut-street, which you will
probably receive today, and from which Congress will be able to determine the
expediency of calling out the militia from Delaware and Pennsylvania. -- Though
it gives me pain that we should be under the necessity of recurring to such a
measure, yet I should suppose it to be advisable. Our army is weak, and by no
means equal to that of the enemy; and, till their designs are known and we are
more reinforced with regular troops, we should be prepared in the best manner
we can. I would observe, if the militia are called out, it should be for a
fixed determinate time: for, though they will certainly return when that
expires, yet that is more tolerable than for them to go off in parties every
day as their whim and caprice suggest, -- which has always been the case when
the time was not stated. I would also observe, if it is possible, they should
be engaged to march out of their states if ordered. If their service is
located, they will move with great reluctance, if they do at all.

On saturday a smart skirmish happened with a detachment of our troops who
attached a number of the enemy near Piscatawa, in which our men behaved well,
and obliged the enemy to give way twice (as reported to me) with loss. The
enemy receiving a strong reinforcement, our people retreated to their post. --
I cannot give the particulars, as they have not been sufficiently ascertained.
The picquets were also attacked yesterday by some of our parties from
Boundbrook, and forced within their lines.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, May 16, 1777. SIR,
YOUR letter of the fifteenth I had the honor to receive last night at eleven
o'clock. -- The commission enclosed for monsieur Armand I shall deliver him as
soon as I see him -- Agreeable to your request, I will give commissions to the
brigadiers, and will ascertain their rank by their original commissions when I
obtain them. -- The inquiry directed respecting major Campbell, shall be made,
and that be done which shall appear right.

I fear it will be hardly possible to satisfy the views and claims of some of
the French gentlemen. The late promotion of monsieur Malmady, though highly
honorable, and such as should be considered fully if not more than adequate to
his pretensions, taken upon any principle, does not come up to his demands. He
arrived here yesterday morning, and has been writing to me upon the subject.
From the high marks of distinction but too readily conferred upon these men in
many instances, they seem to have lost sight of what is just and reasonable. It
would have been happy for us, particularly for me and for the gentlemen
themselves, if a too easy grant of favors had not induced them to contemn all
rank in our army under that of field-officers: -- nor is it in my power to give
commands to every appointment. I shall inform monsieur Armand (and reconcile
him to it in the best manner I can) that there is no vacancy for him at
present: and I would beg leave to suggest, that, where promotions are made in
future from political and honorary motives, it would be well for Congress to
explain to the gentlemen that it may be some time before they can be put in
actual command. This might prevent their entertaining suspicions of neglect on
my part, which the situation of the army will not allow me to obviate. There is
no vacancy for monsieur Malmady, of the rank he now holds, unless the merits of
many other officers, who have served with reputation and much longer here, are
to be overlooked to make may for him. -- Such a measure will neither be
practicable, nor prudent to attempt.

By a letter from general Heard who is at Pompton, I am informed that colonels
Barton and Burskirk with three hundred tory levies from Bergen, on the morning
of the thirteenth, attempted to surprise and cut off about seventy of his
militia stationed at Pyramus. The officer happily had notice of their design,
and eluded it by moving his post. It happened that the morning was foggy; and
the enemy entering at different places, their parties engaged. General Heard
says their loss could not be ascertained: but, from the reports of the
inhabitants, ten of their men were killed and carried away at one time, and
several wounded.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, May 21, 1777. SIR,
ENCLOSED I have the honor to transmit you a general return of the forces in
Jersey. It is regimentally digested, and will show the strength of each corpse.
I should not have sent it so particularly made out, had I not conceived the
conveyance by which it goes from hence entirely secure. -- I have nothing
material to add respecting the enemy.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I need not suggest to Congress the necessity of keeping our numbers
concealed from the knowledge of the public. Nothing but a good face and false
appearances has enabled us hitherto to deceive the, enemy respecting our
strength.



Morristown, May 24, 1777. SIR,
I BEG leave to inform Congress, that, immediately after the receipt of their
resolve of the twenty-sixth of March, recommending the office of
adjutant-general to be filled by the appointent of a person of abilities and
unsuspected attachment to our cause, I wrote to colonel Timothy Pickering of
Salem, offering him the post in the first instance, and transmitting at the
same time a letter for colonel William Lee whom Congress had been pleased to
mention, to be delivered him in case my offer could not be accepted. This
conduct, in preference of colonel Pickering, I was induced to adopt from the
high character I had of him, both as a great military genius cultivated by an
industrious attention to the study of war, and as a gentleman of liberal
education, distinguished zeal, and great method and activity in business. This
character of him I had from gentlemen of distinction and merit, and on whose
judgment I could rely.

When my letter reached colonel Pickering, at first view he thought his
situation in respect to public affairs would not permit him to accept the post.
That for colonel Lee he sent immediately to him, who, in consequence of it,
repaired to headquarters. By colonel Lee I received a letter from colonel
Pickering, stating more particularly the causes which prevented him accepting
the office when it was offered, and assuring me that he would in a little time
accommodate his affairs in such a manner as to come into any military post in
which he might be serviceable, and thought equal to.

Here I am to mark with peculiar satisfaction, in justice to colonel Lee who
has deservedly acquired the reputation of a good officer, that he expressed a
distrust of his abilities to fill the appointment intended for him; and, on
hearing that colonel Pickering would accept it, he not only offered but wished
to relinquish his claim to it in favor of him, whom he declared he considered,
from a very intimate and friendly acquaintance, as a first military character;
and that he knew no gentleman better or so well qualified for the post among
us. -- Matters being thus circumstanced, and colonel Lee pleased with the
command he was in, I wrote to colonel Pickering on his return, who accepted the
office, and is daily expected.

In this business I beg Congress to be assured, though colonel Lee was
postponed in the first instance, their recommendation had its due weight; and
that no motive, other than a regard to the service, induced me to prefer
colonel Pickering. His acknowledged abilities and equal zeal, -- without
derogating from the merits of colonel Lee who holds a high place in my esteem,
-- gave him a preference: and I flatter myself the cause will be promoted in
his appointment, especially as we shall have two good officers in lieu of one,
who, I am persuaded, will do honor to themselves in the line in which they move.

Considering the passes through the Highlands of the utmost importance to
secure, I sent generals Green and Knox about a fortnight ago to see what had
been done for their defense, and to consult with the general officers they
should meet, upon such further measures as might be deemed necessary for their
greater safety. The enclosed copy of their report will fully convey their
sentiments upon the subject; to which I beg leave to refer Congress. -- I have
sent General Putnam to command in that quarter, and have instructed him to use
every possible means in his power for expediting and effecting the works and
obstructions mentioned in the report. Fearing that the cables might not be
procured in a time, I have directed his particular and immediate attention to
fixing the boom. However, as the cables would render that more secure, and will
be extremely serviceable in the opinion of the officers, -- if they are ^o be
had in Philadelphia, I would advise Congress to order them to be purchased and
forwarded without loss of time: -- they cannot be got elsewhere. They must be
proportioned to the width of the river, which is about five hundred and forty
yards; and, as they will be of most use if diagonally laid, the gentlemen think
they should not be less than four hundred and fifty fathoms long, and of the
largest size that can be had. Unless they are large and substantial, they will
answer no purpose, and will not sustain their weight when stretched.

I should be glad to know whether it be the intention of Congress that one of
the already-appointed general officers may be assigned to the command of the
light horse, or whether they have in contemplation the appointing of one for
this purpose: -- if the first, I shall immediately name one to that duty; -- if
the second, they will be pleased to choose one, as it is time we should have
our arrangements complete.

I have nothing of importance to communicate, unless it is that seventeen ships
are said to have arrived at New York on the twenty-second, and that others were
in the offing. A report has also prevailed, and has come through two or three
channels, that governor Tryon (that was) is dead of the wound he received in
the Danbury expedition: and one account is that lieutenant colonel Walcot fell
in the engagement at Ridgefield. I do not know how far the facts are to be
depended on: -- it seems certain that Mr. Tryon was wounded.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. As I do not know what particular purposes Congress had in view when they
ordered colonel Harrison's regiment of artillery to be raised, I do not think
myself at liberty to give any directions about it: but if they have no certain
employment for it in view, I could wish them to order the whole, or such part
of it as they shall judge proper, to join this army, as we are in great want of
more artillery-men than we have. -- It will not be necessary that the artillery
should come.



Morristown, May 28, 1777. SIR,
THE enclosed is a copy of a letter received yesterday from general How.
Congress will perceive, by referring to the copy of his letter of the
twenty-first of April transmitted in mine of the twenty-sixth, that he
persevered in his demand for an equal number of prisoners to be returned for
those sent out by him; which has been the subject of controversy between us. As
general How has called upon me again for my final decision upon the subject,
and Congress are fully possessed of it, having received transcripts of every
paper respecting it, -- I wish them to take the matter under their earliest
consideration, and to inform me as soon as they can, whether the grounds on
which it has been conducted by me are agreeable to their ideas, and whether my
objections are or are not to be departed from. The affair is particularly
stated in my letter of the ninth ultimo to general How, in answer to the paper
addressed to me by lieutenant colonel Walcot; copies of which were enclosed in
my letter to the president on the tenth of the same month. The despute, so fat
as general Lee is concerned, rests at present on their declaring him
exchangeable, as other prisoners are, on the principle of equality of rank; to
ensure which, or his safety, lieutenant colonel Campbell and the Hessian
field-officers are detained. The other objection to returning their prisoners
is, that a great proportion of those sent out by them were not fit subjects of
exchange when released, and were made so by the severity of their treatment and
confinement, and therefore a deduction should be made from the list.

Good faith seems to require that we should return as many of theirs at least
as we received effectives from them, -- I mean such as could be considered
capable of being exchanged; and perhaps sound policy, that the agreement
subsisting for exchanges should continue. On the other hand it may be said that
our prisoners in general, in the enemy's hands at present, will have greater
security by our retaining them, and that general How will be less apt to
relinquish any part of his claim, the more the number in our hands is
diminished by an exchange.

I confess I am under great difficulty in this business. But what is more
particularly the cause of this application is the latter part of the first
paragraph of the enclosed copy, -- " and for your determination respecting the
prisoners now here, that I may make my arrangements accordingly." -- This is
couched in terms of great ambiguity; and I am really at a loss what
interpretation to give it, -- whether he intends that his conduct respecting
them shall be as I advise -- (this appears more favorable than can well be
expected), -- or that, if the previous demand is not answered in a satisfactory
manner, he shall consider them on a different footing from that on which our
former prisoners were, and the agreement totally dissolved. We are told
government offered the prisoners they took to the India company, and they have
procured an act dispensing with that of the habeas-corpus in particular cases
of persons supposed inimical to them, etc. How far they or their commanders may
adopt these measures, remains to be known: -- I have only mentioned them as
they respect the general subject of my letter.

Notwithstanding my recommendation agreeable to what I conceived to be the
sense of Congress, lieutenant colonel Campbell's treatment continues to be such
as cannot be justified either on the principles of generosity, or strict
retaliation; as I have authentic information, and I doubt not you will have the
same, that general Lee's situation is far from being rigorous or uncomfortable:
-- except his not being permitted to go at large on parole, he has reason to be
content with every other circumstance of his treatment.

I am just moving to Boundbrook, from whence I returned yesterday morning. On
monday morning a body of the enemy advanced near that post. They retreated, on
seeing a detachment march to meet them. There was some firing at long shot, but
without any great damage. We had only three men slightly wounded. What their
loss was, I know not: three of their light horse were killed. -- By advices
from the eastward, the troops are coming from Rhode Island.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook, May 29, 1777. SIR,
I THIS morning had the honor of your letter of the twenty-seventh with its
enclosures. -- I shall pay the strictest attention to the resolutions
transmitted me; however, I am not without apprehensions that the regulation
lately adopted, respecting chaplains, will not answer. I recollect when one was
assigned in the course of last year to two regiments, the prevailing opinion
was, -- and that founded on a variety of reasons, -- that it would not do; and
the old mode of appointment was introduced again.

General Schuyler's proposal for raising one or two troops of horse, I think a
good one. I intended to write to him upon the subject before the receipt of
your favor, and shall do it by the first opportunity.

I arrived here yesterday evening: nothing of importance has occurred since;
and I have nothing further to add, than that I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook Camp, May 31, 1777. SIR,
SINCE I did myself the honor to write to you the twenty-ninth, I have received
the enclosed intelligence. As it comes from a person of veracity, and one who
is much in the confidence of the enemy, I have no doubt as to the fact of the
two brigades having come over from New York to Amboy, and also that a number of
wagons have been brought from Staten and Long Island. These accounts are
corroborated by information of the same kind from several different quarters.
But I do not place so much dependence upon the account of the intended attack
upon this place, because I think, if such a matter was really in agitation, it
would be kept a profound secret: I rather am of opinion that it is thrown out
to deceive. But at any rate, taking it for granted that they are assembling
their troops and carriages, what can they have in view but a move, either
immediately, or when their reinforcement, (if they get any) arrives? and if
they do move, I can see no other object but Philadelphia. It is true they have
seemed for some time past to have laid aside all thoughts of attempting that
city by land: but if they had only the attacking this army in contemplation,
they would never encumber themselves with a large train of wagons, which, if
they were successful, would retard them in their pursuit, and, if defeated,
would be in danger of falling into our hands.

I enclose you an extract of a letter which I received from general Sullivan.
-- If the two India ships which have been cut down are gone out to sea, I
should suppose they are intended for the Delaware, because they are not capable
of performing a rough or long voyage. This, if true, looks as if a sudden
corresponding move by land was intended; for they will never send their ships
long before their troops.

These, you will please to observe, are mere conjectures upon circumstances:
for the actions of the the enemy have for a long time past been so different
from appearances, that I hardly dare to form an opinion. But I would wish to
profit by every piece of intelligence, and be prepared to ward off every danger
that threatens. I would therefore recommend that the Pennsylvania militia, who
are assembled at Bristol for the express purpose of guarding the river and
oposing the passage of the enemy, should be put under the command of a good
general officer, who would see that they are kept to their duty, and prepared
for a sudden emergency. Except this is done, they may as well be at home.

I last night received a letter from general M'Dougal, an extract of which you
have enclosed. By this it appears that a reinforcement is arrived, but whether
from Canada or Europe, is uncertain. You will observe that he likewise
mentions, that eight transports with foot, and a schooner with horses and hay,
had fallen down. -- We can only form conjectures at present of the place of
their destination: but if they stand southward, Philadelphia is the most
probable place.

I have the pleasure to communicate a very agreeable piece of intelligence
which I have received from general Parsons, of the destruction of twelve of the
enemy's vessels in Sag-harbor upon the east end of Long Island. I give you his
letter at length, which I think reflects high honor upon the conduct and
bravery of colonel Meigs, his officers, and men.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook, May 31, 1777. SIR,
MONSIEUR Coudray is just arrived at camp, and proposes to set out tomorrow
for Philadelphia. What his views are, I am uncertain, having had no
conversation with him upon the subject: but I find an idea prevails that there
is an agreement between Mr. Deane and him. that he shall have the chief command
of the artillery. How well founded this opinion may be, I cannot determine: but
if it be true, it may involve the most injurious consequences. General Knox,
who has deservedly acquired the character of one of the most valuable officers
in the service, and who, combating almost innumerable difficulties in the
department he fills, has placed the artillery upon a footing that does him the
greatest honor, -- he, I am persuaded, would consider himself injured by an
appointment superceding his command, and would not think himself at liberty to
continue in the service. Should such an event take place in the present state
of things, there would be too much reason to apprehend a train of ills, such as
might convulse and unhinge this important department.

Supposing monsieur Coudray to have made such an agreement, the case is of
great difficulty, and, in my opinion, is worthy of the most delicate
consideration of Congress. Yet may not means be still devised to satisfy this
gentleman by appointing him to some command not derogatory to his promised
rank, and which will be agreeable to him? From the recommendations we have had
of him. I am obliged to esteem him of high character, and of great knowledge in
what he professes: and, from this consideration and the manner in which he is
mentioned to us, it appears that much address and delicacy must be used, to
conciliate matters.

Many reasons, besides those I have noted, might be assigned for continuing
general Knox first in command in this department, which, on reflection, will
readily occur. I would only observe, without insinuating the most distant
shadow of distrust of monsieur Coudray's honor, candor, or integrity, that, on
the general maxims of prudence and policy, it may be questioned with much
propriety whether so important a command as that of the artillery should be
vested in any but a native, or one attached by the ties of interest to these
states.

Congress will be pleased to excuse the freedom I have used upon this occasion,
and, I trust, will impute it to the importance of the subject which gave rise
to it.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook, June 2, 1777. SIR,
THE enclosed copies of generals Gates and Poor's letters, which just now came
to hand, contain the latest advices from the northern army. These I thought it
proper to transmit, as I am not authorized to conclude that general Gates had
written to Congress upon the subject of their contents. I wish our accounts
from that quarter may be happy, if Mr. Carleton makes an attack. -- The
shameful deficiency in all our armies affords but too just grounds for
disagreeable apprehensions: if the quotas assigned the different states are not
immediately filled we shall have every thing to fear. We shall never be able to
resist their force, if the militia are to be relied on; nor do I know whether
their aid, feeble and ineffectual as it is, is much to be expected. -- Can no
expedients be devised to complete the regiments, and to rouse our unthinking
countrymen from their lethargy? -- If there can, the situation of our affairs
calls loudly for it.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Mr. Boudinot, commissary-general for prisoners, will deliver this. He
goes to Philadelphia on business respecting his department, and has several
matters to settle and adjust with Congress, which are essential and necessary
to a regular discharge of his duty. To him I beg leave to refer you upon the
subject, and wish him to have your attention.



Headquarters, Middlebrook, June 3, 1777. SIR,
I WOULD take the liberty of addressing a few lines to Congress on a matter
which appears to me of importance, and which is considered in the same light by
many of our officers, and others not in the military line. -- The subject I
allude to is the condition of many persons now with the enemy, who deluded by
their arts and a misguided attachment to their measures, fled from the
protection of the states, to find security with them, and who, in many
instances, are in arms against us.

It has been suggested through various channels, -- and the suggestion seems to
be credited, especially as some have already escaped, -- that many of these
unhappy people, convinced of their error and the wicked part they have taken,
would embrace the earliest opportunity of leaving the enemy and returning among
us were they sure of being received into our friendship again, and of enjoying
their property and the rights of citizens.

This subject, in the consideration of it, strikes me as important,
interesting, and delicate, -- involving many consequences worthy of mature
deliberation and attention. As such, -- and, deeming myself incompetent to it,
-- I think it my duty (...) submit it to Congress for their discussion, to take
such measures therein as they shall esteem necessary and right.

If these people, particularly those in arms, are ingenuous in what has been
hinted, and it is their wish, or that of any considerable part of them, to
return, -- I should suppose that it would be expedient and founded in sound
policy, to give every suitable assurance to induce them to come. Such an event
would be attended with salutary effects, would weaken the enemy, distress them
greatly, and would probably have a most happy influence in preventing others
from joining their arms. On the other hand, the indulgence may be liable to
great abuse, supposing it not to be duly guarded: or if the effects produced by
it should be partial they will not be adequate to the ends in view. Yet, as the
enemy on their part are using every device they are capable of, to seduce both
soldiers and citizens from our service into theirs, and have succeeded but too
well, it is generally though in the military line that something should be
attempted to counteract them. Whether Congress will be of the same sentiment,
and, -- if they should, -- what and how extensive the mode and indulgence ought
to be, is entirely with them.

There is one difficulty which occurs with me, supposing the measure to be
adopted. -- What line of discrimination can be drawn upon such an occasion;
though circumstances should differ and seem to require it? While the poor,
deluded, ignorant, duped by artifices and a thousand causes to lead them wrong,
have a claim to their country's pardon and indulgence, there are many of
well-informed understanding, who, from their early-avowed hostile dispositions
and inveterate disregard of her rights, and those who have taken a double and
triple part, cannot have the same pretentions; -- whose only view in returning
may be to serve their own sordid purposes, and the better to promote those
plans they have steadily pursued.

One thing more I would observe, which is, that if Congress judge an adoption
of measures eligible on the subject of my letter, the sooner it is come into,
the better, for the most obvious reasons; and the time allowed for those to
return who wish the indulgence, should be fixed at a short period, -- not
longer, in my opinion, than till the Left blank in the original.
day of Left blank in the original.
next: otherwise they may avail themselves of the circumstance, and wait events
to decide their choice. If any good consequences are produced, the means can be
renewed and further extended.

Congress will be pleased to excuse me for thus freely communicating my
sentiments, especially when I assure them that they are dictated by what I
esteem my duty.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. The more I consider the subject of my letter, the more important and
interesting it appears. I am inclined to think, if the measure proposed should
be deemed expedient, that it will be better that the indulgencies and
assurances for their return should be communicated through the medium of some
second, secret hand, qualified to offer them and negotiate the business, rather
than by an act of public authority. Opportunities, I should suppose, may be
found, by which they may obtain due information in that way, and which will not
hold out to the enemy the same cause of suspicion and of vigilance to prevent
their escaping. Whatever mode shall be considered most advisable, should be
immediately adopted. What time should be allowed in the first instance, I am at
a loss to determine: if the continuance is too short, they may be danger of
their not being apprised so as to get off: if it is too long, they will defer
matters to the last, and act then as circumstances of interest dictate. -- To
err in the former will be least injurious.



Headquarters, Middlebrook, June 5, 1777. SIR,
ENCLOSED you will receive a copy of a letter from general How, of this date.
You will perceive how extremely pressing he is for an answer to the demands in
his letters of the twenty-first of April and twenty-second ultimo. As I
referred the consideration of them to Congress in mine of the twenty-eighth of
May requesting their opinion, I entreat that they will not defer giving it,
that I may return an answer. I shall impatiently wait their sentiments, and
flatter myself I shall have them by the most speedy and early conveyance.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook, June 5, 1777. SIR,
I THIS morning had the honor of your letter of the fifth with its enclosures.
-- The resolution of the thirtieth of May, respecting the French gentlemen who
came passengers in the Amphitrite, reached camp before your letter, and has
excited much uneasiness in the artillery corpse. The enclosed copy of a letter
from general Knox will convey their anxiety upon the subject, -- which I think
it necessary to transmit, as well from duty as on account of his request.

The difficulties upon this occasion arise from the peculiar circumstances of
most of the officiers composing the artillery regiments at this time. I do not
know, for my own part, what operation Congress precisely meant the resolution
should have; but if the commissions which these gentlemen are to receive should
give them rank from the date of those they had from the king of France, or from
their compact with Mr. Deane, there are but few officers now in the artillery
who will not be superceded in their command, unless some method is adopted to
prevent it. This, I am persuaded, Congress had not in contemplation, because it
is opposed to policy and to justice; and I am led to believe the resolution was
come into for want of due information how matters were circumstanced in this
instance.

The officers now in the artillery I am obliged to consider of great merit:
experience has proved them to be most warmly attached to the rights of their
country; and their conduct in the line of their profession has been such as
does the highest honor to themselves and the gentleman who immediately commands
them. Without derogating in the least from the character of the French officers
who are to be commissioned, and whom I wish to receive every countenance they
merit, there is strong reason to doubt (laying aside every consideration of
policy) whether they have seen as much real service as our own in the course of
two campaigns. It would be hard, not to say unjust, that the latter should lose
their command when they have a claim to every mark of favor, and after they
have taken great pains to form their companies: the service requires that they
should not; and I am convinced the event would be attended with the most fatal
consequences.

But what is to be done? -- This is a case of difficulty, view it as you will.
-- I am not for rejecting the French gentlemen: -- far otherwise, -- I am for
employing them: and public faith, and the encouragements given to bring them
over, demand that it should be done. After much thought and consideration upon
the subject, two modes occur to me, as the only possible ones by which it can
be effected, and by which the inconveniences I have mentioned can be remedied.
One is, that a new corpse of artillery should be formed, and these gentlemen
attached to it. This we have reason to fear, cannot be done, from the
difficulties we have experienced in raising men, and from their having no
interest or connexions with the people. Their situation in such case, if they
are men of sentiment and active dispositions, would be irksome and distressing:
-- The other is, that our present officers now under consideration should have
their commissions antedated, to give them precedence of rank: and this may be
done with the greater propriety as most of them were intended to hold the posts
they now sustain, before the French gentlemen had any claim upon us. It is true
they were not commissioned, because the old corpse existed under the first
arrangement. Further it is said, -- and there is no doubt of the fact, -- that
those gentlemen were promoted by brevet just before their departure from
France, merely to give them rank here; -- antecedent to which, our officers
were superior to them in this point; and these brevets only confer local rank,
confined to the French American colonies.

This latter mode appears the most eligible: if it is adopted, they will be
distributed through the corpse as assistant officers. Their want of a knowledge
in our language incapacitates them for command in the first instance; and not
only so, but to place them at the head of companies, over officers that have
been at great trouble, pains and expense in raising the men, would be both
unmilitary and unjust. -- I shall now quit the subject, wishing that whatever
will best conciliate matters and advance the public good, may be done;
suggesting at the same time with all deference, as it is much easier to prevent
evils than to remedy them after they have happened, it will be well, in all
cases of foreign and indeed other applications, that the consequences, which
granting them will involve, should be maturely weighed and taken in every point
of view. In the present case of difficulty, things, I am persuaded, might have
been adjusted with the greatest facility, had the committee of foreign
application been fully possessed of all the circumstances respecting the
artillery regiments.

By a letter from general Gates, of the second instant, transmitting a copy of
one from general Poor, the enemy who were at Split-Rock according to their last
advices which I forwarded, have returned down the lake. Captain Whitcomb had
been sent out to reconnoitre, and reported on his return that only one boat
remained.

From sundry accounts from New York, there is reason to believe the enemy are
on the point of making some expedition. Their preparation of ships for troops,
light horse, etc. indicates that they intend to go by water. What their object
is, yet remains a secret. The enclosed copy of an examination is very
particular, and as recent as any that I have received. -- The person who gave
the information belongs to Cape-May county, and appeared to be a sensible
intelligent lad: A deserter of the seventy-first this moment came in: you also
have his examination enclosed.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook, June 8, 1777. SIR,
I WAS this morning honored with your favor of the sixth instant, with its
enclosures. -- I am extremely happy in the approbation Congress have been
pleased to express of my conduct respecting the proposed cartel for the
prisoners, and shall govern myself by the principles which influenced me on
that occasion, and such other as shall appear right and just, should there be
any further negotiation on the subject.

I shall order a return to be made of the chaplains in service, which shall be
transmitted as soon as it is obtained. At present, as the regiments are greatly
dispersed, part in one place and part another and accurate states of them have
not been made, it will not be in my power to forward it immediately. I shall
here take occasion to mention that I communicated the resolution appointing a
brigade-chaplain in the place of all others; to the several brigadiers. They
are all of opinion that it will be impossible for them to discharge the duty;
that many inconveniences and much dissatisfaction will be the result; and that
no establishment appears so good in this instance as the old one. Among many
other weighty objections to the measure, it has been suggested that it has a
tendency to introduce religious disputes into the army, which above all things
should be avoided, -- and in many instances would compel men to a mode of
worship which they do not profess. The old establishment gives every regiment
an opportunity of having a chaplain of their own religious sentiments, -- is
founded on a plan of a more generous toleration, -- and the choice of chaplains
to officiate has been generally in the regiments. Supposing one chaplain could
do the duties of a brigade (which supposition however is inadmissible when we
view things in practice), that being composed of four or five, perhaps in some
instances, six regiments, there might be so many different modes of worship. I
have mentioned the opinion of the officers and these hints to Congress upon
this subject, from a principle of duty, and because I am well assured it is
most foreign to their wishes or intention to excite, by any act, the smallest
uneasiness and jealousy among the troops.

There remains no room to believe otherwise than that the enemy are on the
point of moving: this is confirmed by intelligence from all quarters, and
through so many different channels, that we must consider it certain. Whether
they will move by land or water, or by both, cannot be ascertained; nor is
their destination precisely known: but every circumstance points out
Philadelphia as their object. Being of this opinion, I have directed the return
of general Mifflin. Before he left Philadelphia, I wrote, countermanding the
order for his coming here; but he did not receive my letter. -- I would also
mention to Congress that I think the military stores, lately arrived, and at or
coming to Philadelphia, should be removed to a place of perfect security.
Though I would not excite needless uneasy apprehensions, prudence requires that
things so essential should not be exposed to risk.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook, June 13, 1777. SIR,
ENCLOSED you will receive a copy of a letter from me to lord Cornwallis, on
the inhuman treatment of lieutenant Martin by a party of the enemy's horse. My
remonstrance and sending his corpse produced nothing more than a short answer
from his lordship, which you also have. It was thought unnessary to view the
body, the fact being admitted and justified.

I have also taken the liberty to enclose a copy of my letter to general How,
in answer to his of the twenty-first of April, twenty-second of May, and fifth
instant. From the latter part of the first paragraph in that of the
twenty-second of May, I was induced to propose an exchange of all the prisoners
now in his hands, so far as it can be effected on the principles of the
agreement subsisting between us, except that of lieutenant colonel Campbell and
the Hessian field officers who are to be retained till general Lee is declared
exchangeable. I did not expect the proposition would be acceded to: but, as his
letter is of doubtful meaning in this instance, I thought it expedient to make
the offer, -- first, as it will be a happy event if we release our prisoners,
-- and secondly, as the proposition may draw from him an explanation of his
sentiments, though he should reject it.

The New York paper of the ninth instant I transmit for your perusal: it
contains an extract of a letter from governor Tryon to Christopher Billop of
Long Island. This extract, I think, is worthy of attention, and may be improved
to great advantage, if published in the papers with such strictures and
observations as it will well warrant, and as will occur to an ingenious pen.
The enemy, on their part, use the most artful publications, and avail
themselves of every thing they can, going from us. We should profit, where we
can, by their productions.

I would mention to Congress that several officers in the corpse of cavalry have
applied to me, to know in what point of view their horses are considered, --
Whether as public property, o^ as private belonging to themselves, to be
furnished at their own expense. When colonel Sheldon's regiment was ordered to
be raised, the officers thought the horses should be a matter of public charge:
but as it never had been determined, and I was not perfectly satisfied with the
customs in such cases, I did not consider myself authorized to decide upon it.
I promised to recommend it to the consideration of Congress; and this I have
done since on similar occasions. The officers urge, that, as horses are
essential to the discharge of their duty, they should be provided at the public
expense; that they have risen to such enormous prices, that, if the contrary is
established, they must, from the nature of the service, not only sink their
pay, but make a large sacrifice of their private interest.

Though the practice may have been against their application in other armies,
yet their reasoning seems plausible, and to be founded in justice. There are
objections too against the measure, but not of sufficient validity, in my
opinion, to oppose to their claim. Another reason may be suggested, why the
public should find them horses, which is, that if they were to provide them
themselves, the apprehension of losing them might prevent a proper discharge of
duty, and in some cases produce too great a degree of cautious prudence.

This matter I have thought it necessary to lay before Congress, not doubting
but it will have that attention which it may seem to deserve. -- There is one
thing more I would add upon the subject, which is if their application is
considered just, I should suppose it best to fix a certain determinate sum to
be allowed for the horses they have bought and may have occasion to purchase,
in preference to leaving it to their discretion and judgment.

It being evident, so far as we can reason from circumstances and appearances,
that general How designs Philadelphia to be the first object of his pursuit,
or the defeat of this army, -- and, for one or both of these purposes, is
collecting nearly his whole force at Brunswic, -- a board of general officers
determined yesterday evening after mature deliberation, that all the
continental troops at Peekskill and its dependencies, except one thousand
effectives, should be immediately marched to reinforce this army. That number,
with the convalescents, and such aids of militia as are now and may be
assembled in case of emergency, was deemed competent to the defense of those
posts against any attempts that may be made to possess them in the present
situation of things.

I have enclosed a general return showing our whole strength in Jersey at this
time, from which it will appear our circumstances in this respect are by no
means so desirable as could be wished. I esteem it my duty to transmit
information of this sort from time to time to Congress, and am encouraged the
more to do it from a conviction that the, sensible of the necessity of the most
profound secrecy, will not suffer the least intimation of our numbers to
transpire.

June 14. -- Your fovor of the thirteenth, with its enclosures, was received
last night.

Having proposed to general How an exchange of the prisoners now in his
possession, as you will perceive by the enclosed copy of any letter, and also
added, that, " his conduct toward prisoners would govern mine," it appears to
me that it would be improper to transmit him a copy of your first resolution of
the tenth instant, till we have something more from him on the subject
proposed. I confess I did not, nor do I yet, ^nderstand the paragraph of his
letter of the twenty-second ultimo to which I have alluded, and which induced
me to propose an exchange if that was his wish, and to subjoin, that his
conduct to our prisoners should govern mine, -- as a caution to prevent him
exercising severity on a new mode of treatment of them, contrary to the spirit
of the agreement between us, and the ideas entertained upon the subject when it
was first entered into, -- if such was his meaning.

Finding that there would be great difficulty in filling the battalions
intended to be raised, I did not commission officers for all the sixteen
additional ones: I apprehend such a measure would accumulate expense without
increasing our strength, and therefore did not set the whole on foot. -- I
shall be happy, on governor Coswell's letter and your recommendation of colonel
Shephard, that he should have a regiment: from the character given him, and the
terms on which he offers his services, there can be no objection. Congress will
be pleased to appoint him to the command they wish him to have; and I should
think it advisable that he be ordered to march with his corpse to join this
army, leaving proper officers to recruit the deficiency.

I have perused monsieur De Coudray's opinion about the fortifications, and
have no doubt but that it is well founded. I have not sufficient knowledge of
them to pronounce an opinion with certainty myself.

You will observe by the New York paper the execution of * * *. His family well
deserves the generous notice of Congress. He conducted himself with great
fidelity to our cause, rendering [ his country essential] services, and has
fallen a sac^^fice in promoting her interest. Perhaps a public act of
generosity (considering the character he was in) might not be so eligible as a
private donation.

June 15. -- When I wrote yesterday, my information was that one division of
the enemy was advancing on the Princeton road, and it was believed from the
general movement of their army that they were proceeding toward Delaware. What
their real design was, is not yet understood. Those that advanced on the road,
after marching some distance, filed off to the right down Millstone river, and
joined the other column on the Coryel-ferry road leading by Somerset
courthouse. One object of their movement might be to enclose general Sullivan
and his division between their two columns: another (which most probable was
the principal cause, if they did not mean to proceed to Delaware when they set
out) to maneuver us out of our present encampment into action upon
disadvantageous terms. The first they could not hope to succeed in after
general Sullivan changed his post to Rocky-Hill, -- an event which took place
on the evening before, and which it is presumed they were not well advised of
when they lest Brunswic. A considerable body of them remain at Somerset
courthouse, and on the communication between that and Brunswic. -- We have
been and are harrassing them with light-troops: but they being in open ground
with a large train of artillery, we cannot do it so effectually as could be we
wished.

I shall be glad to be informed whether general De Haas considers himself an
officer in the army. He has never joined it since his promotion, or written a
single line to me upon the subject. If he accepts his commmission it will be
well for Congress to order him to repair to the army immediately. The brigade
intended for him is without a general officer, and has brought on a
disagreeable dispute between two of the colonels, each claiming the command.
This is not the only inconvenience: -- officers of high rank remaining at home
afford a bad example to others who are inferior, and grounds of application for
the like indulgence.

This letter, except the paragraphs of this date, I intended to send yesterday,
but was prevented by the movement of the enemy which rendered it unadvisable.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. By a person just now arrived with a letter from general Sullivan, the
enemy's advanced guard is posted between three and four miles from Somerset
courthouse on the road to Coryel's ferry.



Middlebrook, June 14, 1777, 10 o'clock, A. M. SIR,
YOUR letter of yesterday, with its enclosures, I received last night. By this
conveyance I shall not send a particular answer. -- The enemy are in motion,
and a body is advancing from Millstone toward Vanbieter's bridge: another
division is on the road leading toward Coryel's ferry. -- We are packing up,
and making every preparation to act as circumstances shall seem to require.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. The letters accompanying this you will please to put in the post office.



Headquarters, Middlebrook, June 20, 1777. SIR,
WHEN I had the honor of addressing you last, I informed you that the main body
of the enemy had marched from Brunswic, and extended their van as far as
Somerset courthouse. I am now to acquaint you, that, after emcamping between
these two posts and beginning a line of redoubts, they changed their ground
yesterday morning and in the course of the preceding night, and returned to
Brunswic again, burning, as they went, several valuable dwelling houses. We had
constantly light troops hovering round them as far as circumstances would
permit: but, being secured on their flanks by the Rariton and Millstone, they
were difficult to approach; and, without loss, effected their return to their
former posts. This sudden and precipitate change in their operations has
afforded matter for much speculation. We suppose their original design was to
attempt an impression on our right, or to maneuver us out of our ground, or to
advance toward the Delaware. Whether these conjectures were well founded,
cannot be ascertained: but it is probable, if they had an impression in view,
they found it could not be attempted without great loss -- (as to bringing on
an attack, they effectually secured themselves against one by the post they
took) -- or if passing the Delaware was their object, that, from the temper of
the people, the prosecution of it (if not impracticable) would meet with much
greater opposition than what they expected: for I must observe, -- and with
peculiar satisfaction I do it, -- that, on the first notice of the enemy's
movements, the militia assembled in a most spirited manner, firmly determined
to give them every annoyance in their power, and to afford us every possible
aid. This I thought it my duty to mention in justice to their conduct; and I am
inclined to believe that general Howe's return, thus suddenly made, must have
been in consequence of the information he received that the people were in and
flying to arms in every quarter to oppose him. I shall not reason upon this
event: but I cannot but consider it as a most fortunate and happy one to us,
and the most distressing Mr. How has yet experienced, unless he has schemes in
contemplation beyond the reach of my conjecture.

I should have written to Congress more frequently respecting the enemy after
they came from Brunswic, had I not been almost constantly on horseback, and
had their designs been clear: but as they were not, I did not wish to puzzle
them with conjectures, more especially as I wrote general Arnold (with whom I
was obliged to correspond, that he might cooperate with me as circumstances
should require) to transmit them copies of my letters.

Enclosed you will be pleased to receive an extract of a letter from colonel
Jackson of Boston to general Knox. The intelligence it contains is interesting;
and I shall be happy to hear that the two brigs mentioned have captured the
remainder of the Hessians, and more particularly so if the capture should not
be far from the British coast, provided they arrive safe.

Twelve o'clock. -- I just now received a letter from general S^uyler, a copy
of which, and of its enclosures, is herewith transmitted. -- The enemy, from
appearances, having changed their views for the present, or at ^east rendered
them dark and mysterious, I have sent expresses to brigadiers M'Dougal and
Glover to halt their divisions, if they have proceeded any considerable
distance from Peekskill, till further orders, -- otherwise to return. I have
also written to general Putnam, to hold four regiments in readiness to embark
for general Schuyler's aid, should further intelligence from Canada respecting
the enemy's movements make it necessary. The uncertainty of general Howe's
operations will not permit more to be done at this time. General Parsons
arrived here this morning, and his division is marching to their ground toward
the left of the lines.

I omitted to mention in my last, that, in consultation with my general
officers, it was agreed that promotions should be ^^^^mental in the army for
all officers under the rank of field-officers, -- and for all of that rank, in
the line of their state. This is now settled as a general rule; a right being
reserved however, that it may be made for patticular merit out of this line, or
refused for demerit or any substantial objection.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook, June 21, 1777. SIR,
I WAS last night honored with yours of yesterday morning, with its enclosures,
the contents of which I shall duly attend to.

Having written fully yesterday, and nothing new occurred since, I have only to
request that you will forward the papers respecting the commissary's department
as soon as possible. For want of some certain and fixed line of duty in this
instance, the commissary says it is impossible to conduct matters with any
propriety.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook June 22, 1777. 11 o'clock, P. M. SIR,
I HAVE the honor and pleasure to inform you that the enemy evacuated Brunswic
this morning and retired to Amboy, burning many houses as they went along. Some
of them, from the appearance of the flames, were considerable buildings.

From several pieces of information and from a variety of circumstances it was
evident that a movement was in agitation; and it was the general opinion that
it was intended this morning. I therefore detatched three brigades under the
command of major general Green to fall upon their rear, and kept the main body
of the army paraded upon the heights, to support them if there should be
occasion. A party of colonel Morgan's regiment of light infantry attacked and
drove the Hessian piquet about sunrise: and, upon the appearance of general
Wayne's brigade and Morgan's regiment (who got first to the ground) opposite
Brunswic, the enemy immediately crossed the bridge to the east side of the
river, and threw themselves into redoubts which they had before constructed.
Our troops advanced briskly upon them; upon which they quitted the redoubts
without making any opposition, and retired by the Amboy road.

As all our troops, from the difference of their stations in camp, had not come
up when the enemy began to move off, it was impossible to check them, as their
numbers were far greater than we had any reason to expect, -- being, as we were
informed afterward, between our and five thousand men. Our men pursued them as
far as Piscatawa: but finding it impossible to overtake them, and fearing they
might be led on to the main body, they returned to Brunswic.

By information of the inhabitants, general How, lord Cornwallis, and general
Grant, were in the town when the alarm was first given: but they quitted it
very soon after.

In the pursuit, colonel Morgan's riflemen exchanged several sharp fires with
the enemy, which, it is imagined, did considerable execution. -- I am in hopes
that they afterward fell in with general Maxwell, who was detached last night
with a strong party, to lie between Brunswic and Amboy to intercept any convoys
or parties that might be passing: but I have yet heard nothing from him.

General Green desires me to make mention of the conduct and bravery of
general Wayne and colonel Morgan, and of their officers and men, upon this
occasion, as they constantly advanced upon an enemy far superior to them in
numbers, and well secured behind strong redoubts.

General Sullivan advanced from Rocky-Hill to Brunswic with his division; but,
as he did not receive his order of march till very late at night, he did not
arrive till the enemy had been gone some time.

I have sent down lord Sterling's division to reinforce general Maxwell; and in
the morning I shall move the main body of the army to some secure post nearer
Amboy, from whence we can with more ^as^ annoy the enemy, than from this
distance. -- I am inclined to think they mean to cross to Staten-Island: if
they do, we may perhaps find an opportunity of making a stroke upon their rear:
at any rate we shall have a chance of obliging them to make a total evacuation
of the state of Jersey. -- I have the honor to etc.

Camp at Quibbletown, June 25, 1777. SIR,
When I had the honor to address you last, it was on the subject of the enemy's
retreat from Brunswic to Amboy, and of the measures pursued to annoy them. At
the time of writing, the information I had received respecting their loss was
rather vague and uncertain: but we have reason to believe, from intelligence
through various channels since, that it was pretty considerable, and fell
chiefly on the grenadiers and light infantry who formed their covering party.
The enclosed copy of a letter, containing the information of a person just from
New York, corresponds with other accounts on this head, and with the
declarations of some deserters. Some of the accounts are, that officers were
heard so say they had not suffered so severely since the affair at Princeton.

After the evacuation of Brunswic, I determined, with the advice of my general
officers, to move the whole army the next morning to this post, where they
would be nearer the enemy and might act according to circumstances. In this I
was prevented by rain, and they only moved yesterday morning. I have advanced
lord Sterling's division and some other troops lower down in the neighborhood
of Metuchin meeting house, and intended to have posted more there; but found,
on reconnoitring the ground, that it was low and disadvantageous, and still
more unfavourable through a scarcity of water. These reasons, added to that of
there not being the smallest prospect of attacking the enemy in Amboy with a
probability of success, -- secured on their flanks by water, and in their front
by strong redoubts across the Neck, -- would not permit me, either in my own
opinion or that of my general officers, to keep any greater body of men in that
quarter, where they would have been dispersed, and of consequence extremely
insecure.

I have light parties lying close on the enemy's lines, to watch their motions,
and who will be ready to act in conjuction with lord Sterling's division and
such other troops as it may be necessary to detach; though I think, -- and so
do the rest of the officers, -- that no event is likely to take place that will
require more, since the idea of forcing their lines, or bringing on a genearl
engagement on their own ground, is universally held incompatiable with our
interest, and that that number is sufficient to avail us of any advantages we
can expect to arise from their retreating from Amboy, supposing notice of the
fact should be obtained. Their contiguity to the Sound, and the small distance
across it (having boats prepared to pass in), will enable them to get off
(should they so incline) against every prudent and justifiable exertion on our
part. Whether such is their design, is more than I can positively determine but
there is every reason to believe that they have been and are transporting their
baggage to Staten-Island, and making every preparation to embark on board their
transports for some new expedition.

Your favor of the twenty-fourth I just now received, and am extremely obliged
by your cordial congratulations on the enemy's retreat from Brunswic, and
favorable interpretation of the event to my conduct. -- The resolution you did
me the honor to transmit shall have my attention.

It is much to be regretted, that an express sent off to general Maxwell on
saturday night, to inform him of general Greene's movement toward Brunswic
that he might conduct himself accordingly, did not reach him. Whether the
express went designedly to the enemy, or was taken, is not known: but there is
reasons to believe he fell into their hands. If general Maxwell had received
the order, there is no doubt but their whole rear guard would have been cut
off. This the enemy confessed themselves, as we are well informed by persons in
Bonemtown.

By a reconnoitring party just returned, it is reported as a matter of doubt
whether any of the enemy have removed from Amboy; though it is almost certain
they have transported a great deal of their baggage.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp at Middlebrook, June 28, 1777. SIR,
ON thursday morning general How advanced with his whole army in several
columns, from Amboy, as far as Westfield. We are certainly informed that the
troops sent to Staten-Island returned the preceding evening, and, it is said,
with an augmentation of marines, so that carrying them there was a feint with
intention to deceive us. His design in this sudden movement was either to bring
on a general engagement upon disadvantageous terms, considering matters in any
point of view, -- or to cut off our light parties, and lord Sterling's division
which was sent down to support them, -- or to possess himself of the heights
and passes in the mountains on our left. The two last seemed to be the first
objects of his intention, as his march was rapid against these parties and
indicated a strong disposition to gain those passes.

In this situation of affairs it was thought absolutely necessary that we
should move our force from the low grounds, to occupy the heights before them;
which was effected. As they advanced, they fell in with some of our light
parties and part of lord Sterling's division, with which they had some pretty
smart skirmishing, with but very little loss I believe on our side, except in
three fieldpieces which unfortunately fell into the enemy's hands; but, not
having obtained returns yet, I cannot determine it with certainty; nor can we
ascertain what the enemy's loss was.

As soon as we had gained the passes, I detached a body of light troops under
brigadier-general Scott, to hang on their flank, and to watch their motions;
and ordered Morgan's corpse of riflemen to join him since. -- The enemy remained
at Westfield till yesterday afternoon, when, about three o'clock, they moved
toward Spanktown, with our light troops in their rear and pursuing. The enemy
have plundered all before them, and it is said, burned some houses.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook, June 29, 1777, 9 o'clock P. M. SIR,
I HAVE not been able to ascertain yet with any degree of precision the loss
sustained by the enemy in the several skirmishes on thursday, though we have
many reasons to believe it was much more considerable than what it was
apprehended to be when I had the honor of addressing you upon the subject. The
enclosed copy of a letter from lord Stirling contains the fullest and most
particular information that I have received: and the accounts given by sundry
inhabitants to persons who have been in the neighborhood where the skirmishes
were, and where the enemy were encamped, countenance this intelligence.

As to our loss, as reported by the enemy, I am persuaded it is exaggerated
beyond all bounds of truth or probability, being assured by lord Stirling that
it was trifling, -- and by such deserters as have come in, that they saw but
very few prisoners taken. It would have been certainly known before this (that
is, the number not yet returned), had not some of the parties, and I believe
the most which were then out, joined the corpse since detached.

In respect to the enemy's designs or intended movements, they are not to be
determined. It is certain they got into Amboy yesterday evening; and, from
advices this morning from officers sent to South-Amboy to observe their
motions, there were strong reasons to conclude they were evacuating the town,
as their horse had gone over to Staten-Island, and as several boats were also
passing with baggage, and others with troops. There were further circumstances
favoring this opinion, such as apparent breaches in some of their lines: yet
general Sullivan informs me by a letter just now received, that, from all the
intelligence he has been able to obtain today, he does not think they have any
serious intention of quitting it, and that all their movements are a feint,
calculated merely to deceive, and to cover some plans they have in view.

I have two brigades, -- Scott's and Conway's, -- now lying at and near
Woodbridge, as corpse of observation, and to act as circumstances may require.
General Sullivan was down in the same neighborhood with his division, till this
evening, when he returned, it appearing to him unnecessary to remain longer,
and that the brigades I have mentioned would be sufficient for any event likely
to take place.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. June 30. -- From intelligence received last night, the opinion that the
enemy are evacuating Amboy seems to be more confirmed.

As the facts in lord Stirling's letter are rather taken up on report than from
any certain knowledge of their having happened, I cannot consider them
sufficiently authentic for publication; nor are they transmitted for that
purpose, though I am well persuaded the enemy's loss was much more considerable
than it was at first imagined to be. It has been reported to me today that the
enemy took sixty-four prisoners in the whole. -- Whether they were all of our
army, or in part countrymen, I cannot decide; for having detached at that time
a number of light parties, and many of them having fallen in with the corpse
ordered out since, returns could not be made with accuracy. -- The prisoners
taken by us were thirteen, two of whom are light dragoons, the rest infantry.
-- Generals Scott and Conway intended to move toward Amboy this morning: but
it is probable the rain has prevented them.



Headquarters, Middlebrook, July 1, 1777. SIR,
YESTERDAY afternoon the enemy totally evacuated Amboy, and encamped opposite
to it on Staten-Island. General Scott entered directly after; and posting
guards to secure (...) stores they might have left, he withdrew his brigade,
and halted about four miles from thence. This it was expedient to do, it being
night when he entered, and his remaining there might have induced the enemy,
whose boats were ready, to throw over a superior force in his rear. He wrote
me, he should return this morning, and bring off whatever stores he may find:
though there is little reason to expect that they have left any thing valuable
behind. -- When I am more particularly informed upon the subject, I shall take
the liberty of addressing you on the same.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp at Middlebrook, July 2, 1777. SIR,
THE enclosed copies of general St. Clair's letters, transmitted yesterday
afternoon and last night by general Schuyler, I have thought it my duty to send
you. The intelligence they contain is important and interesting; nor are there
circumstances wanting besides these, to induce a belief, or at least to raise a
strong presumption, that the enemy have in contemplation a junction of their
two armies by way of the lakes and the North-river. If they have their whole
Canada force on the former, it is certainly their object.

On receiving these accounts, I wrote immediately to general Putnam to embark
Nixon's brigade for reinforcing the northern army, -- to wait however the
arrival or near approach of generals Parsons and Varnum's brigades from this
place, who march this morning, -- or the coming in of an equal number of
militia to supply their place before they sail. This I have done by the advice
of my general officers, and is all that is thought practicable in the present
uncertain indeterminate situation of things. The rest of the army here will be
held in readiness to move according to information and circumstances.

As I have observed, if we were certain general Burgoyne was approaching
Ticonderoga with his whole army, I should not hesitate a moment in concluding
that it is in consequence of a preconcerted plan with general How, and that
the latter is to cooperate with him, by pushing his whole force up the
North-river, and aiming a stroke in the first instance and immediately against
the Highland passes. But as the appearance of the enemy on the lake may be a
feint calculated to amuse and distract (though it may seem like a real attack),
to draw this army to Peekskill and more to the northward, that general How may
with more facility turn his arms against Philadelphia, -- it has been
determined unadvisable for us to move till we have further proofs of his
intentions, and that our conduct must be governed by his.

Our situation is truly delicate and embarrassing. Should we march to
Peekskill, leaving general How on Staten-Island, there will be nothing to
prevent him passing to South-Amboy, and pushing from thence to Philadelphia, or
in short by any other route; though the marching such of his troops from the
point opposite Amboy as were encamped there, and the sailing of the ships from
Princess-bay yesterday morning, are circumstances indicating that an
embarkation has or will take place. On the other hand, if the North-river and
the possession of the Highlands are his objects, our remaining here till his
views are certainly known may subject us to a risk that we wish to avoid.

Thus, let us examine matters as we will, difficulties stare us in the face. We
shall attempt to consult, and to do the best we can. -- I have written to
generals Putnam and George Clinton fully upon the subject, urging them to put
forth every exertion in their power, and instantly to call in a respectable
body of militia to aid in the defense of those important posts at this critical
conjuncture. I trust they will come out: their services in all probability will
not be wanted but for a very short time.

I must earnestly request that you will send Mr. Stewart, the issuing
commissary-general, to camp immediately. There is reason to apprehend the army
will be in great distress and confusion for want of issuing commissaries in
three or four days. On saturday, those with Mr. Trumbull declare they will
leave him, without they are put on a different footing from what they now are.
I need not mention the consequences that will result from such an event, if
there are not others here to supply their places.

There is one thing more I would add, which is, that there are not more than
forty thousand dollars in the military chest, and two months' pay due to all
the army, except two or three regiments which have just obtained warrants. A
hundred and fifty-six thousand, out of the last supply sent the paymaster, I
was obliged to order to Peekskill for the troops in that quarter, whose demands
are great and pressing also. I must earnestly entreat that you will forward a
supply directly to the paymaster: -- should we be obliged to move before the
troops are paid, much uneasiness and murmuring will be the certain attendants,
and, I fear, something worse.

As the enemy will adopt every stratagem and device to deceive and distract us,
-- notwithstanding the present appearance in favor of their making an
expedition up the North-river I doubt not but you will have the most vigilant
look-outs kept along Delaware-bay, and proper expresses and signals for
communicating the earliest intelligence. I think it would be highly expedient
that some sensible judicious men should be employed in that business at this
time, who would view things as they ought to be, and from whose accounts
certain inferences and conclusions may be drawn, so as to form a proper line
for our conduct. The most fatal consequences may flow from false information at
this period: things should be examined with all possible certainty. I shall not
be surprised to hear of several ships appearing in or off Delaware, though
general Howe's destination should be elsewhere. Their fleet give them the most
signal advantages, and an opportunity of practicing a thousand feints.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Morristown, July 7, 1777. SIR,
I WAS this morning honored with yours of the fifth, with sundry resolves of
Congress to which I shall pay due attention.

No change has taken place in the situation of the enemy upon Staten-Island
since I wrote to you on the fifth: but I have this morning received an account
from Elizabethtown, which mentions that a person had just come from the island,
who informs that small craft are constantly plying between New York and the
fleet, laden with officers' baggage and stores put up in packages, and marked
with their names and regiments; and that transports are fitted up with stalls
over their main decks for the reception of horses. This looks as if a longer
voyage was intended than up the North-river.

I have given notice to all the eastern states to be upon their guard, should
the fleet put to sea and steer that way: and I think the works upon and
obstructions in the Delaware should be carried on with spirit, and completed as
far as possible, left they should visit that quarter. I think the southern
states should also be advised of the uncertainty of the next operation of the
enemy, that they may also be making such preparations as they may judge
necessary.

I shall make inquiry into the number of arms at present at Springfield: and if
any can possibly be spared to the state of Connecticut, they shall have all or
part of those requested by governor Trumbull. General Knox expects the return
on saturday from Springfield; and I can then determine the matter.

I am pleased to hear that a supply of money is upon the road, as there is two
months' pay due to the troops.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. The enclosed piece of information is just sent to me by general Forman,
which is confirmed in several particulars by two deserters from the fleet, who
left it yesterday morning.



Headquarters, Morristown, July 9, 1777. SIR,
THE enclosed copy of a letter from the commissary-general of provisions, and
the information you will receive from major Hoops, will convince Congress of
the distress and confusion prevailing in that department. Without something is
done in aid of Mr. Trumbull immediately, this army must be disbanded: if the
present difficulties continue, it is impossible it can exist. I entreat
Congress to take the matter under their most early consideration, and to make
such provision as the exigency and importance of the case demands. I know not
but we shall be obliged to move in the course of a few hours; when, from the
situation of things in this line we shall have more to dread, than from the
enemy.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Morristown, July 10, 1777. SIR,
I THIS morning received a letter of the seventh instant from general Schuyler,
a copy of which, and of its enclosure, I herewith send you. The intelligence
which they contain is truly interesting, supposing it just: but it differs so
widely from what we had reason to expect from the accounts mentioned in general
St. Clair's letters to general Schuyler (copies of which you would receive in
his letter transmitted from hence last night by major Hoops) that I would fain
flatter myself it is not true. I am the more encouraged to hope this, as
captain Farmam's letter from Fort-Ann to brigadier Learned seems to be the
foundation of the whole, and does not authorize the unfavorable and unhappy
conclusions built upon it. I should rather suppose, if any accident has
befallen us, it must have happened to the detachment of men from the Grants,
under colonel Warner: for we find from general St. Clair's letters, he expected
something from him. -- The whole account is so confused that we cannot
establish any certain deduction from it; and I shall be happy if it proves
premature and groundless.

I am told by a gentleman who came to camp yesterday evening, that Nixon's
brigade would certainly arrive at Albany on tuesday morning, as he saw the
vessels, in which it was embarked standing up the evening before with a fair
wind.

If the event mentioned by general Schuyler should not have happened, we cannot
doubt but general Burgoyne has come up the lake, determined, if possible, to
carry his point, -- I mean, (...) possess himself of our posts in that quarter,
and to push his arms further. Supposing this not to have happened, as our
continental levies are so deficient in their number, our security and safety
will require that aids from the militia should be called forth in cases of
emergency: if it has, there is now an absolute necessity for their turning out
to check general Burgoyne's progress; or the most disagreeable consequences may
be apprehended. Upon this occasion I would take the liberty to suggest to
Congress the propriety of sending an active, spirited officer, to conduct and
lead them on. If general Arnold has settled his affairs, and can be spared from
Philadelphia, I would recommend him for this business, and that he should
immediately set out for the northern department: he is active, judicious, and
brave, and an officer in whom the militia will repose great confidence. Besides
this, he is well acquainted with that country, and with the routes and most
important passes and defiles in it. I do not think he can render more signal
services, or be more usefully employed at this time, than in this way. I am
persuaded his presence and activity will animate the militia greatly, and spur
them on to a becoming conduct. I could wish him to be engaged in a more
agreeable service, -- to be with better troops: but circumstances call for his
exertions in this way, and I have no doubt of his adding much to the honors he
has already acquired.

In consequence of the advices from general St. Clair, and the strong
probability there is that general How will push against the Highland passes to
cooperate with general Burgoyne, I shall, by the advice of my officers, move
the army from hence tomorrow morning toward the North-river. If such should
be his intention, we shall not be too early, as a favorable wind and tide will
carry him up in a few hours. On the other hand, if Philadelphia is his object,
he connot get round before we can arrive there; nor can he well debark his
troops etc. and proceed across the land, before we can oppose him. -- I have
the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Pompton Plains, July 12, 1777. SIR,
When I had the honor of addressing you last, I hoped the intelligence received
respecting our affairs in the northern department was not true, or at least
that they were not so unfavorable as they were then represented. But the
enclosed copy of a letter from general Schuyler, which came to hand yesterday
evening, confirms it, most unhappily for us, in its fullest latitude. This
event (the evacuation of our posts on the lake), -- among the most unfortunate
that could have befallen us, -- is rendered more interesting by the manner in
which it took place. I have no further information upon the subject than what
the copy contains, and shall be happy to hear by the next advices, that the
main body of the army, of whose situation general Schuyler knew with certainty,
have not become prisoners: for I fear, from the disposition they discovered on
this distressing occasion; they would have surrendered to the enemy, in case
they fell in with them, though inferior in number.

In respect to general Schuyler's demands, it is not in my power to comply with
the whole of them. Not a single tent can be furnished: the kettles will be, and
are ordered on; and an express is going to Springfield for all the
musket-cartridges, sixty barrels of powder, and a proportionable quantity of
lead and cartridge-paper for his use. Ten pieces of artillery, with harness,
are also ordered, with proper officers, from Peekskill. I have written to him
to procure horses and drivers himself, as they are to be obtained with much
more ease where he is, than here: nor can he be supplied with the heavy cannon
which he requests, supposing them necessary, -- not having one to spare from a
more important use, -- the defense of the Highlands. Colonel Putnam, I imagine,
will be with him before this, as his regiment is part of Nixon's brigade, --
who will answer every purpose he can possibly have for an engineer at this
crisis. A supply of intrenching tools was sent him four or five days ago, in
consequence of an application then made.

I should be extremely happy if our situation would allow me to afford him a
large reinforcement of men: but I cannot with any degree of propriety, in the
opinion of my general officers, send more to his aid at this time than a number
of recruits on the march from Massachusetts state, belonging to some of the
regiments under his command, who amount to six hundred at least, and are now, I
expect, pretty well advanced toward Peekskill. With this augmentation to what
he already has, -- supposing general St. Clair and his force to have come in,
and any number of his militia to have turned out, -- he will have an army,
equal if not superior to general Burgoyne's, from the only accounts we have
obtained. -- Besides this consideration, it is most probable that general
Burgoyne will suspend his operations till general How makes a movement and an
effort on his part. His designs, I think, are most unquestionably against the
Highlands, and that he will attempt the execution as soon as possible.

We have been prevented marching today by the rain; but, as soon as the
weather permits, shall proceed as expeditiously as we can toward the
North-river, and cross or not, as shall appear necessary from circumstances.

In my last I took the liberty of suggesting the propriety of sending an active
officer to animate the militia that may assemble for checking general
Burgoyne's progress, and mentioned general Arnold for that purpose. Being more
and more convinced of the important advantages that will result from his
presence and conduct, I have thought it my duty to repeat my wishes on the
subject, and that he may without a moment's loss of time, set out from
Philadelphia for that purpose.

When this arrives, it is likely general Howe's intention will be well
understood: but whether it is or not, as there are strong reasons to believe
his operations will be up the North-river and on the east side of it, I shall
take the liberty to recommend the sending on the North Carolina and other
continental troops at Philadelphia, to join this army, unless Congress have
some information that a southern expedition is intended, of which I am not
apprised.

If Congress have taken colonel Proctor and his corpse into the service of the
states it will be expedient for them to come on with all the field-artillery
which colonel Flowers the commissary may have ready. This I have been induced
to mention, having heard Congress were about to adopt them, and as our demand
for artillerists is great. I would also observe that the situation of our
affairs has become so delicate and embarrassing by the late misfortune we have
experienced, that it is much to be wished some expedient could be come into, if
there be any more efficacious than what has been already recommended, for
filling and completing the several regiments. At present they only count in
number, but not in force, being most shamefully deficient in their just
complement.

Your letter of the eighth was duly received; and, agreeable to your request, I
communicated to generals Green and Knox the resolution of Congress respecting
them and general Sullivan, the last of whom I have not seen since it came to
hand.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Half after eight P. M. -- I this minute received a letter of the ninth
from general Schuyler, a copy of which, and of the Proclamation alluded to, you
have enclosed. I fear more and more that general St. Clair and his army are
prisoners.



Vanauler's, eight miles from Pompton Plains, July 14, 1777. SIR,
I ARRIVED here this afternoon with the army, after a very fatiguing march,
owing to the roads, which have become extremely deep and miry from the late
rains. I intend to proceed in the morning toward the North-river if the
weather permits: at present it is cloudy and heavy, and there is an appearance
of more rain.

By the express who will deliver this, I just now received a letter from
general Schuyler, advising for the first time that general St. Clair is not in
the hands of the enemy. As the express has a large packet for Congress from
general Schuyler, I presume they will be informed of all the intelligence he
was possessed of respecting our affairs in his department, and therefore shall
not trouble them (...) a copy of his letter to myself upon the subject. I
should be happy if they had a more agreeable aspect than they seem to have.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp near the Clove, July 16, 1777. SIR,
I WAS yesterday evening honored with yours of the fourteenth. -- I have heard
nothing from the northward since my last. -- I this day received advice from
Staten-Island, that, on sunday seventy fall of the enemy's ships fell down from
the watering place to the Hook: but whether they have since gone out to sea, I
have not heard. Till I have more certain information of the state of our
affairs to the northward, and of general Howe's real intentions I have
concluded to halt the army at this place, from whence I can either march
forward or return as circumstances may require.

If general Nash should not have begun his march before this reaches you, be
pleased to order him to proceed as far as Trenton only, and there wait my
further orders. In case he should have marched, be pleased to dispatch an
express after him with orders to halt at Trenton.

I am pleased to hear that you have taken colonel Proctor's corpse of artillery
into continental service. You will be kind enough to order them to join the
army immediately: for I expect the light artillery in a few days from the
eastward; and artillery-men will be wanted to man them.

I have no doubt but the militia from the western parts of New England will
turn out to general Schuyler's assistance, as I hope those of this state and
Jersey will to mine, should they be wanted.

I shall be very happy if the committee of Congress can arrange the
commissary's department in such a manner as will satisfy the officers concerned
in the business, and at the same time serve to supply the army with more
regularity than has been done for some time past. I can assure you the
complaints have been many of late, and not without foundation.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp at the Clove, July 16, 1777. SIR,
I BEG leave to congratulate Congress on the captivity of major general Prescot
and one of his aides. The particulars of this fortunate event you will find in
the enclosed extract of a letter this minute received from general Spencer,
which, I presume, are at large in the packet Mr. Greenleaf will deliver.
Lieutenant Colonel Barton who conducted the enterprise, and the small handful
under his command, have great merit. I shall immediately propose to general
How his exchange for that of major general Lee, which if acceded to, will not
only do away one ground of controversy between general How and myself, but
will release lieutenant colonel Campbell and the Hessian field-officers, and
procure the enlargement of an equal number of ours in his hands.

In mine of this morning I desired that colonel Proctor's regiment should join
this army without loss of time. Upon consulting general Knox, we are of opinion
they had better halt at Trenton with general Nash till further orders, as the
operations of general How are not yet perfectly understood. -- I have nothing
new from the northern department, -- and only to add, that I have the honor to
be, with great respect, sir, your most obedient servant,

G. W.

Camp at the Clove, July 18, 1777. SIR,
I JUST now received a letter from general Schuyler, of the fourteenth instant,
enclosing the proceedings of the council of war which he alludes to, a copy of
which, and of his letter, I herewith transmit. He represents matters in a
distressing point of view: -- I believe they are bad; but I hope they are not
so alarming as they are painted by him.

My letter of the twelfth would advise Congress how far his demand of
necessaries had or would be complied with. In addition to the supplies then
ordered, I directed a day or two after, six tons of musket-ball to be forwarded
to him about Peekskill with all possible expedition, which I doubt not, have
arrived at Albany. As to sending him more troops than those mentioned in my
letter above referred to, it is not in my power: and I am persuaded the force
he now has, with such succor as may be had from the militia, if well
conducted, would greatly if not effectually stop general Burgoyne's progress.

General Arnold arrived here last night, and will set out this evening for
Albany. From his activity and disposition for enterprise, I flatter myself his
presence and assistance in that quarter will be attended with happy
consequences: I am well assured his utmost exertions will be employed to baffle
the enemy's views: and, wishing that they may succeed,

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

To the Committee of Congress, on a visit to the Camp.
Camp at the Clove, July 19, 1777. GENTLEMEN,
THE little notice I had of your coming to the army, and the shortness of your
stay at camp, will more than probably occasion the omission of many matters
which of right ought to be laid before you; and the interruption, which my
thoughts constantly meet by a variety of occurrences, must apologize for the
crude and indigested manner in which they are offered.

The completion of the continental regiments is a matter of such infinite
importance, that I think no means should be left unessayed to accomplish it.
Draughting, where the powers of government are adequate, would be the speediest
and most effectual: but if it should be thought unadvisable to attempt th^^
mode, -- next to it I would recommend that the business of recruiting should be
taken entirely out of the hands of the officers of the army, and that each
state should appoint some person of known activity (one, for instance, who has
been a good undersheriff) in each county or township, not only to recruit, but
to apprehend deserters; -- these persons to be liberally rewarded for each
recruit and deserter whom they shall deliver, at stated periods and places, to
officers appointed to receive, discipline, and march them to the army; -- none
of these recruiters to have the smallest power to act out of their own
districts, but to be absolutely fixed to them.

A mode of this kind would, in my humble opinion, be less burdensome to the
public than the present, -- prevent the idle habits which recruiting officers
contract, not only injurious to themselves, but to others. -- the most
effectual means which can be devised for the recovery of deserters, -- the
surest way of keeping your regiments of equal strength, and of making the duty
more equal in the detail of it: in a word many valuable advantages would result
from it, whilst I can suggest but one reason against it, -- and that (fully
satisfied I am), when weighed in the scale of interest, will not operate, -- I
mean, the keeping so many officers in camp, who might be spared from the duties
of the field till the regiments are stronger than at present. The sixteen
additional regiments labor under such disadvantages in some states, as to
render the interposition of Congress, in some shape or other, indispensably
necessary.

With respect to food, considering we are in such an extensive and abundant
country, no army was ever worse supplied than ours with many essential articles
of it. Our soldiers, the greatest part of last campaign and the whole of this,
have scarcely tasted any kind of vegetables, -- had but little salt; -- and
vinegar, which would have been a tolerable substitute for vegetables, they have
been in a great measure strangers to. Neither have they been provided with
proper drink: beer or cider seldom comes within the verge of the camp, and rum
in much too small quantities. Thus, to devouring large quantities of animal
food untempered by vegetables or vinegar, or by any kind of drink but water, --
and eating indifferent bread (but for this last a remedy is provided), -- are
to be ascribed the many putrid diseases incident to the army, and the
lamentable mortality that attended us last campaign. If these evils can be
remedied, the expense and trouble ought not to be obstacles: though some kinds
of vegetables are not to be had, others are, which together with sour krout and
vinegar, might easily be had, if proper persons acquainted with the business
were employed therein.

Soap is another article in great demand. The continental allowance is too
small: and, dear as every necessary of life is now got, a soldier's pay will
not enable him to purchase; by which means his consequent dirtiness adds not a
little to the diseases in the army.

I have no reason to accuse the clothier-general of inattention to his
department; and therefore, as his supplies are incompetent to the wants of the
army, I am to suppose his resources are unequal. Ought not each state then to
be called upon to draw such supplies from the country manufactories, as can be
afforded? particularly of shoes, stockings, shirts and blankets, -- articles
indispensably necessary, and of which scarce too many can be provided: -- in
the mean while, every provision to be making, for clothing the troops uniformly
and warm in the winter. It is a maxim which needs no illustration, that nothing
can be of more importance in an army, than the clothing and feeding it well. On
these the health, comforts, and spirits of the soldiers essentially depend; and
it is a melancholy fact, that the American army are miserably defective in both
these respects. The distress most of them are in for want of clothing is
painful to humanity, dispiriting to themselves, and discouraging to every
officer. It makes every pretension to the preservation of cleanliness
impossible, exposes them to a variety of disorders, and abates or destroys that
military pride, without which nothing can be expected from any army.

The consequence of giving rank indiscriminately is much to be dreaded: great
dissatisfaction has already arisen on account of bestowing this on officers of
the civil departments of the army, on the inferior staff, waggon-master, etc.
who, by custom, propriety, and every other motive, are excluded from it in all
well-regulated armies. The too great liberality practiced in this respect will
destroy the pride of rank where it ought to exist, and will not only render it
cheap, but contemptible. It is the policy of all armies to make it valued and
respected, as a stimulus to emulation, and an incitement to bold and gallant
undertakings: it must be very unadvisable therefore, in our infant state of
war, to adopt novel customs to bring it into discredit, -- which must and will
be the consequence of making it too common, besides the disgust it creates in
others.

An auditor of accounts, to be constantly with the army, is absolutely
requisite. It is impossible for me, crowded as I am with other business, to
examine and adjust the numerous complex accounts of the army with that
correctness the public have a right to expect, before warrants pass for
payment; and without doing it, great impositions may follow. The provision for
making regimental paymasters regulate all regimental accounts is altogether
incompetent to the end proposed from it: for these men being appointed
generally agreeable to the recommendation of the field-officers of the
regiments they belong to, associating constantly with the officers of their
corpse, and in a great measure under their control, -- cannot be considered as
sufficiently uninfluenced: nor are auditors at a distance from the army of much
use, as it would require a delay not admissible, to send accounts to them to
audit before they were passed and paid in consequence of warrants from the
commander-in-chief of the army.

A good geographer, to survey the roads and take sketches of the country where
the army is to act, would be extremely useful, and might be attended with
exceeding valuable consequences. He might with propriety have the chief
direction of the guides, and must have a head to procure, govern, and pay them.
If such a person should be approved of, I would beg leave to recommend Mr.
Robert Erskine, who is thoroughly skilled in this business, has already
assisted us in making maps of the country, and has (as I am informed) uniformly
supported the character of a fast friend to America.

A small traveling press, to follow headquarters, would be productive of many
eminent advantages. It would enable us to give speedy and exact information of
any military transactions that take place, with proper comments upon them, and
thereby frustrate the pernicious tendency of falsehood and misrepresentation,
which, in my opinion, -- of whatever complexion they may be, -- are, in the
main, detrimental to our cause. If the people had a channel of intelligence,
that, from its usual authenticity, they could look up to with confidence, they
might often be preserved from that despondency which they are apt to fall into
from the exaggerated pictures our enemies and their emissaries among us
commonly draw of any misfortunes we meet with, -- and from that diffidence of
truths favorable to us, which they must naturally feel from the frequent
deception they are exposed to by the extravagant colorings our friends often
give to our successes. It would also be very useful to dispatch business in
camp, being the most expeditious means of taking copies of orders or other
matters that require to be dispersed, and would save a good deal in returns and
other papers we are often obliged to get printed in Philadelphia. An ingenious
man, to accompany this press and be employed wholly in writing for it, might
render it singularly beneficial.

I am exceedingly embarrassed how to dispose of the French officers in general,
but more especially the artillery officers who are come out under the sanction
of a compact. I can think of no other way than that of forming a separate corpse
of them, and draughting men from the whole line to compose that corpse: but even
this will be attended with many disagreeable effects: -- among others this is
not the least, that officers will think themselves much injured to have the men
they have had the trouble of raising, taken from them and given to others.
There is something in this which is discouraging, and breaks the spirit of a
good officer who prides himself in having a full and complete corpse.

A doubt has arisen, whether a person who belongs to any of the United States
of America, and who owed allegiance to any of the said states, -- that went to
the enemy some time past, and since that time has been lurking about any of the
fortifications, or about any of the encampments of the armies of the United
States, -- plundering and driving off cattle to the enemy, recruiting for them
or committing any such atrocious crime, -- or who is appointed an officer in
the enemy's army, -- can be tried by a general court martial, under the
resolution of Congress of the twenty-first of August, 1776, and punished as a
spy.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, eleven miles in the Clove, July 22, 1777. SIR,
WE have been under great embarrassments respecting the intended operations of
general How, and still are, notwithstanding the utmost pains to obtain
intelligence of the same. At present it would appear that he is going out to
sea. By authentic information, there are only forty ships at New York; the rest
are gone elsewhere, and have fallen down between the Narrows and the Hook:
between these two places, the number, from the most accurate observation, was
about one hundred and twenty yesterday. As I observed before, their destination
is uncertain and unknown: but I have thought it my duty to inform Congress of
these facts, that they may give orders to the militia to hold themselves in
readiness to march on the shortest notice, in case Philadelphia should be their
object. At the same time I am to request that they will have a sufficient
number of proper look-outs fixed at the capes of Delaware (to whose accounts
implicit confidence may be given), to make the earliest reports of the arrival
of any fleet, -- which Congress will transmit me by the speediest conveyance.

As the enemy will probably make many feints, and have it unhappily but too
much in their power from their shipping, I would advise that the look-outs
should be cautioned to be extremely accurate in their observations and reports,
mentioning with as much precision as possible, the number of ships that may
appear. -- Our situation is already critical, and may be rendered still more so
by inaccurate and ill-grounded intelligence.

From the advices received on saturday, of the movements of part of the enemy's
ships, and the strong reasons there were to suppose general How would push up
the North-river to cooperate with general Burgoyne, I detached lord Stirling
with his division to Peekskill on sunday morning: -- they crossed the river
that evening and the next morning. This movement will prove unnecessary, should
his destination be to the southward. I have also ordered general Nixon's
brigade from Peekskill to reinforce general Schuyler, from his representations
of the inadequacy of his force to oppose general Burgoyne, and of the seeming
backwardness of the people in that quarter to afford him aid.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I think the works at Billingsport well worthy of attention; and it is
expedient to effect their completion as soon as possible.



Headquarters, Ramapaugh, July 25, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to enclose you a couple of letters which monsieur Davout, the
bearer of this delivered me in his behalf. You will perceive by them that he is
desirous of entering into our service, and what his pretensions have been in
his own country. I have referred him to Congress to determine on what footing
he is to stand with us. -- He requests me to mention that he would be glad of a
decision, and to be informed at once what can be done, whether he can be
employed or not, and in what capacity.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Half after eight A. M. July 25, 1777. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to transmit you the enclosed letter from governor
Franklin, which came this minute by express. -- As Mr. Franklin was confined by
order of Congress, I could not think myself at liberty to answer him on the
subject of his request, and therefore have referred it to their consideration.
At the same time I would observe his situation is distressing, and must
interest all our feelings, as I have no doubt of the great indisposition of his
lady. -- I should suppose, after his solemn assurances, and being laid under
such further restrictions as Congress may judge necessary to impose upon him,
that he might be indulged to see her. Humanity and generosity plead powerfully
in favor of his application, and I am certain it will be duly considered. If
it is granted, he should have the earliest notice, or the end and the views of
Congress may be disappointed in the death of Mrs. Franklin before his arrival.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp at Ramapaugh, three miles from the Clove, July 25, 1777. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to transmit you a copy of my letter to general How, of
the sixteenth instant, proposing an exchange between generals Lee and Prescot.
I dispatched it early the next morning, and presume it got to hand on the
eighteenth. As yet I have not received his answer.

The amazing advantage the enemy derive from their ships and the command of the
water, keeps us in a state of constant perplexity and the most anxious
conjecture. We are not yet informed of their destination, nor can any plausible
conclusions be drawn respecting it, at least not such as appear satisfactory.
What renders the matter still more difficult and confused, is their extreme
inactivity and delay: for it is certain they began to embark immediately after
the evacuation of Amboy, and now remain between the Narrows and the Hook, or
were there when I was last advised upon the subject. I have two active
officers, with an escort, now out for the purpose of intelligence, and for
reconnoitring their situation from Fort-Lee and along the river in that
neighborhood.

Things being thus circumstanced, and various opinions, as to their real
object, prevailing among us, -- some supposing it to be Philadelphia, others
the North-river, and others an expedition more easterly, -- I would submit it
to Congress whether the militia of the neighboring counties should not be
immediately called to the first, or at Chester, -- the lower counties, at
Wilmington. This measure appears to me highly expedient, and no objection can
lie against it, of sufficient validity to prevent it, as a few days must
certainly determine their real designs. -- Should they be against Philadelphia,
and they have favorable winds, their voyage may be made in a short time, when
it may be too late to obtain their aid, and to arrange them properly for
defense, supposing them to come in. I am the more induced to recommend this
measure, as the several objects we have to attend to necessarily oblige this
army to continue at a considerable distance from that place till their
intentions are better understood; and as they might by a sudden and rapid push
attempt to effect some material capital stroke before we could get there,
unless there is a respectable force to oppose them: for, though no great
dependence can be put in a militia acting alone, nor a vigorous opposition
expected from them (from the nature of things) to a disciplined, well-appointed
army, yet their operations may be greatly retarded by them, and may be checked
till other succors arrive. The report of a force, especially if it is in any
wise respectable, let it be of what sort it may, will have some influence on
their conduct, and may prevent enterprises that would otherwise be undertaken.

From the intelligence we received on saturday evening, that a number of the
enemy's ships were standing up the North-river, -- and in the course of that
and the preceding day, that forty sail were in the Sound, going into Fairfield
harbor, -- I had not the least doubt in my mind but general How had in view a
stroke against the Highlands and the fortifications there, and to cooperate
with general Burgoyne. In consequence of these advices I judged it expedient to
move the army the next morning, from our then encampment, toward those posts.
Lord Stirling's division was ordered to take the route to King's-ferry, and to
pass the river to Peekskill; and I proceeded myself with the remainder, which
composed the main body, by the route leading through the Clove toward
New-Windsor. We marched over a very difficult and rugged road till night, when
we halted, -- the first division having advanced about eighteen miles. In this
situation we lay till yesterday morning, when, from the information received
before respecting the enemy's fleet being at or near the Hook, and no further
accounts of the ships in the Sound, a change in our measures took place.
Stephen and Lincoln's divisions were ordered to proceed to Chester, (there to
wait further directions, as a place from whence they may move with much more
^ase either to Philadelphia or Hudson's river, being seven miles nearer the
former, and equally convenient to the latter) and general Greene's division to
this ground. By dividing, and this arrangement, I am in hopes our movements
will be more expeditious, wheresoever they may be necessary.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. In my letter of the twenty-third I mentioned I had ordered Nixon's
brigade as a further reinforcement to general Schuyler: -- I meant Glover's.

Four o'clock, P. M. This minute I received a letter of the twenty-second from
general Schuyler, a copy of which, and of its enclosure, I herewith transmit.
His letter of the twenty-first which he mentions has not come to hand. --
Things seem still in an unpromising way in that quarter. -- General Schuyler
complains much of the want of artillerists: -- it is not with me to satisfy his
demands: he has at this time a much greater proportion of artillerists than
this army, having regard to the quantity of artillery.

After sealing my letter, I received, by express from colonel Moylan, a letter
advising that the fleet sailed from the Hook yesterday morning out to sea.



July*, 1777. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to transmit you the enclosed memorandum of warlike
stores wanted for an expedition to the river St. John's, which I received in a
letter from general Heath, of the sixteenth instant. -- The memorandum was sent
that I might order the stores to be supplied. -- Not knowing that Congress have
such an expedition in view at this time, I do not conceive myself authorized to
comply with the requisition; and therefore refer the matter to their
consideration, to direct therein as they shall judge proper: but I would beg
leave to observe, that I think the force, intended to be employed upon the
occasion, would render infinitely more important services by reinforcing the
northern army, and assisting in the repulse of general Burgoyne. The progress
of his arms, and the deficiency in the quotas of men exacted from the states to
compose our army, seem to forbid expeditions for conquest, and to demand our
utmost exertions to maintain what we already have. -- Congress will be pleased
to write to the Massachusetts council on the subject, and a line to general
Heath, that he may know how to govern himself respecting the application.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Cross-Roads, sixteen miles from Morristown, 2 o'clock P. M. SIR,
Your letter of the 26th, with its enclosures, I met on the road. -- The
subject of rank, which Congress have been pleased to submit to my
consideration, shall have my attention Blank in the original: -- probably July
27 or 28.
as soon as circumstances will admit, and the result be made known.

General Greene's division, consisting of Muhlenberg and Weedon's brigades, is
now here: it will proceed six or seven miles further this evening. -- Generals
Sullivan and Stirling's divisions have repassed Hudson's river: -- the former
will proceed by this route, -- the latter by way of Paramus and Boundbrook or
Brunswic. -- General Stephen, with his own and Lincoln's division (general
Lincoln being ordered to join general Schuyler) is marching on a back road from
Chester, through Sussex, to Howel's ferry on Delaware. -- Moylan's and Bland's
regiments of horse, which were pastering about Boundbrook and on the
communication toward Woodbridge, were ordered to march on the first
intelligence I received of the fleet's sailing. -- Morgan's corpse of light
troops is also on the march through Brunswic, with directions to halt at
Trenton till further orders, or till he gets certain information of the fleet
in Delaware. -- I intend in like manner that lord Stirling's division shall
halt and remain there at Bristol, till we have further information of the
enemy. -- From either of these places they will be sufficiently near
Philadelphia, and may proceed in time on any emergency.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Coryel's-Ferry, Jersey, July 30, 1777. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to inform you that I arrived here on the twenty-eighth
at night with general Greene's division, one brigade of which passed the river
that evening, that the whole might encamp the more commodiously. General
Stephen, with his own and Lincoln's division, also arrived a little time after
at Howel's ferry, four miles above this.

I have thought proper to halt the whole army at these two places and at
Trenton till our knowledge of the enemy's destination becomes more certain. If
the Delaware is their object, we are now within two day's easy march of
Philadelphia, and can be there in time, I trust, to make every necessary
disposition for opposing them. -- On the other hand, if general How, by this
expedition to sea, only means a deep feint, and should turn his attention
against the North-river, we can from hence reinforce general Putnam's army more
expeditiously than if we were farther advanced.

The importance of my receiving the earliest intelligence of the fleet's
arrival is apparent; and Congress, I am certain, will direct proper measures
for obtaining it, and also for transmitting it to me in the most speedy manner.
If authentic advice should be had of the fleet's coming into the Delaware, at
the same time it is communicated to me it will be proper that an express should
be sent to lord Stirling or commanding officer at Trenton, to advance with all
the troops from thence. Should this not be done, the marching of the troops
there will be considerably delayed.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Coryel's, July 31, ten o'clock, A. M. SIR,
I am this moment honored with yours of five o'clock this morning, and have
accordingly set the army in motion. One division had crossed the Delaware the
day before yesterday; and I am in hopes the whole of the troops now here will
be able to reach Philadelphia tomorrow evening. -- Lord Stirling's division
lies just in my rear, and will move on with us. -- I propose setting off for
your city as soon as I can get the chief part of the army over.

I am with the greatest respect, etc. G. W.

Philadelphia, August 3, 1777. SIR,
YOUR favor of this date, with its enclosures, is now before me. -- At the same
time that I express my thanks for the high mark of confidence which Congress
have been pleased to repose in me by their resolve authorizing me to send an
officer to command the northern army, I should wish to be excused from making
the appointment. For this, many reasons might be mentioned, which, I am
persuaded, will occur to Congress upon reflection. -- The northern department,
in a great measure, has been considered as separate, and more particularly
under their direction; and the officers commanding there, always of their
nomination. I have never interfered further than merely to advise, and to give
such aids as were in my power, on the requisitions of those officers. -- The
present situation of that department is delicate and critical, and the choice
of an officer to command may involve very interesting and important
consequences.

It is certainly necessary that a body of militia should be immediately called
out to reinforce the northern army. In the conference which your committee
honored me with yesterday evening, I mentioned the number which I thought
sufficient: but my opinion on this point, and the apportioning them to the
different states, I wish to submit to Congress, who can best determine the
quotas that should come from each. -- I would only observe, that Connecticut
and New York are already, and may be again, called on to afford succors to the
army at Peekskill.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp near Germantown, August 6, 1777. SIR,
I BEG to be informed whether Congress have written or mean to write,
themselves, to generals Schuyler and St. Clair to repair to headquarters, or
whether they expect me to do it. My reason for this is, the resolves for their
recall (transmitted in your favor of the second instant) do not mention how the
same should be communicated.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp near Germantown, August 7, 1777. SIR,
YESTERDAY evening I received a letter from general Schuyler, of the first
instant, a copy of which, and of its enclosures, I do myself the honor of
transmitting you. By these you will perceive that our affairs at the northward
have experienced no change for the better; -- on the contrary, that they are in
a more unpromising train.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp near Germantown, August 9, 1777. SIR,
ENCLOSED you will be pleased to receive copies of two letters and other
papers, which just now came to hand by different expresses. -- General Heath's
letter of the second instant seems to make the intelligence respecting the
fleet, which he had obtained before, vague, if not entirely ill-founded.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp near Germantown, August 9, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your letter of yesterday, and with its
enclosures. -- I shall pay attention to the resolves transmitted; and, as soon
as circumstances admit, shall propose to general How an exchange between
lieutenant colonel Campbell and the Hessian field-officers, and a like number
of ours, of equal rank, in his hands.

I would beg leave to lay before Congress a copy of a report made by a board of
general officers, held on the seventh instant, to consult of several matters
respecting the army. In the course of their deliberation they took into
consideration the subject reported. -- I shall only add that this matter has
been long complained of by the officers, and more so as the indulgence they
pray could not nor can be ever attended with the least possible injury to the
public, and is what I believe is allowed in most armies. -- Congress, I am
persuaded, will give it their attention, -- and, if no good objections of a
public nature appear against the measure, will grant what the officers wish and
the board have recommended.

I perceive by the resolves of the thirtieth ultimo and first instant, for
recalling generals Schuyler and St. Clair, that they are directed to repair to
headquarters. I also find that a committee had been resolved on, to digest a
mode for enquiring into the reasons for evacuating Ticonderoga and
Mount-Independence, and into the conduct of the general officers of the
northern department at the time of the evacuation. -- As these gentlemen have
received the letter upon this subject by this time, and will probably be down
in the course of a few days, I shall be glad to be informed what to do with
them when they arrive. I may then be at a great distance from this, -- and, in
such case, should be at a loss what to say, or how to conduct myself respecting
them, without receiving some directions, which I request to be favored with by
the earliest opportunity.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Camp near Germantown, August*, 1777. SIR,
THE disappearance of the enemy's fleet for so many days rendering it rather
improbable that they will again return, I Probably August 9.
have thought it advisable to remove the army back to Coryel's, where it will
be near enough to succor Philadelphia, should the enemy, contrary to
appearances, still make that the object of their next operation; and will be so
much the more conveniently situated to proceed to the northward, should the
event of the present ambiguous and perplexing situation of things call them
that way. I was the more inclined to this step, as the nearness of the army to
the city, -- besides other disadvantages, afforded a temptation both to
officers and men, to indulge themselves in licenses inconsistent with
discipline and order, and consequently of an injurious tendency.

But before my departure I esteem it my duty to communicate to Congress the
result of my examination into the nature of the river-defence proper to be
adopted, according to the means in our possession, to prevent the success of
any attempt upon Philadelphia by water. I therefore beg leave to lay before
Congress what appears to me most eligible, considering all circumstances, and
comparing my own observations with the different opinions of the gentlemen whom
I consulted on the occasion.

It is generally a well-founded maxim, that we ought to endeavor to reduce our
defense as much as possible to a certainty by collecting our strength and
making all the preparations at one point, rather than to risk its being weak
and ineffectual every where, by dividing our force and attention to different
objects: -- in doing this we may disable ourselves from acting with sufficient
vigor any where, and a misfortune in one place may pave the way for a similar
one in another. In our circumstances we have neither men, cannon, nor any thing
else to spare, and perhaps cannot with propriety hazard them on objects, which
being attended with the greatest success we can promise ourselves, can be
productive of only partial and indecisive advantages, and which may possibly
fail of the end proposed, -- may have some serious ill consequences, -- and
must at all events have some disadvantages.

It is then to be considered where our defense can be most effectually made, --
whether at Billingsport or at Fort-Island. -- It appears to me that the last
deserves greatly the preference: Billingsport has but one row of
chevaux-de-frise: Fort-Island has three, and, in addition to them, a boom, and
another chevaux-de-frise ready to be sunk in the channel on the approach of the
enemy: of course the obstructions, in this respect, are four times as great at
the one as at the other. The galleys and floating batteries that could be
brought for the defense of the chevaux-de-frise at Billingsport would be unable
to maintain their station when once the enemy were in possession of the
commanding ground on the Jersey side, to which they would be entirely exposed;
and, notwithstanding the works raising there, -- even supposing them complete,
-- the strongest advocates for making our defense in this place do not pretend
that the event can be protracted more than fifteen or twenty days at most; at
the end of which time, we should be obliged, with the loss of our cannon at
least, to abandon the defense, and leave it in the power of the enemy to remove
or destroy the chevaux de-frise at pleasure.

Nor is it by any means certain that a single row of chevaux-de-frise would be
an impenetrable barrier to the enemy's ships: -- experiments have been made,
that lead to a contrary supposition; and if they should hazard one (which it
might be well worth their while to do with their less valuable ships) under
favor of a leading breeze and tide, and should succeed in it, -- the
consequence might be the loss of our galleys and floating batteries, which I
apprehend might be intercepted, and (with the assistance of their galleys and
small armed vessels) taken: and this would greatly weaken the opposition we
might otherwise give at Fort-Island, and tend powerfully to render it abortive.

But if they should not attempt this, contenting themselves with safer though
slower operations, I have already observed that it is agreed on all hands, in
fifteen or twenty days they would be able to possess themselves of infallible
means of frustrating our opposition there by the capture of our works. And if
we add to this that it might very possibly happen in less time, -- if from no
other cause, yet from the garrison being intimidated by a consciousness of its
own inferiority and inability to support itself against a so much superior
force of numbers, which might occasion a conduct destructive to itself, --
there will remain no sufficient reasons to justify the making of this the
principal point of defense.

At Fort-Island, the boom and chevaux-de-frise are an ample security against
any forcible impression of the enemy's ships, which it would be imprudent for
them to attempt. -- On the Jersey side, the situation of the ground is such,
that the galleys, floating batteries, and forts, employed in the defense of the
obstructions, would have little to fear from any batteries, erected there.
Red-bank seems by its elevation to be the only advantageous spot for annoying
them: but as it is computed to be above nineteen hundred yards from
Fort-Island, the distance is rather too great to allow any battery raised there
to act with such effect as to be able to silence our fire. -- On this side, the
ground, by dikes and sluices, may be laid under water to so considerable an
extent as to leave no danger of our river force being annoyed from thence; for
which purpose suitable preparations ought at once to be made, against it be
necessary to carry them in effect.

But though a battery upon Red-bank would not. in my apprehension, be able to
prevent the efficacy of our defense, or give any material disturbance to
Fort-Island in particular, yet it might serve to make the situation of some of
our galleys rather uneasy; and this perhaps makes it worth while to pre-occupy
it in order to keep it out of the enemy's hands, erecting a small but strong
work there, capable of containing about two hundred men; with six or eight
pieces of light cannon and a proportionable quantity of stores. As the
approaches to it are difficult on account of the adjacent creeks, and a
communication can be kept open between it and our army, -- by which means the
garrison might receive succors from time to time, -- though we could not
expect to make it impregnable, yet we should have a prospect of holding it much
longer than we could the works at Billingsport. In the position, which, from my
present view of it, I should think it best for our army to take, the left wing
of it would be nearly opposite to Red-bank, and therefore in a condition to
relieve and support it; -- whereas Billingsport being more remote from the
probable position of the army, and detached from any other work, could not
easily derive any assistance from without, and must rely wholly upon its own
strength.

Either at Billingsport or at Fort-Island, I believe there is not much to be
apprehended from the fire of the enemy's ships unaided by land batteries: for,
as by the information of those who ought to be acquainted with the fact, not
more than three ships can act abreast at a time at either place, -- and as the
galleys, not requiring the same depth of water, can extend themselves at
pleasure, and besides carry a superior weight of metal to that which frigates
commonly have, -- a much superior fire could be opposed to them than any they
could bring, and (from the difference of size and make between the frigates and
galleys) to much better effect than theirs. The comparative extent of the river
at Billingsport and at Fort-Island has been assigned as a motive preferable to
the former, -- the river being narrower there than at the latter, and supposed
to admit of fewer ships operating at a time: but as it is asserted by the
gentlemen i^ the river department, that the sand-banks and shallowness of the
river in most places near Fort-Island compensate for the width of it, and make
it impossible for more than three ships to act together at a time, -- this
reason for preferring the position at Billingsport seems to have no foundation.
And if we consider that our whole force of galleys and floating batteries would
be collected at Fort-Island, assisted by the fort itself, -- and that it would
not be safe to trust them all out for the defense of Billingsport for fear of
the disaster already suggested, -- it seems evident enough that this is the
place where our defense may be most successfully made.

One of the most weighty considerations with me is that our army, as before
intimated, could more conveniently cooperate with the defense by water here
than at Billingsport. The ground on this side is better situated here than at
the other place: and the army being so much nearer the city, it is so much the
less likely that the enemy should be able, by a circuitous route, to fall into
the rear of it, and separate it from the city, -- which is a circumstance that
ought carefully to be attended to.

Some gentlemen are of opinion that our principal dependence ought to be upon
Fort-Island and its appendages; but at the same time, that we should make a
part of our defense at Billingsport, -- proposing, for that purpose, that the
works there should be continued on the new contracted scale, to be garrisoned
by four or five hundred men. The reasons for this are, that it would serve to
delay the enemy, and give our army time to come up, should it be at any
distance, -- and that it would prevent those disagreeable impressions which
never fail to accompany the abandoning works that have been once raised, and
plans that have been once in execution, especially when the persons concerned
in the defense of them repose a degree of confidence in them, -- which is said
to be the case in the present instance.

But these reasons may perhaps not be so conclusive as it is imagined: for it
is a question, whether, if our army was so remote as to make such a delay
necessary, the enemy would embarrass themselves with removing the water
obstructions in the first place, but would not rather debark and make a rapid
march by land, possessing themselves of the city, and of those positions which
would make the surrender of the galleys, etc. in some sort a natural
consequence. And it is worthy of consideration whether the abandoning the works
begun at this time, which will probably allow some leisure for any disagreeable
impressions it might make to be effaced, will not be less injurious than the
abandoning them hereafter when they have cost more expense, time, and labor,
and in the critical moment of an attack, when every misfortune, and the loss of
the most inconsiderable post, is too apt to have a much worse influence on the
mind, than the real importance of it will justify.

Add to this the possibility that the garrison, dismayed at the approach of
numbers so superior to their own, might not answer the end expected from them,
and might even be lost by their timidity; -- the certainty of losing the cannon
after the time limited for the defense, and thereby weakening that of the upper
position; -- the chance of losing the galleys and floating batteries requisite
for covering the chevaux-de-frise, by a hazardous and successful attempt to
break through them, -- and the garrison with them, which would fall of course
upon such an event. -- It is however submitted to Congress to balance the
advantages and disadvantages, and determine accordingly. I would only beg leave
to give it clearly as my opinion that our principal dependence ought to be upon
Fort-Island and the obstructions there, and that Billingsport ought not by any
means to be defended more than as a secondary object: and, to that end, I would
recommend that the works on Fort-Island, which, on their present construction,
are by no means calculated for the defense of the chevaux-de-frise, -- be
immediately altered and adapted to that purpose, taking care at the same time
to make them defensible with a small number of men against any sudden attempt
to land in boats and carry them by assault.

But, whatever scheme is pursued, I could wish the greatest diligence and
dispatch may be used in bringing it to maturity: for, though the danger which
lately threatened seems to have subsided, there is no knowing how soon it may
return: and certainly it will be prudent to do every thing in our power to be
prepared for it, as we can lose nothing by being so, and may lose a great deal
by neglecting to improve the interval of leisure they have given us, should it
be their intention to revisit this quarter. As the means to this, it will be
necessary to furnish Mr. Coudray, to whom the superintendency of those works is
entrusted, with a competent number of workmen, tools, and what other things he
may want, to enable him to carry them on with propriety, ease, and expedition.

On the whole, I am of opinion that the obstructions in the river, with the
help of galleys, floating batteries, and with tolerable industry to put the
land works in a proper state, will be extremely formidable to the enemy, and
authorize a reasonable expectation of their being effectual. The fireships
also will contribute to this end: for though there are many obstacles to render
their success precarious, and a happy concurrence of circumstances is necessary
toward it, -- any of which failing may disappoint the project, -- and there is
therefore no room to be sanguine, yet there is some probability of its
succeeding; and they will be at least an embarrassment and terror to the enemy,
and will oblige them to use precautions inconvenient to them, and serviceable
to us.

As an accurate knowledge of the country is essential to a good defense, -- and
as the enemy's approach may be sudden, and we may be called to act, without
having time, when it happens, to examine it sufficiently if it is not done
beforehand, it would answer a valuable purpose to have it immediately carefully
reconnoitred, and sketches taken of all the landing-places, great roads, and
bypath, encamping grounds, heights, rivers, creeks, morasses, and every thing
that it can be of any importance to know. Marcus-Hook seems to be the most
advanced place at which it is conjectured the enemy will land: the survey
should therefore comprehend all the country between that and Philadelphia.
Monsieur Du Coudray has offered his service, with his engineers, to do this
business, if authorized by Congress, only requiring that they may be supplied
with horses and a hand or two. If Congress approve of it, I shall be glad they
may be desired to enter upon it without loss of time.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Sunday evening August 10.
, 9 o'clock. SIR,
I THIS minute received your favor of this afternoon, transmitting intelligence
that a fleet was seen off Sinapuxent on the seventh instant. I was about three
miles eastward of the Billet tavern, on the road leading to Coryel's ferry,
when the express arrived. -- The troops are encamped near the road, where they
will remain till I have further accounts respecting the fleet, which you will
be pleased to forward to me by the earliest conveyance after they come to hand.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Camp at Cross-Roads, August 12, 1777. SIR,
GENERAL Newcomb having informed me that he had collected a body of about five
hundred Jersey militia at Woodbury, I have desired him to endeavor to keep them
together while matters remain in their present uncertainty and suspense, and to
employ them in whatever works may be carrying on at Billingsport or Red-bank
for the defense of the river. I mention this, that, if it shall be thought
proper, monsieur De Coudray may be directed to call for the assistance of those
militia accordingly.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Camp at Cross-Roads, August 15, 1777. SIR,
MONSIEUR Du Coudray has laid before me a plan of the river, by which it
appears that, for a considerable space between the two sand banks on the east
side of Fort-Island, there is from four to four and a half fathoms depth of
water. According to this representation, there would be room for three frigates
to lie between those banks in such a position as to enfilade the works at
Fort-Island, and make it difficult to maintain them.

There are but two ways of remedying this inconvenience; -- one by having a
sufficient number of chevaux-de-frise sunk at the entrance between the two
banks; -- and the other by having the left flank of Fort-Island fortification
supported by a good battery capable of resisting the cannon of the ships, and
obliging them to quit their station. The first is evidently preferable, because
the efficacy of it will be more certain. A few chevaux-de-frise properly placed
might effectually bar all access to the ships: but there is a possibility that
any battery we can construct might be overpowered by the fire of the shipping:
and as we have few cannon, and Fort-Island is itself a marshy spot, incapable
of affording earth for the batteries necessary to be raised upon it, which must
be brought from the opposite shore, -- it would not be prudent to multiply
works there more than cannot be avoided. It would also be a great advantage
gained, to secure the island from annoyance except in one point, and that in
front, from only three ships at at a time, -- which would be effected by
stopping up the passage between the two banks with the chevaux-de-frise. I
should therefore think it of importance to have this measure immediately
adopted and carried into execution.

With great respect, I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Neshaminy Camp, August 16, 1777. SIR,
I DO myself the honor of addressing a few lines to Congress on a subject which
appears to me of infinite importance, and to have a claim in their serious
attention. The matter I allude to is the exorbitant price exacted by merchants
and venders of good for every necessary they dispose of. I am sensible the
trouble and risk in importing give the adventurers a right to a generous price,
and that such, from motives of policy, should be paid: but yet I cannot
conceive that they, in direct violation of every principle of generosity, of
reason, and of justice, should be allowed (if it is possible to restrain them)
to avail themselves of the difficulties of the times, and to amass fortunes
upon the public ruin.

This grievance is now an object of universal complaint, and of universal
apprehension: and the consequences that are likely to result from a continuance
of it excite in every well-affected mind the most disagreeable feelings. The
enclosed copy of a memorial from a part of the Pennsylvania officers shows
their sentiments upon the subject; and I am persuaded those of the whole army
are similar, as they have and do experience the gross abuses they complain of.
I know that ways and means, for preventing this evil wholly, are difficult (if
impracticable) to find out: but I should hope that Congress themselves, or the
supreme powers in the respective states, through their recommendation, may
devise some mode by which it may be redressed in part.

I think there are two measures, which, if adopted and put under proper
regulations, would be of considerable saving to the public, and to the army, at
the same time that they would contribute a good deal to do away part of the
uneasiness of the latter, arising from the enormous prices they are compelled
to pay for necessaries. The first is the establishment of public tanneries in
three or four of the states, under care of a judicious commissary or director,
to which all hides of the cattle killed for the army should be carried, and
tanned. There should be also deputies to attend the army to collect the hides:
and it appears to me that establishing the tanneries in different states, --
for instance one in this, and another in Connecticut, -- will be much more
advisable than fixing only one in either of them; as the business may be
carried on more extensively, with more convenience, and at less expense, than
if the raw hides were to be transported to one place only, from which probably
there would be a necessity of carrying them the whole distance back again after
they were dressed. -- This subject was under consideration of Congress once
before, and a commissary (if I recollect, a Mr. Philips) appointed, who
declined the office. Leather is of such essential use, and so indispensably
necessary for shoes and other purposes in the army, that too much care nor too
effectual means cannot be taken to procure it.

What I have ventured to mention, if gone into, will add much to our supplies,
and, I am certain, will prevent the high and unjustifiable prices demanded for
this article when in the hands of private owners. Besides, at those tanneries,
a number of artists, such as shoe and harness makers, might be employed to work
the leather up.

In like manner, since our imports of spirit have become so precarious, nay
impracticable, on account of the enemy's fleet which infests our whole coast,
-- I would beg leave to suggest the propriety of erecting public distilleries
in different states. -- The benefits arising from the moderate use of strong
liquor have been experienced in all armies, and are not to be disputed. -- In
the present situation of affairs, our soldiery cannot obtain such supplies as
are absolutely necessary; and if they are fortunate enough to get any, it is
from the sutlers at most extravagant rates, and at such as are incredible to
tell of. This is a source of much complaint, and, I should hope, may be removed
by appointing proper persons to buy grain and distill it for the army, -- large
quantities of which may be easily procured, and on reasonable terms, in many of
the states.

In respect to the observation in the memorial about rations, it is certain the
present allowed value is by no means sufficient; nor does it answer the purpose
intended. Since that was fixed, provisions, like every other article, though
not from the same causes, have become extremely dear; and what at that time was
a just equivalent, is totally inadequate now. This matter, I doubt not, will
have the attention of Congress, and such regulations be made respecting it, as
may be right and equitable.

It appears to me from the information I have received, that two companies --
each to consist of sixty men at least -- under proper officers, of unsuspected
attachment, spirit and activity, -- should be immediately raised, to guard the
laboratory and stores at Carlisle. Their security is of considerable
importance, and ought to be attended to. These companies, besides serving as a
guard, will be frequently of use as escorts and convoys to stores. -- If
Congress should deem them necessary, and order them to be enlisted, yet I would
recommend that they should not be raised as merely stationary or local, --
having found from experience that regiments or companies formed upon such a
footing enter upon other services with great discontent and reluctance, though
the occasion should be never so pressing.

In a letter of the thirteenth of June, I submitted to Congress an application
from the officers of cavalry respecting their horses, -- whether they were to
be provided at their own or the public expense. I also laid before them, in a
letter of the fifth of July, captain Sullivan's requisition for pay. -- I shall
be glad to be honored with their determination upon these subjects, and also in
general respecting the line of conduct I should pursue as to the pay of
officers taken prisoners at any time before the close of the last compaign, who
have been permitted to be on parole; -- and whether there is to be any
distinction between such of them as are continued by new appointments, and
those who are not. I have frequent applications in these instances, and wish to
know how to act.

Since the express from general Schuyler left this, I received a letter from
governor Clinton, a copy of which, and of its enclosures, I herewith transmit,
as they give a much more favorable account of the affair at Fort-Schuyler, than
was contained in his letter.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Neshaminy Camp, August 17, 1777. SIR,
THE unfavorable situation of our affairs in the northern department, and the
pressing applications of general Schuyler for aid, induced me to write some
time ago to general Putnam to hold Vancortlandt and Livingston's regiments in
readiness to embark for Albany, in case I should find it necessary, and the
succors he received of militia would justify the measure. I have the honor to
acquaint you, that, by a letter from him, of the sixteenth, which came to hand
yesterday, he informed me, that, without waiting for further directions, he had
ordered them to proceed with all possible expedition, as the late advices from
that quarter seemed to make a further augmentation of the army requisite.

Besides these, I have, contrary to my wishes, but from the necessity of the
case, ordered colonel Morgan to march immediately with his corpse as an
additional support. I hope they will be of material service, particularly in
opposing the savage part of general Burgoyne's force, which, from every
account, spreads a general alarm among the inhabitants, and affects the minds
of the militia not a little, who have not been much accustomed to their mode of
warfare.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Camp at Cross-Roads, August 17, 1777. SIR,
COLONEL Portail, for himself and in behalf of the gentlemen with him, has made
different applications to me for horses and servants; and I have been in a
manner under the necessity of furnishing them by way of loan, till they can be
otherwise provided. They expect these things to be found them at the public
expense; and inform me that the matter is now before Congress, whose
determination they look for every moment. I have taken the liberty to mention
this, because I should be glad, if any thing of the kind is intended, that it
might be done as soon as convenient; or, if it is not, that they may be
informed their expectations are not well founded. This will put them upon
providing for themselves, and prevent their repeating their applications to me
on a subject which I am not authorized to do any thing in.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Neshaminy Camp, August 18, 1777. SIR,
I LAST night had the honor of your favor of the seventeenth, with its
enclosures. You will perceive by my letter of yesterday, transmitted by favor
of the marquis De la Fayette, that I had been so happy as to anticipate the
views of Congress by ordering colonel Morgan to march with his corpse to the
northern army.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, Bucks County, August 20, 1777. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to forward you a packet which just came to hand from
general Schuyler. In his letter to me he communicates an agreeable account of
the face of affairs at Fort-Schuyler: I therefore do myself the pleasure of
enclosing you an extract.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp at Neshaminy, August 21, 1777. SIR,
SINCE I wrote to you on the twelfth instant on the subject of the militia
under the command of general Newcomb, I have received another letter from him,
which you have enclosed. -- By this it appears that the men were not employed
in any way while they were at Red-bank, and that they are now anxious to get
home to their farms, as they see no immediate occasion for their services. As I
had in some measure put them under the direction of monsieur Du Coudray, I did
not choose to give them a discharge without consulting you, though in my opinion
they had better be suffered to go home than be kept discontented, as they will
turn out with more spirit when they are wanted again. The bearer waits upon you
for your determination.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Bucks County, August 21, 1777. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to enclose you a copy of doctor Franklin's letter in
favor of count Pulaski, of Poland, by whom this will be handed to you. I some
time ago had a letter from Mr. Deane, couched in terms equally favorable to the
character and military abilities of this gentlemen. -- How he can with
propriety be provided for, you will be best able to determine. -- He takes this
from me as an introductory letter, at his own request.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Neshaminy Camp, August 21, 1777. SIR,
FROM the time which has elapsed since general How departed from the capes of
Delaware, there is the strongest reason to conclude that he is gone either to
the eastward or southward, and with a design to execute some determined plan.
The danger of the sea, -- the injury his troops must sustain from being so long
confined, -- the loss of time, so late in the campaign, -- will scarcely admit
a supposition that he is merely making a feint, and (...) to return either to
the Delaware or the North-river without performing some enterprise first in
another quarter. The probability is in favor of a southern expedition, because
he has been seen, since his departure from the capes, off Sinapuxent, steering
a southern course, -- and because, had his destination been to the eastward,
his arrival there, from the general state of the winds, must have announced it
before this, or his fleet would have been discovered by some of the cruisers on
that coast.

If he is gone to the southward, he must be gone far that way: for, had
Chesapeak-bay been his object, he would have been there long since, and the
fact well established. Beyond that, there is no place short of Charleston, of
sufficient importance to engage his attention. The extensive commerce, the vast
accumulation of military and other stores in that town and its dependencies,
with the eclat it would give his arms if he should unfortunately take it,
afford him stronger inducements to direct his operations there, than he could
possibly have elsewhere.

Matters being thus circumstanced, an important question arises, -- how this
army is to be employed? If his intentions are such as I have supposed them, it
appears to me that an attempt to follow him would not only be fruitless, but
would be attended with the most ruinous consequences. The distance is so
immense that general How might accomplish every purpose he had in view, before
we could possibly arrive to oppose him; and so long a march through an
unhealthy climate at this season would debilitate and waste a principal part of
our force. Added to this, after we had made a considerable progress, he might
easily reimbark his troops and turn his arms against Philadelphia or elsewhere,
as he should think proper, without our being in a condition to give the least
aid.

As these, and many other reasons which will readily occur to Congress, will
show the impracticability of our counteracting general How in that quarter
with any good effect, we have no other alternative left than to remain here
idle and inactive, on the remote probability of his returning this way, -- or
to proceed toward Hudson's-river, with a view of opposing general Burgoyne, or
making an attempt on York-Island, as the situation of affairs shall point out.
A successful stroke with respect to either would be attended with the most
signal advantages, and would be the best compensation we could make for any
losses we may sustain to the southward. Besides these considerations, -- if,
after all our conjectures and reasonings upon the subject, general How should
be gone to the eastward to cooperate with Mr. Burgoyne, the army will be, by
the movement proposed, so far on its way to prevent, I hope, the success of his
enterprise.

The above reasons led me to call a council of general officers this morning,
to take the subject of removing the troops from hence into consideration: and I
am happy to inform Congress they were in sentiment with me upon the occasion,
as they will perceive by a copy of the proceedings then had, which I do myself
the honor of laying before them. Nevertheless, as it is a movement which may
involve the most important consequences, I have thought proper to submit it to
Congress for their deliberation and decision. If it is deemed expedient, we
have perhaps not a moment to lose in carrying it into execution; and, under
this persuasion, I have sent colonel Hamilton, one of my aides, (who will have
the honor of delivering this) to bring me the result of their opinion.

As the northern department has been all along considered separate, and in some
measure distinct, and there are special resolves vesting the command in
particular persons. -- in case it should hereafter appear eligible to unite the
two armies, it may perhaps be necessary that Congress should place the matter
upon such a footing as to remove all scruples or difficulties about the
command, that could possibly arise on my arrival there. -- This I request, from
a disposition to harmony, and from my knowing the ill and fatal consequences
that have often arisen from such controversies, and not from the most distant
apprehension that one would take place upon such an event. The thing however is
possible, and to guard against it can do injury.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. That I may not appear inconsistent, to advise, and to act before I
obtain an opinion, -- I beg leave to mention that I shall move the army to the
Delaware tomorrow morning, to change their ground at any rate, as their
present encampment begins to be disagreeable, and would injure their health in
a short time. Our forage also begins to grow scarce here.



Neshaminy Camp, August 21, 1777. SIR,
I AM this moment honored with yours of this morning, containing several pieces
of intelligence of the fleet's having been seen off the capes of Virginia on
the fifteenth instant. -- I shall, in consequence of this information, halt
upon my present ground till I hear something further.

Colonel Pinckney of South Carolina paid me a visit two days ago. He informed
me that the military stores in Charleston and the neighborhood were immense,
and that he did not believe that the governor or commanding officer there had
had the least intimation of the fleet's having stood to the southward; and he
seemed very apprehensive, that, if Charleston was their object, they would find
them lulled into security, and quite unprepared for an attack. -- As I cannot
yet think that general How seriously intends to go into Chesapeak, I would by
all means advise that an express be immediately dispatched (if one has not
already gone) to warn them of their danger, to let them prepare in the best
manner for defense, and to advise them to remove all supernumerary stores.

I shall immediately call upon governor Livingston to furnish the number of
(...) from the state of Jersey, demanded by requisition of Congress, to
garrison the forts in the Highlands, while the New York militia march to
reinforce the northern army.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Camp at Cross-Roads, August 22, 1777. SIR,
I AM honored with your favor containing the intelligence of the enemy's
arrival in Chesapeak-bay, and the resolution of Congress thereupon. -- I have,
in consequence of this account, sent orders to general Nash immediately to
embark his brigade and colonel Proctor's corpse of artillery, if vessels can be
procured for the purpose, and to proceed to Chester, -- or, if vessels cannot
be provided, to hasten toward that place by land with all the dispatch he can.
I have also directed general Sullivan to join this army with his division as
speedily as possible, and I have issued orders for all the troops here to be in
motion tomorrow morning very early, with intention to march them toward
Philadelphia, and onwards.

I am happy to find Congress have ordered the removal of the stores from
Lancaster and York, to places of greater safety, which is, without doubt, a
very proper and necessary measure: With much respect and esteem, I have the
honor to be, sir, your most obedient servant,

G. W.

August 23, 1777. SIR,
I BEG leave to inform you that the army marched early this morning, and will
encamp, I expect, this evening, within five or six miles of Philadelphia.
Tomorrow morning it will move again, and I think to march it through the city,
but without halting. I am induced to do this, from the opinion of several of my
officers and many friends in Philadelphia, that it may have some influence on
the minds of the disaffected there, and those who are dupes to their artifices
and opinions. The march will be down Front and up Chesnut-street, and, I
presume, about seven o'clock.

Notwithstanding the arrival of the enemy's fleet in Chesapeak-bay, and the
seeming probability that general How will debark his troops and attempt
something, yet I would take the liberty to mention that I think the several
works for the defense of the city should be carried on with the usual industry,
and that no pains should be omitted to complete them. I would also advise that
the same look-outs for intelligence should be continued at the capes, and the
earliest information communicated of any thing material: for, though the fleet
is in Chesapeak-bay, the enemy may push in a number of vessels with troops, and
make an effort to effect some stroke against Philadelphia by surprise. Such an
event does not seem probable while they have a larger show of force in a
neighboring state: but it will be prudent to guard against it.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Chester, August 25, 1777, eight o'clock. SIR,
I LAST night had the honor of your favor of the twenty-fourth, with its
enclosures. -- No letters came for you from general Schuyler; and therefore,
agreeable to your request, I transmit you a copy of one I received from him,
and of the material papers which it covered. Among the copies, you will find
general Burgoyne's instructions at large to lieutenant colonel Baum, pointing
out the objects or his command when he was first detached. What we had before,
was after he marched, and was an answer to a report he had received from him.
-- There was also a mistake in his name before, being called Be^^ in the copies
sent by general Lincoln.

I shall be happy if the account respecting Staten-Island should prove true: --
I hope it will.

Two divisions of the army moved this morning, and will proceed after a short
halt near this place to refresh themselves: the remainder will continue on
their ground today, in order to rest and recover from the fatigue of the march
yesterday and the day before. After breakfast I intend to set out for
Wilmington with the light horse, to reconnoitre the country, and to obtain the
best information I can respecting the enemy.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Wilmington, August 25, 1777, six o'clock, P. M. SIR,
THE enclosed intelligence has just come to my hands. General Greene's and
general Stephen's divisions are within a few miles of this place. I shall order
them to march immediately here. The two other divisions halted this day at
Derby to refresh themselves; but they will come on as expeditiously as
possible. There are about five hundred Pennsylvania militia at Chester and
Marcus-Hook, that are armed: there are a number more unarmed. -- I have ordered
all the armed immediately down. I do not know what number of the militia of
this state are yet collected: but I am told they turn out with great alacrity.

There are a quantity of public and private stores at the Head-of-Elk, which I
am afraid will fall into the enemy's hands if they advance quickly: among
others, there is a considerable parcel of salt. -- Every attempt will be made
to save that. When I get my force collected, I shall dispose of it in the best
manner in my power. To this end, I purpose to view the grounds toward the
enemy in the morning: I am yet a stranger to them.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Wilmington, August 27, 1777. SIR,
I THIS morning returned from the Head-of-Elk, which I left last night. In
respect to the enemy, I have nothing new to communicate: -- they remain where
they debarked first. I could not find out from enquiry what number is landed,
nor form an estimate of it from the distant view I had of their encampment. But
few tents were to be seen from Iron-hill and Gray's-bill, which are the only
eminences about Elk. I am happy to inform you that all the public stores are
removed from thence, except about seven thousand bushels of corn. This I urged
the commissary to get off as soon as possible, and hope it will be effected in
a few days, if the enemy should not prevent, which their situation gives them
but too easy an opportunity of doing. The scarcity of teams in proportion to
the demand will render the removal rather tedious, though I have directed the
quartermaster to send some from hence to expedite the measure.

A part of the Delaware militia are stationed there; and about nine hundred
more from Pennsylvania are now on the march that way. I also intended to move
part of the army that way today, but am under the necessity of deferring it
till their arms are put in order, and they are supplied with ammunition., both
having been greatly injured by the heavy rains that fell yesterday and last
night.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Wilmington, August 28, 1777. SIR,
HAVING endeavored, at the solicitation of the count De Pulaski, to think of
some mode for employing him in our service, there is none occurs to me, liable
to so few inconveniences and exceptions as the giving him the command of the
horse. This department is still without a head, as I have not, in the present
deficiency of brigadiers with the army, thought it advisable to take one from
the foot for that command. The nature of the horse service with us being such
that they commonly act in detachments, a general officer with them is less
necessary than at the head of the brigades of infantry. In the absence of
general Smallwood, who is ordered to put himself at the head of the Maryland
militia, we shall have two brigades without general officers.

But though the horse will suffer less from the want of a general officer than
the foot, a man of real capacity, experience, and knowledge in that service,
might be extremely useful. The count appears, by his recommendations, to have
sustained no inconsiderable military character in his own country: and as the
principal attention in Poland has been for some time past paid to the cavalry,
it is to be presumed this gentleman is not unacquainted with it. -- I submit it
to Congress how far it may be eligible to confer the appointment I have
mentioned upon him: they will be sensible of all the objections attending the
measure, without my particularising them, and can determine accordingly.

This gentleman, we are told, has been, like us, engaged in defending the
liberty and independence of his country, and has sacrificed his fortune to his
zeal for those objects. He derives from hence a title to our respect, that
ought to operate in his favor, as far as the good of the service will permit:
but it can never be expected we should lose sight of this.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Wilmington, August 29, 1777. SIR,
ON my return to this place last evening from White-Clay creek, I was honored
with yours of the twenty-seventh, with sundry resolves of Congress, to which I
shall pay due attention.

The enemy advanced a part of their army yesterday to Gray's-Hill about two
miles on this side of Elk, -- whether with intent to take post there, or to
cover while they remove what stores they found in the town, I cannot yet
determine. -- I do not know what quantity of private property remained: but of
the public there were several thousand bushels of corn and oats, which might
have been removed also, had not most of the teams in the country been employed
by private persons in bringing off very valuable goods.

Our light parties yesterday took between thirty and forty prisoners; twelve
deserters from the navy and eight from the army have already come in; but they
are able to give us very little intelligence. They generally agree that their
troops are healthy, but that their horses suffered very much by the voyage.

By a letter from general Gates which you were pleased to transmit me
yesterday, he requests that commissions may be sent to brigadiers Glover, Poor,
and Patterson, which I beg the favor of you to do by the return express. The
two last lost theirs with their baggage at Ticonderoga, and general Glover had
none.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Wilmington, August 30, 1777. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you yesterday, nothing of importance has
occurred, and the enemy remain as they then were. -- I was reconnoitring the
country and different roads all yesterday, and am now setting out on the same
business again.

Sensible of the advantages of light troops. I have formed a corpse under the
command of a brigadier, by draughting a hundred from each brigade, which is to
be constantly near the enemy, and to give them every possible annoyance.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
Ten o'clock. -- This minute twenty-four British prisoners arrived, taken
yesterday by captain Lee of the light horse.



Wilmington, September 1, 1777. SIR,
THE latest and most material intelligence which I have obtained respecting the
enemy, you will find in the enclosed papers which I do myself the honor of
transmitting to you.

How far the enemy have it in view to extend themselves in a line from bay to
bay, I cannot determine: but the idea has taken place with many: and it is said
to be founded on their hints to some persons, who, -- from accident in some
instances, and perhaps choice in others, -- have had a more familiar
intercourse with them. I cannot suppose they have any such design, or, if they
have, that it can be more than temporary for procuring supplies of provisions.

General Howe's declaration is agreeable to his constant usage, and is what we
might reasonably expect. The only difference is, the present exhibition is
styled a 'declaration.' It is another effort to seduce the people to give up
their rights, and to encourage our soldiers to desert. The facts contained in
the deposition of Francis Alexander, which you have also enclosed, seem to be
opposed to that regularity and discipline which are promised by the declaration.

Yesterday there was some skirmishing between one of our advanced parties and
one of the enemy's, in which they were obliged to retreat with the loss of an
officer and three men killed, according to report. -- We had one private
wounded.

I have received no particular accounts respecting the Maryland Eastern-Shore
militia: from the best information I have, a great many are well disposed to
turn out, but are prevented giving their aid through want of arms. --
Apprehending that the militia there would stand in need of an officer to
arrange them, I wrote to general Cadwallader, requesting his good offices,
which I am told have been exerted. -- Colonel Gift is now gone down, and I
expect will move on as soon as possible, with such as are armed, toward the
enemy. -- General Smallwood is gone to take the command of those on the
Western-Shore, of whom I hear many are collecting: -- but I have no authentic
advices on the subject.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
Will it not be advisable to order colonel Richardson's regiment from their
present station, to march and join the Eastern-Shore militia?



Wilmington, September 1, 1777. SIR,
AT half after twelve o'clock I was honored with yours of this morning, with
its several enclosures. -- I shall make inquiry respecting the workmen in the
militia, and will order all to be detached, that can be spared.

The intelligence from the northward is very interesting, and I hope will be
succeeded by other fortunate events. -- I am sorry general Arnold did not
arrive sooner: if he had, it is probable the enemy would have suffered
considerably in their retreat. -- I flatter myself that we shall have nothing
more to apprehend in that quarter this campaign, and that the disgrace and
disappointment they have met with will produce a favorable change in the
dispositions of the Indians.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. You will be pleased to send the letter for colonel Hughes by the eastern
post tomorrow.



Wilmington, Sept. 3, 1777, eight o'clock, P. M. SIR,
I THIS minute returned to headquarters where I found your favor of this date,
with the resolves respecting general Sullivan, and colonel Richardson's
battalion. -- I had conversed with general Sullivan upon the subject, and
observed to him that it was necessary an inquiry should be had relative to the
affair of Staten-Island, as his conduct was censured, and much dissatisfaction
prevailed. He was sensible of the propriety of the measure, and expressed a
desire that it should take place, provided he could have the benefit of general
Smallwood's testimony, who was on the expedition. -- That gentlemen happens at
this time to be in Maryland; which must necessarily delay the inquiry, unless
some mode can be agreed upon for obtaining his sentiments upon the matter.

This morning the enemy came out with a considerable force and three pieces of
artillery, against our light advanced corpse, and, after some pretty smart
skirmishing, obliged them to retreat, -- being far inferior in number, and
without cannon. -- The loss on either side is not yet ascertained: ours, though
not exactly known, is not very considerable: theirs, we have reason to believe,
was much greater, as some of our parties, composed of expert marksmen, had
opportunities of giving them several close, well-directed fires, -- more
particularly in one instance, when a body of riflemen formed a kind of
ambuscade. -- They advanced about two miles this side of Iron-Hill, and then
withdrew to that place, leaving a piquet at Couch's mill, about a mile in
front. Our parties now lie at White-Clay creek, except the advanced piquets,
which are at Christiana bridge.

Our monday a large detachment of the enemy landed at Cecil courthouse; and
this morning I had advice of their having advanced on the Newcastle road as far
as Carson's tavern. Parties of horse were sent out to reconnoitre them, which
went three miles beyond the Red-Lion, but could neither see nor hear of them;
whence I conjectured they filed off by a road to their left, and fell in with
their main body. -- The design of their movement this morning seems to have
been to disperse our light troops who had been troublesome to them, and to gain
possession of Iron-Hill, to establish a post most probably for covering their
retreat in case of accidents.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Wilmington, Sept. 5, 1777. SIR,
SINCE I did myself the honor of writing to you the night before last, the
enemy have remained entirely quiet. -- A person who came express from general
Rodney informs me that the enemy's shipping fell down from Cecil courthouse on
tuesday last; but how low, he does not know. I have desired general Rodney to
inquire into this matter, and, if it be true, to send persons along the bay
shore to see where they lie. -- General Maxwell, who is just come up from the
lines, confirms the account of the shipping having fallen down Elk: but it is
thought to be with a design of going up the other arm of the bay for the
convenience of watering near the mouth of Susquehanna.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. We have not been able to ascertain the enemy's loss in the late action
any other way than by a woman who came from their camp yesterday: -- she says
she saw nine waggonloads of wounded. I think this probable, because we had
about forty killed and wounded; and, as our men were thinly posted, they must
have done more damage upon a close body, than they received.



Newport, September 7, 1777. SIR,
HIS excellency being out reconnoitring, and busily engaged in the affairs of
the army, I have the honor to acknowledge his receipt of your letter of the
sixth, with the resolutions enclosed, which came to hand yesterday afternoon.

In respect to the militia requested of Jersey, his excellency is doubtful
whether they can be obtained: for governor Livingston, by a late letter,
informed him that he had no expectation that more than three hundred, of the
thousand called for to garrison the posts in the Highlands, would march,
notwithstanding he has issued orders for that purpose; and that three weeks
would probably elapse before that number went. If the requisition can be
complied with, he has no doubt of general Dickinson's exertions, and is
satisfied of the propriety of appointing him to the command. This, he imagines,
would have followed of course, as he is major general of all the militia in the
state, and has given ample testimony, as well of his capacity as of his
firmness and bravery.

By deserters and other intelligence, his excellency was informed last night
that the enemy's whole force left Elk yesterday, and advanced on the road
toward Christiana. The deserters added that they had disencumbered themselves
of all their tents and baggage, and had sent them back and reimbarked them. All
their ships, except two or three which are ships of war, are said to have
fallen down the bay, below the mouth of Sassafras. -- We have had no
information today of any further movements; and I believe their main body lies
about Iron-Hill.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.
P. S. The deserters said they had destroyed a good deal of the corn, etc. they
found in store.



Eight miles from Wilmington, Sept. 9, 1777. SIR,
THE enemy advanced yesterday with a seeming intention of attacking us upon our
post near Newport. We waited for them the whole day; but they halted in the
evening at a place called Milltown, about two miles from us. -- Upon
reconnoitring their situation, it appeared probable that they only meant to
amuse us in front, while their real intent was to march by our right, and, by
suddenly passing the Brandywine and gaining the heights upon the north side of
that river, get between us and Philadelphia, and cut us off from that city. To
prevent this, it was judged expedient to change our position immediately: the
army accordingly marched at two o'clock this morning, and will take post this
evening upon the high grounds near Chad's Ford. -- We have heard nothing
circumstantial from the enemy this day: when I do, I shall immediately transmit
you an account.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Chad's Ford, September 10, 1777. SIR,
YESTERDAY evening I received the honor of your letter of the ninth, with its
several enclosures. -- I have written to general Putnam to detach the fifteen
hundred men mentioned by Congress, and enclose my letter upon the subject,
which you will be pleased to forward to him by the earliest opportunity.

In respect to the subject of monsieur Du Coudray's letter, I would beg leave
to observe, however eligible the measure ^ight otherwise be which he
recommends, an attempt to carry (...) into execution at this time would answer
no valuable purpose, as the work in all probability could not be more than
marked out when it would be wanted. I would also add that I do not conceive any
great advantages could be derived from it, supposing it could be completed, --
as we are certain the enemy will never attack lines which they can avoid. If
they were obliged to approach Philadelphia by a particular route, in such case
no exertions should be spared to erect works, and the adoption of the plan
would be highly expedient.

The enemy are now lying near Kennet's Square, and in a tolerably compact body.
They have parties advanced on the Lancaster road, and on those leading over
this ford and to Wilmington. Maneuvering appears to be their plan. I hope,
notwithstanding, that we shall be able to find out their real intended route,
and to defeat their purposes.

By light-horsemen this instant come in, the enemy are in motion, and appear to
be advancing toward us. His excellency is giving the necessary orders, and
getting the troops under arms, which prevents him from signing this himself as
was intended at first.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.
One o'clock. -- It is said the enemy have halted.



Camp at Ghad's Ford, September 10, 1777. SIR,
YOUR favor of this morning came to hand about two o'clock. His excellency was
then out, and still is. -- I have nothing material to inform you of respecting
the enemy. -- By the last advices from our reconnoitring parties, they had
halted in a low ground strongly flanked by two hills, about a mile below
Welch's tavern. It is supposed they moved from the post they occupied this
morning, for want of water. -- Some interesting event may take place tomorrow,
as they are within a convenient distance to attack, if they have any such
intention.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.

Chad's Ford, Sept. 11, 1777, three quarters after 8 o'clock A. M. SIR,
THE enemy are now advancing. Their present appearance indicates a disposition
to pursue this route. If they do, I trust they will meet with a suitable
reception, and such as will establish our liberties. -- They are now advanced
near the Brandiwine, and have fired several pieces of artillery.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.

Chad's Ford, 5 o'clock P. M. Sept. 11, 1777. SIR,
WHEN I had the honor of addressing you this morning, I mentioned that the
enemy were advancing, and had begun a cannonade. -- I would now beg leave to
inform you that they have kept up a brisk fire from their artillery ever since.
Their advanced party was attacked by our light troops under general Maxwell,
who crossed the Brandiwine for that purpose, and had posted his men on some
high grounds on each side the road. The fire from our people was not of long
duration, as the enemy pressed on in force, -- but was very severe.

What loss the enemy sustained, cannot be ascertained with precision: but, from
our situation, and the briskness of the attack, it is the general opinion,
particularly of those who were engaged, that they had at least three hundred
men killed and wounded. -- Our damage is not exactly known: but, from the best
accounts we have been able to obtain, it does not exceed fifty in the whole.

After this affair, the enemy halted upon the heights, where they have remained
ever since, except a detachment of them, which filed off about eleven o'clock
from their left, and which has since passed Brandiwine at Jones's ford, between
five and six miles above Chad's. The amount of it is not known, -- the accounts
respecting it being various, -- some making it two or three thousand strong,
and others more.

Generals Sullivan, Stirling, and Stephen, with their divisions, are gone in
pursuit, and to attack it if they can with any prospect of success. -- There
has been a scattering loose fire between our parties on each side the creek
since the action in the morning, which just now became warm, when general
Maxwell passed over with his corpse, and drove them from their ground with the
loss of thirty men left dead on the spot (among them a captain of the
forty-ninth), and a number of intrenching tools with which they were throwing
up a battery.

At half after four o'clock, the enemy attacked general Sullivan at the ford
next above this, and the action has been very violent ever since. -- It still
continues. -- A very severe cannonade has begun here too; and I suppose we
shall have a very hot evening: -- I hope it will be a happy one.

I have the honor to be, in great haste, sir, your most obedient servant. R. H.
HARRISON.

Chester, Sept. 11, 1777, twelve o'clock at night. SIR,
I AM sorry to inform you, that, in this day's engagement, we have been obliged
to leave the enemy masters of the field. -- Unfortunately, the intelligence
received, of the enemy's advancing up the Brandiwine and crossing at a ford
about six miles above us, was uncertain and contradictory, notwithstanding all
my pains to get the best. This prevented me making a disposition adequate to
the force with which the enemy attacked us on our right; in consequence of
which, the troops first engaged were obliged to retire before they could be
reinforced. In the midst of the attack on the right, that body of the enemy,
which remained on the other side of Chad's ford, crossed it, and attacked the
division there under the command of general Wayne, and the light troops under
general Maxwell, who, after a severe conflict, also retired. -- The militia
under the command of geneneral Armstrong being posted at a ford about two miles
below Chad's, had no opportunity of engaging.

But, though we fought under many disadvantages, and were, from the causes
above mentioned, obliged to retire, yet our loss of men is not, I am persuaded,
very considerable, -- I believe, much less then enemy's. We have also lost
seven or eight pieces of cannon, according to the best information I can at
present obtain. -- The baggage, having been previously moved off, is all
secure, saving the men's blankets, which being at their backs, many of them
doubtless are lost.

I have directed all the troops to assemble behind Chester, where they are now
arranging for this night. -- Notwithstanding the misfortune of the day, I am
happy to find the troops in good spirits: and I hope another time we shall
compensate for the losses now sustained.

The marquis La Fayette was wounded in the leg, and general Woodford in the
hand: diverse other officers were wounded, and some slain; but the numbers of
either cannot now be ascertained.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. It has not been in my power to send you earlier intelligence, -- the
present being the first leisure moment I have had since the action.



Headquarters, Germantown, September 13, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE been honored with your favor of this date. -- I heartily wish the works
on Delaware were completed: but I think, -- and in this opinion my officers
concur, -- that the service will be injured if any part of the continental
troops were now to be employed about them. If we should be able to oppose
general How with success in the field, the works will be unnecessary; -- if
not, and he should force us from hence, he will certainly possess himself of
them. But, to prevent his attempting it now, I have directed the meadows on
Province. Island to be overflowed immediately, and any other grounds that may
be thought necessary for that purpose. -- The works have been more peculiarly
under the direction of monsieur Du Coudray, and I doubt not he will pay every
attention to their completion and security, that the situation of affairs will
admit of.

A part of the militia under general Armstrong will be posted along Schuylkill,
to throw up redoubts at the different fords, which will be occasionally
occupied, whilst I move to the other side with the main body of the army. --
This disposition appears to me the most eligible from a consideration of all
circumstances, and better than if any part of our present force was to be
employed at the forts. -- If further reinforcements of the militia should come
in, they perhaps may be more properly assigned to that business than any we now
have.

Your letter respecting general De Borre just now came to hand: I shall
transmit him a copy of it and of the resolution. There can be no court of
inquiry into his conduct at this time: as soon as the state of the army will
admit, it will be held.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, near Germantown, Sept. 14, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE the honor of yours this morning, enclosing the copy of a letter from
general Dickinson. -- In consequence of the interesting information contained
in it, I have written to general Putnam, directing him to send forward a second
detachment of a thousand men in addition to the former, as you will perceive by
perusing the enclosed duplicate of my letter to him which you will be pleased
to seal and dispatch as expeditiously as possible, lest the original should by
any accident miscarry.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. You have also copies of other letters, by which you will perceive the
measures I am taking, and which you will in like manner be pleased to forward.
-- On second thoughts, I should be glad you would transmit the enclosures open
to general Dickinson, for his perusal and information, and to be forwarded by
him.



Buck Tavern, Sept. 15, 1777, three o'clock P. M. SIR,
YOUR favor of yesterday, with its several enclosures, came to hand last night.
-- Though I would willingly pay every attention to the resolutions of Congress,
yet, in the late instance respecting the recall of general Sullivan, I must beg
leave to defer giving any order about it, till I hear further from that
honorable body. -- Our situation at this time is critical and delicate; and
nothing should be done to add to its embarrassments. We are now most probably
on the point of another action: and to derange the army by withdrawing so many
general officers from it, may and must be attended with many disagreeable if
not ruinous consequences. Such a proceeding at another time might not produce
any bad effects: but how can the army be possibly conducted with a prospect of
success, if the general officers are taken off in the moment of battle? --
Congress may rely upon it, such a measure will not promote but injure the
service.

It is not my wish to prevent or to delay a proper inquiry into general
Sullivan's conduct a single instant, when the circumstances of the army will
admit: but now they prohibit it, and (I think) the suspension in his command
also. The recall of general St. Clair obliged me to part with general Lincoln
whom I could but ill spare; so that the whole charge of his division is now
upon general Wayne, there being no other brigadier in it than himself. -- The
Maryland troops, if general Sullivan is taken away, will not have one general
officer, general Smallwood being at the head of the militia coming from that
state, and general De Borre suspended: -- added to this, colonel Gist, who
commands one regiment of them, is now from it by order. -- In a word, sir,
whether the charges alleged against Sullivan are true or false, or whether his
conduct has been exceptionable or not, I am satisfied the resolution for his
recall at this time was unhappily adopted, and, if carried into execution, will
not fail to add new difficulties to our present distresses: and I am obliged to
observe, in justice to my own character, that I cannot be answerable for the
consequences which may arise from a want of officers to assist me.

It gives me great pleasure to find general Gates is on so respectable a
footing; and I hope our affairs in that quarter, in the course of a little
time, will be in as prosperous a train as we could reasonably wish.

The main body of the enemy, from the best intelligence I have been able to
get, lies near Dilworthtown, not far from the field of action, where they have
been busily employed in burying their dead, which, from accounts, amounted to a
very considerable number. -- We are moving up this road to get between the
enemy and the Swedes' ford, and to prevent them from turning our right flank,
which they seem to have a violent inclination to effect, by all their movements.

I would beg leave to recommend in the most earnest manner, that some board or
committee be appointed, or some mode adopted, for obtaining supplies of
blankets for the troops: -- many are now without; and the season becoming cold,
they will be injured in their health, and unfitted for service, unless they are
immediately provided with them. Our supplies in this instance, as well as in
every article of clothing, cannot be too great, as there are frequent losses
not equally to be avoided. -- I would also observe that I think, in point of
prudence and sound policy, every species of provisions should be removed from
the city, except such as will be necessary to supply the present demands of
this army. I have been told there are considerable quantities in private hands,
which should not be suffered to remain a moment longer than they can be
conveyed away.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp between the Warren and White-Horse Taverns, September 16, 1777. SIR,
I ARRIVED here last night with the army, and am now so far advanced as to be
in a position to meet the enemy on the route to Swedes' Ford if they should
direct their course that way. -- Their situation, I believe, from the best
information I have been able to obtain, is nearly the same as it was yesterday
evening when I wrote to you.

I have ordered all the troops to be refreshed this morning, as they were late
in getting to their ground last night, and they are now cooking their
provision. In the mean time I intend to see my general officers, and to collect
their sentiments upon the subject of our next movement and operations.

General Smallwood was at Oxford meeting house yesterday. He has with him about
eleven hundred and fifty rank and file fit for duty: but not more than eight
hundred and sixty or seventy are well armed, -- some are without any: they want
ammunition too and many necessaries. The former I ordered on sunday. -- Colonel
Gist is at Christiana with about seven hundred men, who will form a junction
with general Smallwood.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Yellow-Springs, September 17, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE been honored with your two favors of yesterday, and their enclosures,
to which due attention shall be paid.

The enemy seem now to be straining every nerve to accomplish their purpose:
but I trust, whatever present success they may have, they will, ere long,
experience a reverse of fortune. -- If they have four thousand men in the
Jerseys, it is probable they have something more serious in view than a mere
diversion: but I am in hopes, when general M'Dougal comes to unite his force
with the militia, general Dickinson will be strong enough effectually to make
head against them.

Yesterday the enemy moved from Concord, by the Edgemont toward the Lancaster
road, with evident design to gain our right flank. This obliged us to alter our
position and march to this place, from whence we intend immediately to proceed
to Warwick. -- We suffered much from the severe weather yesterday and last
night, being unavoidably separated from our tents and baggage, -- which not
only endangers the health of the men, but has been very injurious to our arms
and ammunition. These, when we arrive at Warwick, we shall endeavor, as soon as
possible, to put again into a proper condition, -- to do which, and to refresh
the men, are two principal motives for going there.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp near Pott's-Grove, September 23, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE not had the honor of addressing you since your adjournment to
Lancaster, and I sincerely wish that my first letter was upon a more agreeable
subject. -- The enemy, by a variety of perplexing maneuvers through a country
from which I could not derive the least intelligence (being to a man
disaffected), contrived to pass the Schuylkill last night at the Flatland and
other fords in the neighborhood of it. They marched immediately toward
Philadelphia, and I imagine their advanced parties will be near that city
tonight.

They had so far got the start before I received certain intelligence that any
considerable number had crossed, that I found it in vain to think of overtaking
their rear, with troops harrassed as ours had been with constant marching since
the battle of Brandiwine; and therefore concluded, by the advice of all the
general officers, to march from this place tomorrow morning toward
Philadelphia, and on the way endeavor to form a junction with the continental
troops under general M'Dougal from Peekskill, and the Jersey militia under
general Dickinson, both of whom are, I hope, on this side the Delaware. -- I am
also obliged to wait for general Wayne and general Smallwood, who were left
upon the other side of Schuylkill, in hopes of falling upon the enemy's rear:
-- but they have eluded them as well as us.

When I last recrossed the Schuylkill, it was with a firm intent of giving the
enemy battle wherever I should meet them, and accordingly advanced as far as
the Warren tavern upon the Lancaster road, near which place the two armies were
upon the point of coming to a general engagement, but were prevented by a most
violent flood of rain, which continued all the day and following night. When it
held up, we had the mortification to find that our ammunition, which had been
completed to forty rounds a man, was entirely ruined; and in that situation we
had nothing left for it but to find out a strong piece of ground which we could
easily maintain till we could get the arms put into order, and a recruit of
ammunition.

Before this could be fully effected, the enemy marched from their position
near the White-horse tavern, down the road leading to the Swedes' Ford. -- I
immediately crossed the Schuylkill above them, and threw myself full in their
front, hoping to meet them in their passage, or soon after they had passed the
river. -- The day before yesterday they were again in motion, and marched
rapidly up the road leading toward Reading. -- This induced me to believe that
they had two objects in view, -- one to get round the right of the army, -- the
other perhaps to detach parties to Reading where we had considerable quantities
of military stores.

To frustrate those intentions, I moved the army up on this side the river to
this place, determined to keep pace with them: but early this morning I
received intelligence that they had crossed the fords below. -- Why I did not
follow immediately, I have mentioned in the former part of my letter: but the
strongest reason against being able to make a forced march is the want of
shoes. Messieurs Caroll, Chase, and Penn, who were some days with the army, can
inform Congress in how deplorable a situation the troops are, for want of that
necessary article. At least one thousand men are barefooted, and have
performed the marches in that condition. I was told of a great number of shoes
in the hands of private people in Philadelphia, and sent down to secure them:
but I doubt the approach of the enemy will prevent it.

I have planned a method of throwing a garrison into Fort Mifflin. -- If it
succeeds, and they, with the assistance of the ships and galleys, should keep
the obstructions in the river, general Howe's situation in Philadelphia will
not be the most agreeable: for if his supplies can be stopped by water, it may
be easily done by land. To do both shall be my utmost endeavor; and I am not
yet without hope that the acquisition of Philadelphia may, instead of his good
fortune, prove his ruin.

General St. Clair, who has been constantly with the army for some time past,
can give you many pieces of information which may have escaped me, and
therefore I refer you to him for many particulars.

If there are any shoes and blankets to be had in Lancaster or that part of the
country, I earnestly entreat you to have them taken up for the use of the army.
I have been informed that there are large parcels of shoes in particular there.

Finding that the enclosed came from colonel Gibson, I took the liberty of
opening it, as I wanted much to know what route he was taking.

I have ordered all the Virginia militia who are tolerably armed to come
forward and join the army. Those who have no arms are to wait at Frederictown
in Maryland till they hear whether any can be provided for them at Lancaster:
you will therefore be pleased to make enquiry what number can be procured
there, and send an express to Frederic with orders for as many men to come
forward as there are arms.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, twenty miles from Philadelphia, October 3, 1777. SIR,
YESTERDAY afternoon I had the honor to receive your favors of the thirtieth
ultimo, with their enclosures. -- I was much obliged by the accounts from the
northern army, though in general they had reached me before; and I flatter
myself we shall soon hear that they have been succeeded by other fortunate and
interesting events, as the two armies, by general Gates's letter, were encamped
near each other.

I shall pay due attention to the resolution you refer me to; and no exertions
on my part shall be wanting, to collect what necessaries I can for the army.
This, I am persuaded, will be equally attended to by the honorable board of
war; and I hope, by care and industry, many supplies may be obtained to relieve
our distresses, which, in the articles of shoes, stockings, and blankets, are
extremely great.

Since my letter of the twenty-ninth, no favorable change has taken place in
our affairs: -- on the contrary, we have sustained an additional loss in the
capture of the Delaware. She fell into the enemy's hands in a day or two after
they were in possession of the city, and in a manner not yet well understood.
-- Some have supposed the crew mutinied, -- while another report is, that she
was disabled in her rudder by a shot, and drove on shore. -- This misfortune
takes off the success of captain Biddle's crui^e. -- I will not dwell longer on
the subject. -- Congress may rest assured, all the means in my power shall be
employed to put our affairs in a more agreeable train, and to accomplish the
end they so earnestly wish.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Enclosed is a copy of general Howe's proclamation issued the
twenty-eighth ultimo.



Camp near Pennioacker's Mill, October 5, 1777. SIR,
HAVING received intelligence through two intercepted letters, that general
How had detached a part of his force for the purpose of reducing Billingsport
and the forts on the Delaware, I communicated the accounts to my general
officers, who were unanimously of opinion that a favorable opportunity offered
to make an attack upon the troops which were at and near Germantown. It was
accordingly agreed that it should take place yesterday morning, and the
following dispositions were made.

The divisions of Sullivan and Wayne, flanked by Conway's brigade, were to
enter the town by the way of Chesnut-hill, while general Armstrong with the
Pennsylvania militia should fall down the Manatawny road by Vandeering's mill,
and get upon the enemy's left and rear. -- The divisions of Green and Stephen,
flanked by M'Dougal's brigade, were to enter, by taking a circuit by way of the
lime-kiln road, at the market-house, and to attack their right wing; and the
militia of Maryland and Jersey, under generals Smallwood and Forman, were to
march by the old York road, and fall upon the rear of their right. Lord
Stirling, with Nash and Maxwell's brigades, was to form a corps-de-reserve.

We marched about seven o'clock the preceding evening, and general Sullivan's
advanced party, drawn from Conway's brigade, attacked their piquet at Mount
Airy or Mr. Allen's house, about sunrise the next morning, which presently
gave way; and his main body, consisting of the right wing, following soon,
engaged the light infantry and other troops encamped near the piquet, which
they forced from their ground. -- Leaving their baggage, they retreated a
considerable distance, having previously thrown a party into Mr. Chew's house,
who were in a situation not to be easily forced, and had it in their power,
from the windows, to give us no small annoyance, and in a great measure to
obstruct our advance.

The attack from our left column under general Green began about
three-quarters of an hour after that from the right, and was for some time
equally successful. But I cannot enter upon the particulars of what happened in
that quarter, as I am not yet informed of them with sufficient certainty and
precision.

The morning was extremely foggy, which prevented our improving the advantages
we gained, so well as we should otherwise have done. This circumstance, by
concealing from us the true situation of the enemy, obliged us to act with more
caution and less expedition than we could have wished, and gave the enemy time
to recover from the effects of our first impression and, what was still more
unfortunate, it served to keep our different parties in ignorance of each
other's movements, and hindered their acting in concert. It also occasioned
them to mistake one another for the enemy, -- which, I believe, more than any
thing else, contributed to the misfortune which ensued. -- In the midst of the
most promising appearances, when every thing gave the most flattering hopes of
victory, the troops began suddenly to retreat, and entirely left the field, in
spite of every effort that could be made to rally them.

Upon the whole, it may be said the day was rather unfortunate than injurious.
-- We sustained no material loss of men, and brought off all the artillery,
except one piece which was dismounted. -- The enemy are nothing the better by
the event; and our troops, who are not in the least dispirited by it, have
gained what all young troops gain by being in actions. We have had however
several valuable officers killed and wounded, particularly the latter. General
Nash is among the wounded, and his life is despaired of. -- As soon as it is
possible to obtain a return of our loss, I will transmit it.

In justice to general Sullivan and the whole right wing of the army, whose
conduct I had an opportunity of observing, as they acted immediately under my
eye: -- I have the pleasure to inform you that both officers and men behaved
with a degree of gallantry that did them the highest honor.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. As I have observed, I have not received a return of our loss: but, from
what I have just now learned from general Green. I fear it is more
considerable than I at first apprehended -- in men. The cannon, mentioned
above, is said to have been brought off in a wagon.



Camp near Pennibacker's Mill, October 7, 1777. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the fifth, I have obtained a return
of our loss in the action on saturday, by which it appears to be much more
considerable than I at first apprehended, though I always imagined myself that
it was greater than it was generally supposed to be. The copy of the return
enclosed will show the amount as it now stands; but I hope many of those who
are missing will yet come in: I fear however there are several under that
denomination to be added to the number of the slain, as the action was warm in
every quarter, from the information of the officers who commanded the different
attacks.

What loss the enemy sustained, I am not able precisely to ascertain: but from
a variety of corresponding accounts of persons who left the city since, and
those of a deserter, it was very considerable. The deserter, who is
intelligent, says general Agnew was killed, sir William Erskine wounded in the
head and leg, and that their general l^ss, in killed and wounded amounted to
near eight hundred. Several reputable persons from the city corroborate this,
particularly with respect to general Agnew's death: some say upwards of two
hundred wagons with wounded were carried in after the action, and before they
came out, and that it was the common belief there, the enemy had been severely
handled.

It is with much chagrin and mortification I add, that every account confirms
the opinion I at first entertained, that our troops retreated at the instant
when victory was declaring herself in our favor. -- The tumult, disorder, and
even despair, which, it seems, had taken place in the British army, were
scarcely to be paralleled: and it is said, so strongly did the ideas of a
retreat prevail, that Chester was fixed on as their rendezvous. I can discover
no other cause for not improving this happy opportunity, than the extreme
haziness of the weather.

My intention is to encamp the army at some suitable place to rest and refresh
the men, and recover them from the still remaining effects of that disorder
naturally attendant on a retreat. We shall here wait for the reinforcements
coming on, and shall then act according to circumstances. -- General Varnum,
with the detachment from Peekskill amounting to about twelve hundred, including
officers, would be last night at Coryel's ferry. About five hundred militia
from Virginia, and two hundred from Maryland, together with colonel Gibson's
state regiment consisting of two hundred and twenty-six effectives, have
already joined the army. -- Since the action, general Forman's brigade of
Jersey militia has quitted us. The men began to be uneasy at their situation,
and desirous to return home: and as, by some intelligence received from general
Dickinson, there was reason to imagine there might be a call for their services
in the Jerseys, it was thought expedient to gratify their desire.

The state of our water defense on the Delaware is far from being as flattering
as could be wished. After some slight opposition from the Jersey militia under
general Newcomb, a detachment of the enemy took possession of Billingsport.
This perhaps is an event of no material consequence: but it is to be lamented
that many of the officers and seamen on board the galleys have manifested a
disposition that does them little honor. Looking upon their situation as
desperate, or probably from worse motives, they have been guilty of the most
alarming desertions: two whole crews, including the officers, have deserted to
the enemy. I learn however by captain Brewer, who is this moment arrived here
from the fleet, that the accounts they have received from the city, of our late
attack, were such as to have produced a favorable change, and to have inspired
them with more confidence. -- I would here observe, that the charge of bad
conduct was by no means applicable to the whole: -- far from it. -- He further
adds that four of the enemy's ships made an attempt yesterday morning to weigh
the chevaux-de-frise opposite to Billingsport, but were repulsed by our
galleys, -- which has also contributed to raise the spirits of the seamen. Our
garrison on Fort-Island, consisting of little more than two hundred continental
troops under lieutenant colonel Smith, appear determined to maintain their
posts to the last extremity.

I beg leave to mention to Congress that there is a great deficiency of general
officers to command this army. When the detachment coming from Peekskill joins
us, we shall have thirteen brigades. These require as many brigadiers, and six
major-generals. -- instead of these, we shall have only four major-generals and
six brigadiers; and the deficiency will be still increased by the death of
general Nash, which, from every appearance, is momently to be expected. General
Woodford's absence, occasioned by his wound, adds to our embarrassments, though
it will be but for a time. Under these circumstances, Congress will be sensible
that the government of the army cannot go on with that energy which is
essential to its well-being and success. Neither officers nor men will transfer
the respect and obedience they pay to a general officer, to a colonel who
happens to be appointed to the temporary command of a brigade; nor will he,
knowing his authority to be only temporary, be as solicitous to enforce it as
one who is conscious he is to continue in the station he fills. Want of leisure
prevents my being more particular at this time: but I shall take the liberty,
in a day or two, to point out the troops that are in want of general officers,
with my observations on the subject.

I cannot however omit this opportunity of recommending general M'Dougal to
their notice. This gentleman, from the time of his appointment as brigadier, --
from his abilities, military knowledge, and approved bravery, -- has every
claim to promotion. If I mistake not, he was passed over in the last
appointment of major-generals, and younger officers preferred before him: but
his disinterested attachment to the service prevented his acting in the manner
that is customary in like circumstances. This, I think, gives him a peculiar
title to esteem, and concurs with the opinion I have of his value as an
officer, to make me wish it may appear advisable to Congress to promote him to
one of the vacancies.

It would be well if the intended inquiry into the conduct of general St. Clair
could be brought to a speedy issue; and, if he is acquitted to the satisfaction
of Congress, that, as his general character as an officer is good, he may be
again restored to the service.

By a letter this evening received from colonel Hawks Hay of Haverstraw, dated
the fifth at four o'clock P. M. four ships of war, a considerable number of
armed vessels, eight transports, and forty flat-bottomed boats, arrived that
morning in the bay opposite that place, and were landing troops at
Verplank's-Point. -- Their number and design were not known.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Enclosed you will find a copy of a letter from colonel Mifflin,
containing an account of the action of the fourth, as mentioned by the British
officers in Philadelphia. -- I would beg leave to observe, that I think miss *
* *'s name should not be mentioned.



Pennibacker's Mill, October 8, 1777. SIR,
AS general Howe's operations are in this quarter, and his object in all
probability fixed for this campaign, I am induced to submit it to the
consideration of Congress if the whole or a part of the regiment of artillery
commanded by colonel Harrison should not be immediately ordered to join this
army. In the late actions, the corpse under general Knox has suffered severely;
and it is so reduced by the number of killed, wounded, etc. that we are obliged
to make draughts from the other battalions to supply their places. The measure
I have ventured to submit will not, from present appearances, be attended with
any ill consequences, if carried into execution, -- and the less so, as the
state of Virginia, according to my information, is raising another regiment.
Should it be thought advisable. Congress will transmit their orders to colonel
Harrison. -- If the regiment comes, they need not bring their artillery.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, twenty-six miles from Philadelphia, October 10, 1777. SIR,
ON wednesday evening I received the honor of your letter of the seventh with
it several enclosures. -- The providing of suitable quarters for the troops
during the winter demands our attention: but I confess it is difficult to say
where they will be. Sundry circumstances may occur in the course of the
campaign, to render any provision, which might now be thought of, altogether
improper.

In respect to general Putnam's letter, though the accounts transmitted by
colonel Hawks Hay indicate that the enemy had some attack in contemplation,
yet I cannot but think the force the general mentions to have been at New York
was greatly exaggerated. The highest number of the reinforcements, said to have
arrived, is three thousand; and these are mentioned to be half boys. Other
reports make it much less, -- and some as low as five or six hundred. --
However, be it what it may, it is not in my power to grant him aid. -- Had the
reinforcement arrived before the troops marched from Peekskill, so many might
not have been ordered from thence. But the case was otherwise, or at least I
was not apprised of their arrival; and the detachments from thence were
directed by the advice of my general officers, who had under consideration the
state of the whole force at that post and its dependencies, according to a
general return. At the same time I urged general Putnam to call in all his
out-posts, and to write in pressing terms to governor Trumbull to assist him
with some militia.

I have not heard a single syllable more of the troops or fleet mentioned by
colonel Hawks Hay, except a vague report today that a number, supposed to be
about fifteen hundred, had landed on this side the river at Haverstraw. -- If
the fact is so, it is probable they mean to pass through the Clove and invest
the forts. -- I have great confidence in the activity and bravery of governor
Clinton; and I trust, if such is their view, they will meet at least with a
spirited if not a successful opposition. -- I have sent up lieutenant colonel
Radire, one of the engineers, with orders to direct such other works as may
appear necessary.

There was a very severe cannonade on wednesday night: i^ began about twelve
o'clock, and continued till yesterday morning between seven and eight. I have
not learned the occasion; but, from the direction, suppose it was at
Fort-Mifflin, or an engagement between our armed vessels and the enemy's ships,
which probably were making a second attempt against the chevaux-de-frise. -- I
have determined to maintain the post at Red-bank, if it can be done, and have
detached colonel Green there with his regiment of Rhode Island troops,
consisting of about two hundred and twelve effective privates. I have also
written to general Newcomb of Jersey, pressing him to give all the aid he can
from the militia.

Since my letter of the seventh we have been joined by more of the Virginia
militia. -- The whole number now in camp amounts to about eleven hundred. Many
of their arms are indifferent, and almost the whole are destitute of pouches
and other necessary accoutrements.

On sunday the enemy evacuated Billingsport. -- They left all our cannon, but
burned the platforms and carriages.

Enclosed you will receive a letter addressed to me by colonel Portail.
Congress will judge of the contents, and decide upon them as they may think
they merit.

The military chest is nearly exhausted, not having more than ten thousand
dollars in it; and a large part of the army is to pay for the month of August.
Besides their claims, large sums are wanted by the quartermaster general, and
for other purposes. -- Congress, I hope, will order such immediate supply to be
forwarded to the paymaster-general, as shall be in their power.

October 11. -- I wish to know what stores of lead we have, and what
expectations of further supplies. I am rather uneasy on this head, as I have
not been able to obtain satisfaction on some inquiries within the course of a
few days.

The cannonade mentioned above was between our galleys and a detachment of the
enemy who were attempting to throw up a battery at Webb's or the lowest ferry
on Schuylkill. It has been repeated this morning. -- Their design, in erecting
this battery, probably is to cover their passage to Province-Island, from
whence, by occupying the grounds about the pest-houses, they may expect to
annoy Fort-Mifflin.

Our distress for want of shoes and stockings is amazingly great, particularly
for want of the former. On this account we have a great many men who cannot do
duty, and several detained at the hospitals for no other cause. -- I must
request Congress to continue their exertions to relieve us, and to direct every
supply of these and other necessaries to be forwarded as soon as they possibly
can after they are collected. It will be proper to send them on as fast as they
can be procured, without waiting to make up a considerable quantity to be
brought at one time.

I was this morning honored with your favors of the ninth, and their several
enclosures. -- I feel in the most sensible manner the honorable approbation
Congress have been pleased to give of my conduct, and that of the army under my
command, in the action on the fourth instant: nor am I less indebted to you,
sir, for the polite mode in which you have conveyed their sentiments. -- I
shall communicate the resolve upon the subject to the army, and hope, if a
favorable opportunity offers, under the smiles of providence, they will merit,
by more substantial services, the further applause of their country.

The resolution of the eighth, for preventing supplies and intelligence being
carried to the enemy, appears to me to be a salutary one; and I hope it will be
attended with the most beneficial consequences. That it may be known among the
inhabitants who are in their neighborhood, and who have been guilty of such
practices, I would wish to receive several printed copies, that they may be
distributed in proper places.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I have just now received a line from the paymaster-general on the
subject of money, which I enclose.



Headquarters, October 13, 1777. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the eleventh instant, nothing
material has happened between our army and general Howe's. -- The enclosed
copies of commodore. Hazlewood and colonel Bradford's letters will show the
situation of affairs in the navy and at Fort-Mifflin, on the eleventh, -- which
are the latest accounts I have received from thence. But there has been a warm
cannonade ever since, which continued, with but little intermission, till
between two and three o'clock yesterday afternoon, when it ceased. The result I
have not heard; but I hope, from the determined spirit of the fleet and the
garrison, matters continue as we could wish.

I received an express last night from general Putnam, informing me of the
capture of Fort-Montgomery, and the consequent evacuation of Peekskill. I
should send copies of his letters to me: but as the express who brought them
had dispatches for Congress, I conclude he has advised them fully on the
subject. -- These events may have an unhappy influence on our northern affairs:
but as the Connecticut militia seem to be coming in fast, and governor Clinton
is exerting himself to bring out the force of New York, -- if general Putnam
can but keep pace with their fleet in their progress up the river, I hope he
will be able to frustrate their design of relieving general Burgoyne, and that
every thing will still terminate well in that quarter.

It gives me pain to repeat so often the wants of the army: and nothing would
induce me to it but the most urgent necessity. Every mode hitherto adopted for
supplying them has proved inadequate, notwithstanding my best endeavors to make
the most of the means which have been in my power. -- The enclosed return will
show how great our deficiency in the most essential articles. -- What new
expedient Congress can devise for more effectually answering these demands, I
know not, persuaded as I am that their closest attention has not been wanting
to a matter of so great importance: but, circumstanced as we are, I am under an
absolute necessity of troubling them, that if any new source can be opened for
alleviating our distresses, it may be embraced as speedily as possible; for it
is impossible that any army, so unprovided, can long subsist, or act with that
vigor which is requisite to ensure success.

The return now enclosed is for troops present in camp, -- besides which, there
are numbers in the several hospitals, totally destitute of the necessaries they
require to sit them for the field; and, on this account alone, are prevented
from joining their corpse. The recruits coming in are also in the same
melancholy predicament. -- I cannot ascertain with precision what quantity of
clothing is at this time in Mr. Mease's hands: but, from every account, what he
has can administer but a very partial relief. -- I know he is entirely bare of
some of the most capital articles we want.

With respect to cartouch-boxes, without which it is impossible to act, I
cannot find from my inquiries that there are any in store. Several of the
continental troops are deficient in this instance; and, what adds to our
distress, there are but very few of the southern militia that are provided. --
I am trying to make a collection about the country: but, from the information I
have received, the measure will be attended with but little success. -- This
want, though not remedied immediately, may be removed in time; and I would take
the liberty to recommend that the earliest attention should be had to making a
large supply. I would also advise that much care should be use in choosing the
leather: -- none but the best and thickest is proper for the purpose; and each
box should have a small inner flap for the greater security of the cartridges
against the rain and moist weather. The flaps in general are too small, and do
not project sufficiently over the ends or sides of the boxes. -- I am convinced
of the utility, nay necessity, of these improvements, and that the adoption of
them, though they will incur an additional expense at first, will prove a
considerable saving, and of the most beneficial consequences: for we know from
unhappy experience in the severe rain on the sixteenth ultimo, the few boxes we
had of this construction preserved the ammunition without injury, whilst it was
almost wholly destroyed in those of the common form with a single flap.

There is one thing more which I cannot omit mentioning to Congress, and which,
in my opinion, has a claim to their most serious attention, -- I mean the
general defective state of the regiments which compose our armies. -- Congress
will find, from a view of the returns transmitted from time to time, that they
do not amount to half of their just complement. What can be done to remedy
this, I know not: but it is certain every idea of voluntary enlistments seems
to be at an end; and it is equally certain that the mode of draughting has been
carried on with such want of energy in some states, and so much disregarded in
others, that but a small accession of force has been derived from it. These
facts are sufficiently interesting of themselves. -- But there are others to be
added. -- I am told that Virginia, in her regulations for draughting, extended
her plan only to the nine regiments that were first raised. In what policy this
was founded, I cannot determine: but the other six are to receive no
reinforcements from that source. -- Nor do matters stop here. The engagements
of the first nine regiments, I am informed, were temporary; and, according to
the officers' accounts, the longest period to which any of the men are bound to
serve is next April: -- many are not obliged so long; and there are some who
claim a discharge at this time. -- I do not mention these things through
choice, but from a principle of duty, to the end that Congress may devise some
timely and effectual provision for the whole, if such shall be in their power.
-- It is unnecessary to enlarge upon the subject; and I will only observe that
the consequences of calling the militia [ into the field in] the course of the
war have been so severely and ruinously felt, that I trust our views will never
be turned to them but in cases of the greatest extremity.

In pursuance of the resolution of Congress, a court of inquiry has sat upon
general Sullivan. They met on the tenth, and continued the examination till the
twelfth, when they came to the enclosed opinion. -- The depositions and papers
which were before the court were many and prolix. They are not transmitted: but
they may be obtained from the court, if wanted. -- Besides the depository
proofs which they had of wounded and dead officers, they had many gentlemen
before them in person.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. October 14. -- I last night received letters from commodore Hazlewood
and colonel Smith. -- The situation of affairs was nearly the same, the evening
before, as when the commodore and colonel Bradford wrote on the tenth and
eleventh. The cannonade mentioned above was from our galleys at the enemy's
redoubts.



Headquarters at Peter Wintz's, October 16, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your favors of the twelfth and thirteenth
instant, with their several enclosures. -- In respect to the resolution
directing a flag to be sent to general How, I am inclined to think that the
information upon which it was framed was without foundation. The letters which
have come from our officers who have been lately taken generally mention that
their treatment has been tolerably good; and such privates as have escaped have
said nothing in the course of their examination of their having been compelled
to work. -- For these reasons I have taken the liberty to decline sending the
flag. At the same time Congress may be assured, if our prisoners suffer any
wrongs, I shall take every means in my power to have them redressed as soon as
I am apprised of them.

It is with the highest satisfaction I congratulate Congress on the success of
our arms at the northward in the action of the seventh, -- an event of the most
interesting importance at this critical juncture. From the happy train in which
things then were, I hope we shall soon hear of the most decisive advantages.

We moved this morning from the encampment at which we had been for six or
seven days past, and are just arrived at the grounds we occupied before the
action of the fourth. One motive for coming here is to divert the enemy's
attention and force from the forts. These they seem to consider as capital
objects, and (from their operations) mean to reduce, if possible. -- At present
their designs are directed against Fort-Mifflin and the chevaux-de-frise. I
have therefore detached a further reinforcement to the garrison.

I yesterday, through the hands of Mrs. * * *, received a letter of a very
curious and extraordinary nature from Mr. D* * *, which I have thought proper
to transmit to Congress. To this ridiculous, illiberal performance, I made a
short reply, by desiring the bearer of it, if she should hereafter by any
accident meet with Mr. D* * *, to tell him I should have returned it unopened,
if I had any idea of the contents; -- observing at the same time, that I highly
disapproved the intercourse she seemed to have been carrying on, and expected
it would be discontinued. -- Notwithstanding the author's assertion, I cannot
but suspect that the measure did not originate with him; and that he was
induced to it by the hope of establishing his interest and peace more
effectually with the enemy.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, near White-Marsh, October 21, 1777. SIR,
I LAST night had the honor to receive your letter of the seventeenth instant,
with its several enclosures.

I heartily wish the states may feel the importance of filling their
battalions, and may, in consequence of the recommendation of Congress, adopt
such measures as will prove effectual for the purpose. I cannot but think that
heretofore there has been a want of attention in this instance, and that the
subject, though interesting to the last degree, has been viewed with too much
indifference. The resolutions respecting deserters, I hope, will also have
their notice. It is highly necessary that they should come into some
regulations for apprehending them, and punishing those who give them
countenance. If this is not done, our force will be always diminishing, and no
exertions in the army will prevent it. I shall try the effects of a
proclamation on those who are now delinquents, and shall be happy if it meets
with success; but confess, from the experiment I have made, that I am not
sanguine in my expectations that it will be the case.

As to the recruiting officers, I must observe, that, notwithstanding the
resolution of Congress of the thirty-first of July, and my circular letter on
the subject of it to many of the states, I have not received an account that
any officers have been appointed, except in Connecticut and Jersey.

On sunday the enemy evacuated Germantown, and withdrew themselves within their
lines near the city. They seem determined to reduce the forts, if possible;
and, for this purpose, have thrown several parties over on Province-Island. I
was informed this afternoon that a detachment also passed the Delaware at
Cooper's ferry in the morning. If the account be true (and I have no doubt of
it) it is highly probable they mean to make an attack upon the garrison at
Red-bank. I am taking every measure in my power to counteract them, and have
written to generals Forman and Newcomb of Jersey to afford every aid they can
to relieve the fort, in case they do invest it.

Against Fort-Mifflin they have kept up a cannonade, more or less every day,
and have thrown several shells, but without doing any considerable damage. The
explosion of one killed a private, and wounded three others, who were in a
barrack where it fell. They also set fire to two ammunition-boxes with a hot
ball on the nineteenth, which did some injury to the barracks. I do not
recollect that we have suffered lately in any instances besides these.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, October 24, 1777. SIR,
I DO myself the honor of transmitting to Congress the enclosed copies of
sundry letters just now received, and congratulate them most sincerely on the
important intelligence which they contain. -- The damage the enemy have
sustained in their ships, I hope, will prevent their future attempts to gain
the passage of the river; and the repulse of the troops under count Donnop, and
his captivity, I flatter myself, will also be attended with the most happy
consequences. At the time these actions happened, a supply of ammunition was on
the way to the forts; and I have also ordered a further quantity to be
immediately sent.

By colonel Blaine, one of the issuing commissaries, who left Red-bank in the
morning before the action, I am happily informed that he had thrown
considerable supplies of provision into both garrisons. He also adds that he
came from Jersey this morning, and that the enemy had recrossed the Delaware
and returned to Philadelphia. I have written to colonel Green that the
prisoners must be immediately sent from his post: and Mr. Clymer, a deputy
under Mr. Boudinot, will set out tomorrow morning to make a proper disposition
of them.

It gives me great concern to inform Congress, that, after all my exertions, we
are still in a distressed situation for want of blankets and shoes. At this
time no inconsiderable part of our force are incapable of acting, through the
deficiency on the latter: and I fear, without we can be relieved, it will be
the case with two-thirds of the army in the course of a few days.

I am and have been waiting with the most anxious impatience for a confirmation
of general Burgoyne's surrender. I have received no further intelligence
respecting it (excepting vague report) than the first account, which came to
hand so long ago as saturday morning. -- If Congress have had authentic advices
about it, I wish to be favored with them.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, near White-Marsh, November 1, 1777. SIR,
I WAS duly honored with Mr. Hancock's letter of the twenty-fifth, with its
several enclosures. -- I shall take the case of John More under consideration;
and will transmit colonel Mason my determination upon the same.

At this time I cannot inform the commissary whether any alterations have or
have not been made by general orders in the original ration establishment. I
have been under the necessity, from time to time, to send away my orderly
books; and they are necessary to be examined on the subject. However, I think
it probable that a departure from the first allowance may have been found
expedient, and directed by some authority, -- or the commissary would not have
adopted it. -- In respect to the alteration referred to my consideration, it is
a matter of consequence, and I have desired the general officers to inform
themselves whether it will be agreeable to the army at large, or what other
regulations may be necessary in this instance. -- As soon as I have their
sentiments, I will write to Congress upon the subject.

The enemy still consider the possession of our posts upon the river of great
importance; and, from their preparations of fascines, etc. and the best
information I have been able to obtain, they will make further efforts to carry
them. -- Viewing them in this light myself, and imagining that they would
persevere in their plans to occupy them, I wrote some days ago in the most
pressing terms to generals Dickinson, Forman, and * * *, to afford every aid in
their power from the militia of New Jersey. As yet we have received but little;
and I have no encouragement to expect that it will be much augmented in a short
time. This does not proceed from a want of activity and exertion on the part of
the two first-mentioned gentlemen, whose conduct and zea^ upon every occasion
give them a claim to the public esteem, but in a considerable degree to the
peculiar circumstances of their state at this time. The apprehensions of an
invasion from Staten-Island keep a large proportion of the militia from the
eastern and upper part of the state almost, constantly employed at and in the
neighborhood of Elizabethtown, and Mr. Livingston's powers, as governor, being
expired, -- and no provision made (it seems) for such a contingency, -- there
are none of sufficient authority to order them out, till a new appointment can
be had: -- at least there is ground to suspect that the orders and exertions of
these two gentlemen, unassisted by civil authority, will not be attended with
the advantages we wish, and which our affairs require. * * *

Under these circumstances I have been obliged to detach a further
reinforcement of continental troops under general Varnum, to maintain the two
garrisons, if possible, -- besides sailors drawn from the line, to man the
galleys. This detachment, when it arrives, added to the force now in the forts,
will make the whole amount to sixteen hundred effective rank and file sent from
this army.

After the action of the fourth ultimo at Germantown, I hoped we should have
been in a situation to attack the enemy again on those grounds, and with more
success than in the former instance: but this I was not able to effect. The
severe rain on the sixteenth of September, -- the action on the fourth, -- the
removal of our stores, and having to form a new elaboratory, -- added to the
small number of hands engaged in the business of it, -- laid us under
difficulties in the capital and essential article of ammunition, that could not
be surmounted. Every exertion was directed to obtain supplies; but
(notwithstanding) they were inadequate, too scanty, and insufficient to attempt
any thing on a large and general scale, before the enemy withdrew themselves.
With what we had, in case an experiment had been made, fortune might have
decided in our favor for the present; but we should not have been afterward in
a situation to maintain the advantage we might have gained: and if a repulse
had taken place, and the enemy pursued, -- for want of a reserve, we might have
been exposed to the most imminent danger of being ruined. -- The distress of
the soldiers for want of shoes was also a powerful obstacle to the measure.

I could wish that our circumstances were now such as to authorize a general
attack for dislodging them from the city: but I think that they are not. This
also is the opinion of my general officers, upon a full and comprehensive view
of matters, as Congress will perceive by the enclosed copy of the minutes of
council on the twenty-ninth ultimo, which I have taken the liberty to transmit
and lay before them. -- The superiority of numbers the part of the enemy, in
respect to regular troops, -- their superior discipline, and the redoubts and
lines which they have thrown up between the two rivers and about the city, --
the happy state of our affairs at the northward, and the practicability of
drawing succors from thence, the consequences of a defeat, -- these were all
motives which led to a decision against an attack at this time.

I have sent colonel Hamilton, one of my aides to general Gates, to give him a
just representation of things, and to explain to him the expediency of our
receiving the reinforcements which have been determined necessary, if they will
not interfere with and frustrate any important plans he may have formed. Indeed
I cannot conceive that there is any object now remaining, that demands our
attention and most vigorous efforts so much as the destruction of the army in
this quarter. Should we be able to effect this, we shall have little to fear in
future.

General Howe's force, according to the state now made, is more considerable
than it was generally supposed to be. I did not think it quite so great myself,
but always imagined the common estimate much too low: -- nor can I positively
say what it really is. However, there are strong reasons to believe that it is
not over-rated. After the evacuation of Germantown, an almost infinite number
of scraps and bits of paper were found, which, being separated and arranged
with great industry and care, bear the marks of genuine and authentic returns
at different periods. The manner in which they were destroyed and disposed of
gives no room to suspect that it was the effect of design. -- In addition to
this, I am informed by general Putnam that he had heard a reinforcement of four
regiments was coming round to Delaware from New York.

The enclosed return will give Congress a general view of the strength of this
army when it was made, and a particular one of the forces of each state which
compose it. By this they will perceive how greatly deficient the whole are in
furnishing their just quotas. -- The militia from Maryland and Virginia are no
longer to be counted on: -- all the former, except about two hundred, are
already gone; and a few days, I expect, will produce the departure of the whole
or chief part of the latter, from the importunate applications which some of
them have made. Besides this diminution, I am apprehensive we shall have
several men added to the sick list by reason of the late excessive rain and
want of clothes.

We have not yet come to any determination respecting the disposition of our
troops for the winter, -- supposing it a matter of great importance, and that
for the present we should be silent upon it. The reasons will readily occur. By
continuing the campaign, perhaps many salutary if not decisive advantages may
be derived; but it appears to me that this must depend upon the supplies of
clothing which the men receive. If they cannot be accommodated in this
instance, it will be difficult if not impossible to do it without effecting
their destruction.

I would take the liberty to mention that I feel myself in a delicate situation
with respect to the marquis La Fayette. -- He is extremely solicitous of having
a command equal to his rank, and professes very different ideas, as to the
purposes of his appointment, from those Congress have mentioned to me: -- he
certainly did not understand them. -- I do not know in what light they will
view the matter: but it appears to me, from a consideration of his illustrious
and importortant connections, -- the attachment which he has manifested for our
cause, -- and the consequences which his return in disgust might produce, --
that it will be advisable to gratify him in his wishes; and the more so, as
several gentlemen from France, who came over under some assurances, have gone
back disappointed in their expectations. -- His conduct with respect to them
stands in a favorable point of view, -- having interested himself to remove
their uneasiness, and urged the impropriety of their making any unfavorable
representations upon their arrivil at home: and in all his letters, he has
placed our affairs in the best situation he could. -- Besides, he is sensible,
discreet in his manners, has made great proficiency in our language, and, from
the disposition he discovered at the battle of Brandiwine, possesses a large
share of bravery and military ardor.

There is a French gentleman here, -- monsieur Vrigny, -- in whose favor the
marquis seems much interested. He assures me he is an officer of great merit,
and, from that motive and a regard to the service, wishes to see him promoted.
The rank he holds in France, and his present expectations, are contained in the
enclosed copy of a paper given me by the marquis, Monsieur Vrigny also has
honorable certificates of his services, nearly corresponding with the maquis's
account of them. -- If Congress are pleased to honor him with a commission in
the army of the states, I must try to employ him.

I took the liberty some short time ago to mention to Congress the situation of
the nine first-raised Virginia regiments, and the term for which they stand
engaged; and; considering that we should suffer greatly by the loss of so large
a part of our force which have been long inured to service, I thought it
advisable to consult the officers commanding them, upon the mode which should
appear to them best calculated to re-enlist them. They accordingly met, and
reported their sentiments in writing, a copy of which I have enclosed. -- I do
not know that expedients, more promising of success than those they have
pointed out, can be adopted. -- Congress will be pleased to give the matter
their earliest attention, and to favor me with their opinion by the first
opportunity, whether the indulgence and allowance they have proposed may be
granted. -- and, if any additional bounty may be given, what it shall be. --
The high sums paid for substitutes and draughts, of late, even in the militia
service, will make this necessary: for the soldiers, being well app rised of
that fact, will not be induced to engage again during the war or for three
years, for the usual premium.

I would also lay before Congress a remonstrance by the subaltern officers of
the Virginia line, founded on a reform I thought necessary to take place in the
regiments from that state. These, in their establishment, were made to consist
of ten companies, -- two more than were assigned to those of the states in
general. This, and the great disproportion between the officers and men,
induced me to reduce them to a level with the rest belonging to the continent,
in order to prevent, a considerable unnecessary expense. -- To effect this, no
new promotions are to be made in the two extra companies, viz. the ninth and
tenth, either to vacancies existing at the time of the regulation, or to any
future ones that may happen therein: and the subalterns are to remain in their
rank and command, till they can be promoted in the other eight companies, and
their men incorporated. -- This is what they complain of. -- (...) have made a
short state of facts, and wish Congress to determine (...) and the remonstrance
as they shall think proper.

At the request of governor Clinton I have transmitted a copy of his letter to
me, giving an account of general Vaughan's expedition up the North-river after
the capture of Fort-Montgomery, and the destruction committed by his troops in
burning Kingston and the houses and mills on the river. -- According to the
latest advices, they have returned again; and it is reported that they have
destroyed the barracks and forts, and gone to New York: -- but this is not
confirmed.

A few days ago, Mr. Franks of Philadelphia, agent for the British prisoners,
sent out six thousand continental dollars to Mr. Richard Graham of Virginia,
for the subsistence of the Hessian and other prisoners in that state. The
policy of suffering the enemy to support their prisoners with money which they
refuse themselves, and which they attempt to depreciate in every instance they
possibly can, appears to me very questionable, -- and the more so, as it may be
counterfeited. -- Besides, they have laid us under every difficulty they can
devise, as to our prisoners in their hands: -- nothing will do for their
support but hard money. -- If the enemy were obliged to furnish the same, the
quanity with us would be greater, and of course the means of relieving ours,
easier. I do not know what consequences a prohibition against receiving
continental money or the currency of any state from them might involve: I think
the subject is worthy of the consideration of Congress; and for that reason I
have mentioned it.

November 3. -- The report of the enemy's having destroyed the forts and
barracks on the North-river, and of their having returned to New York, is
confirmed. I this morning received a letter from general Putnam upon the
subject, a copy of which is transmitted. -- The information that they mean to
reinforce general How, I doubt not, is true: it has come through several
channels, and nothing is more probable. -- As to their having a further
expedition in view, it seems to be questionable: -- general Burgoyne's defeat,
and the eastern troops being ready to be employed in another way, are
circumstances against the measure.

Agreeable to my expectation, the Virginia militia are gone: so that we have
none now in aid of the continental troops, but those of this state mentioned in
the return, and a few from Maryland. I do not know what can or will be done to
obtain further reinforcements of them: but it appears to me, taking matters in
any point of light, that further aids should come from Virginia and Maryland:
for, should we be able to accommodate the continental forces with clothes so as
to carry on a winter campaign, their assistance will be material, either to
maintain a blockade, or in any decisive stroke we may attempt. And if they
cannot be so provided, and we should be obliged to retire into quarters, their
service will be still more necessary to assist in covering the country against
incursions for forage and provisions. The militia of this state, themselves,
supposing they should be tolerably vigorous in their exertions, will not be
equal to the task: at least it will be difficult, if not impracticable, for
them to do it. It is to be wished that such as can be drawn out may be engaged
to serve three months, or two at least (if it can be effected), after their
arrival in camp; and that a mode could be adopted to supply their places with
others at the expiration of their term, should the exigency of our affairs
require it. A time for their continuance should be fixed, or they will always
be uneasy and pushing off; and the longer circumstances will admit it to be,
the better: for, after the period recurs, for which they come. it will be
impossible to retain, them a moment. As to the number that should be required,
it is difficult to determine: however, it is likely it will fall short of the
requisition, as it ever has upon such occasions.

There is a report prevailing in camp, which has come through several channels,
that a successful expedition has been made upon Rhode Island, and eight hundred
prisoners taken, with several pieces of artillery, and a large quantity of
salt. -- I heartily wish it may be true: but at present it wants confirmation

Mr. Thompson's letter of the twenty-first ultimo, with its enclosures, came to
hand yesterday. I join Congress most sincerely in congratulations on our
important success in the surrender of general Burgoyne at the head of his
forces, and am happy they have received a confirmation of the event from
general Gates.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Marsh, Nov. 8, 1777. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to enclose you an extract a letter from major general
Dickinson, of the sixth instant, by which it appears that a reinforcement has
sailed from New York, either from general How or some other expedition. I have
not yet head whether any of the troops on their march from the northward have
yet crossed the North-river: but I hope they will be with me near as soon as
general Howe's reinforcement can arrive at Philadelphia.

There was a heavy firing of cannon all the day of the fifth, down the river;
and in the evening some musketry was heard; from whence we concluded that an
attack had been made upon Fort-Mifflin. But it turned out to be an attack made
by general Varnum, with a twelve and an eighteen-pounder fixed near Red-bank,
upon the enemy's ships. He thinks he damaged the Somerset of sixty-four guns
considerably, as she got on ground, and was for some time exposed to his fire.
The ships were obliged to quit their stations and fall lower down.

From a variety of accounts and circumstances, I am induced to believe that the
enemy are miditating a grand blow against Fort-Mifflin. I have put the place in
as good a state of defense as my present numbers will admit, and have directed
general Varnum to afford every further assistance in his power. I therefore
hope they will meet a warm reception whenever they make the attempt.

The military chest is again empty, and the army is unpaid for the months of
September and October, -- besides the draughts that are requisite for the
commissary and quarter-master-general's department. You will therefore be
pleased to direct a supply of cash to be sent on as expediously as possible.

I fear, from a letter which I have lately received from general Heath, that no
proper measures are taken to put up a supply of salt provisions for next
campaign, to the eastward. I have enclosed a copy of general Heath's letter to
Mr. Buchanan, the commissary-general of purchases, and have desired him to have
the matter looked into in time: but is of so much importance to the very
existence of the army, that I think it deserves the attention of Congress.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

To HENRY LAURENS Esquire, President of Congress.
Camp at White-Marsh, November 10, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your favors of the fourth and fifth instant,
with their several enclosures. Among those of the former, I found the
resolution you are pleased to allude to, respecting your appointment as
president. *Permit me, sir, to congratulate you upon this event, and to assure
you I have the most entire confidence that I shall experience in you during
your presidency the same politeness, and attention to the interests of the
states, that marked the conduct of your worthy predecessor.

With respect to the views of the navy-board for securing the frigates, the
situation of the army would not admit of a compliance with them, supposing they
would answer the end. I have therefore written to te board in the most pressing
terms, to have the frigates scuttled in such way that they may be raised when
it shall be necessary, and that in the mean time they may not be liable to
injury from floating ice. -- I see no measure so likely to secure them to us,
and against the enemy's attempts. -- I have been extremely fearful they would
have possessed and employed them, with the Delaware and their batteries, on the
rear of the galleys and the fort, while the ships below attacked in front. I
need not point out the probable consequences of such an event: they are too
obvious.

The resolves which you request to be communicated to the army shall be
published in general orders. -- The letters for commodore Hazlewood, etc. have
been put in a proper channel of conveyance.

As to the disposition of part of the northern army, my letter of the first,
continued to the third, contains my ideas upon the subject, and those my
general officers. I shall be sorry if the measures I have taken on this head
should interfere with or materially vary from any plans Congress might have had
in view. Their proceedings of the fifth, I presume, were founded on a
supposition that the enemy were still up the North-river, and garrisoning the
forts they had taken. -- This not being the case, and all accounts agreeing
that reinforcements to general How are coming from York, I hope the aides I
have required will be considered expedient and proper. Independent of the
latter consideration, I think our exertions and force should be directed to
effect general Howe's destruction if it is possible.

Among the various difficulties attenting the army the adjustment of rank is
not the least. This, -- owing to the several modes, the severel principles,
that have prevailed in granting commissions, -- is involving in great
perplexity. The officers of the Pennsylvania troops are in much confusion about
it: in many instances, those who were junior in rank, from local and other
circumstances, have obtained commissions older in date than those which were
granted afterward to officers, their superiors before. This, with many other
irregularies, has been and is the cause of great uneasiness: and, though
precedence of rank so claimed should not be supported in justice or upon any
principle, -- we find all, having the least pretext for the title, strenuous to
support it, and willing to hold a superiority. I was therefore induced to order
a board of officers to take the matter under consideration. The result,
respecting the field-officers of this state, I now enclose, and wish Congress
to adopt the regulation which the board have made, and to transmit me, by the
earliest opportunity, commissions dated according to their arrangement. At the
same time it may be proper that there should be a resolve vacating the
commissions they now have, and directing them to be delivered to me. Their
attention to this business, I trust, will be immediate: the disputes and
jealousies with the officers require it.

I have enclosed the memorial of colonel Portail and the other engineers for
their promotion, referred to me by the board of war for my sentiments. -- As to
the terms these gentlemen mentioned to have been proposed and agreed to when
they first arrived. I know nothing of them further than the memorial states. In
respect to their abilities and knowledge in their profession, I must observe
they have had no great opportunity of proving them since they were in our
service. However, I have reason to believe that they have been regularly bred
in this important branch of war, and that their talents, which have been
hitherto, as it were, dormant, want only a proper occasion to call them forth;
in which case, I have no doubt they would do themselves honor, and the states
essential service. -- It is of great importance, too, to consider the
practicability of replacing these gentlemen with persons equally qualified, if
they should quit the service; and how indispensable men of skill in this branch
of military science are to every army. While I am on this subject, I would take
the liberty to mention that I have been well informed that the engineer in the
northern army (Corieski, I think, his name is) is a gentleman of science and
merit. From the character I have had of him, he is deserving of notice too.

I would beg leave to mention that we are in great distress for want of money.
This will be more urgent every day: and it is probable there will be a great
deal of pay due to the troops coming to reinforce us. -- General Putnam writes
pressingly for a supply, and says he is in a most disagreeable situation for
the want of it. -- I must request the attention of Congress to this subject.

Your favor of the seventh came to hand this morning. I shall pay proper
attention to the enclosures. -- The rank of the officers of cavalry I will
attempt to have settled as soon as circumstances will admit.

I have nothing very interesting to communicate. -- The enemy have lost one of
their new floating batteries: it sunk in a little time after it was launched.
There has been a cannonade today: -- it still continues: -- I do not know the
occasion, but imagine it is between the ships and galleys.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp near White-Marsh, November 11, 1777. SIR,
The condition of the army for want of clothes and blankets, -- and the little
prospect I have of obtaining relief, according to the information I have
received from the board of war, -- occasion me to trouble you at this time. The
mode of seizing and forcing supplies from the inhabitants, I fear, would prove
very inadequate to the demands, while it would certainly embitter the minds of
the people, and excite perhaps a hurtful jealousy against the army. I have had
officers out for the purpose of purchasing and making voluntary collections of
necssaries; and, in a few instances, more coercive measures have been
exercised: but all these have proved of little avail: our distresses still
continue, and are becoming greater. I would therefore humbly submit it to the
consideration of Congress whether it may not be expedient for them to address
the several legislative and executive powers of the states on this subject as
early as possible, and in the most urgent terms. It appears to me, if they were
to appoint, under the authority of Congress, proper active agents, that many
necessaries might be procured in addition to those [ purchased] on public
account. Besides this, I think the exigency of our affairs requires that they
should resove on an immediate assessment to be made on the inhabitants. -- If
these modes were adopted, considerable aids might be derived, and in a way much
less exceptionable than that of seizing by the army. The assemblies in many
states, I believe, are now sitting; and I have no doubt, upon a requisition by
Congress, but they will give attention to the measure.

Enclosed you will receive a copy of a letter from general Putnam, which came
to hand today. You will find his and governor Clinton's opinion respecting the
fortifications necessary to be made for the security of the North-river. As
soon as I heard that Warner's militia were coming down to reinforce me, I
immediately wrote to countermand them, and directed that they should be
retained to carry on the necessary works during the time they are to serve. --
My letter on this subject was on the ninth instant. -- As to the other troops,
the propriety of bringing them here, I believe, is not to be questioned. We are
told through various channels that sir Henry Clinton is coming round with all
the force that can possibly be spared from New York; and it is said that those
on Staten-Island are withdrawn. It is added also that the inhabitants of the
former are greatly alarmed and disgusted, and that general Tryon is calling in
the militia of Long Island for the defense of the city. General Putnam's letter
will also evince the necessity there is for a large and immediate supply of
money being sent to the paymaster-general.

I have also the honor to transmit you a copy of a report by a board of general
officers, on the subject of rations, which I submit to the consideration of
Congress. The establishment and regulations which they propose appear to me to
be just and necessary, supposing the commissary's estimate to be right, which I
presume is the case, from the exorbitant price which has been and is now paid
for every species of provision. -- The necessity of an alteration in the former
value has been long urged by many officers; and, for want of it, several, I
believe, have left the service:

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. By advices just received, thirty-eight transports have arrived in
Delaware with troops. They were as high up as Reedy-Island yesterday. -- I
suppose they are from New York. -- The memorial of colonel Portail and the
other engineers, omitted to be enclosed in my letter of yesterday, is now
transmitted.

Notwithstanding the measures I have ventured to recommend on the subject of
clothing, I shall pursue every means in my power that will contribute to
procure a supply.



Headquarters, White-Marsh, Nov. 17, 1777. SIR,
I AM sorry to inform you that Fort-Mifflin was evacuated the night before
last, after a defense which does credit to the American arms, and will ever
reflect the highest honor upon the officers and men of the garrison. The works
were entirely beat down, every piece of cannon dismounted, and one of the
enemy's ships so near that she threw grenades into the fort, and killed men
upon the platforms, from her tops, before they quitted the island. This ship
had been cut down for the purpose, and so constructed that she made but a small
draught of water, and by these means warped in between Fort-Mifflin and
Province-Island. Some complaints are made that the captains of the galleys did
not sufficiently exert themselves to drive this vessel from her station: but I
shall not determine any thing upon the matter till a proper enquiry is made.

Nothing in the course of this campaign has taken up so much of the attention
and consideration of myself and all the general officers, as the possibility of
giving a further relief to Fort-Mifflin than what we had already afforded. Such
a garrison was thrown into it as has been found by experience capable of
defending it to the last extremity: and Red-bank, which was deemed essentially
necessary, not only for the purpose of keeping open the communication, but of
annoying the enemy's ships and covering our own fleet, has been possessed by a
considerable detachment from this army. The only remaining and practicable mode
of giving relief to the fort was by dislodging the enemy from Province-Island,
from whence they kept up an incessant fire. But this, from the situation of the
ground, was not to be attempted with any degree of safety to the attacking
party, without the whole or a considerable part of the army should be removed
to the west side of Schuylkill to support and cover it.

To account for this, you must be made acquainted with the nature of the
ground. In order to have made the attack upon Province-Island, the party
destined for that purpose, -- which should have been at least fifteen hundred,
-- must have marched down the Chester road as far as the Bell inn near Derby,
and thence, turning toward Delaware, must have proceeded about four miles
further through a neck of land, to the island. The enemy have a bridge at the
middle ferry upon Schuylkill, which is but four miles from the Bell inn;
consequently, by throwing a body of men over that bridge upon the first
discovery of our design, and marching down to the Bell, they would have
effectually cut off our detachment upon their return. -- It is true the
covering party might have consisted of a less number than the whole army: but
then those remaining upon this side the river would have been too few to have
been entrusted with all the artillery and stores of the army, within twelve
miles of the enemy.

There were many and very forcible reasons against a total remove to the west
side of Schuylkill. Leaving all our stores at Easton, Bethlehem, and Allentown,
uncovered, -- and abandoning several of our hospitals within reach of the
enemy, -- first presented themselves. Another, and in my opinion a more weighty
reason than either of the preceding, was the importance of supporting the post
at Red-bank, upon which that of Fort-Mifflin in a great measure depended, as
through it we sent in supplies of men, provision, and ammunition. The enemy,
sensible of this, endeavored to dislodge us from Red-bank on the twenty-second
of last month; which, as Congress have been informed, cost them four hundred
men.

Now, had our army been on the west side of Schuylkill, they might, without any
danger of an attack upon their lines, have thrown over of considerable a force
into Jersey, that they might have overpowered the garrison, and, by making
themselves masters of it, have reduced Fort-Mifflin by famine or want of
ammunition. Thus we should in all probability have lost both posts by one
stroke. -- They might also, by taking possession of the fords upon Schuylkill,
have rendered the junction of our northern reinforcements with us a very
difficult, if not an impracticable matter: and, should any accident have
happened to them, we should have stood a very poor chance of looking general
How in the face through the winter with an inferior army. We should finally
have thrown the army into such a situation, that we must inevitable have drawn
on a general engagement before our reinforcements arrived; which, considering
our disparity of numbers, would probably have ended with the most disagreeable
consequences.

It was therefore determined a few days ago to wait the arrival of the
reinforcement from the northward before any alteration could safely be made in
the disposition of the army: and I was not without hopes that the fort would
have held out till that time. -- That we might then have moved without
endangering the stores, I had-given orders for the removal of them, from the
places before mentioned, to Lebanon and other places in Lancaster county, which
is at any rate more safe and convenient than where they were.

As the keeping possession of Red-bank, and thereby still preventing the enemy
from weighing the chevaux-de-frise before the frost obliges their ships to quit
the river, has become a matter of the greatest importance, I have determined to
send down general St. Clair, general Knox, and baron Kalb, to take a view of
the ground, and to endeavor to form a judgment of the most probable means of
securing it. They will at the same time see how far it is possible for our
fleet to keep their station since the loss of Fort-Mifflin, and also make the
proper inquiry into the conduct of the captains of the galleys, mentioned in
the former part of this letter.

I am informed that it is matter of amazement, and that reflections have been
thrown out against this army, for not being more active and enterprising than,
in the opinion of some, they ought to have been. If the charge is just, the
best way to account for it, will be to refer you to the returns of our
strength, and those which I can produce of the enemy, and to the enclosed
abstract of the clothing now actually wanting for the army: and then I think
the wonder will be, how they keep the field at all in tents at this season of
the year. -- What stock the clothier-general has to supply this demand, or what
are his prospects, he himself will inform you, as I have directed him to go to
York-town to lay these matters before Congress. There are, besides, most of
those in the hospitals more bare than those in the field: -- many remain there
for want of clothes only.

Several general officers, unable to procure clothing in the common line, have
employed agents to purchase up what could be found in different parts of the
country. General Wayne, among others, has employed Mr. Zantzinger of Lancaster,
who has purchased to the amount of four thousand five hundred pounds, for which
he desires a draught upon the treasury-board. -- Enclosed you have a copy of
his letter. -- I am not clear whether this application should properly be made
to the treasury, or the clothier-general, who should charge the money to the
regiments for whom the clothes are, as so much advanced to them. If the latter
should appear the most proper mode, I will order it to be done.

I am anxiously waiting the arrival of the troops from the northward, who
ought, from the time they have had my orders, to have been here before this.
Colonel Hamilton, one of my aides, is up the North-river, doing all he can to
push them forward: but he writes me word that he finds many unaccountable
delays thrown in his way. However I am in hopes that many days will not elapse
before a brigade or two, at least, arrive. -- The want of these troops has
embarrassed all my measures exceedingly.

November 18. -- Your dispatches of the thirteenth and fourteenth have this
moment come to hand. They shall be attended to, and answered in my next.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Marsh, November 23, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your favors of the thirteenth and nineteenth
instant with their enclosures. -- I am well assured Congress have not been
inattentive to the necessities of the army: and that the deficiency in our
supplies, particularly in the article of clothing, has arisen from the
difficulty of importing, on account of the numerous fleet that line our coast.
However I am persuaded that considerable relief might be drawn from the
different states, were they to exert themselves properly. This I hope will be
the case as soon as they receive the pressing recommendations of Congress upon
the subject.

It has been the unvaried custom of the enemy, from the commencement of the
present contest, to try every artifice and device to delude the people. The
message through John Brown was calculated for this end. I am surprised Mr
Willing should suffer himself to be imposed on by such flimsy measures. He
knows that there is a plain obvious way for general and lord How to
communicate any proposals they wish to make, to Congress, without the
intervention of a second and third hand. But this would not suit their views.
-- I am sorry that Mr. Brown should be the bearer of the message; as, from the
character I have had of him, he is a worthy, well-disposed man. It has been
frequently mentioned that he had interested himself much in behalf of our
prisoners, and had afforded them every relief and comfort his circumstances
would allow him to give.

I have been endeavoring to effect an exchange of prisoners, from principles of
justice, and from motives of humanity: but at present I have no prospect of it.
Yet general How has assured our officers it was his wish, and, if it could not
be done, that he should readily agree to their release on parole. -- The
enclosed copies of my letters and his answer will show Congress what has passed
between us upon that subject; and at the same time, that I had remonstrated
against the severe and cruel treatment of the prisoners, and proposed the plan
of sending in a suitable person to inquire into the facts, before the receipt
of their resolution. Their sufferings, I am persuaded, have been great, and
shocking to humanity. I have called upon general How for redress, and an
explicit answer to my letter of the fourteenth. If I do not receive one by
tomorrow night, with the most positive and satisfactory assurances that a
proper conduct shall be observed toward them in future, we must retaliate,
however much we wish to avoid severity, and measures that bear the smallest
appearance of rigor or inhumanity.

Enclosed you will receive a list of sundry officers who have been cashiered
since the action of the fourth ultimo. -- I flatter myself that these examples
will involves many favorable and beneficial consequences. -- Besides these,
there were many more brought to trial, who were acquitted; among them, general
Maxwell, and general Wayne, -- the former for charges against him while he
commanded the light troops, -- the latter for charges against his conduct in
the attack made on his division, in the night of the twentieth of September.
The result of the court of inquiry against general Wayne not entirely exempting
him from censure in his own opinion, he requested a court martial; and, upon a
full and minute investigation of the charges against him, he was honorably
acquitted, and in terms of high respect.

I am sorry to inform Congress that the enemy are now in possession of all the
water defenses. -- Fort-Mifflin and that at Red-bank mutually depended on each
other for support; and the reduction of the former made the tenure of the
latter extremely precarious, if not impracticable. After the loss of
Fort-Mifflin, it was found Red-bank could derive no advantages from the galleys
and armed vessels -- (they could not maintain their station) -- and, in case of
investiture, the garrison could have no supplies, no retreat, nor any hope of
relief, but such as might arise from a superior force acting without on the
rear of the enemy, and dislodging them. Under these circumstances, the garrison
was obliged to evacuate it on the night of the twentieth instant, on the
approach of lord Cornwallis who had crossed the river from Chester with a
detachment. supposed to be about two thousand men, and formed a junction with
the troops lately arrived from New York, and those that had been landed before
at Billingsport.

From general Varnum's account, I have reason to hope that we saved most of the
stores, except a few heavy cannon: however I cannot be particular in this
instance. -- I am also to add, from the intelligence I have received, that most
if not all the armed vessels have been burned by our own people, except the
galleys, one brig, and two sloops, which are said to have run by the city. --
How far this might be founded in necessity, I am not able to determine; but I
suppose it was done under that idea, and an apprehension of their falling into
the enemy's hands if they attempted to pass up the river.

Upon the first information I had of lord Cornwallis's movement, I detached
general Huntington's brigade to join general Varnum, and, as soon as possible,
general, Green with his division; hoping that these, -- with Glover's brigade
which was on the march through Jersey, and which I directed to file off to the
left for the same purpose, -- and with such militia as could be collected, --
would be able to defeat the enemy's design, and to preserve the fort. But they
were so rapid in their advances, that our troops could not form a juction and
arrive in time to succor the garrison; which obliged them to withdraw.

General Green is still in Jersey; and when Glover's brigade joins him, if an
attack can be made on lord Cornwallis with a prospect of success, I am
persuaded it will be done. About a hundred and seventy of Morgan's corpse are
also gone to reinforce him.

Generals Poor and Patterson with their brigades, and colonel Bailey with
Learned's, are now in camp. The last arrived on friday evening, the other two
in the course of yesterday. I have not yet obtained returns of their strength;
but, from the accounts of the officers, they will amount in the whole to
twenty-three or twenty-four hundred rank and file. But I find many of them are
very deficient in the articles of shoes, stockings, breeches, and blankets. --
Besides these, about three hundred and fifty men, -- detachments from Lee's,
Jackson's, and Henley's regiments, -- have joined me.

Yesterday evening the enemy burned several houses in the neighborhood of
Philadelphia, and they have committed the most wanton spoil in many others.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, November 26, 1777. SIR,
I WAS yesterday morning honored with your favors of the twenty-second instant.
-- I wish the measures Congress have adopted may effectually suppress the
disturbances in the western department. Should they prove successful and the
savages and wicked deluded inhabitants receive a severe check, it is probable
they will not be induced again to take part against us, or at least for some
considerable time. Colonel Crawford set out yesterday evening, and will be with
Congress I expect, in the course of two or three days to take their commands.

I was much obliged by the foreign intelligence you were pleased to transmit
me: it is agreeable and interesting: and I heartily wish there may be an early
declaration of hostilities between France and Britain. From these advices,
things seem to be getting into a proper train for it: and it is not easily to
be conceived that it can be much longer delayed. However our expectations have
not been answered in this instance, and they may yet be held in suspense. The
political reasons, that lead to delay on the part of France, I do not perfectly
understand. As to Britain, her honor is lost in the contest with us, and the
most indignant insults will scarcely be able to draw her attention from her
present pursuits. -- The account of Mr. Lee having effected the purposes of his
embassy at the court of Berlin is of great importance, if it be true. In such
case, administration, however desirous they may be, will probably be
disappointed in their schemes of further mercenary aides against us.

I must take the liberty to request the decision of Congress on the case of the
nine first-raised Virginia regiments as early as circumstances will permit. If
the plan proposed for re-enlisting them is judged expedient, one capital
inducement to that end, suggested by the officers, will cease if it is longer
delayed. It is a matter of considerable importance, and of which I wish to be
satisfied as soon as possible. -- I should also be happy in their determination
respecting the marquis De la Fayette. He is more and more solicitous to be in
actual service, and is pressing in his applications for a command. -- I
ventured before to submit my sentiments upon the measure; and I still fear a
refusal will not only induce him to return in disgust, but may involve some
unfavorable consequences. -- There are now some vacant divisions in the army,
to one of which he may be appointed, if it should be the pleasure of Congress.
I am convinced he possesses a large share of that military ardor which
generally characterises the nobility of his country. He went to Jersey with
general Green, and I find he has not been inactive there. This you will
perceive by the following extract from a letter just received from general
Green.

"The marquis, with about four hundred militia and the rifle corpse, attacked
the enemy's piquet last evening, killed about twenty, wounded many more, and
took about twenty prisoners. The marquis is charmed with the spirited behavior
of the militia and rifle corpse: -- they drove the enemy about half a mile, and
kept the ground until dark. The enemy's piquet consisted of about three
hundred, and were reinforced during the skirmish. -- The marquis is determined
to be in the way of danger."

* * * I must request you to transmit me a number of bank commissions as soon
as you have an opportunity to do it. There are several vacancies yet to fill;
and the officers entitled to them are anxious to be appointed. The commissions
I want should be under your signature, and not Mr. Hancock's. I mention this,
lest you should send any of the latter that might remain. Those signed by you
will be competent to all cases: those by Mr Hancock, only to such as happened
during his presidency; and of these I have now some.

November 27. -- Enclosed you will receive a copy of general Howe's letter in
answer to mine of the fourteenth and twenty-third, which only came to hand last
night, and at an instant when I was giving the commissary of prisoners
instructions forthwith to confine a number of the officers in our hands, and to
put the privates under very different restrictions from those they have been
used to. -- I am in hopes the treatment of ours will be much better in future.
Mr. Boudinot will immediately take measures for releasing the officers on
parole, that we may relieve an equal number of ours. I should have been happy
to have effected a general exchange, or a partial one: but general How will
not upon any terms but those he has ever insisted on.

The enemy have got up several of their ships to the city. It is likely they
have found a passage through the chevaux-de-frise, or they may have removed
them.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Marsh, December 1, 1777. SIR,
ON saturday I had the honor to receive your favor of the twenty-sixth ultimo
with its enclosures. -- The resolve of the twenty-fifth I have bulished in
orders, agreeable to direction, and shall be happy if Congress can fall upon
measures to render the situation of the officers and soldiery more eligible
than what it now is. At present it is truly distressing: and, unless some means
can be devised to support them more comfortably, we shall have to apprehend the
most alarming consequences. The officers, or at least a large proportion of
them, as well as the men, are in a most disagreeable condition as to clothing,
and without any certain prospect of relief: and, what is still more painful, --
if perchance they have an opportunity of purchasing (which is seldom the case),
they have the mortification to find themselves totally incompetent to it, from
the depreciation of our money, and the exorbitant prices demanded for all
articles in this way. -- This is the source of great uneasiness, of
indifference to the service, and of repeated (I may say, daily) applications to
leave it, and these too by as good officers as are in the American line.

In respect to promotions for merit and intrepidity, I would beg leave to
observe, that, though these are proper considerations to found them upon, yet
they should be made with the greatest caution and attention, and only in cases
of the most eminent and distinguished services. Every promotion or rise out of
common course cannot fail to excite uneasiness in a greater or lesser degree:
and nothing will reconcile them to the army my at large, and particularly the
officers more immediately affected by them, -- but where the causes are known
and acknowledged. This I mention from my wishes to promote the public interest,
from my knowledge that harmony is essential to this end, and from no other
motive whatever.

Before the receipt of your favor, I do not recollect to have heard of John
Simper's case. His brother has not been with me. As soon as he arrives, I shall
give directions for him to be released from his present confinement, and to be
forwarded to Cecil county.

I have nothing material to inform Congress of. -- Lord Cornwallis and the
detachment under his command (mentioned in my last) returned from Jersey on
thursday. -- We had reason to expect an attack since, from our advices from the
city, but have been disappointed. -- General Green has also joined me with all
the troops that were with him, except Huntington's brigade, which will be in
today.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Marsh, Dec. 10, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to inform you, that, in the course of last week, from a
variety of intelligence, I had reason to expect that general How was preparing
to give us a general action. Accordingly, on thursday night he moved from the
city with all his force, except a very inconsiderable part left in his lines
and redoubts, -- and appeared the next morning on Chesnut-hill, in front of,
and about three miles distant from, our right wing. As soon as their position
was discovered, the Pennsylvania militia were ordered from our right, to
skirmish with their light advanced parties; and I am sorry to mention that
brigadier-general Irvine who led them on had the misfortune to be wounded and
to be made prisoner. -- Nothing more occurred on that day.

On friday night, the enemy changed their ground, and moved to our left, within
a mile of our line, where they remained quiet and advantageously posted the
whole of the next day. On sunday they inclined still further to our left; and,
from every appearance, there was reason to apprehend they were determined on an
action. -- In this movement, their advanced and flanking parties were warmly
attacked by colonel Morgan and his corpse, and also by the Maryland militia
under colonel Gist. Their loss I cannot ascertain: but I am informed it was
considerable, having regard to the number of the corpse who engaged them. --
About sunset after various marches and counter-marches, they halted; and I
still supposed, from their disposition and preceding maneuvers, that they
would attack us in the night or early the next morning: but in this I was
mistaken.

On monday afternoon they began to move again, and, instead of advancing, filed
off from their right: and the first certain account that I could obtain of
their intentions was that they were in full march toward Philadelphia by two
or three routes. -- I immediate detached light parties after them to fall upon
their rear: but they were not able to come up with them.

The enemy's loss, as I have observed, I cannot ascertain. One account from the
city is that five hundred wounded had been sent in; another is that eighty-two
wagons had gone in with men in this situation. These, I fear, are both
exaggerated, and not to be depended upon. -- We lost twenty-seven men in
Morgan's corpse, killed and wounded, besides major Morris, a brave and gallant
officer, who is among the latter. Of the Maryland militia there were also
sixteen or seventeen wounded. I have not received further returns yet.

I sincerely wish that they had made an attack, as the issue, in all
probability, -- from the disposition of our troops, and the strong situation of
our camp, -- would have been fortunate and happy. At the same time I must add,
that reason, prudence, and every principle of policy, forbad us quitting our
post to attack them. Nothing but success would have justified the measure: and
this could not be expected from their position.

The constant attention and watching I was obliged to give the enemy's
movements would not allow me to write before: and this I believe was the less
material, as I have reason to think your committee who were in camp most of the
time, and who are now here, transmitted an account of such occurrences as they
deemed important in any degree. The first cause too, sir, and my engagements
with the committee previous to the coming out of the enemy, will, I trust,
sufficiently apologize for my not acknowledging before the honor of your favors
of the thirtieth ultimo and the first instant, which came to hand in due order
and time.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Valley-Forge, January 2, 1778. SIR,
I TAKE the liberty of introducing major John Clarke, the bearer of this, to
your notice. He entered the service at the commencement of the war, and has for
some time past acted as aid-de-camp to major general Green. He is active,
sensible, and enterprising, and has rendered me very great assistance since the
army has been in Pennsylvania, by procuring me constant and certain
intelligence of the motions and intentions of the enemy. -- It is somewhat
uncertain whether the state of the major's health will admit of his remaining
in the military line: if it should, I may perhaps have occasion to recommend
him in a more particular manner to the favor of Congress at a future time. At
present, I can assure you that if you should, while he remains in the
neighborhood of York, have any occasion for his services, you will find him not
only willing but very capable of executing any of your commands.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, January 5, 1778. SIR,
I YESTERDAY evening had the honor of your favor of the first instant, with its
several enclosures. The letter you allude to, from the committee of Congress
and board of war, came to hand on saturday morning: but it does not mention the
regulations adopted for removing the difficulties and failures in the
commissary line. I trust they will be vigorous, or the army cannot exist. It
will never answer, to procure supplies of clothing or provision by coereive
measures: -- the small seizures made of the former a few days a ago in
consequence of the most pressing and absolute necessity, -- when that, or to
dissolve, was the alternative, -- excited the greatest alarm and uneasiness
even among our best and warmest friends. Such procedures may give a momentary
relief; but, if repeated, will prove of the most pernicious consequence.
Besides spreading disaffection, jealousy, and fear in the people, they never
fail, even in the most veteran troops under the most rigid and exact
discipline, to raise in the soldiery a disposition of licentiousness, to
plunder and robbery, -- difficult to suppress afterward, and which has proved
not only ruinous to the inhabitants, but, in many instances, to armies
themselves. -- I regret the occasion that compelled us to the measure the other
day; and shall consider it among the greatest of our misfortunes, if we should
be under the necessity of practicing it again.

I had received from the board of war a copy of the resolutions of the
twenty-ninth ultimo, and published such parts in orders as were directed. I
shall endeavor as far as possible, to carry the intention of Congress into
execution, respecting the extra pay, and to prevent any from receiving it, who
do not come under their description. -- The three packets with commissions came
safe to hand.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
I am now under the necessity of keeping several parties from the army
threshing grain, that our supplies may not fail: -- but this will not do. -- As
to meet, our stock is trifling, not being sufficient for more than two days, if
so long, with the most sparing economy.



Valley-Forge, January 9, 1778. SIR,
I YESTERDAY evening had the honor to receive your favor of the fifth instant,
with its enclosures. -- The power Congress has been pleased to vest me with,
for appointing aides-de-camp, I shall use with economy, and I will not appoint
more at any time than shall be necessary and essential to advance the public
interest. Any future appointments that may be material will be made out of the
line of the army, if circumstances will allow it. In general this has been the
case.

The proceedings of Congress for the detention of general Burgoyne and army, or
rather suspending their embarkation, till the convention of Saratoga is
explicitly ratified and notified by the court of Britain, shall remain secret
here till they are duly announced by Congress. -- This procedure, when known to
the general, will chagrin him much: for I learn by a letter from general Heath,
that the refusal to let his troops embark at Rhode Island or in the Sound had
given him some uneasiness. -- I have nothing of importance to communicate; and
have only to add that I have the honor to be, with great respect, etc.

G. W.
P. S. The great diversity of opinions prevailing, as to the operation which
the resolves of the thirtieth ultimo and first instant should have, which gave
a month's extra pay, makes it necessary for me to request Congress to describe
with certainty and precision the persons who they intended should be the
particular objects of their bonevolence. Without this, I am certain I shall not
be able to execute the resolves according to their intention, and in a manner
that will be agreeable to the army.

If such officers and men as were in camp when the resolves were passed, and
who continue the whole winter, are the only objects to be benefited, it is
urged that many who have discharged their duty with fidelity, -- who have
experienced a severe campaign to that time or till a few days before, -- who
may be now out of camp, and yet be here in the course of the winter, -- will be
excluded. For example, all officers and men on furlough, though they should
have been long from their homes before, -- perhaps much longer in many
instances, than many who remain, -- and whose private necessities oblige them
to be absent, -- those who have fallen sick from their services, and who are in
hospitals or in the country, -- detachments on command, -- these would be
excluded. Such discriminations, I believe, will give great disgust and
uneasiness. -- It is difficult, in cases of this nature, to draw a proper line
of distinction, and impossible to do it in such a way as to give satisfaction.

I do not mean to enlarge upon the subject: my only wish is to have it
precisely ascertained, who are to be included and paid, and who are not, under
the resolves, that I may not on the one hand act contrary to the public
intention, and on the other give cause of complaint, and perhaps do wrong to
individuals.

Knowing the difficulty of drawing a proper line, and the disgust and
murmurings that ever attend discriminations, -- were I to advise upon the
subject, only such officers and men should be excluded (since extra pay has
been determined on) as are absent from camp without regular authority, or such
as may abuse indulgencies regularly obtained.

It has been observed by some, and perhaps with propriety, that there are
officers and men now in camp, or who may be shortly in, who have no superior
claim to merit, -- whose affairs are not so pressing, or who have already had
indulgencies, -- or who, from their being nearer their friends and connections,
have had opportunities of seeing them frequently, of ordering their concerns,
and visiting their homes once, twice, or perhaps oftener in the campaign. --
whilst they who were more remote were precluded from any of these advantages,
and were constantly on duty. These considerations will have their weight in the
scale of disgust with the parties interested. -- For my part, though the
resolves were founded in principles of generosity, -- were intended to reward
merit, and promote the service, -- from the difficulties attending the
execution, I wish they had never been made, especially as I believe officers
and men would in a little time have become tolerably well reconciled to their
quarters.


I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, January 12, 1778. SIR,
AS I do not recollect with precision whether any, or what resolutions have
been made by Congress respecting captures by the army or detachments of it, and
not having all their proceedings with me, with which I have been honored from
time to time to assist my enquiries upon the subject, -- I must take the
liberty to request that they will determine, and favor me with their decisions
upon, the following points:

1. What articles captured are to be considered as public property?

2. Whether articles captured by parties or detachments, not determined public
property, are to be distributed or sold for the benefit of the army at large,
or are to be considered as the sole and exclusive right of the captors?

3. If, in general instances, such articles as are taken, and which are not
considered public property, are determined to be the sole and exclusive right
of the captors, -- are stationary detachments, who, from their situation, have
much more than a common chance of making prizes, to be considered upon the same
footing?

4. If there is to be a distinction between stationary and other detachments,
-- and the former are denied an exclusive right to the captures they make, --
what proportion of the articles are they to have?

I have been induced to state the above questions on account of some
difficulties that have arisen respecting the prize taken by the detachment at
Wilmington under general Smallwood, that the same may be determined, and
certain principles established, to govern in like and future cases. -- In the
instance of this prize, as the baggage taken (from general Smallwood's and the
officers' representation) will be but inconsiderable when divided among
themselves, I have consented that they shall have it at a just appraisement and
distribution, and have directed him to have the whole, and the value, properly
inventoried, that such order may be made respecting the latter, as the
decisions of Congress may justify and point out. I have also directed the sale
of the brig, as I understand some offers have been made for her, and as her
situation may be considered hazardous and precarious.

Besides the brig taken at Wilmington, a vessel has stranded at Reedy-Island
with goods on board. It is said a quantity of rum, some bales of cloth, a
number of hats, and some other articles (all wanted by the army), have been
taken out of her by the militia, particularly those of Kent county. These
general Smallwood is endeavoring to find, that they may be of public benefit.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, January 13, 1778. SIR,
THIS will be delivered to you by the chevalier De Mauduit du Plessis, who was
among the first French officers that joined the army of the United States. The
gallant conduct of this young gentlemen at Brandiwine, Germantown, and his
disdinguished services at Fort-Mercer where he united the offices of engineer
and commandant of artillery, entitle him to the particular notice of Congress.
-- He made several judicious alterations in the works at Red-bank, showed great
good conduct during the action in which the Hessians were repulsed, and was
spoken of, in consequence, in terms of the highest applause, by the commanding
officer of the post. -- After the evacuation was determined upon, he became the
means of saving some valuable artillery and stores, and cheerfully undertook,
as volunteer, the hazardous operation of blowing up the magazine, etc. without
the apparatus usually provided upon such occasions. -- I must further add in
monsieur Du Plessis' favor, that he possesses a degree of modesty not always
found in men who have performed brilliant actions. It is with pleasure
therefore that I recommend it to Congress to grant him a brevet of
lieutenant colonel, -- a reward due to his merit, and which will not have the
inconvenience of occasioning any dissatisfaction in the corpse to which he
belongs.

As some particular circumstances have prevented monsieur Du Plessis waiting
upon Congress sooner, I hope there will be no difficulty in antedating the
bre^et, so that the recompense may more immediately follow the services which
he has done. At the same time, that there may not be any uneasiness on the part
of monsieur Fleury whom Congress have been pleased to reward in the same way,
and as their times of service are nearly equal in France, I would propose that
monsieur Du Plessis' brevet should bear the same date, viz. the twenty-sixth of
November.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, January 31, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE been honored with your several favors of the fourteenth, nineteenth,
twenty-second and twenty-fifth instant, in due order, with their enclosures,
which shall have my attention. My application in preparing and digesting
matters for the consideration of the committee who are now in camp, prevented
me acknowledging them before. -- The packet for governor Livingston, which
accompanied the first two, I transmitted him the next day by a careful hand,
and hope it got safe to him.

The enclosed copy of a letter and memorial from general Forman I would take
the liberty of laying before Congress. -- Supplying the army with salt is a
matter of infinite importance; and if it can be accomplished, it is very much
to be desired. -- How far general Forman may succeed in his experiments, I
cannot determine: but, from every account, there is a favorable prospect of his
manufacturing a considerable quantity of this necessary and essential article.
-- For the greater security of the works against the enemy's tenders, etc. he
prays to be furnished with a guard of fifty men. His requisition is submitted
to Congress; and they will be pleased to determine upon it in such manner as
they may think proper.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, February 3, 1778. SIR,
ON the.......ultimo I had the honor to receive your favor of the
twenty-seventh with the copies alluded to. -- As the proceedings of Congress in
this instance seem to imply that our unfortunate people in the hands of the
enemy are to be victualled by us, I have only to wish that the supplies may be
constant and plentiful. I have transmitted your letter to Mr. Boudinot who is
out of camp, and have requested his most pointed attention to the business. I
have also written to general How upon the occasion, and enclosed him one of
the copies. -- In my next I shall take the liberty of transcribing you a copy
of my letter to him on this head, and of some others which have lately passed
between us.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I wish a supply of money to be sent as soon as possible. Our distresses
for want of it are not easily to be described. -- What Mr. Palfrey brought with
him was not sufficient to pay the troops for November, by two hundred and fifty
or three hundred thousand dollars. The demands were immense, most of the
eastern troops having had four or five months' pay due to them, and some, more.
The army now in general has three months' pay in arrear, exclusive of the
month's extra pay; and, besides this, the quartermaster is pressing for large
draughts for the purposes of his department, though he has received a
proportion of the money which came with Mr. Palfrey.



Valley-Forge, February 8, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your favor of the third instant, and with its
enclosures.

As general M'Dougall's late severe illness and present feeble state will not
permit him to proceed on the intended excursion into Canada, baron De Kalb will
follow the marquis agreeable to his wish and the direction of Congress.

According to the promise contained in my last, I take the liberty to transmit
you copies of such letters as have lately passed between general How and
myself.

February 12. -- Since writing the above I have received another letter from
general How, of the fifth instant, a copy of which, and of my answer, you have
also enclosed. By these you will perceive that he has proposed a general
exchange of prisoners, and that I have acceded to it. -- I have written to Mr.
Boudinot, commissary in this line, requiring his return to camp; and shall give
him directions to pursue the most speedy measures for accomplishing this
business, so interesting to the unhappy officers and men in general Howe's
hands, and to the cause of humanity. -- There are some other matters, as you
will discover, which I could not enter upon.

The situation of the affairs of the army has not till lately made it
convenient to go into the inquiry directed by the resolve of the twenty-eighth
of November, of the losses of the Forts Montgomery and Clinton in the state of
New York, and of Fort-Mifflin on Delaware. With respect to the two former, it
happens that almost all the principal officers acting in that quarter were in
some way or other so far concerned in the affair, as to make them improper for
prosecuting the inquiry; I therefore propose to send officers from this army.
If his health will permit, I should wish general M'Dougall to preside. His
thorough knowledge of those posts and all their connections qualifies him in a
peculiar manner for the purpose. -- I have written to him on the subject.

With respect to Fort-Mifflin, the inquiry involves very extensive
considerations, and more or less, affects almost all the general officers in
this army, whose advice and concurrence in the measures taken make them in some
degree parties. The mode, in my opinion, most unexceptionable, to be pursued,
is for Congress to authorize a committee of their own body, or to delegate any
other persons they may choose to entrust, not connected with the operations of
this army, to go into the business.

February 14. -- Your several favors of the seventh, and that of the eighth
instant, were duly received yesterday evening. -- As soon as circumstances will
admit, I shall appoint a court martial in the case directed, and shall notify
the parties concerned of the same. -- The oath, which Congress have prescribed
to be taken by the officers of the army, I shall publish in general orders, and
the mode how it is to be done, with directions about the certificates. -- I
shall extend colonel Dyer's furlough to the first of April, as required.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Valley-Forge, February 27, 1778. SIR,
I AM now to acknowledge the honor of your several favors of the eightenth,
nineteenth, and twenty-first instant, which, with their respective enclosures,
have been duly received.

In compliance with the resolution of Congress of the fifth instant,
transmitted in your letter of the seventh, I was about to take measures for
appointing a court martial and bringing on the trials which they direct. But on
recurring to the papers you were pleased to send me, I do not find that the
committee have made any particular charges against the officers who are to be
the objects of trial. It was probably the intention of Congress that these
charges should be laid by me. But as I might err in doing it, and not fully
correspond with their views in the matter, -- especially as it would require
considerable time and thought to make myself sufficiently acquainted with it
from the papers collected, -- I should think it would be most advisable for
Congress to state explicitly the charges they wish to have exhibited against
the officers respectively; and then the business may be proceeded on with
propriety.

Besides the above reasons which operate generally against my exhibiting the
charges, -- in the particular instance of general Schuyler, it is impossible
for me to do it, as I do not know what instructions he had received from
Congress from time to time as to the objects of his command, nor precisely what
these were. These appear to me necessary to be known, and essential to carry on
a prosecution against him.

When Congress shall have arranged these points, and are pleased to honor me
with them, I will pursue the speediest measures to bring on the trials. -- The
sooner this can be done, the better, as some of the parties are extremely
anxious, and strongly importune it.

Baron Steuben has arrived at camp. He appears to be much of a gentleman, and,
as far as I have had an opportunity of judging, a man of military knowledge,
and acquainted with the world.

The enclosed extract of a letter from general Putnam will show how great the
distresses are in that quarter for want of money. He has described their
necessities so fully, that it is unnecessary for me to add upon the subject: I
shall only observe that his account is more than justified by many other
letters, and that I am persuaded the earliest possible supply will be
forwarded, that the very important and interesting works carrying on there may
not be the least retarded.

I am under some embarrassments respecting the thirteenth Virginia regiment. It
was raised on the west side of the Allegany and toward Pittsburg, with
assurances from the officers, it is said, that the men should not be drawn from
that quarter. This circumstance, added to the disturbances by the Indians, and
the exposed situation of their families, has been the cause of great
desertions, and is at present the source of much uneasiness, and the more so,
as part of the regiment was never marched from thence. -- I think the whole
should be united either here or there, and wish Congress to direct me upon the
subject. -- At the same time that their case, if truly represented, seems to be
hard, and to merit the indulgence they claim, I would observe that the twelfth
regiment from the western parts of the same state, and the eighth and twelfth
Pennsylvania from the frontier counties of this, have similar pretensions, and
might become uneasy, and apply for a like indulgence.

Agreeable to the directions of Congress, I shall send a major general to
Rhode Island though the number of officers here of this rank, from one cause
and another, is greatly reduced, and more so than it ought to be in point of
policy.

Our loss of matrosses, the last campaign, in killed and wounded, was
considerable; and it has not been a little increased this winter by desertions
from colonel Proctor's corpse. From these circumstances, we are very weak in
this line; and I request that Congress will be pleased to order colonel
Harrison's regiment of artillery to march from Virginia as early as the roads
will admit, and join this army.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, March 7, 1778. SIR,
I TAKE the liberty of transmitting you copies of three, letters from general
How, of the fourteenth and twenty-first ultimo, and of the second instant,
with their enclosures. The unhappy violation of the flag of truce has laid us
under no small embarrassments, and has afforded the enemy good grounds for
complaint and triumph at the same time. This however is the natural
consequence, and must ever be the case, where different powers counteract each
other in matters of the most delicate importance. There are some circumstances
attending this affair, which it may possibly be in the power of Congress to
throw light upon. -- If they can, I shall be obliged by their assistance.

March 8. -- In consequence of the letters which have lately passed between
general How and myself, -- particularly those of the fifth and tenth ultimo,
copies of which I had the honor to transmit you in mine of the eighth,
continued to the fourteenth, -- I was about to send commissioners to meet those
appointed by general How for adjusting the disputed points between us, carry
into execution an exchange of prisoners, and improving the old cartel, as far
as it might be practicable, for their better accommodation in future. This
meeting was to be on the tenth instant: but, yesterday morning, Dunlap's paper
of the fourth being put into my hands, I found that a resolution had been made
the twenty-sixth of February, calling for all accounts against prisoners in our
hands, and declaring that no exchange should take place, till the balance due
thereon to the United States is discharged. Some of the states are not required
to exhibit their claims till the first of June. -- The time that would be taken
to adjust them, and make a delivery of the prisoners, would more than exhaust
all the ensuing summer.

This resolution I cannot consider as an intended infraction of my engagements
with general How: yet its operation is diametrically opposite both to the
spirit and letter of the propositions made on my part, and acceded to on his. I
supposed myself fully authorized "by the instructions and intentions" of
Congress to act as I did: and I now conceive that the public as well as my own
personal honor and faith are pledged for the performance.

By the direction of Congress, I in the first instance stipulated with general
How an exchange of prisoners, -- officer for officer, of equal rank, --
soldier for soldier, -- and citizen for citizen. This agreement they have ever
approved, and repeatedly declared their willingness to carry into execution. --
Their resolution of the twenty-fourth of March last empowered me (on condition
of general Lee being declared exchangeable) not only " to proceed" to the
exchange of prisoners according to the principles and regulations of the cartel
before agreed on, but also to enter into such further principles and
regulations as should appear to me most proper and advantageous. A subsequent
resolution of the sixth of June holds forth the same language, sanctions my
conduct and reasonings in the negociations about that time on the subject, and
directs an adherence to them. -- No event has occurred since that period, by
which I could conclude there was any alteration in the views of Congress: -- so
far from it, that all my late letters breathing the same spirit with the
former, and pointedly signifying my wish to bring about a general exchange, --
if not with an express, -- at least met with a tacit approbation. -- General
How at length by profession, if not in reality, is willing to perform the
agreement on the conditions required by me, and confirmed by them.

It may be said, that, with whatever powers I was originally vested to
negotiate an exchange, the resolution of the nineteenth of December last was an
abridgment of them, so far as to annex a new condition, -- the settlement and
payment of accounts previous to its taking place. -- I had no conception of
this being the case in the present instance, however the letter may warrant the
construction. Besides the common principle of preventing the inconveniences
necessarily resulting from allowing the enemy to make their payments in paper
currency, I had reason to imagine that general Burgoyne's army was more
particularly the object of the concluding clause. This interpretation I the
more readily adopted; for, exclusive of the affairs of that army, I verily
believed, that, from the confused defective state of our accounts relating to
prisoners, there would be a considerable balance in favor of Mr. How. Nor was
the situation of our accounts the only reason for this belief: -- the prisoners
in our hands, especially those westward of the Delaware, as I am informed, have
been in a great measure supported by their own labor, and at the expense of the
enemy, who have had agents constantly among us. -- If this is the case, the
reason of the resolve not applying, the effect ought not of course.

But perhaps it may be thought contrary to our interest to go into an exchange,
as the enemy would derive more immediate advantage from it then we should. --
This I shall not deny: but it appeared to me, that, on principles of genuine,
extensive policy, independent of the considerations of compassion and justice,
we were under an obligation not to elude it. I have the best evidence that an
event of this kind is the general wish of the country: -- I know it to be the
wish of the army; and no one can doubt that it is the ardent wish of the
unhappy sufferers themselves. We need only consult the tide of humanity, and
the sympathies natural to those connected by the cements of blood, interest,
and a common dread of evil, to be convinced that the prevailing current of
sentiment demands an exchange. If the country, the army, and even the prisoners
themselves, had a precise idea of our circumstances, and could be fully
sensible of the disadvantages that might attend the giving our enemy a
considerable reinforcement without having an equivalent, they might perhaps be
willing to make a sacrifice of their feelings to the motives of policy. But
they have not this knowledge, and cannot be entrusted with it; and their
reasonings, of necessity, will be governed by what they feel.

Were an opinion once to be established (and the enemy and their emissaries
know very well how to inculcate it, if they are furnished with a plausible
pretext), that we designedly avoided an exchange, it would be a cause of
dissatisfaction and disgust to the country and to the army, -- of resentment
and desperation to our captive officers and soldiers: -- to say nothing of the
importance of not hazarding our national character but upon the most solid
grounds, especially in our embryo state, from the influence it may have on our
affairs abroad, -- it may not be a little dangerous to beget in the minds of
our own countrymen a suspicion that we do not pay the strictest observance to
the maxims of honor and good faith.

It is prudent to use the greatest caution not to shock the notions of general
justice and humanity, universal among mankind as well in a public as a private
view. In a business on the side of which the passions are so much concerned as
in the present, men would be readily disposed to believe the worst, and cherish
the most unfavorable conclusions. Were the letters that, have passed between
general How and myself from first to last, and the proceedings of Congress on
the same subject, to be published with proper comments, it is much to be
feared, -- if the exchange should be deferred till the terms of the last
resolve were fulfilled, -- that it would be difficult to prevent our being
generally accused with a breach of good faith. Perhaps it might be said, that,
while the enemy refused us justice, we fondly embraced the opportunity to be
loud, persevering, incessant in our claims; but the moment they were willing to
render it, we receded from ourselves, and started new difficulties. -- This, I
say, might be the reasoning of speculative minds; and they might consider all
our professions as mere professions; or, at best, that interest and policy were
to be the only arbiters of their validity.

Imputations of this nature would have a tendency to unnerve our operations, by
diminishing that respect and confidence which are essential to be placed in
those who are at the head of affairs either in the civil or military line.
This, added to the prospect of hopeless captivity, would be a great
discouragement to the service. The ill consequences of both would be immense,
by increasing the causes of discontent in the army, which are already too
numerous, and many of which are in a great measure unavoidable, -- by
fortifying that unwillingness which already appears too great, toward entering
into the service, and of course impeding the progress both of draughting and
recruiting, -- by dejecting the courage of the soldiery, from an apprehension
of the horrors of captivity, -- and finally by reducing those, whose lot it is
to drink the bitter cup, to a despair which can only find relief by renouncing
their attachments and engaging with their captors. These effects have already
been experienced in part from the obstacles that have lain in the way of
exchanges: but if these obstacles were once to seem the result of system, they
would become ten-fold. -- Nothing has operated more disagreeably upon the minds
of the militia than the fear of captivity, on the footing it has hitherto
stood. -- What would be their reasonings, if it should be thought to stand upon
a worse?

If a present temporary interest is to be a ruling principle, it is easy to
prove that an exchange can never take place. The constitution of our army in
respect to the term of service for which our men engage, and the dependence we
are obliged to place on the militia, must forever operate against us in
exchanges, and forbid an equality of advantages. Should it be said that there
are times when it might be more peculiarly unequal and injurious, and that the
present is such on account of the weak condition of our army, -- I answer that
the delay necessarily involved in the previous negotiation on the subject, in
delivering the prisoners from time to time in small numbers and receiving
others in their stead, and the mode of delivery at different places, will
nearly bring the matter to the point we could wish, and give us leisure to
reinforce this army (if it is to be done at all), so as to obviate in a great
measure the ill consequences apprehended.

But if the argument of interest on a partial scale be pursued as far as it
will go, not only the general consideration thrown out above, but special ones
apposite to every situation, will present themselves, that we ought not to
exchange: -- now we ought not, because our army is weak! -- when the season is
more advanced, and it is time for the campaign to open, we ought not, because
our army may be strong, and it will be our business to avail ourselves of our
own strength and the enemy's weakness, to strike some decisive blow! -- if
they, by the protection of their shipping and impregnable works, should be able
to baffle our attempts till the period of reinforcements from Europe arrive, it
will surely then not be our interest to add numbers and strength to an enemy
already sufficiently numerous and strong! -- Thus, by a parity of reasoning,
the golden era will never come, which is to relieve the miseries of captivity.
Our service must become odious: those who are out of it will endeavor to keep
so; and those who are in it will wish to get out of it: every prisoner the
enemy makes will be his soldier rather than submit to a rigorous and despairing
confinement.

If we do not seize the present propitious moment when the necessities of the
enemy press them to reasonable terms, to form and establish a liberal cartel,
it is not impossible, in the vicissitudes and reverses of war, that a time may
come when we should wish we had embraced it, and interest may strongly (...)
enemy to decline it, except on the most unequal conditions. True policy, as
well as good faith, in my opinion, binds us to improve the occasion.

There are however some ambiguities in general Howe's conduct, which require
explanation, and ought to put us upon our guard. -- I determined to make the
affair of citizens, -- viz. to procure an exemption from captivity for them, if
possible, -- or, if not, (since it cannot now be demanded as a matter of right)
to fix their exchangeability upon the easiest and most unequivocal foundation.
-- an indispensable preliminary to any further procedure; and at the same time
to secure the exchange of general Lee and all other officers who have been the
particular objects of exception.

The interview intended between general Howe's commissioners and those on our
part on the tenth instant is now postponed. I cannot doubt that Congress, in
preservation of the public faith and my personal honor, will remove all
impediments that now oppose themselves to my engagements, and that they will
authorize me, through commissioners appointed for the purpose, to negociate a
more extensive and competent cartel, upon such principles as may appear
advantageous and founded in necessity, -- any resolutions heretofore to the
contrary notwithstanding; and I must request that they will favor me with their
answer by the earliest opportunity.

The work, from its nature, will be difficult. Two parties are concerned, whose
interests are more than opposite in a common view. -- We shall endeavor to act
for the best, and to promote the public service as far as possible, though we
may not be able to answer the expectations of all. But it should be remembered,
that, although general Howe's want of men affords a prospect of favorable
terms, yet he will not be disposed to sacrifice to it all considerations of
general advantage in a contract of such a nature; and it is not even to be
hoped that it can take place except on principles of mutual benefit.

I persuade myself that the freedom I have taken in delivering my sentiments so
fully upon this occasion will readily be excused, as it proceeds from a desire
to place the motives of my conduct in a just point of view, and from an opinion
of duty that led me to a free discussion of a subject, which considered in all
its lights, will appear to comprehend consequences of the first delicacy and
magnitude.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Valley-Forge, March 9, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE been this day favored with yours of the twenty-seventh of February, and
of the second, third, and fourth instant, which I shall answer in their order.

The removal of so valuable a train of field artillery from Albany to
Farmington, as to a place of greater security, was certainly a measure highly
proper; and you may be assured that every precaution shall be taken to escort
them safely through Jersey to this camp, when it is thought advisable to bring
them hither.

You mistook the intent of mine of the eighteenth of February. I did not mean
to give you the trouble of making a return of the British officers who were
exchanged after the convention. General Reidesel, as I informed you wrote to me
to obtain liberty for him to make an exchange of some of his suite and other
foreign officers, as that liberty had been allowed to the British. I did not
choose to give him any answer until I had applied to you, that I might know
whether you had any reason for making such distinction: and as you
misapprehended me, I shall still be obliged to defer answering him till I hear
from you. -- I think, considering the great number of officers of ours who are
in captivity, it is our interest to exchange as many of their officers,
prisoners under the convention, as we can.

Commissioners from me are to meet others from general How on the thirty-first
of this month, to endeavor to settle a general exchange of prisoners. -- Until
we know the issue of the negotiation, it will be hardly worth while to alter
the situation of the prisoners in Lancaster county.

On the twenty-seventh of February I had occasion to write to Congress, on the
subject of yours of the third. It was occasioned by a representation from the
colonel of the thirteenth Virginia regiment which was raised (as colonel
M'Kay's and Cooke's were) to remain upon the frontier. Were this the case with
only one regiment, I should not hesitate, considering the face of affairs to
the westward, to order it immediately to Fort-Pitt or the neighborhood. But the
eighth and twelfth Pennsylvania, and the twelfth and thirteenth Virginia, all
claim the same right; and if the indulgence is granted to one, the others will
be dissatisfied: and to spare them all at this time is impossible.

To regain the deserters from those regiments is certainly a very desirable
thing; and the mode you point out is the most probable. But I fear, if those
men who are now here find that the deserters are not to be brought down to join
their regiments in camp, that they may be induced to go off, in hopes of
obtaining the same terms. I confess I am much embarrassed by this matter, and
shall be exceedingly glad to have the advice and assistance of Congress and the
board upon the subject, before I come to any determination. It is an evil that
will ever result from enlistments for local purposes, when it is not convenient
to abide by the agreement.

I shall immediately transmit the papers, enclosed in yours of the fourth, to
general How.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Several instances having occurred, in which officers have drawn clothing
from the clothier-general, not being entitled to it, -- I shall be glad, if any
applications are made to the board in future, that they will never give orders
to any but such as bring testimonials from the brigadier or officer commanding
the brigade they belong to. -- Some who have resigned have taken up clothing on
their return home.



Valley-Forge, March 12, 1778. SIR,
ON sunday night I had the honor to receive your favors of the first and fifth
instant, with their enclosures.

I am happy to find that my past conduct respecting citizens, in the
correspondence between general How and myself, is approved by Congress. They
may rest assured that their rights are strongly impressed on my mind; and that,
in all my transactions, every support in my power shall be given them. I know
their importance; and, in my expected negociations with general How, if
possible, I will exempt citizens from captivity. However I cannot hope to
effect it, as I cannot demand it as a matter of right, since Congress
themselves, in their original resolve directing a proposition to be made for
the exchange of prisoners, mentioned that of citizens, -- which implied a right
of capturing them.

They may be assured that general Lee will not be forgotten. He has all along
been a principal object in dispute: and, so far from doing any thing injurious
to him, his right to be exchanged, and his releasement, are intended to be
placed upon the most explicit, unambiguous footing. -- Indeed, from the spirit
of general Howe's letters collectively taken, since his agreement to enlarge
the officers on parole in the first instance, and his extension of it in the
exchange, -- though they are not free from ambiguities, -- it may be inferred,
that, on sending in lieutenant colonel Campbell and the Hessian field-officers
captured at Trenton, an exchange of all officers will immediately commence. It
seems to be a point with him that it shall begin with them, as they have been
longest in captivity. -- I have taken the liberty to enclose you copies of
three letters which have just passed between general How and myself, more
particularly concerning general Lee, in which I have pushed matters respecting
him as far as I thought it prudent at this time. -- Every precaution will
certainly be used to prevent the enemy gaining any advantage in the exchange of
prisoners.

With great deference, I would take the liberty to observe that Congress seemed
to have carried the preamble of their resolve of the twenty-sixth ultimo,
prohibiting the enlisting, etc. prisoners and deserters, too far; and, through
accident, to have recited a fact that has never happened (at least to my
knowledge), and which is injurious to us, -- viz. that prisoners had been
enlisted by us. If any have, it is what I never knew. However, be this as it
may, if the resolution has not been published, I could wish the preamble to be
altered, and only to recite, " that experience, etc. in deserters" only. The
resolution itself may stand as it does, comprehending a prohibition against the
enlistment of both.

My reason for troubling Congress upon this occasion is, -- we have always
complained against general How, and still do, for obliging and permitting the
prisoners in his hands to enlist, as an unwarrantable procedure, and wholly
repugnant to the spirit at least of the cartel. This preamble seems to admit
the practice on our part, which would certainly justify it in him, and is such
evidence as must silence us in future (should it stand), and afford him an
opportunity for recrimination, -- though, as I have suggested, I believe no
prisoners have ever been enlisted by us, -- I am sure, none have through
compulsion.

I have the pleasure to transmit you an extract of a letter from captain Barry,
which will inform you of his successes. The two ships he burned after stripping
them; and he was obliged, it seems, two days after the capture, to ground and
abandon the schooner, after a long and severe engagement with some of the
enemy's frigates and smaller armed vessels. -- It is said he saved her guns and
most of her tackle.

I also take the liberty to lay before Congress copies of letters from
messieurs Champion, Wadsworth, and Reed. From the uniformity of sentiment held
forth by these gentlemen, it is much to be feared the measures lately adopted
by the commissioners at New Haven, for regulating the prices of provision, will
have a disagreeable effect upon our supplies of meat. -- How far it may be
practicable to suspend their operation for a time, I cannot determine: but, if
it can be done, it appears we should experience many advantages from it. It is
a matter of great importance; and as such, is submitted to Congress for their
consideration. -- If any thing can be done to procure supplies of provision,
particularly of the salt kind, I should suppose, and am persuaded, it will not
be omitted.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, March 14, 1778. SIR,
THIS will be presented to you by count Pulaski, who, from a conviction that
his remaining at the head of the cavalry was a constant subject of uneasiness
to the principal officers of that corpse, has been induced to resign his
command. Waving a minute inquiry into the causes of dissatisfaction, -- which
may be reduced perhaps to the disadvantages under which he labored, as a
stranger not well acquainted with the language, genius and manners of this
country, -- it may be sufficient to observe that the degree of harmony which is
inseparable from the well-being and consequent utility of a corpse, has not
subsisted in the cavalry since his appointment, and that the most effectual as
well as the easiest remedy is that which he has generously applied.

The count however, far from being disgusted with the service, is led by his
thirst of glory, and zeal for the cause of liberty, to solicit farther
employment, and waits upon the Congress to make his proposals. They are briefly
that he be allowed to raise an independent corpse composed of sixty-eight horse
and two hundred foot, -- the horse to be armed with lances, and the foot
equipped in the manner of light infantry. The former he thinks he can readily
fill with natives of good character and worthy the trust reposed in them. With
respect to the other, he is desirous of more latitude, so as to have liberty of
engaging prisoners and deserters from the enemy.

The original plan for the lance-men was to have draughted them from the
regiments of horse. But, as this method would produce a clashing of interests
and perhaps occasion new disturbances, the count prefers having a corpse totally
unconnected with any other. My advice to him, therefore, is to enlist his
number of cavalry with the continental bounty; and, if it should be found
consonant to the views of Congress to allow his raising the number proposed
over and above the establishment for the horse, then he would have them on the
footing of an independent corpse: if not, he might at all events have them as
draughts; and in this case there would be no ground for complaint.

With regard to the infantry, which the count esteems essential to the success
of the cavalry, I have informed him that the enlisting deserters and prisoners
is prohibited by a late resolve of Congress. -- How far Congress might be
inclined to make an exception, and license the engaging prisoners in a
particular detached corpse, in which such characters may be admitted with less
danger than promiscuously in the line, -- I cannot undertake to pronounce.

I have only to add that the count's valor and active zeal on all occasions
have done him great honor; and, from a persuasion, that, by being less exposed
to the inconveniences which he has hitherto experienced, he will render great
services with such a command as he asks for, I wish him to succeed in his
application.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. It is to be understood that the count expects to retain his rank as
brigadier, and, I think, is entitled to it from his general character and
particular disinterestedness on the present occasion.



Headquarters, Valley-Forge, March 16, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to transmit you a letter from governor Clinton which he
enclosed to me for my perusal and consideration. -- The inconvenience he
mentions, as resulting from the resolve respecting the appointment of a
commandant for Forts Montgomery and Clinton, requires to be obviated. I do not
conceive it to have been the design of Congress to make the command of those
forts altogether distinct and independent on the general command of the posts
in that quarter; but only to designate the rank of the officer who should have
the immediate charge of them.

There is such an intimate connection between the forts and the other posts and
passes in the Highlands and their vicinity, that it is necessary for one
officer to have the superintendency and control of the whole, and to be
answerable for all. If this were not to be the case, but the command were not
to be divided, there might want that cooperation between the garrisons and the
troops without, which might be essential to their preservation and to the
common purposes of defense. The assigning a fixed number of men to the
garrisons would not remove this inconvenience; for the cooperation would still
be necessary. But if it were otherwise, I should not think the measure
advisable, because we do not know what number of men we may have in the field
next campaign; and the number for the defense of the Highlands must be
proportioned to the general strength; and the force of the garrisons, to that
number.

On these considerations, having ordered general M'Dougal to repair to the
Highlands to assume the chief command there, I have comprehended the forts
among the other objects of his trust; in the discharge of which, I am persuaded
he will manifest adequate zeal and ability. But as the resolve in question
affords room for doubt, it will be proper to have it explained, so as more
explicitly to ascertain the intention of Congress.

I am perfectly in sentiment with governor Clinton on the propriety of drawing
the troops from the northward to reinforce and carry on the works in the
Highlands. From every thing I can learn, there seems to be no prospect of
prosecuting the intended expedition into Canada. If so, I apprehend it can
answer no valuable end to keep a body of troops in and about Albany. -- In the
present circumstances of Canada, little is to be dreaded thence: the enemy, in
all probability, will be well satisfied to act on the defensive, without
risking the consequences of an attempt against us. A proper garrison at
Fort-Schuyler, and a small party by way of guard at Albany, with the militia of
the country that may be occasionally drawn together, will be a sufficient
security against the inroads from the enemy from Canada, or the depredations of
the neighboring Indians, supposing there were any of the tribes whose
dispositions were still actively hostile notwithstanding our late northern
successes, -- which is by no means a natural supposition. -- All the men, more
than are wanted for these purposes, would be of the most important utility in
the Highlands.

If the arms and stores at Albany should be thought an objection to the plan, I
would beg leave to observe that Albany appears to me a most improper place for
stationary arsenals or magazines, and that those which are there at present
should be removed without delay. Besides, as they would be in most danger from
an incursion up the North-river, the best way to counteract that danger is to
strengthen the passes in the Highlands, and obstruct the navigation; in order
to which the reinforcing them with the troops from the northward would be no
inconsiderable step. -- With the greatest respect, I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Valley-Forge, March 16, 1778. SIR,
THIS will be delivered to you by captain Sullivan, who waits on Congress upon
the subject of pay and the loss of his rank in the line of the Massachusetts
officers. -- He is one of the gentlemen, who, in going with major Sherburne to
relieve the post we had at the cedars in 1776, after a brave and gallant
conduct, fell into the enemy's hands. In a few days after, on the treaty which
general Arnold made, he generously offered himself, as I have been informed,
and went one of the hostages to Quebec, for the performance of it.

By some means the state of Massachusetts Bay has not continued him in their
line, nor has he any appointment in the army. He is now on parole, through the
indulgence of general Carleton, and has applied to me for pay and rations from
the time of his return: and considering also the deprivation of his rank as
hard and injurious, he hopes he will be provided for in a suitable manner, and
according to that standing which he formerly held in the army.

Captain Sullivan's wishes, in either instance, cannot be answered by me. -- As
to the first, the resolution of the nineteenth of January, regulating the pay
of prisoners (which is the only rule for my government) seems to have drawn the
line between officers on parole who are continued in service, and those who are
not; and, making that the only criterion to fix pay, to have precluded every
other discrimination: and the powers, which were vested in the respective
states to appoint officers, prohibit any interference by me in his favor, as to
the latter.

I have stated the nature of the captain's claims, and the reasons which are
opposed to his obtaining relief in either instance from me. I shall only add
that the neglect by the states (in their appointments) of the officers who were
in captivity, where there was no other objection to them, was at least
ungenerous, if not impolitic and unjust. It has been the case in many
instances: and as to the gentlemen who is particularly the subject of this
letter, the testimonials that have been given of his character as an officer
were much in his favor, and greatly to his honor.

By accident, the resolution of the nineteenth of January, alluded to above,
has been mislaid. I must trouble you with a request for another copy of it.

I transmit Congress colonel * * *'s application to resign. As general
Huntington, in whose brigade he is, and in whom I have the utmost confidence,
is perfectly willing, I have only to say upon the occasion that I have not the
smallest objection to the measure.

General Sullivan set out for Rhode Island on friday last, to take the command
there in consequence of the resolution of Congress directing me to send a
major general there for that purpose. Supposing general Green in the
quartermaster line, I have now only one major general left in camp.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Valley-Forge, March 17, 1778. SIR,
ON saturday I had the honor to receive your favor of the tenth, with the
resolutions alluded to.

Enclosed I take the liberty to transmit an extract of a letter just received
from general Parsons. -- This, as well as the letter which I enclosed you
yesterday from governor Clinton, will show the confusion in the management of
affairs on the North-river. I informed Congress then that I had sent general
M'Dongal to take the chief command there, comprehending the forts, -- which
appeared to me the only effectual means for curing all disorders, and promoting
the public service. -- To remove all impediments, it were to be wished that
Congress would invest him with every necessary power for carrying into
execution the objects of his command: and it might be well if they were to
extend to any future commanding officer, as it would prevent those difficulties
which have heretofore arisen from their having been considered as merely
personal.

I am more and more in sentiment with governor Clinton on the propriety and
absolute necessity of drawing the troops from the northward, to reinforce and
carry on the works in the Highlands. From the information I have from colonel
Radiere who has just come from thence, I find that the intended defenses are
far less advanced than I had any idea of. According to him, little or nothing
is yet done, though I have repeatedly and constantly urged the prosecution of
them with all possible industry. The enclosed copies of my letters to general
Putnam will show that I have uniformly pressed the closest attention to the
business, -- though it might be inferred from general Parsons's letter that
there had been some inconsistency in my orders. There remains but a little time
to do a great deal in; and I fear that no exertions now will be sufficient to
place things in that quarter on the secure and respectable footing we could
wish. However, we should do the most we can: and if the works can not be as
complete as they ought, the troops will be there; and a reliance must be had in
their bravery, to repel any attempt that may be formed against them.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, March 18, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE the honor of transmitting yo^ the enclosed letter from general
Smallwood, giving intelligence of the enemy's motions on the Delaware, and his
conjectures respecting their object. The account he has heard of troops being
on board the vessels is confirmed by the relations of deserters and others, who
agree that a considerable number of men have been embarked, and add that they
took seventeen days' provision with them. From this circumstance it is scarcely
to be imagined that they are ordered on a sea voyage. The proportion of small
vessels in the fleet makes it probable they have in view to collect forage, or
attempt the destruction of the salt-works; and both these ideas are favored by
accounts from the city. -- As soon as their intentions are certainly known,
they shall be communicated. In the mean time, I have the honor to be, with the
greatest respect, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, Valley-Forge, March 21, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE the honor of yours of the fourteenth and fifteenth instant. In
consequence of the resolves transmitted to me, I have dispatched an express to
the marquis De la Fayette and baron De Kalb, to recall them from the northward:
and, instead of ordering down Hazen's regiment to rejoin this army, I have
ordered Van Schaick's immediately to the Highlands, where the public works are
in a manner at a stand for want of hands. Van Schaick's is a full and fresh
regiment, -- Hazen's but weak in point of numbers, and must be considerably
fatigued from their late long march. * * *

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, March 24, 1778. SIR,
HEREWITH I do myself the honor to enclose copies of a letter from an officer
of militia in Elizabethtown, to me, and an extract of a letter from one of Mr.
Boudinot's deputies at Boston, to him, -- both tending to induce a belief that
the enemy have some enterprise in contemplation. What this is, time must
discover. -- I have this whole winter been clearly of opinion that general
Howe's movements would be very early this spring, to take advantage of the weak
state of our army, -- or late, if he expected considerable reinforcements from
England, and meant to avail himself of his full strength. If the first takes
place, as appearances indicate, it may, I think, be considered as a proof of
one or both of these two things, -- that he is either well informed (he cannot
indeed be otherwise) of the situation, and more than probably, of the strength
of our army, -- or that he expects no considerable reinforcements this year
from Europe. In either case it is our indispensable duty to reinforce and
arrange our army as speedily as possible, that we may in the first instance be
prepared for defense, -- in the second, take advantage of any favorable
circumstance which may happen, to injure the enemy.

Whatever may be the designs of Congress with respect to the establishment of
the army, I know not: but I do most earnestly and devoutly recommend a speedy
adoption of them, and the appointment of officers, as our present situation at
this advanced season is truly alarming, and to me highly distressing, as I am
convinced that we shall be plunged into the campaign before our arrangements
are made, and the army properly organized.

The numberless disadvantages resulting from the late appointment of general
officers last year, make me look forward with infinite anxiety, this: -- for,
after all the wisdom that Congress or their committee can use in the choice of
officers, many will be disgusted: resignations of some and perhaps
non-acceptance of others will follow. Before matters then can be brought to a
proper tone, much time will be lost, and a great deal of trouble and vexation
encountered, -- to overcome which, is not the work of a day: and, till they are
overcome, confusion, disorder, and loss, must prevail. In the mean while,
order, regularity, and discipline, which require the vigilance of every officer
to establish, and must flow from the general officers in every army, -- are
neglected, or not entered upon in time, to effect. Thus it happened last year,
and brigades and divisions became vacant, to the great injury of the service.

As it is not improper for Congress to have some idea of the present temper of
the army, it may not ne amiss to remark in this place, that, since the month of
August last, between two and three hundred officers have resigned their
commissions, and many others were with difficulty dissuaded from it. In the
Virginia line only, not less than six colonels, as good as any in the service,
have left it lately; and more, I am told, are in the humor to do so.

Highly advantageous also would it be, if the recruits and draughts from
North Carolina and Virginia were not suffered to halt on their way to camp
under pretense of getting equipped, but sent forward and incorporated into the
different regiments of their respective states as soon as it could be done. Out
of the number of men said to be draughted in Virginia last fall, and others
from North Carolina, very few have joined the army; but, owing to desertion and
other causes, they have dwindled to nothing: and this will always be the case
with new recruits, especially those who are unwillingly drawn forth, if much
time is spent in getting them to their regiments under the care of proper
officers. This shows the necessity (if the season and other powerful reasons
did not loudly call for it) of hastening them to the army.

My solicitude for the preservation of the communication of the North-river
gives me very uneasy sensations on account of our posts there, and will excuse
my again asking if the troops to the northward, except such as are necessary
for the defense of Fort-Schuyler, can be so advantageously employed as at the
works on that river. -- A respectable force at those posts would awe New York,
and divide general Howe's force or expose the city. -- To depend too much upon
militia, is, in my opinion, putting every thing to hazard.

If I should appear uncommonly anxious respecting the several matters contained
in this letter, by repeating them, -- Congress will do me the justice, I hope,
to believe that I am actuated by no views but such as are prompted by
circumstances and the advanced season. -- With the greatest respect, I have the
honor to be, etc.

G. W.
P. S. Your letter of the twenty-first instant is just come to hand, containing
several resolves of Congress.



Valley-Forge, March 24, 1778. SIR,
COLONEL Charles Lewis of the fourteenth Virginia regiment will have the honor
to deliver you this. He waits on Congress to resign his commission. I have
interested myself, but in vain, to retain him in the service, and have only to
add my regret at the loss of so good an officer.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Valley-Forge, March 29, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE been honored with yours of the twenty-fifth, enclosing duplicates of
two former resolves of Congress, and a resolve of the twenty-third instant,
accepting the resignation of colonel Charles Webb.

Since mine of the twenty-fourth, Mr. Boudinot has communicated the following
intelligence, being part of a letter to him: -- "I have lately received some
intelligence from New York, that we may make ourselves easy in Jersey, as all
the force that can be spared is to be sent to join general How. -- Two
thousand five hundred are actually on board transports, and lying at the
watering place."

I have this day received a letter from general Smallwood, dated yesterday at
Wilmington, in which he says -- "The enemy, about four days ago, had a fleet of
near fifty sail standing up the river, which I fancy was from New York; and
yesterday their foraging fleet went up without touching upon this side the
Delaware, except three or four small parties about Port-Penn, who have been
constantly drove off by a party of about a hundred of our men, who have been
guarding and aiding the removal of the forage, which is at length happily
effected."

A Philadelphia paper of the twenty-seventh also mentions, that a fleet of
upwards of forty sail had left the Hook on sunday, and that they were said to
be in the river.

From all the above circumstances, I have no doubt but the troops have arrived
from New York. -- I have heard nothing further from Rhode Island since I wrote
to you last.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Valley-Forge, April 1, 1778. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you upon the twenty-ninth ultimo, I have
not been able to learn with any precision whether the transports that arrived
brought any considerable number of troops. -- A Hessian de^erter says there
were only a few German convalescents on board. If so, the fleet with two
thousand five hundred, mentioned in my last, is not arrived, supposing they
were bound to Philadelphia.

General St. Clair arrived yesterday from Boston: and, as he seems very anxious
to have his matter determined one way or the other, I beg leave to recall the
attention of Congress to my letter of the twenty-seventh of February upon that
subject. -- Having received no information since that time which serves to
direct my judgment as to the charges which it will be proper to exhibit against
general St. Clair, I have only again to request that Congress or the committee
will be pleased to point out the particular charges upon which the court shall
proceed.

I could wish this matter might not be delayed; on several accounts. General
St. Clair is in a very delicate situation, and feels it sensibly. He was kept
inactive great part of last campaign, and probably will be the whole of this,
except his trial can be shortly brought on, -- as it will be almost impossible
to find time to hold a court after the scene of action opens. -- If he should
be acquitted, he would render very essential service, especially at this time
when we have so few general officers: if condemned, his place may be
immediately filled. It will besides take him some little time to prepare for
his defense after he knows the particular charges alleged against him.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Valley-Forge, April 3, 1778. SIR,
CAPTAIN Lee of the light dragoons, and the officers under his command, having
uniformly distinguished themselves by a conduct of exemplary zeal, prudence,
and bravery, I took occasion, on a late signal instance of it, to express the
high sense I entertained of their merit, and to assure him that it should not
fail of being properly noticed. I was induced to give this assurance from a
conviction that it is the wish of Congress to give every encouragement to
merit, and that they would cheerfully embrace so favorable an opportunity of
manifesting this disposition.

I had it in contemplation at the time, in case no other method more eligible
could be adopted, to make him an offer of a place in my family. I have
consulted the committee of Congress upon the subject, and we were mutually of
opinion that the giving captain Lee the command of two troops of horse on the
proposed establishment, with the rank of major, to act as an independent
partisan corpse, would be a mode of rewarding him, very advantageous to the
service. Captain Lee's genius particularly adapts him to a command of this
nature; and it will be the most agreeable to him, of any station in which he
could be placed.

I beg leave to recommend this measure to Congress, and shall be obliged by
their decision as speedily as may be convenient. The campaign is fast
approaching, and there will probably be very little time to raise and prepare
the corpse for it. It is a part of the plan to give Mr. Lindsay the command of
the second troop, and to make Mr. Peyton captain-lieutenant of the first.

I am with the highest respect and esteem, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Valley-Forge, April 4, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE now the honor to acknowledge your several letters of the twenty-first,
twenty-ninth, and thirtieth ultimo, with their enclosures, which have been duly
received. -- It gives me pain to observe they appear to contain several
implications by which my sensibility is not a little wounded. -- I find myself
extremely embarrassed by the steps I had taken toward an exchange of prisoners
and the formation of a general cartel making more ample provision for their
future accommodation and relief. The views of Congress seem to be very
different from what I supposed them when I entered into my late engagements
with general How: their resolution of the thirtieth ultimo, pointedly
requiring a strict adherence to all former ones upon the subject, will in all
probability render them impracticable. -- I considered some of their
resolutions as dictated on the principle of retaliation, and did not imagine
the terms they contained would be insisted upon in negociating an agreement
calculated to remedy the evil which occasioned them. In most respects they
might be substantially complied with: but there are some points to which an
exact conformity must of necessity destroy the idea of a cartel. One is the
obliging the enemy to pay gold and silver on equal terms for continental
currency, estimating the articles supplied them at their actual prices with us,
as seems to be the design of the resolve of the nineteenth of December. --
Another is the subjecting the inhabitants of these states, taken in arms
against them, to trial and punishment, agreeable to the resolve of the
thirtieth of the same month.

I am well aware that appearances ought to be upheld, and that we should avoid
as much as possible recognizing by any public act the depreciation of our
currency; but I conceive this end would be answered as far as might be
necessary, by stipulating that all money payments should be made in gold and
silver, being the common medium of commerce among nations, at the rate of four
shillings and sixpence for a Spanish milled dollars, etc. -- by fixing the
price of rations on an equitable scale relatively to our respective
circumstances, -- and providing for the payment of what we may owe, by sending
in provision, and selling it at their market. The rates of money, and the
prices of provisions and other commodities, differ every where: and, in
treaties of a similar nature between any two states, it is requisite, for
mutual convenience, to ascertain some common ratio both for the value of money
in payments, and for the rates of those articles on which they may arise.

It was determined on mature consideration not to conclude any thing expressly
that should contradict the resolution of the thirtieth December: but at the
same time, if it is designed to be the rule of practice, it is easy to perceive
it would at once overturn any cartel that could be formed. General How would
never consent to observe it on his part, if such a practice were to exist on
ours. -- Though the law ought not to be contravened by an express article
admitting the exchangeability of such persons, yet, if it is not suffered to
sleep, it is in vain to expect the operation of it will be acquiesced in by the
enemy.

The measures I have taken must evince that it is my determination to pay the
fullest attention to the interests of citizens, and to the rights of general
Lee, in the treaty: and I think it but justice to the gentlemen appointed to
negotiate it, to declare that I know them to be so fully impressed with the
importance of both those objects, as to make them cheerfully observant of the
injunctions of Congress, so far as not to conclude any agreement of which the
exchange of general Lee and the alternative respecting citizens are not
essential parts. -- These points had been early determined on.

It is with no small concern that I have been obliged to trouble Congress upon
the subjects of this letter: and, should they appear to them in the same light
they do to me, and they should think proper to remove the obstacles which now
oppose the business in hand, I must request they will be pleased to communicate
their determination as expeditiously as possible, that the commissioners may
govern themselves accordingly and either proceed to forming a cartel, or put an
end to the negotiation. -- Before the resolves of the thirteenth came to hand,
they had met, and been in treaty two days, with a prospect of a favorable
accommodation.

I am happy to inform Congress that general Lee will be out on parole tomorrow
in place of general Prescot: and I have every reason to expect, if the
negotiation can be continued upon admissible terms, that his exchange will
immediately follow the releasement of colonel Campbell and the Hessian
field-officers. It is agreed that lieutenant colonel Allen shall be exchanged
for lieutenant colonel Campbell.

The importunate applications of colonel Lee and major Swazey to leave the
service oblige me to lay the matter before Congress. Colonel Lee's letter upon
the subject was transmitted me the twenty-fifth of January: but, hoping he
might change his mind, I deferred writing to Congress upon his request. He has
renewed it again in urgent terms, through general Heath, and I have only to
observe that it is a painful circumstance to see officers of their merit
leaving the service. -- It is the case every day. -- I shall be obliged by
Congress informing me of the dates of the resignations of the colonels in the
Virginia line: -- I have only received the date of colonel Lewis's.

Enclosed is a letter from captain Cotteneau of the ship Ferdinand, with an
invoice of her cargo. The letter only came to hand yesterday: and, as it is of
an old date, it is highly probable that the goods are sold. If they are not, --
from the captain's desire to give the public a preference in the sale, Congress
will have an opportunity of directing them to be purchased. Most of them would
be proper for the army.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

To the Committee for the Affairs of the Army.
Headquarters, April 9, 1778. GENTLEMEN,
BY a resolve of Congress, the appointment of officers to the corpse which
brigadier-general count Pulaski is authorized to raise, has been referred to
your decision in conjunction with me. -- As I know the superior confidence
which a commandant places in officers of his own choice, I have given him my
approbation of the gentlemen whom he has nominated: -- it remains with you to
decide in their favor, or have others substituted.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, April 10, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE had the honor of receiving your favor of the fourth instant, enclosing
a resolve of Congress, of the same date, empowering me to call forth five
thousand militia from the states of Maryland, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey. I
thank Congress for the power: at the same time it is incumbent on me to assure
them, that, -- granting the practicability of collecting such a number, -- it
would prove a work of time, difficulty, and expense; to evince which, I need
only recur to the experience of last campaign on similar occasions, and to
remind you that it was not possible to obtain a thousand men, nor sometimes
even one hundred, from this state, although the former number was required and
promised, for the purpose of covering during the winter the country between
Schuylkill and Delaware.

As this resolve appears to have been made in consequence of my letters of the
twenty-fourth and twenty-ninth ultimo, which were founded on conjecture, and,
in some degree, misinformation, -- and as the execution of it would, exclusive
of the inconveniences abovementioned, I am persuaded have a tendency to injure
the completion of the continental regiments, -- I shall call for a small part
only of the number allowed; but could wish that Hartley's regiment were ordered
immediately to camp, and the duties of it performed by militia. In like manner
I would propose that all remote guards should be composed of militia, and that
the several purposes for which men are drawn from the continental troops should
be answered by them. This would be a means of drawing together a considerable
number of men who are in a manner lost to the army, and of employing the
militia to the best advantage possible.

The great end of my letter to Congress of the twenty-fourth ultimo, seems to
have been mistaken. My views were not turned to reinforcements of militia. To
know whether the old establishment of the army, or the new as agreed upon by
the committee, is the choice of Congress, -- and in what manner the regiments
of this state and the additionals are to be reduced, -- officers for the whole
appointed, etc. were my objects. These are objects of the greatest moment, as
they may, in their consequences, involve the fate of America; for I will
undertake to say, that it is next to impossible, when the season is so far
advanced, properly to accomplish those changes, appointments, and the dependent
arrangements for the ensuing campaign. Should any convulsion happen, or
movement take place, they will be altogether impracticable. -- Justice to my
own character, as well as duty to the public, constrain me to repeat these
things: their consequences are more easily conceived than described.

It may be said by some, ^ir, that my wish to see the officers of this army
upon a more respectable establishment, is the cause of my solicitude, and
carries me too far. -- To such I can declare that my anxiety proceeds from the
causes abovementioned. If my opinion is asked with respect to the necessity of
making this provision for the officers, I am ready to declare that I do most
religiously believe the salvation of the cause depends upon it, -- and, without
it, your officers will moulder to nothing, or be composed of low and illiterate
men, void of capacity for this or any other business. To prove this, I can with
truth aver, that scarce a day passes, without the offer of one or two
commissions; and my advices from the eastward and southward are that numbers
who had gone home on furlough mean not to return, but are establishing
themselves in more lucrative employments. -- Let congress determine what will
be the consequence of this spirit.

Personally, as an officer, I have no interest in their decision, because I
have declared, and I now repeat it, that I never will receive the smallest
benefit from the half-pay establishment: but, as a man who fights under the
weight of a proscription, and as a citizen who wishes to see the liberty of his
country established upon a permanent foundation, and whose property depends
upon the success of our arms, I am deeply interested. But, -- all this apart,
and justice out of the question, -- upon the single ground of economy and
public saving, I will maintain the utility of it: for I have not the least
doubt, that, until officers consider their commissions in an honorable and
interested point of view, and are afraid to endanger them by negligence and
inattention, no order, regularity, or care either of the men or public
property, will prevail. * * *

By officers who are just returned from Massachusetts Bay, I learn that there
is not the least prospect of getting men from thence before the month of June,
-- if then; and indeed that there is no reason to expect any number that will
deserve the name of reinforcement for the continental regiments this campaign,
-- the towns being only called upon to furnish the deficiency of their last
year's quota, so that all subsequent casualties are disregarded, and the
fifteen regiments from that state, which may now perhaps want four thousand men
to complete them, will receive only five hundred if the towns came within that
number of their complement last year. -- What change the requisition of
Congress, of the [ twenty-sixth] of February, may effect, I shall not undertake
to say: -- if it has not a speedy and powerful operation, our prospects in that
quarter will be exceedingly unpromising.

A gentleman from New Hampshire some little time since informed me that matters
were nearly in the same train there, notwithstanding a resolve for the
completion of their batallions; and the enclosed copy of a letter (No. 1) from
general Putnam, whom I have desired to remain in Connecticut for some time in
order to forward the recruits from that state, conveys his ideas of what may be
expected from thence. What New York, New Jersey, and North Carolina have done
or are about to do, I know not. -- Pennsylvania and Maryland have tried the
effect of voluntary enlistments to little purpose; and the first, in direct
contradiction to the most pointed injunctions laid on the officers, have their
recruits composed chiefly of deserters, who will embrace the first opportunity
of escaping with our arms. -- Virginia, it is true, has proceeded to a draught:
but the number, besides being in itself inadequate, has been lessened by
desertion; and the deficiency of the regiments, on the other hand, being
increased by death and desertion, their strength will probably fall very far
short of the new establishment.

This, ^ir, is not a flattering picture of our affairs: but the representation
is just; and it is incumbent on me to exhibit it in my own defense, as,
notwithstanding all these unfavorable circumstances, -- and what is to me a
certain prospect of being plunged into the campaign before the arrangements are
made, officers appointed, etc. -- great matters, I perceive, are expected from
our activity this spring: -- in proportion therefore will the disappointment be
felt by those who are the most sanguine. For want of the ratification of
Congress, the horse establishment, companies of sappers, provost-marshalsey,
etc. etc. (as agreed to by the committee, and recommended to their
consideration) are entirely at a stand, at a time when we ought to be deriving
benefits from their execution. -- In a word, at no period since the
commencement of the war have I felt more painful sensations on account of
delay, than at the present, and, urged by them, I have expressed myself without
reserve.

By a letter just received from general Weedon, I am informed of his intention
to resign, if general Woodford should be restored to his former rank, which he
had not then heard. General Muhlenberg is now balancing on the same point. One,
therefore, if not two brigadiers, will be wanted for that state. -- The
disadvantages resulting from the frequent resignations in the Virginia line,
the changes of commanding officers to the regiments, and other causes equally
distressing, have injured that corpse beyond conception, and have been the means
of reducing very respectable regiments in some instances to a mere handful of
men; and this will ever be the case till officers can be fixed by something
equivalent to the sacrifice they make. To reason otherwise, and suppose that
public virtue alone will enable men to forego the case and comforts of life, to
encounter the hardships and dangers of war for a bare subsistence, when their
companions and friends are amassing large fortunes, -- is viewing human nature
rather as it should be, than as it really is.

The clothier-general of the army, as well as the heads of every other
department, should be in camp, near the commander in chief: otherwise it is
impossible that the operations of war can be conducted with energy and
precision. I wish most sincerely that this, -- as not the least essential part
of the business settled with the committee, -- were decided, and a thorough
investigation were had into the conduct of this department; as it is a matter
of universal astonishment that we should be deficient in any article of
clothing, when it is commonly asserted that the eastern states alone can
furnish materials enough to clothe a hundred thousand men. -- If this be a
fact, there is a fatal error somewhere, to which may be attributed the death
and desertion of thousands.

I shall make no apology for the freedom of this letter. -- To inform Congress
of such facts as materially affect the service, I conceive to be one great and
essential part of my duty to them and myself. My agreement with the committee
entitled me to expect upwards of forty thousand continental troops, exclusive
of artillery and horse, for the service of the ensuing campaign, including
those to be employed in the defense of the North river. -- Instead of these,
what are my prospects?

Major General the marquis De la Fayette is arrived in camp, and will resume
the command of his division. -- The baron De Kalb is expected in a few days.
The enclosure, No. 2, is the copy of a letter from colonel Shrieve of the
second Jersey batallion, containing an account of the destruction of the salt
and salt-works at Squan, -- and No. 3, of a letter from general M'Dougal,
showing the state of affairs in that department. -- With very great respect, I
have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.
P. S. Your favor of the eighth instant, enclosing the act of Congress
appointing captain Lee major and commandant of an independent corpse, is this
moment come to hand.



Valley-Forge, April 18, 1778. SIR,
ON thursday evening I had the honor to receive your two letters of the
fourteenth instant. -- I am much obliged by the fresh assurances which Congress
are pleased to make me of their confidence; and they may be satisfied that I
wish nothing more ardently than that a good and perfect agreement should
subsist between us.

The negotiation between the commissioners is ended without effecting a cartel;
nor do I suppose, from the information I have received on the subject, that
there is any good prospect that one will ^ver be formed, at least for a great
while, on a liberal and extensive plan. -- A report of the proceedings of the
commissioners on o^r part, at their several meetings, I take the liberty to
enclose. The papers, No. 1, contain the letters between general How and
myself, stipulating the neutrality of Germantown, -- our respective powers, --
and the result of the meeting there; -- No. 2, the subsequent proce^dings at
Newtown. The old agreement, I presume, continues; and under it we must carry on
exchanges.

General Muhlenberg has communicated his determination to resign, but has
promised not to leave his brigade till Congress shall appoint another general
in his room, provided it is done in any reasonable time.

By postponing my call upon the militia, as mentioned in my last of the tenth,
I did not mean to decline it altogether. I did not see the necessity of calling
out five thousand for the sole purpose of defense; and, in the present
situation of things, I cannot perceive my way sufficiently clear for offensive
measures, as I do not know when to expect the recruits from the different
states, nor what prospect the commissary has of provision: -- as we only get it
from hand to mouth, assembling the militia, unless for the purpose of defense,
should be the last thing done, as they soon become impatient, and are very
expensive in the articles of stores, camp utensils, provisions, etc.

The enclosed draught of a bill was brought to headquarters yesterday
afternoon by a gentleman who informed me that a large cargo of them had been
just sent out of Philadelphia. Whether this insidious proceeding is genuine and
imported in the packet which arrived a few days ago, or contrived in
Philadelphia, is a point undetermined and immaterial; but it is certainly
founded on principles of the most * * *, -- meant to poison the minds of the
people, and detach the wavering at least from our cause. I suppose it will
obtain a place in the papers, and am not without anxiety that it will have a
malignant influence. -- I would submit it whether it will not be highly
expedient for Congress to investigate it in all its parts, and to expose in the
most striking manner the injustice, delusion, and fraud, it contains. -- I
trust it will be attacked, in every shape, in every part of the continent.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, April 20, 1778. SIR,
WITH your letter of the seventeenth instant, and its enclosures, I was duly
honored on saturday afternoon. -- When I addressed you on the eighteenth, I was
doubtful whether the draught of the bill then transmitted was not spurious and
contrived in Philadelphia: but its authenticity, I am almost certain, is not to
be questioned. The information from Philadelphia seems clear and conlusive that
it came over in the packet, with lord North's speech on the introduction of it
into parliament. I enclose a paper containing his speech, which just came to
hand. -- This bill I am persuaded, will pass into a law. -- Congress will
perceive by the minister's speech, that it aims at objects of the greatest
extent and importance, and will, no doubt, in one way or other, involve the
most interesting consequences to this country.

With great respect, I have the honor to be, sir, your most obedient servant,
G. W.

Valley-Forge, April 23, 1778. SIR,
I TAKE the liberty to transmit you a letter which I received yesterday from
governor Tryon, enclosing the draughts of the two bills I forwarded before,
with his certificate of the manner in which they came to his hands, accompanied
by his more extraordinary and impertinent request, that, through my means, the
contents should be communicated to the officers and men of this army. This
engine of ministry, from governor Livingston's account, is very industriously
circulating copies of these draughts, in obedience to their and his royal
mandates. -- The letter which I enclose, and a triplicate, came to hand at one
time: some future conveyance, it is probable, will present me the duplicate.

I would also take the liberty to enclose you the Evening Post, No. 475, which
governor Livingston was so obliging as to send me yesterday. Were we not fully
satisfied from our experience, that there are no artifices, no measures too * *
* for the enemy or their adherents to attempt in order to promote their views,
we might be astonished at the daring confidence, in defiance of the opinion of
the world, manifested in a publication in this paper, purporting to be a
resolution of congress, of the twentieth of February. This proceeding is
infamous to the last degree, and calculated to produce the most baneful
consequences by exciting an opposition in the people to our draughting system,
and embarrassing at least the only probable mode now left us for raising men. I
think it of great importance that the forgery should be announced in the most
public manner, and am the more induced to this opinion from governor
Livingston's account of the disagreeable operation it has had, and is still
likely to produce, if not contradicted. If it is, and with a few strictures, I
should hope that it would excite in the breasts of all our countrymen, a just
and generous contempt of the enemy for such a dirty, wicked proceeding.

I was last night honored with your favor of the eighteenth instant, with the
proceedings alluded to. -- A general plan of operations for the campaign is
indispensably essential to be settled. I have thought much upon the subject:
and some propositions respecting it were put into the hands of all the general
officers here on tuesday evening, for their consideration. I also intended to
send a messenger this day to meet general Gates, supposing him to be on his way
to Hudson's-river, and to request his call at this camp, that we might enter
into a full and free discussion on the point. -- Their is not a moment to be
delayed in forming some general system, in my opinion; and I only wait the
arrival of generals Gates and Mifflin, to summon a council for the purpose.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
It is confidently reported, -- and I have little doubt of the truth of it, --
that sir William How is recalled, and that general Clinton is to succeed him
in the command. -- I have also the pleasure to transmit a list of sundry
officers exchanged on the twenty-first instant.



Valley-Forge, April 25, 1778. SIR,
I BEG leave to inform Congress that the report of the commissioners coming,
according to intelligence received yesterday by a person of Philadelphia, is
confidently believed; and it is there thought they will very soon arrive. I
think it almost certain that the matter will not be delayed, as the conduct of
ministry, in not sending them immediately after their former propositions, has
been much reprobated, and as it may be of much importance to improve the first
impressions of the people upon the occasion. -- Lord Amherst, admiral Keppel,
and general Murray, are said to be the persons appointed; and it is likely they
are vested with both civil and military powers. -- The information was through
the channel of a sensible intelligent man, well known, and of esteemed credit.
He is connected with the British army, having two or three brothers in it. -- I
shall transmit the earliest accounts I may receive from time to time on this
very interesting subject.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, April 27, 1778. SIR,
I HAD the honor yesterday afternoon to receive your letter of the
twenty-fourth, continued to the twenty-fifth, with its important enclosures. --
Congress will be pleased to accept my sincere thanks for the fresh instance of
confidence manifested in their resolution of the twenty-third, and other
proceedings; and they may rest assured that whatever powers are entrusted to me
shall be invariably directed to promote the interest of these states. If in any
case there should be a misapplication or a failure in the execution, it will be
the effect of mistake and not of design.

I shall take measures for distributing the report of the committee on Lord
North's bills, and the resolution of the twenty-third inviting delinquents to
return to their allegiance and to the protection of these states. This
proceeding appears to me founded in great good policy; and I should hope that
it will be attended with many valuable consequences: -- but this can only be
proved by the event.

Though I wish most heartily for the aid of general Lee in council and upon
every other occasion, -- yet, as the time of his return is uncertain, or at
least it will be several days before it takes place, -- and as it seems to me
that there is not a moment to lose in forming some general system for our
operations, -- I should think it inexpedient for general Gates to delay coming
to camp till his arrival. After a plan is digested, there will be a great deal
of time expended before things will be in a proper train for execution. The
season is fast advancing; and the period which may be most favorable for any
designs we may form will presently arrive.

I take the liberty to transmit an extract of a letter from general Heath,
which will show Congress that he is pressed on all sides for money. Governor
Livingston too is apprehensive he will be under embarrassments on account of
the purchase of horses in consequence of the recommendation of the committee.
Their letter to him by some means has been mislaid in the assembly, and he does
not know exactly the mode prescribed for the payment. I cannot inform him
myself, or do what perhaps is more necessary, -- furnish him with money; and
therefore hope that Congress or the committee will.

I have written major general Tryon a few lines in answer to his letter, a copy
of which is enclosed.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, April 30, 1778. SIR,
THE extensive ill consequences, arising from a want of uniformity in
discipline and maneuvers throughout the army, have long occasioned me to wish
for the establishment of a well-organised inspectorship: and the concurrence of
Congress in the same views has induced me to set on foot a temporary
institution, which, from the success that has hitherto attended it, gives me
the most flattering expectations, and will, I hope, obtain their approbation.

Baron De Steuben's length of service in the first military school in Europe,
and his former rank, pointed him out as a person peculiarly qualified to be at
the head of this department. This appeared the least exceptionable way of
introducing him into the army, and one that would give him the most ready
opportunity of displaying his talents. I therefore proposed to him to undertake
the office of inspector-general, which he agreed to with the greatest
cheerfulness, and has performed the duties of it with a zeal and intelligence
equal to our wishes. He has two ranks of inspectors under him: the lowest are
officers charged with the inspection of brigades, with the title of
brigade-inspectors: the others superintended several of these: they have
written instructions relative to their several functions; and the maneuvers
which they are to practice are illustrated by a company which the baron has
taken the pains to train himself.

The brigade-inspectors were chosen by the brigadier and the commanding
officers of regiments in each brigade. The inspectors are lieutenant eolon^ls
Barber of Jersey, Brooks of Massachusetts, Davis of Virginia, and monsieur
Ternant, a French gentleman: -- the reason for employing him (apart of his
intrinsic merit and abilities) was his possessing the French and English
languages equally, which made him a necessary assistant to the Baron de
Steuben. He is content to serve without rank, until, after an experiment of his
abilities, Congress shall determine what he is entitled to.

Upon the arrival of lieutenant colonel Fleury in camp, as he was unemployed,
and had exercised the office of aid-major in France, the Baron proposed to have
him employed as an inspector; in which I readily acquiesced, as Congress had
given him the rank and pay of lieutenant colonel. -- There may be other foreign
officers in continental pay, idle for want of being attached to some corpse, of
whose services we might avail ourselves this way, which is the only method of
disposing of them, unless they could be formed into a distinct corpse.

From the extraordinary fatigue and close attention required of the officers
employed in the inspectorship, I did not think it amiss to let them entertain
hopes that Congress would allow some addition to the pay which they derive from
their rank; and I take the liberty of recommending the measure. I would propose
twenty dollars, per month for the brigade inspectors, and thirty for the
inspectors, in addition to their pay in the line.

I should do injustice if I were to be longer silent with regard to the merits
of the baron De Steuben. His knowledge of his profession, added to the zeal
which he has discovered since he began upon the functions of his office, lead
me to consider him as an acquisition to the service, and to recommend him to
the attention of Congress. His expectations with regard to rank extend to that
of major general. His finances, he ingenuously co^resses, will not admit of his
serving without the incidental emoluments: and Congress, I presume from his
character and their own knowledge of him, will without difficulty gratify him
in these particulars.

The baron is sensible that our situation requires a few variations in the
duties of his office from the general practice in Europe, and particularly that
they must necessarily be more comprehensive; in which, as well as in his
instructions, he has skilfully yielded to circumstances. -- The success which
has hitherto attended the plan enables me to request with confidence the
ratification of Congress, and is, I think, a pledge of the establishment of a
well-combined general system, which insurmountable obstacles have hitherto
opposed.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, May 1, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE had the honor to receive your dispatches of the twenty-seventh instant.
In compliance with the request of Congress, I shall immediately call upon the
officers in the army to take the oath of allegiance and abjuration. This I
should have done as soon as the resolution passed, had it not been for the
state of the army at that time, and that there were some strong reasons which
made it expedient to defer the matter.

My opinion upon the subject of a future provision for the officers has been
so fully, and, I trust, so necessarily and equitably urged, that I shall not
add further respecting it, except my sincere wishes that the establishment was
determined on. Nothing, in my idea, can be more just; and I am certain there is
nothing n^re essential: -- the present unsettled state of the army is hurtful
in the extreme.

Since my letter of the twenty-seventh, I have received authentic information
of the sailing of a very large number of transports from Philadelphia, -- two
hundred, it is said. They went down the Delaware the beginning of the week,
light and empty. -- I have not been able to learn any thing of their
destination; nor can I form a conjecture upon the occasion, that is the least
satisfactory.

With infinite pleasure I beg leave to congratulate Congress on the very
important and interesting advices brought by the frigate La Sensible. --
General M'Dougal and Mr. Deane were so obliging as to transmit me the outlines
of the good tidings. As soon as Congress may think it expedient, I shall be
happy to have an opportunity of announcing to the army, with the usual
ceremony, such parts of the intelligence as may be proper, and sanctioned by
authority. I have mentioned the matter to such officers as I have seen; and I
believe no event was ever received with more heartfelt joy.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Just as I had finished my letter above, I received the honor of your
favor of the twenty-eighth, with the resolution and packets alluded to. I will
take measures for dispersing the printed resolutions.



Camp, May 1, 1778. SIR,
IN compliance with your request contained in your letter of the thirteenth
ultimo, I have delivered the bundle of papers respecting the loss of
Ticonderoga, etc. transmitted me some time ago, which I hope will get safe to
hand.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Valley-Forge, May 3, 1778. SIR,
IN a late letter from general Schuyler, I received the proceedings of a board
of commissioners for Indian affairs, held at Albany the fifteenth of last
month. It appears by them and some other accounts I have seen, that there is
but little prospect of succeeding in the plan for engaging a body of Indians
from that quarter to serve with this army. The advantage which the enemy
possesses over us, in having the means of making presents much more liberally
than we can, has made a strong impression upon their minds, and seems to be
more than a counterbalance for any arguments we can offer to conciliate their
attachment. They also appear to be apprehensive for their own safety, and
rather to wish for aid and protection from us, than willing to leave their
habitations and come to our assistance.

The measure proposed was by way of experiment, as one which might possibly be
attended with valuable consequences, and, if it could have been effected
without much difficulty, might have been worth a trial. But, as the scheme does
not well correspond with their present disposition, and may serve to increase
our embarrassments in keeping them even in tolerable good humor, I am inclined
to think it would be most advisable to relinquish the attempt. They may be told
of what has happened in Europe, with proper embellishments, and that our
affairs are now upon such a footing as to render their aid in the field
unnecessary, and that all we require of them is their friendship and good
wishes. This and promises of protection may have a powerful and happy effect.

It is of great importance to counteract the temptation held out by the enemy,
and to secure the good will of the Indians, who appear to be at least in a
state of hesitancy and indecision, if nothing worse. Congress, I am persuaded,
will do every thing in their power to promote these desirable ends.

With great respect and esteem, I have the honor to be, sir, your most obedient
servant, G. W.

Headquarters, Valley-Forge, May 4, 1778. SIR,
LAST night at eleven o'clock I was honored with your dispatches of the third.
-- The contents afford me the most sensible pleasure. Mr. Simeon Deane had
informed me by a line from Bethlehem, that he was the bearer of the articles of
alliance, etc. between France and the states. -- I shall defer celebrating this
happy event in a suitable manner until I have liberty from Congress to announce
it publicly. I will only say that the army are anxious to manifest their joy
upon the occasion.

Enclosed you have a letter which I received a few days ago from lord Stirling,
and which, at his request, I lay before Congress, with its contents.

I am, with the greatest esteem and respect, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, May 11, 1778. SIR,
I TAKE the liberty to transmit to Congress a copy of a letter from general
How, which I received at three o'clock this afternoon. The contents are
exceedingly interesting to the unhappy prisoners in his hands. I thought it my
duty to forward them immediately; and I must request that Congress will be
pleased to inform me as soon as possible, what line of conduct I am to pursue
upon this occasion. -- The enclosed extract of a letter from general Smallwood
will show the painful alternative to which the prisoners in Philadelphia will
be reduced unless they are relieved: and this is confirmed by intelligence
through several other channels to myself. -- I shall wait directions in the
matter, and govern myself by them in my answer to general How.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. As to an equivalent in men for officers, that proposed by his
commissioners were too high. A much more moderate one was nearly agreed to
between them and the gentlemen deputed by me, when they were in treaty. -- This
mode of relief, at this instant, may not be necessary to adopt. There are
probably officers in general Burgoyne's army who are desirous of being
exchanged: and, if not, an equivalent may be fixed on, as circumstances may
point out.



Valley-Forge, May 12, 1778. SIR,
I HAD the honor to receive in due time your several favors of the third,
sixth, and ninth instant, with the papers to which they respectively alluded.
-- After much consideration upon the subject, I have appointed general M'Intosh
to command at Fort-Pitt and in the western country, for which he will set out
as soon as he can accommodate his affairs. I part with this gentleman with much
reluctance, as I esteem him an officer of great worth and merit, and as I know
his services here are and will be materially wanted. His firm disposition and
equal justice, his assiduity and good understanding, -- added to his being a
stranger to all parties in that quarter, -- pointed him out as a proper person;
and I trust, extensive advantages will be derived, from his command, which I
could wish was more agreeable. -- He will wait on Congress for their
instructions.

As lieutenant colonel Southerland, major Agnew, and lieutenant Poe, have only
requested to go to Europe on parole, it does not appear to me that I can with
propriety apply to general How for their exchange: -- this would imply that
they were prisoners of war. Though their exchange is certainly the most
desirable mode of release as it would relieve an equal number of our officers
from captivity, yet I should be happy if a negotiation for the purpose should
commence on their part. Knowing that it would be our interest to exchange all
the officers of general Buygoyne's army if it could be done, I wrote general
Heath not long since, to take occasion to mention to them that we should always
be willing to accede to any equal propositions for that purpose, and would
carefully convey their applications to sir William How or the general who
might command the British army. -- I take the liberty to return their letters,
presuming that Congress may incline to give them some answer, either directly,
or through general Heath.

In respect to lieutenant colonel * * *, I do not find that there is any
necessity for granting the prayer of his petition: we have already too many
officers; and I do not apprehend the interest of the states would be much
promoted in his appointment. If he could make up two or three companies, they
would be of prisoners and deserters, who would most assuredly embrace an early
opportunity to go off with their arms and clothing. I am disposed to consider
him as a man of some address and policy, as he is aiming at a confirmation in
the line of the army (by obtaining an appointment to a new corpse) of the rank
which he had as a division quartermaster. Besides the impolicy of augmenting
the number of our officers where it is not really essential, such a promotion
would give dissatisfaction; and I suppose there are few officers, if any, who
formerly commanded Mr. * * * in the line of the army, that would submit to his
orders.

The enclosed copy of a letter from general Dickinson to (...) will inform
Congress of the fate of the continental frigates in Delaware, -- a fate (in the
situation they were left) I had long predicted, and which I had taken much
pains to avert, by using every argument in my power to have them sunk. In that
case, their destruction would have been at least a work of time, difficulty and
expense, and might have been perhaps prevented. -- About one o'clock on
thursday I got notice of an intended move of the enemy by water; and,
conjecturing the destination of it, had a detachment under general Maxwell
(whose tour of duty it was) ready to march toward the Delaware by four
o'clock: but a heavy rain prevented their moving till next morning.

I have been happy in the exchange, and a visit from lieutenant colonel Allen.
His fortitude and firmness seem to have placed him out of the reach of
misfortune. There is an original something in him that commands admiration; and
his long captivity and sufferings have only served to increase if possible his
enthusiastic zeal. -- He appears very desirous of rendering his services to the
states, and of being employed, and at the same time does not discover any
ambition for high rank. -- Congress will herewith receive a letter from him;
and I doubt not they will make such provision for him as they may think proper
and suitable.

I take pleasure in transmitting a Philadelphia paper of the ninth, which came
to hand yesterday evening, containing a message from his most christian majesty
to the court of London in consequence of the treaty between him and these
states, -- and his Britannic majesty's address to the lords and commons, etc.
-- The message is received in terms of irony and derision, more degrading to
the pride and dignity of Britain than any thing she has ever experienced since
she has been a nation. It is not an actual declaration of war, but it certainly
must produce one.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. A great number of blank oaths will be wanted. You will be pleased to
order some by every opportunity.



Valley-Forge, May 18, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE been honored with your two favors of the eleventh and fifteenth
instant, with the several papers alluded to, the former by monsieur Jemat, the
latter by express yesterday. Colonel Johnson set out on saturday afternoon to
wait on Congress upon the subject of his appointment, and, I presume, will be
at York today.

I shall announce the resolution of the fifteenth to the army, and would
flatter myself it will quiet in a great measure the uneasiness which have been
so extremely distressing, and prevent resignations, which had proceeded, and
were likely to be at such a height, as to destroy our whole military system. It
has experienced no inconsiderable shock, particularly in the line of some
states, from the loss of several very valuable officers.

The letter and brevet for colonel Allen I will transmit by the first
opportunity. -- He left camp eight days ago.

From a variety of concurring circumstances, and the uniform report of persons
who have left Philadelphia within four days past, it would appear that the
enemy mean to evacuate the city. It is said they have already embarked a part
of their heavy cannon and baggage, -- that transports are fitted and fitting
for their horse, and taking in hay. The accounts further add that there has
been a press for some nights in the city, and several men obtained in this way,
and carried aboard ship; also that there has been an increased number of
vendues. These circumstances all indicate an evacuation: but I have not been
able to learn the objects of their future operations. -- I wrote to general
Gates yesterday upon the subject, that he may be prepared in the best manner
the situation of things will admit, in case they should be destined for the
North-river, -- and desired him to retain for the present all the eastern
recruits intended for this army.

The quarter-master-general and commissary of provisions are directed to use
every possible exertion for putting the affairs of their departments in a train
to facilitate a movement in case it should be necessary. But such have been the
derangements and disorders in them, that we must be greatly embarrassed for a
considerable time yet.

A valuable detachment, under the command of the marquis Fayette, marched this
morning, which is intended to move between the Delaware and Schuylkill, for
restraining the enemy's parties, procuring intelligence, and to act as
circumstance may require.

I cannot help feeling for the prisoners in possession of the enemy. If they
evacuate Philadelphia, those unhappy men will be dragged away with them, and
perhaps to a more miserable confinement. But, supposing that their future
treatment should not be worse, or even that it should be more comfortable than
their past, -- the idea of being removed farther from their friends, and
farther from relief, must distress them to the last degree.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I would take the liberty to mention that I think the arms and clothing
expected from France should be brought forward without a moment's delay after
they arrive. The impolicy of suffering them ever to remain in places accessible
to shipping, out of the question, -- our distress for both is amazingly great:
we have many men now without firelocks, and many coming in, in the same
predicament; and half the army are without shirts. Our condition, for want of
the latter, and blankets, is quite painful -- of the former, very distressing.
The doctors attribute in a great degree the loss of hundreds of lives by the
scarcity of clothing; and I am certain hundreds have deserted from the same
cause.



Headquarters, Valley-Forge, May 21, 1778. SIR,
GENERAL M'Intosh will have the honor to deliver you this. He is now on his way
to take the command at Pittsburg and in the western frontiers, and waits on
Congress for their instructions. -- I would take the liberty of submitting to
Congress the enclosed account of expenses incurred by the general in his
journey from Georgia to join this army, and which he presented to me and to the
auditors for payment. I did not know how far I might be authorized to comply
with his request, and therefore lay the matter before Congress. At the same
time I would observe that nothing appears to me more equitable than that claims
of this sort, where they are not immoderate, should be satisfied by the public.
-- If this were not the case, the expenses of an officer, when ordered from one
post to another, especially where they are distant, would sink the whole or a
very large part of his pay. -- The charges attending the general's journey from
hence to Pittsburg will require equal attention; and the whole, I am persuaded,
will meet with a just and suitable provision.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, May 28, 1778. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the twenty-fourth instant, nothing
material has happened. The enemy are still in Philadelphia: but the
intelligence from thence is so clear and so strong, that it is certain, or
nearly as much so as any event can be that is contingent, that they mean to
abandon it. Against the various measures they are pursuing, which point to an
evacuation, there is but one single circumstance opposed that I can learn,
which is, that they are working at their redoubts with great industry. But this
fact, though certainly true, cannot be of sufficient weight to raise a doubt
upon the subject, and must be considered as merely calculated to deceive us,
and to mask their design.

We cannot find out, notwithstanding the most diligent pains, whether their
movement will be by land or sea; nor are the inhabitants of the town satisfied
on the point. -- Appearances favor either. -- They have a great many ships, and
very large: yet, from a preparation of boats at Prince's-bay on the south side
of Staten-Island which I am just advised of, and for some other reasons, a land
route is not improbable.

I have detached to Jersey the whole of the troops of that state under general
Maxwell, which, I flatter myself, with the militia general Dickinson will be
able to collect, will give them some annoyance in case they attempt to retreat
by land.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, May 28, 1778. SIR,
Lieutenant Colonel John Gibson, of the sixth Virginia regiment, who, from his
knowledge of the western country, and Indian nations and language, is ordered
to repair to Pittsburg, will have the honor of delivering you this. He is
entitled, and has been ever since the twenty-fifth of October last, to a
regiment in that line; and I must take the liberty to request that Congress
will give him a commission of that date. -- The resolution of the thirty-first
of December, "recommending the states to suspend filling up regimental
vacancies," -- my expectations that some officers of inferior rank, and perhaps
of the same, belonging to other states, might be reduced upon a new
arrangement, -- and the certainty, that, if I gave commissions in one instance,
I should be obliged to do it in all, -- have prevented me appointing him to the
vacancy he had a right to. I do not know particularly to what regiment he ought
to be appointed: Congress therefore will be pleased to give him a commission
for a regiment from the state of Virginia, without mentioning the number.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Many copies of oaths are still wanted.



Headquarters, Valley-Forge, May 31, 1778. SIR,
I HAD the honor to receive your favor of the twenty-fifth instant by doctor
Scudder, and that of the twenty-ninth, yesterday afternoon, with the enclosures
and packet to which they referred.

I shall inform major Lee of the new arrangement of his corpse, and will appoint
the officers required. -- Major Beatty is not in camp. The letter addressed to
him shall be sent by the first opportunity to Princeton, where I presume he
will be found. That for captain Smith is already dispatched to him.

The enemy are yet in Philadelphia, though the whole chain of information for
several days past afforded grounds to believe that they would have evacuated it
before now. -- I should suppose they are nearly prepared to do it, though the
removal of the store^ and baggage of so large an army requires considerable
time.

June 1. -- I should be glad to know, in case Philadelphia is evacuated,
whether any and what line of conduct is to be pursued respecting the goods that
may be left. -- Such articles as come under the denomination of public stores
will of course be taken by the proper officers for the use of the states. --
The point on which I wish directions is with respect to goods and merchandise,
private property. I do not know whether any considerable quantity may be left:
but it has been suggested; that, from an expectation of the sort, there are
some bringing into light their gold and silver for the purpose of buying-up. --
If there should be clothing suitable for the army, perhaps there might be
nothing unjust in the public's taking the preference, and Congress appointing
one or two intelligent active persons of address, acquainted with the city and
with those who have the goods, with proper powers to purchase them.

Whatever measure may be thought expedient, it will be necessary to adopt it as
early as possible, as the evacuation will probably take place in a short time.
Robert Morris, esquire, I should imagine, if the purchasing scheme is
determined on, will be able to point out proper persons. Some gentlemen have
mentioned messieurs Samuel Howell and Thomas Franklyn as well qualified both on
account of their integrity and attachment to our cause, and from their
knowledge of the city and residence in it ever since the enemy had the
possession.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I was just now honored with your letter of the thirty-first ultimo.



Valley-Forge, June 2, 1778. SIR,
I BEG leave to inform you, that, agreeable to the resolutions transmitted in
your favor of the thirty-first ultimo, I shall undertake the reform of the
North Carolina batallions in camp as soon as circumstances will admit.

I sincerely with the legislatures of the several states had passed laws
adopting the generous policy recommended by Congress in their resolution of the
twenty-third of April. I am assured by authority not to be questioned, that,
for want of this, hundreds, nay thousands of people, and among them many
valuable artisans with large quantities of goods, will be forced from
Philadelphia, who otherwise would willingly remain. From report, their
reluctance and distress upon this occasion are scarcely to be paralelled. --
There are a few whose conduct has been such, that no assurances of security, I
presume, could induce them to stay: and their departure, compelled and founded
as it were in the approbation of their own consciences, would answer all the
purposes of example, especially if followed by a confiscation of property. -- A
proscribing system, or laws having the same effect, when carried to a great
extent, ever appeared to me to be impolitic: and their operation should always
cease with the causes which produced them. Examples in terrorem are necessary:
but to exile many of its inhabitants cannot be the interest of any state.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Valley-Forge, June 4, 1778. SIR,
I TAKE the liberty to transmit you by express the enclosed packet which just
arrived at our advanced post by a flag from sir Henry Clinton. I also transmit
a copy of a letter I received from him, of the thirtieth ultimo, and of my
answer; likewise copies of his and lord Howe's letters which came to hand by
the present flag. -- The packet, I presume, contains Acts similar to those sent
to me.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, June 7, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your favors of the fourth and fifth instant, and
with the resolutions and papers to which they refer. -- I have taken measures
to communicate the new establishment of the army through the line; and the
sooner the arrangements can be made, the better. Should there appear further
regulations necessary, I shall take the liberty to offer my sentiments
respecting them.

My principal design, in addressing you so soon after the receipt of your
letters, is to advise Congress of the arrival of the commissioners. Lord
Carlisle, governor Johnston, and William Eden, esquire, are come over in this
character, and got to Philadelphia yesterday. Lord Cornwallis is also arrived.

I have been just favored with the enclosed British paper, which I transmit for
your perusal. -- Some parts of it are very interesting.

By some accident the copies of the resolutions of the tenth of January,
referred to in that of the fourth instant, have been mislaid or lost. This
circumstance lays me under the necessity of troubling you with a request for
others.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I am told a resolution passed about the nineteenth ultimo, respecting
the payment of prisoners either in the actual possession of the enemy, (...) on
parole. I do not recollect to have been honored with it; and, if there is such
a one, I wish to be favored with a copy for the government of my conduct.



Headquarters, Valley-Forge, June 9, 1778. SIR,
I WAS favored with yours of the sixth instant, enclosing copies of your
answers to lord How and general Clinton. The originals I sent in early this
morning by a flag. -- I have the honor to transmit you a duplicate of a letter
I received from sir Henry Clinton for the purpose of procuring a passport for
doctor Ferguson (the secretary to the king's commission) to Congress, with my
answer to him, -- on the subject of which, Congress will be pleased to favor me
with their instructions.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, June 10, 1778. SIR,
MAJOR Campbell of the thirteenth Virginia regiment will have the honor of
presenting you with this. He is now on his way* at the earnest solicitation of
general M'Intosh, to serve in the western department, and waits on Congress, to
obtain (if they shall think proper) a commission for a lieutenant-colonelcy in
the Virginia line, to which he has been entitled in the ordinary cause since
the twentieth of February last. -- The major sustains the character of a good
and brave officer, and has behaved as such during his service. -- He is the
more desirous of getting a commission at this time, as otherwise he may be
commanded by the lieutenant-colonels to be, or who are, appointed to the two
new regiments lately ordered to be raised in that quarter. I do not know the
particular regiment to which he should be affixed; therefore, if he obtains a
commission, it may be left blank in this instance.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, June 15, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your favors of the eleventh and fourteenth
instant, and with the enclosures to which they refer. -- The resolution for
settling the value of rations which have become due since the first of January,
and fixing the mode of payment, I shall announce in this day's orders, and hope
it will be highly satisfactory to all who are interested in it.

I have notified general Mifflin of the inquiry directed by Congress on the
eleventh instant, by transmitting him a copy of their proceedings; and he has
obtained leave, on his solicitation, to repair to York, etc. to prepare for his
defense. This I thought myself under a necessity of granting, however
inconvenient and injurious it may be to permit the absence of officers at this
period.

Our expectations that Philadelphia will be evacuated in the course of a few
days are again up. The information received yesterday through various channels,
and in a pretty direct way, would seem to place the matter almost on the
footing of a certainty.

We had about forty privates and twenty seamen exchanged on sunday. Another
party will be exchanged today; and, according to agreement, the whole of our
unfortunate men will be released as fast as we can bring down parties of the
prisoners in our hands, to give for them. -- It is thought by some we shall not
have an opportunity of completing the exchange of all those in Philadelphia
before the enemy leave it. -- Mr. Bou^inot has also settled and adjusted the
whole number of prisoners we are to account for (besides those now in actual
confinement) at nine hundred, which is less than half of the claim sir William
How so pertinaciously and so long adhered to.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, half after eleven, A. M. June 18, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE the pleasure to inform Congress that I was this minute advised by Mr.
Roberts that the enemy evacuated the city early this morning. He was down at
the middle ferry on this side, where he received the intelligence from a number
of citizens who were on the opposite shore. They told him th^^ about three
thousand of the troops had embarked on board transports. The destruction of the
bridge prevented him crossing. -- I expect every moment official accounts on
the subject.

I have put six brigades in motion; and the rest of the army are preparing to
follow with all possible dispatch. We shall proceed toward Jersey, and govern
ourselves according to circumstances. As yet I am not fully ascertained of the
enemy's destination; nor are there wanting a variety of opinions as to the
route they will pursue, whether it will be by land or sea, admitting it to be
to New York. Some think it probable, in such case that the part of their army
which crossed the Delaware will march down the Jersey shore some distance, and
then embark. -- There is other intelligence corroborating Mr. Roberts's, but
none official is yet come.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
A letter from captain M'Clean, dated in Philadelphia, this minute came to
hand, confirming the evacuation.



Headquarters, June 18, 1778, six o'clock, P. M. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you this forenoon, I received your letter
of the seventeenth, with its several enclosures. -- I am happy in the
approbation of Congress respecting my conduct to doctor Ferguson. I could not
find, after the maturest consideration on the subject, that his passage through
the country could be in any wise material, or answer any other purpose than to
spread disaffection.

I shall take every measure in my power to prevent an intercourse between the
army and the enemy, and also between the inhabitants and the latter. You may
rest assured that whatever letters come from their lines shall be, as they ever
have been, minutely inspected; and whenever they import any thing of an
insidious cast, they shall be suppressed. In this I trust I shall not offend
against any rule of right, nor the strictest propriety.

The letter for the commissioners I shall transmit by the earliest opportunity:
however, their departure from Philadelphia will prevent their getting it as
soon as they otherwise would have done. -- I cannot say that I regret the
delay: for there is no knowing to what acts of depredation and ruin their
disappointed ambition might have led. And permit me to add that I think there
was no other criterion for Congress to go by, than the one they have adopted.
The proceedings of the twenty-second of April, it is probable, have reached,
Britain by this time, and will show that the present powers of the
commissioners, -- or at least those we are obliged to suppose them to possess,
-- are wholly incompatible to any valuable end.

I have appointed general Arnold to command in Philadelphia, as the state of
his wound will not permit his services in a more active line. Colonel Jackson,
with a detachment of troops, is to attend him* and I flatter myself that order
will be preserved, and the several purposes answered, expressed by Congress in
their resolution of the fourth instant. -- The general set out this evening,
and I myself shall move with the main body of the army at five in the morning
tomorrow.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. By this conveyance you will be pleased to receive the proceedings of the
court of inquiry respecting the losses of the forts in the Highlands.



Headquarters, June 18, 1778, SIR,
THE baron Steuben will have the honor to deliver you this. I do not know
particularly the extent of his business at York; but, from what he has
communicated, it is in part to get the duties and powers of his appointment
minutely defined and settled. I enclose a copy of orders on the fifteenth
instant, which were issued to quiet the minds of the general officers, and to
remove a spirit of jealousy which but too apparently was rising among them.
These contain my ideas of the principal duties of the inspector's office, and,
I have reason to think, are generally agreeable to the army. While I am on this
subject, I must do justice to the baron's intelligence, zeal, and indefatigable
industry, from which we have experienced very happy effects.

The enclosed letter I transmit at the request of captain Gibbs; and I wish to
recommend him to the consideration of Congress. He has been in the army from
the commencement of the war, and in the capacities he mentions. When Congress
were pleased to honor me with the appointment of officers for the sixteen
additional batallions, I offered to make some provision for him; but this he
declined, preferring to remain in my family. The guard he commanded originally
consisted of fifty men: but, since the arrival of baron Steuben, it has been
augmented to a hundred and fifty. He advised that there should be a select
corpse of this number to receive the maneuvers in the first instance, and to
act as a model to the army; and proposed that it should be formed of the old
guard company and draughts from the line. I presume, -- if it should be
Congress's pleasure, -- that a majority would be highly agreeable to the
captain, and (...) as much as he expects.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

June 20, 1778, four o'clock, P. M. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to inform you that I am now advanced with the main body of
the army within ten miles of Coryel's ferry, and shall halt to refresh the
troops and for the night, as the weather is very rainy. -- General Lee, with
the six brigades mentioned in my former letter, will reach the ferry this
evening.

My last accounts from Jersey were from general Dickinson, dated yesterday at
three o'clock, P. M. These say the enemy had then advanced to Eyrestown, three
miles below Mount-Holly, and were busily employed in repairing the bridge which
had been destroyed. General Dickinson adds that there had been a brisk firing
for some minutes between the enemy and Maxwell's brigade, or a part of it, in
their advance, in which the former, according to the report of a deserter, had
several killed. He further says the militia had been [ apprised] of their
approach, were in good spirits, and that he expected today to be tolerably
strong. -- I have this minute written him by express, requesting him to
acquaint me with their and his own situation, what number of men he has already
collected, and what further augmentations he expects to receive.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

June 21, -- ten miles from Coryel's. SIR,
THIS will be delivered you by major Wemp who has the care of some warriors of
the Seneca nation. The enclosed copy of a letter from our commissioners will
show that they are come to obtain the release of Astiarix, another warrior, who
was taken on the frontiers of Virginia. I never heard of the circumstance till
I was informed of it a few days ago by a letter from general Schuyler. As the
commissioners have consented to his exchange, and advised it, I have assured
them it was agreeable to me; and I must take the liberty to request that
Congress will order it to be accomplished as soon as possible.

I have treated them with civility, but declared at the same time, in answer to
their speeches both in council and as warriors, -- if they do not immediately
cease hostilities, and become our friends, or at least neutral, -- that, the
moment we are clear of the British army, I will turn our whole force against
them and the other nations at war with us, and cut them off to a man. They saw
the main body of our army today; which circumstance, added to the evacuation
of Philadelphia, and the presents I wrote general Arnold to make them, with
other instances of kindness, I trust, will have a happy influence on the
actions and dispositions of their nation when they return.

They are also attended by a few of our Oneida and Tu^carora friends, who were
thought necessary to proceed with the truce. They had dispatches from their
sachems for the immediate return of such of their men and warriors as were
here, on account of their apprehensions of hostilities by the Senecas, etc. --
I consented to the measure, and directed that they should be furnished with
ample and suitable presents, if they could be obtained previous to their
departure. -- The army is in march; which will not permit me to add further
than that I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, near Coryel's, June 22, 1778, SIR,
I HAVE the honor to inform you that I am now in Jersey, and that the troops
are passing the river at Coryel's, and are mostly over. -- The latest
intelligence I have had respecting the enemy was yesterday from general
Dickinson. He says they were in the morning at Morestown and Mount-Holly; but
that he had not been able to learn what route they would pursue from thence;
nor was it easy to determine, as, from their situation, they might either
proceed to South-Amboy, or by way of Brunswic. We have been a good deal impeded
in our march by rainy weather. -- As soon as we have cleaned the arms, and can
get matters in train, we propose moving toward Princeton, in order to avail
ourselves of any favorable occasions that may present themselves, of attacking
or annoying the enemy.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Englishtown, six miles from Monmouth, June 28, 1778, half after eleven, A. M.
SIR,
I WAS duly honored with your favor of the twentieth instant, with the report
to which it referred, and trust my situation will apologize for my not
answering it before.

I am now here with the main body of the army, and pressing hard to come up
with the enemy. They encamped yesterday at Monmouth courthouse, having almost
the whole of their front, particularly their left wing, secured by a marsh and
thick wood, and their rear by a difficult defile, from whence they moved very
early this morning. -- Our advance, from the rainy weather, and the intense
heat when fair, (though these may have been equally disadvantageous to them)
has been greatly delayed. Several of our men have fallen sick from these
causes; and a few unfortunately have fainted, and died in a little time after.

We have a select and strong detachment more forward, under the command of
major general Lee, with orders to attack their rear if possible. Whether the
detachment will be able to come up with it, is a matter of question, especially
before they get into strong grounds. Besides this, Morgan, with his corpse, and
some bodies of militia, are on their flanks.

I cannot determine yet at what place they intend to embark. Some think they
will push for Sandy-hook, whilst others suppose they mean to go to
Shoal-harbor. The latter opinion seems to be founded in the greater
probability, as, from intelligence, several vessels and craft are lying off
that place.

We have made a few prisoners; and they have lost a good many men by desertion.
I cannot ascertain their number, as they came in to our advanced parties, and
pushed immediately into the country. I think five or six hundred is the least
number that have come in, in the whole. They are chiefly foreigners.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Fields near Monmouth Courthouse, June 29, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to inform you, that, about seven o'clock yesterday morning,
both armies advanced on each other. About twelve, they met on the grounds near
Monmouth courthouse, when an action commenced. We forced the enemy from the
field, and encamped on the ground. They took a strong post in our front,
secured on both flanks by morasses and thick woods, where they remained all
about twelve at night, and then retreated. -- I cannot at this time go into a
detail of matters: when opportunity will permit, I shall take the liberty of
transmitting Congress a more particular account of the proceedings of the day.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Englishtown, July 1, 1778, SIR,
I EMBRACE the first moment of leisure to give Congress a more full and
particular account of the movements of the army under my command since its
passing the Delaware, than the situation of our affairs would heretofore permit.

I had the honor to advise them; that, on the appearances of the enemy's
intention to march through Jersey becoming serious, I had detached general
Maxwell's brigade in conjunction with the militia of that state to interrupt
and impede their progress by every obstruction in their power, so as to give
time to the army under my command to come up with them, and take advantage of
any favorable circumstances that might present themselves. The army having
proceeded to Coryel's ferry, and crossed the Delaware at that place, I
immediately detached colonel Morgan with a select corpse of six hundred men to
reinforce general Maxwell, and marched with the main body toward Princeton.

The flow advance of the enemy had greatly the air of design; and led me, with
others, to suspect that general Clinton, desirous of a general action, was
endeavoring to draw us down into the lower country, in order, by a rapid
movement, to gain our right, and take possession of the strong grounds above
us. -- This consideration, and to give the troops time to repose and refresh
themselves from the fatigues they had experienced from rainy and excessive hot
weather, determined me to halt at Hopewell township, about five miles from
Princeton, where we remained till the morning of the twenty fifth.

On the preceding day I made a second detachment of fifteen hundred chosen
troops under brigadier-general Scott, to reinforce those already in the
vicinity of the enemy, the more effectually to annoy and delay their march. The
next day the army moved to Kingston; and, having received intelligence that the
enemy were prosecuting their route toward Monmouth courthouse, I dispatched a
thousand select men under brigadiergeneral Wayne, and sent the marquis De la
Fayette to take the command of the whole advanced corpse, including Maxwell's
brigade and Morgan's light infantry, with orders to take the first fair
opportunity of attacking the enemy's rear.

In the evening of the same day, the whole army marched from Kingston, where
our baggage was left, with intention to preserve a proper distance for
supporting the advanced corpse, and arrived at Cranberry early the next morning.
The intense heat of the weather, and a heavy storm unluckily coming on, made it
impossible to resume our march that day without great inconvenience and injury
to the troops. Our advanced corpse, being differently circumstanced, moved from
the position it had held the night before, and took post in the evening on the
Monmouth road, about five miles from the enemy's rear, in expectation of
attacking them next morning on their march. -- The main body having remained at
Cranberry, the advanced corpse was found to be too remote, and too far upon the
right, to be supported in case of an attack either upon or from the enemy;
which induced me to send orders to the marquis to file off by his left toward
Englishtown, which he accordingly executed early in the morning of the
twenty-seventh.

The enemy, in marching from Allentown, had changed their disposition, and
placed their best troops in the rear, consisting of all the grenadiers, light
infantry, and cha^seurs of the line. -- This alteration made it necessary to
increase the number of our advanced-corps; in consequence of which I detached
major general Lee with two brigades to join the marquis at Englishtown, on whom
of course the command of the whole devolved, amounting to about five thousand
men. The main body marched the same day, and encamped within three miles of
that place. Morgan's corpse was left hovering on the enemy's right flank; and
the Jersey militia, amounting at this time to about seven or eight hundred men,
under general Dickinson, on their left.

The enemy were now encamped in a strong position, with their right extending
about a mile and a half beyond the courthouse in the parting of the roads
leading to Shrewsbury and Middletown, and their left along the road from
Allentown to Monmouth, about three miles on this side the courthouse. Their
right flank lay on the skirt of a small wood, while their left was secured by a
very thick one, -- a morass running toward their rear, and their whole front
covered by a wood, and, for a considerable extent toward the left, with a
morass. -- In this situation they halted till the morning of the twenty-eighth.

Matters being thus situated, -- and having had the best information, that, if
the enemy were once arrived at the heights of Middletown, ten or twelve miles
from where they were, it would be impossible to attempt any thing against them
with a prospect of success, -- I determined to attack their rear the moment
they should get in motion from their present ground. I communicated my
intention to general Lee, and ordered him to make his disposition for the
attack, and to keep his troops constantly lying upon their arms, to be in
readiness at the shortest notice. This was done with respect to the troops
under my immediate command.

About five in the morning, general Dickinson sent an express informing that
the front of the enemy had begun their march. I instantly put the army in
motion, and sent orders by one of my aids to general Lee to move on and attack
them unless there should be very powerful reasons to the contrary, --
acquainting him at the same time, that I was marching to support him, and, for
doing it with the greater expedition and convenience, should make the men
disencumber themselves of their packs and blankets.

After marching about five miles, to my great surprise and mortification, I met
the whole advanced corpse retreating, -- and, as I was told, by general Lee's
orders, -- without having made any opposition, except one fire, given by a
party under the command of colonel Butler, on their being charged by the
enemy's cavalry, who were repulsed. -- I proceeded immediately to the rear of
the corpse, which I found closely pressed by the enemy, and gave directions for
forming part of the retreating troops, who, by the brave and spirited conduct
of the officers, aided by some pieces of well-served artillery, checked the
enemy's advance, and gave time to make a disposition of the left wing and
second line of the army upon an eminence, and in a wood a little in the rear,
covered by a morass in front. On this were placed some batteries of cannon by
lord Stirling who commanded the left wing, which played upon the enemy with
great effect, and, seconded by parties of infantry detached to oppose them,
effectually put a stop to their advance.

General Lee being detached with the advanced corpse, the command of the right
wing, for the occasion, was given to general Green. For the expedition of the
march, and to counteract any attempt to turn our right, I had ordered him to
file off by the new church, two miles from Englishtown, and fall into the
Monmouth road, a small distance in the rear of the courthouse, while the rest
of the column moved directly on toward the courthouse. On intelligence of the
retreat, he marched up and took a very advantageous position on the right.

The enemy, by this time, finding themselves warmly opposed in front, made ^n
attempt to turn our left flank; but they were bravely repulsed and driven back
by detached parties of infantry. They also made a movement to our right with as
little success, general Green having advanced a body of troops with artillery
to a commanding piece of ground; which not only disappointed their design of
turning our right, but severely enfiladed those in front of the left wing. --
In addition to this, general Wayne advanced with a body of troops, and kept up
so severe and well-directed a fire, that the enemy were soon compelled to
retire behind the defile where the first stand in the beginning of the action
had been made.

In this situation the enemy had both their flanks secured by thick woods and
morasses, while their front could only be approached through a narrow pass. I
resolved nevertheless to attack them; and, for that purpose, ordered general
Poor, with his own and the Carolina brigade, to move round upon their right,
and general Woodford upon their left, and the artillery to (...) them in front.
But the impediments in their way prevented their getting within reach before it
was dark. They remained upon the ground they had been directed to occupy during
the night, with intention to begin the attack early the next morning; and the
army continued lying upon their arms in the field of action, to be in readiness
to support them.

In the mean time the enemy were employed in removing their wounded, and about
twelve o'clock at night marched away in such silence, that, though general Poor
lay extremely near them, they effected their retreat without his knowledge.
They carried off all their wounded, except four officers and about forty
privates whose wounds were too dangerous to permit their removal.

The extreme heat of the weather, the fatigue of the men from their march
through a deep sandy country almost entirely destitute of water, and the
distance the enemy had gained by marching in the night, made a pursuit
impracticable and fruitless: it would have answered no valuable purpose, and
would have been fatal to numbers of our men, several of whom died the preceding
day with heat.

Were I to conclude my account of this day's transactions without expressing my
obligations to the officers of the army in general, I should do injustice to
their merit, and violence to my own feelings. They seemed to vie with each
other in manifesting their zeal and bravery. The catalogue of those who
distinguished themselves is too long to admit of particularising individuals. I
cannot, however, forbear mentioning brigadier-general Wayne, whose good conduct
and bravery through the whole action deserves particular commendation.

The behavior of the troops in general, after they recovered from the first
surprise occasioned by the retreat of the advanced corpse, was such as could not
be surpassed. -- All the artillery, both officers and men, that were engaged,
distinguished themselves in a remarkable manner.

Enclosed, Congress will be pleased to receive a return of our killed, wounded,
and missing. Among the first were lieutenant colonel Bunner of Pennsylvania,
and major Dickinson of Virginia, both officers of distinguished merit, and much
to be regretted. -- The enemy's slain, left on the field, and buried by us,
according to the return of the persons assigned to that duty, were four
officers and two hundred and forty-five privates. In the former number was the
honorable colonel Monckton. Exclusive of these, they buried some themselves, as
there were several new graves near the field of battle. -- How many men they
may have had wounded, cannot be determined: but, from the usual proportion, the
number must have been considerable. -- There were a few prison^rs taken.

The peculiar situation of general Lee at this time requires that I should say
nothing of his conduct. He is now in arrest. The charges against him, with such
sentence as the court martial may decree in his ca^e, shall be transmitted for
the approbation or disapprobation of Congress, as soon as it shall be passed.

Being fully convinced by the gentlemen of this country that the enemy cannot
be hurt or injured in their embarkation at Sandy-Hook, the place to which they
are going, -- and unwilling to get too far removed from the North-river, -- I
put the troops in motion early this morning, and shall proceed that way,
leaving the Jersey brigade, Morgan's corpse, and other light parties (the
militia being all dismissed), to hover about them, to countenance desertion,
and to prevent their depredations as far as possible. -- After they embark, the
former will take post in the neighborhood of Elizabethtown, the latter rejoin
the corpse from which they were detached.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, near Brunswic, July 7, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to inform you, that, on sunday morning, the left wing of the
army moved toward the North-river; the right followed yesterday; and the
second line, which forms the rear division, is also now in motion. I shall
advance as fast as I can consistently with the circumstances of the weather and
the health of the troops.

The enemy, from the advices of our parties of observation, were nearly if not
all embarked yesterday. They have continued to desert upon all occasions.

I should be extremely happy if the committee appointed to arrange the army
would repair to it as soon as possible. Congress can form no adequate idea of
the discontents prevailing on account of the unsettled state of rank, and the
uncertainty in which officers are as to their future situation. The variety of
hands in which the power of granting commissions and filling up vacancies is
lodged, -- and other circumstances, -- have occasioned frequent instances of
younger officers commanding their seniors, from the former having received
their commissions, and the latter not, -- and these, not only in the line of
the army at large, but in their own brigades, and even in their own regiments.
-- This, it will be readily conceived, is necessarily productive of much
confusion, altercation and complaint, and requires the speediest remedy.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. By accounts from Monmouth, more of the enemy's dead have been found. --
It is said the number buried by us and the inhabitants exceeds three hundred.



Camp, at Paramus, July 12, 1778. SIR,
ON friday evening, I had the honor to receive your letter of the seventh
instant, with its enclosures. -- The vote of approbation and thanks, which
Congress have been pleased to honor me with, gives me the highest satisfaction,
and at the same time demands a return of my sincerest acknowledgments. -- The
other resolution I communicated with great pleasure to the army at large in
yesterday's orders.

The left wing of the army, which advanced yesterday four miles beyond this,
moved this morning on the route toward King's ferry. The right, and second
line, which makes the last division, are now here, where they will halt for a
day or two, -- or perhaps longer, if no circumstances of a pressing nature cast
up, -- in order to refresh themselves from the great fatigues they have
suffered from the intense heat of the weather.

We have had it reported for two or three days through several channels from
New York, that there is a French fleet on the coast: and it is added that the
enemy have been manning with the utmost dispatch several of their ships of war
which were there, and have pushed them out to sea. -- How far these facts are
true, I cannot determine: but I should think it of infinite importance to
ascertain the first, if possible, by sending out swift-sailing cruisers. The
most interesting advantages might follow the information. -- I will try, by
every practicable m^ans that I can devise, to obtain an accurate account of the
enemy's fleet at New York.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, Paramus, July 14, 1778. SIR,
I HAD the honor yesterday evening of receiving your very important favor of
the tenth instant. -- Colonel Laurens, one of my aids, will set out this
morning with a letter to the French admiral, the count D'Estaing, enclosing a
copy of yours and such other information as I have been able to collect. Its
further purpose is for the establishing a convention of signals in case of
cooperation, or to convey him such knowledge of the enemy's naval force and
position, as may from time to time come under our cognizance.

It appears by intelligence of today that the count D'Estaing is off or near
Sandy-Hook, having already seized several fishing boats on the banks, in order
to procure information and pilots.

The army is in motion, and will cross the North-river with all convenient
dispatch, where I shall pursue such measures as may appear best calculated for
improving the present conjuncture.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, near White-Plains, July 22, 1778. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the fourteenth I have been favored
with your letters of the eleventh and seventeenth, with their respective
enclosures. The next morning after the receipt of the former which came to hand
on the seventeenth, I dispatched lieutenant colonel Hamilton, another of my
aids, with the best pilots and the most skilful masters of ships I could
procure, to admiral count D'Estaing, to converse with him more fully on the
subject of his operations, than I was able to direct lieutenant colonel Laurens
to do for want of the information which I afterward obtained from major
Chouin, and a knowledge in several other points besides.

On sunday night Mr. Laurens returned; and I found by him that it (...) the
count's first wish to enter at Sandy-Hook, in order to possess himself of, or
to destroy if possible, the whole of the British fleet lying in the bay of
New York; and that, for this purpose, he had been much engaged in his inquiries
about the depth of water, and in ^ounding the channel to ascertain it; the
result of which was, that the water, from the experiments made, was too shallow
at the entrance to admit his large ships, -- or, if they could be got in, it
appeared that it would not be without a great deal of difficulty and risk.
After this disappointment, the next important object which seemed to present
itself was an attempt against Rhode Island, which the count inclined to make
(unless I should advise the contrary) as soon as the Chimere frigate, which had
carried his excellency monsieur Girard into the Delaware, should rejoin him.

Lieutenant Colonel Hamilton, who was well informed of our situation and of my
sentiments on every point, was instructed to give the admiral a full and
accurate state of facts, and to acquaint him what aid, and how far we could
cooperate with him in case of an attempt either against New York or
Rhode Island; and also to obtain his ideas of the plan and system which he
might think ought to be pursued, and to agree with him on certain signals.

Previous to my dispatching Mr. Hamilton, from the information I received on my
enquiries respecting the navigation at the Hook, I was led to suspect (however
interesting and desirable the destruction or capture of the British fleet might
be) that it was not sufficient to introduce the count's ships. Under this
apprehension, I wrote general Sullivan on the seventeenth by express, that an
expedition might take place in a short time against Rhode Island, and urged him
at the same, time to apply to the states of Massachusetts, Rhode Island and
Connecticut, for as many men as would augment his force to five thousand, and
also to make every possible preparation of boast; provision, pilots, etc. as if
the event was fixed and certain.

From this time till about twelve o'clock on sunday, the troops continued
passing the river, when I crossed with the last division. On monday afternoon I
arrived at this place, in the neighborhood of which, the right and left wing
encamped that night, with the second line a few miles in their rear. And here I
am happy to add that their passage across the river was effected without any
accident, or without any more delay than necessarily attended the work.

Being persuaded now from the conversation which I have had with several pilots
and masters of vessels, of character, as well as from the accounts of other
gentlemen, and colonel Laurens's report on his return, that the passing of the
count's ships by the Hook would be extremely precarious, if not impracticable,
-- I determined yesterday (which was as soon as it could be done), without
waiting for further intelligence upon the subject, to put two brigades under
marching orders. They accordingly marched this morning at two o'clock, for
Rhode Island, under the particular command of generals Varnum and Glover
respectively, and both under the direction, for the present, of the marquis De
la Fayette. A water conveyance was thought of, and wished for the ^ase of the
troops: but, on consideration of all circumstances, such as the difficulty of
providing vessels, the change and precarlousness of the winds, the risk from
the enemy's ships, etc. their route by land was deemed by far the more
eligible. -- The force with general Sullivan, from the best and latest advice I
have been able to obtain, is about three thousand. -- A detachment under
colonel Jackson will follow Varnum's and Glover's brigades.

The enclosed papers, No. 1, respecting eight persons sent from Bennington, and
ordered into the enemy's lines, came to hand yesterday. About the same time I
received a letter from governor Clinton, containing a petition by the
prisoners, and a letter from the committee of Albany, all remonstrating against
the proceeding. As this is a matter in which I have no authority to act, nor in
which I would wish to intermeddle, I take the liberty of referring it to
Congress that they may decide upon it. -- The prisoners are at West-Point, and
ordered to be detained there for the present.

I would also take the liberty of transmitting to Congress a letter from
captain Gibbs, and of recommending him to their consideration. His letter was
to have been sent by the baron Steuben before we marched from Valley-Forge: but
his declining to go to Yorktown at that time, and our move through the Jerseys,
delayed its being done. The captain has been in the army from the commencement
of the war, and in the capacities which he mentions. -- When Congress were
pleased to honor me with the appointment of officers for the sixteen additional
battalions, I offered to make some provision for him: but this he declined,
preferring to remain in my family. The guard he originally commanded consisted
of fifty men; but, since the arrival of baron Steuben, it has been augmented to
a hundred and fifty. The baron advised that there should be a select corpse of
this number, to receive the maneuvers in the first instance, and to act as a
model to the army; and proposed that it should be formed of the old guard
company, and draughts from the line. -- I presume, if it should be Congress's
pleasure, a majority would be highly acceptable to the captain, and that it is
as much as he expects.

Eleven o'clock, P. M. -- I this moment received a letter from colonel
Hamilton, who is on his return to the army, dated the twentieth at Black-point.
He informs that the count D'Estaing would sail the next evening for
Rhode Island, being convinced from actual soundings that he could not enter his
ships. He was anxiously waiting the arrival of the Chimere, but, at all events,
meant to sail at the time he mentions. The admiral has agreed on signals with
Mr. Hamilton. -- Immediately after this letter came to hand, my aid, Mr.
Laurens, set out for Providence, having many things to communicate to general
Sullivan upon the subject of his cooperation, which neither time nor propriety
would suffer me to commit to paper. General Sullivan is directed not to confine
the number of his troops to five thousand, but to augment it, if he shall judge
it necessary to insure his success.

I was informed by Mr. Laurens, that the count D'Estaing's magazine of bread is
not so large as he could wish, and that in the course of a few weeks he shall
be in want. This circumstance I thought it right to mention: and I should
suppose that any quantity of biscuit may be provided in a little time at
Philadelphia.

The enclosures, No. 2, are copies of three letters from myself to the admiral.
-- I flatter myself that the present of stock which I directed for him on his
first arrival, in behalf of the states, will be approved by Congress.

The accounts from the western frontiers of Tryon county are distressing. The
spirit of the savages seems to be roused, and they appear determined on
mischief and havoc in every quarter. -- By a letter from governor Clinton, of
the twenty-first, they have destroyed Springfield and Andreas town, and are
marching toward the settlements on the west branch of the Delaware. These
incursions are extremely embarrassing to our other affairs, and I think, will
justify a conclusion that sir Henry Clinton's intention was to operate up the
North-river. -- Whether it may have changed with circumstances cannot be
determined.

I have detached the fourth Pennsylvania regiment and the remains of Morgan's
corpse, under lieutenant colonel Butler, and also colonel Graham with a York
state regiment, to cooperate with the militia, and to check the Indians, if
possible. Colonel Butler is an enterprising good officer, and well acquainted
with the savage mode of warfare: and I am persuaded whatever comes within the
compass of his force and abilities, will be done.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, July 26, 1778. SIR,
THE baron De Steuben will have the honor of delivering you this. I am
extremely sorry that this gentleman's situation and views seem to have
determined him to quit the service, in which he has been heretofore and is
capable still of being extensively useful. Some discontents, which arose among
the officers on account of the powers with which the office was at first
vested, induced me to arrange the duties of it upon a (...) different from that
on which it began. The moving state of the army has for some time past, in a
great degree, suspended the exercise of the inspectorate. When the troops
marched from Brunswic, the scarcity of general officers, -- most of them being
engaged with the court martial either as members or witnesses, -- occasioned my
giving the baron a temporary command of a division during the march. On our
arrival near our present encampment, I intended he should relinquish this
charge, and resume his former office, for which purpose a general order was
accordingly issued. But I find that he is entirely disinclined to the measure,
and resolves not to continue in the service unless he can hold an actual
command in the line.

Justice concurring with inclination constrains me to testify that the baron
has in every instance discharged the several trusts reposed in him with great
zeal and ability, so as to give him the fullest title to my esteem, as a brave,
indefatigable, judicious, and experienced officer. -- I regret there should be
a necessity that his services should be lost to the army: at the same time I
think it my duty explicitly to observe to Congress, that his desire of having
an actual and permanent command in the line cannot be complied with, without
wounding the feelings of a number of officers whose rank and merits give them
every claim to attention; and that the doing it would be productive of much
dissatisfaction and extensive ill consequences. This does not proceed from any
personal objections on the part of those officers against the baron: -- on the
contrary, most of them, whom I have heard speak of him, express a high sense of
his military worth. It proceeds from motives of another nature, which are too
obvious to need particular explanation, or may be summed up in this, that they
conceive such a step would be injurious to their essential rights and just
expectations. -- That this would be their way of thinking upon the subject, I
am fully convinced, from the effect which the temporary command given him, even
under circumstances so peculiar as those I have mentioned, produced: -- the
strongest symptoms of discontent appeared upon the occasion.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, July 28, 1778. SIR,
THIS will be presented to Congress by general Putnam. He arrived from
Connecticut the day after I came into the neighborhood of this camp. -- As I
have not received any resolution of Congress respecting the court of inquiry
which they directed, and which was transmitted them, on the subject of the
posts in the Highlands taken last year, I am at a loss in what point of view to
consider him. -- He wishes some decision in this instance; and his journey to
Philadelphia is for that purpose. -- I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, August 3, 1778. SIR,
I DO myself the honor of transmitting to Congress a copy of a letter from
general Knox, and of sundry observations and remarks on the ordnance
establishment of the eleventh of February, which I received about the time we
marched from Valley-Forge. These would have been transmitted before, had it not
been for the moving state of the army, and a variety of other objects which
engrossed my attention. -- We have found by experience that some inconveniences
have resulted from the establishment, which I conceive have proceeded
principally from the total independence of the commissary-general of military
stores on the commanding officer of artillery. It seems some alterations are
necessary: and what they shall be, Congress will be pleased to determine.

It is not without reluctance that I am constrained to renew my importunities
on the subject of the committee of arrangement. The present unsettled state of
the army is productive of so much dissatisfaction and confusion, and of such a
variety of disputes, that almost the whole of my time is now employed in
finding temporary and inadequate expedients to quiet the minds of the officers,
and keep business on a tolerable sort of footing. Not an hour passes without
new applications and new complaints about rank: and, for want of a proper
adjustment of this and many other essential points, our affairs are in a most
irksome and injurious train. We can scarcely form a court martial or parade a
detachment in any instance, without a warm discussion on the subject of
precedence; and there are several good officers now who are forced to decline
duty, to prevent disputes, and their being commanded by others who upon every
principle are their inferiors, unless their having obtained commissions before
them (from the opportunities they had of making earlier applications, from
local circumstances) should be considered sufficient to give them a superior
claim. -- There are many other causes of dissatisfaction on this head: but I
will not enter into a minute relation of them. I sincerely wish that the
gentlemen appointed, or such others as Congress may think proper to nominate
for the occasion, would immediately repair to camp: -- the present opportunity
is favorable for reducing matters to system and order; and, from painful
experience, I know there is an absolute necessity for it.

I should also hope that Congress will excuse me for mentioning again the
necessity there is for appointing some brigadiers. The Massachusetts, by the
resignation of general Learned, wants one: Pennsylvania, as general Hand is not
here, has but one with the army: Maryland, which has two large brigades in the
field, has only general Smallwood; and the North Carolina troops, since the
departure of general M'Intosh, have been without any. -- As I had taken the
liberty upon a former occasion to offer my sentiments to Congress and their
committee upon this subject, I should not trouble them now, if I was not more
and more convinced that the service required promotions in this line. The
frequent changes which take place among the officers, where there are no
brigadiers, are attended with great inconvenience and detriment; and they are
an effectual bar to the introduction of discipline. In such cases, the officers
know that their command is but temporary, always liable to cease; and therefore
they do not find themselves sufficiently interested to promote order and
subordination; nor will the rest look up to them with that respect and
deference which are essential. Every day's experience proves this, and shows
beyond question that the affairs of a brigade can never be in a right train
without a brigadier or some general officer to direct them. -- It is certain
these appointments, at the first view, will add a little to the list of
expense: but in the end they will be a great saving, and produce many important
advantages. -- We are also a good deal distressed at this time for
major-generals. However, as this arises more from the peculiar circumstances
and situation of many which prevent them from duty in the line, than from a
deficiency in the number appointed, I shall not add upon the occasion.

There is another branch of the army, which, in my opinion, calls loudly for
the appointment of a general officer, and this is the cavalry. -- For want of a
proper regulating head in this corpse, the whole has been in confusion, and of
but very little service; whereas, under a right management, it might be most
useful. The principal officers in it do not harmonise; which circumstance, with
their disputes about rank, would (were there no other objections) effectually
prevent the corpse from rendering the public the services they have a right to
expect, and of which it should be capable. To promote any gentleman now in it
to a general command, would not be acquiesced in by the rest, -- nor do I know
that any of them wish it; -- and it would increase their misunderstanding, and,
of course, disorder.

I mean to draw all the horse immediately together, when I trust they will be
under the direction of a general officer appointed by Congress for the purpose.
Who he shall be, will remain solely with them to determine. However, I will
take the liberty to add that he should be intelligent, active, attentive; and,
as far as I can judge, general Cadwallader or general Reed would fill the post
with great-honor and advantage; though it would seem, from the seat the latter
has taken in Congress, and from his late appointment to the council of
Pennsylvania, as if he had declined every military view. The abilities of these
gentlemen, as well as their attachment, are generally known; and I am led to
believe that either would be as acceptable to the corpse as any person that can
be found. Indeed I have learned as much from two of the colonels.

I have been waiting with the most impatient anxiety to hear of count
D'Estaing's arrival at Rhode Island; but as yet I have not been so happy. My
last intelligence from thence is a letter from general Sullivan, dated at ten
o'clock in the forenoon of the twenty-seventh, when he had no advice of the
fleet. -- He was in high spirits; and, from the preparation in which matters
were, he entertained the most flattering hopes of success in the intended
enterprise. -- The brigades of Varnum and Glover, with Jackson's detachment,
would arrive, I expect, on the second instant.

As the army was encamped, and there was no great prospect of a sudden removal,
I judged it advisable to send general Green to the eastward on wednesday last,
being fully persuaded his services, as well in the quartermaster line as in
the field, would be of material importance in the expedition against the enemy
in that quarter. He is intimately acquainted with the whole of that country,
and besides he has an extensive interest and influence in it. And, in justice
to general Green, I take occasion to observe that the public is much indebted
to him for his judicious manage^ent and active exertions in his present
department. When he entered upon it, he found it in a most confused,
distracted, and destitute state. This, by his conduct and industry, has
undergone a very happy change, and such as enabled us with great facility to
make a sudden move with the whole army and baggage from Valley-Forge in pursuit
of the enemy, and to perform a march to this place. In a word, he has given the
most general satisfaction, and his affairs carry much the face of method and
system. -- I also consider it as an act of justice to speak of the conduct of
colonel Wadsworth, commissary-general. He has been indefatigable in his
exertions, to provide for the army; and, since his appointment, our supplies of
provision have been good and ample.

August 4. -- At seven o'clock in the evening yesterday, I received the
enclosed letter from general Sullivan, with one addressed to myself, a copy of
which I do myself the pleasure of forwarding. -- I am exceedingly happy in the
count's arrival, and that things wear so pleasing an aspect.

There is another subject on which I must take the liberty of addressing
Congress, which is that of the clothier's department. I am perfectly satisfied,
that, unless this very important and interesting office is put under better
regulations, the army will never be clothed. * * * I believe both officers and
men, particularly the latter, have suffered greater inconveniences and
distresses than soldiers ever did before, for want of clothing; and that this
has not flowed more from a real scarcity of articles, than a want of proper
exertions and provident management to procure them. -- It is essential that
something should be done, and immediately, to place the department on a better
footing. We have now a great many men entirely destitute of shirts and
breeches, and I suppose not less than a fourth or fifth of the whole here who
are without shoes. From the deficiencies in this line, numbers of desertions
have proceeded, -- not to mention deaths; and, what is still worse, the troops
which remain, and see themselves in rags, want that spirit and pride necessary
to constitute the soldier.

I have been informed by several officers, and by such as I can depend on, that
many of the late draughts are willing and desirous of enlisting during the war.
I do not conceive myself at liberty to give direction on the point, and
therefore submit it to Congress to decide. However, if they can be engaged for
the usual bounties allowed by the continent, after proper precautions are taken
to prevent fraud, I think the measure will be expedient. -- It is true, our
affairs have an agreeable aspect at present: but the war may continue, and we
-- want men. A third of the time of some of them, and a half in the case of
others, is already expired; and, as they will rise in their views, and become
more difficult in proportion as their service draws to a conclusion, -- if the
step is considered advisable, the sooner we attempt to enlist, the better in
all probability will the work succeed.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

White-Plains, August 7, 1778. SIR,
YESTERDAY afternoon I had the honor to receive your favor of the thirtieth
ultimo. -- Major Gibbs is now at Rhode Island. I shall embrace the first safe
opportunity to transmit him your letter and the commission with which Congress
have been pleased to honor him.

Since my letter of the third and fourth instant, I have received no advices
from general Sullivan, so that I can give no information of our operations
against the enemy in the eastern quarter. -- I am told the militia of
Massachusetts and Connecticut were collecting fast, and proceeding to reinforce
him.

I have the pleasure to acquaint Congress that major general Lincoln arrived
here yesterday, and that he is happily so far recovered from his wound, as to
be able to take his command in the line.

The enclosed paper from New York came to hand last night. It contains an
account of the fire which unfortunately broke out in the city on sunday night,
and of the damage which was occasioned by it. It also contains the latest
advices that I have seen from Britain, and such as appear to be interesting.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Camp, August 7, 1778, ten o'clock, P. M. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you today, I received letters from count
D'Estaing, and my aid, lieutenant colonel Laurens. These contain the latest
advices I have from Rhode Island, -- of which I do myself the pleasure of
transmitting copies by this conveyance.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

White-Plains, August 11, 1778. SIR,
I TAKE the liberty of transmitting to Congress the enclosed letter which I
just now received from the paymaster-general. They will perceive by it that the
military chest is entirely exhausted, and that a third of the army remains
unpaid for the months of April and May. The importance and necessity of an
immediate and large supply will at once appear; and I am persuaded it will be
ordered and forwarded with all possible expedition.

Since I had the honor of writing by colonel Heth on sunday last, I have not
received any advices from Rhode Island.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, August 13, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to transmit you a letter from general Sullivan, which, from
the tardiness of the expresses, is but just come to hand. I suppose it gives
Congress the same information communicated to me: but, lest there should be any
particulars mentioned in his letter to me which may not be contained in the one
to you, I am induced to accompany the latter with a copy of the former.

The papers sent from Congress to headquarters, and returned, respecting the
case of major general St. Clair, will be wanted immediately, as it is probable
his trial will now very speedily come on.

I beg you will excuse the trouble I give you in requesting you will favor me,
in your next, with copies of the resolve of Congress for raising the regiment
of artillery in Virginia and appointing colonel Harrison to the command of it,
-- and of another, passed the latter end of seventy-six, for raising three
battalions of continental artillery. Some disputes about rank have arisen,
which make these resolutions necessary; and it happens that my papers of that
period are absent.

With the utmost respect, I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I request you will be pleased to forward the enclosed to Mr. Sergeant
without delay.



[The following letter, without date, appears to have been written about the
fifteenth of August, 1778.] SIR,
MR. Fuhrer and Mr. Kleinsmit have lately left the British lines, and come in
to us. -- The account they give of themselves is this, that they had been first
lieutenants in the Hessian corpse, were taken prisoners at Trenton, resided
during their captivity at Dumfries in Virginia, were lately exchanged, and have
since resigned their commissions: -- that having solicited permission to come
out from the enemy, and refused, they determined to leave them at all hazards,
and have now put their design in execution. -- The circumstances of their
captivity are known to several officers in our army.

They are desirous of entering into our service, observing that there are a
number of German officers in the same disposition with themselves, who will
resign and join us, if they find that these meet with proper countenance. -- It
appears to me that important advantages may attend the encouraging a
disposition of this nature (if it really exists, -- which is far from being
impossible) from the influence it will necessarily have upon the soldiery by
increasing that spirit of desertion and discontent which already prevails among
them.

Congress will best judge of the propriety of employing these gentlemen. -- I
have been thinking in what manner it might be done; and the mode least
exceptionable, which at present occurs to me, is to authorize them to raise a
corpse for themselves, by enlisting such German inhabitants, and such deserters
from the foreign troops, as may be willing to engage. The corpse at first, as it
is only by way of experiment, need not be large, but may be afterward
increased as circumstances shall point out. This measure, I apprehend, cannot
be attended with any material inconvenience, and may be productive of utility.
If the gentlemen are employed at all, it must be in a new corpse, as they could
not be introduced into any of those already formed, without injuring the
officers in them, and producing dissatisfaction, murmurs, and resignations.

I have founded them on the plan here suggested, and they seem to be very
sanguine in its success, and anxious to undertake it. -- They expect some
augmentation in rank; and indeed it seems necessary, in order the more
effectually to interest others to follow their example: but caution should be
used not to carry the idea too far; because, besides other weighty
considerations, the higher the rank conferred on them, the more difficult it
will be to provide for those who may hereafter come to us, and who will of
course frame their expectations by comparison.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. An additional grade, to the rank they held in the corpse they come from,
will, in my opinion, be sufficient.



Headquarters, White-Plains, August 16, 1778. SIR,
I TAKE the liberty, by the conveyance now offered me by captain Riley, to
transmit to Congress the proceedings of the court martial in the case of
major general Lee.

The enclosed papers comprehend a request by general Phillips for an officer to
go to Canada by way of the lakes, on the subject of clothing for the convention
troops. I do not conceive myself at liberty to answer general Heath upon the
point, who referred it to me; and request that Congress will favor me with
their direction as soon as they conveniently can, that I may enable him to
satisfy general Phillips respecting it.

I have not received a single tittle of intelligence from Rhode Island since
general Sullivan's letter of the tenth, a copy of which I transmitted in mine
of the thirteenth. I am extremely anxious to hear from thence, and of count
D'Estaing's safe arrival in port: the moment I do, I shall do myself the honor
to advise Congress.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, Aug. 16, 1778. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you today by captain Riley, I received a
letter from general Sullivan, a copy of which you have enclosed. From this it
appears the count D'Estaing had not returned with his squadron on the
thirteenth instant: and there is reason to fear, from the violence of the
weather ever since, that he has not yet got in. -- This accident has much
deranged our views, and I shall be happy if it does not totally defeat our
enterprise against Rhode Island. -- I feel much for the count. He has been
peculiarly unfortunate in the combination of several untoward circumstances to
frustrate his plans.

The letter addressed to you accompanied mine from general Sullivan. They were
both delivered at the same instant; and through inadvertence I broke the seal
of yours. Before I had opened it, I discovered the mistake; and the contents
have not been seen. This relation, I trust, will apologize for the measure.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Your favor of the thirteenth has come to hand.



Headquarters, White-Plains, August 19, 1778. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to transmit you a copy of a letter from general
Sullivan, dated the seventeenth instant, which I just now received, with the
letter enclosed. -- It appears that count D'Estaing was still out with his
fleet, but yet that the general was in high spirits, and in the strongest hopes
of success. I flatter myself they are well grounded, and that in the course of
a few days he will announce the entire reduction of the enemy's force on the
island.

The declaration respecting governor Johnston has been sent by a flag to the
British commissioners.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, August 21, 1778. SIR,
YOUR favor of the sixteenth, with the several papers to which it referred,
came duly to hand on wednesday afternoon.

I this minute received from general Sullivan the letter I have now the honor
of forwarding you, with one addressed to myself. A copy of the latter is also
enclosed. -- The general seems to have been near the enemy's lines, and on the
point of opening all his batteries. Things appear to be in a promising train.

By advices from an officer of rank and intelligence who is stationed with a
party in Monmouth county, I am informed that sixteen ships entered the Hook on
the seventeenth, -- one having a flag; and that, on that and the preceding day,
a heavy (...) was heard at sea.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, August 21, 1778. SIR,
I DO myself the honor of transmitting to Congress the enclosed memorial of
colonel Rawlings, presented in behalf of himself and the Maryland officers who
were under his command in the year 1776. The facts which are stated in it are
generally true; and I cannot but feel myself exceedingly interested in favor of
these gentlemen. The conduct of this whole corpse, when Fort-Washington was
attacked, is so generally known and approved, that it is almost unnecessary to
add upon the subject. However I think it but justice to observe that every
representation of that day's transaction gave them the highest credit. -- They
fought with a degree of veteran bravery; and, though but a handful, they
maintained their ground a considerable time, notwithstanding the most vigorous
efforts to force them. All who were spectators upon the occasion have declared
this; and the enemy themselves have not refused them applause.

It seems hard that officers of their merit should be overlooked, -- and a loss
to the service that they should remain unemployed: but the consequences that
would attend their incorporation with any of the corpse now existing appear too
disagreeable, to try the experiment. Colonel Rawlings himself, from the
information I have had, does not incline to give any uneasiness to the line of
the army, and would rather make a distant part of it against the Indians, in
case he could be provided for in that way. Captain Beall, who is charged with
this, will be able to inform Congress more fully than I can of the wishes of
the colonel and the rest of his officers; and his account may lead perhaps to
some suitable and practicable provision for them. As I have observed before,
they are men who deserve well of their country. -- I only mention the Maryland
officers upon this occasion, because that part of the corpse which came from
Virginia was provided for by the state in their present arrangement, as I have
been credibly advised.

Mr. Rawlings was never in the complete and actual command of the regiment
under his direction as colonel, because he never obtained a commission: but he
became entitled to it according to the then common rule of promotion by the
death of colonel Stephenson, and the non-acceptance of colonel Morgan who was
appointed to it. Of the latter circumstance Mr. Rawlings, I am persuaded, was
never apprised, as it was kept a secret from an apprehension that the enemy
might claim an officer of the rank of colonel in exchange for Morgan who was
then a prisoner on parole, if his promotion came to their knowledge. -- Major
Williams of the Maryland part of the corpse was appointed by the state to one of
her regiments now in the field, and is the only officer in his predicament I
know of, that they arranged.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, August 24, 1778. SIR,
I HAD yesterday the honor to receive your favor of the twentieth instant. -- I
take the liberty of transmitting you a copy of a letter which this minute came
to hand from general Sullivan, advising of the count D'Estaing's arrival. He
omitted to enclose the admiral's letter to which he refers; and therefore I can
give no further intelligence than what the copy contains. -- From the suffering
of the fleet, the storm must have been exceedingly severe at sea.

I also enclose two York papers of the nineteenth and twentieth. These mention
an engagement off Sandy-Hook on the sixteenth. It could only have been partial
on the side of the French squadron at any rate, as the Languedoc and the
seventy-four-gun ships must have lost their masts before that time. -- It would
seem by the account given in the papers, that the Isis and some other ships on
the part of the enemy had been damaged.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, August 25, 1778. SIR,
ENCLOSED you will be pleased to receive a copy of a letter of the twenty-third
instant from general Sullivan, which came to hand about half after three
o'clock this morning, with the several papers to which it refers, copies of
which are also transmitted. By these, Congress will perceive our prospects are
much changed with respect to the operations against Rhode Island; and that the
issue, as things are now circumstanced, -- whether we look to a continuation of
the siege, to an immediate attack, or a retreat, -- must be attended with great
difficulty and risk. -- I trust the wisest measures will be pursued; and I will
hope for the best.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. General Sullivan, I think, must be under a mistake as to the amount of
the relief which the enemy had attempted to give from York. -- I have used
every possible means to gain information from time to time on this head; and I
never could learn, either from deserters or others who had been in the city,
that any troops had embarked since the reinforcement sent up the Sound long
ago, except some draughts to act in the fleet as marines.



Headquarters, White-Plains, August 31, 1778, three o'clock, P. M. SIR,
I WOULD take the liberty to inform Congress that colonel Armand is come to
camp with his corpse, and has applied to me for commissions for his officers. --
By the resolution for establishing the corpse, it was to be officered out of the
foreigners then commissioned in our service, who were not nor could be provided
for in any of the regiments. Instead of this, there are only three officers in
the corpse who before held any commissions in our service, viz.
lieutenant colonel Vrigney, and captains Mercley and Shafner. The two last were
only lieutenants, and are now appointed to captaincies, contrary (it seems to
me) to the spirit and intention of the resolution.

As colonel Armand has departed from his instructions which must govern me, I
am not authorized to grant the commissions he requires, and am therefore under
the necessity of troubling Congress with the arrangement of the corpse, No. 1,
as it now actually stands for their consideration and decision. -- The colonel
founds his deviation from the resolve upon some verbal intimation given him
that the part in question would not be insisted on.

I would also take the liberty to mention that general Du Portail lately
delivered me a memorial, in which, among other things, he represents that he
had made an agreement with Congress at his first appointment, that neither
himself nor the other gentlemen with him should be commanded by any of the
engineers who had preceded them in our army. -- I could not but answer that the
commissions of officers were the only rule of precedence and command I had to
judge by; and, while others held superior appointments, I must consider them
accordingly in the course of service. He gave me the enclosed letter to you
upon the subject, and is extremely anxious to have the matter placed upon a
certain footing: and, no doubt, it will be for the good and tranquillity of the
service that the claim be determined as speedily as possible one way or the
other. At the same time I think it right to observe that it cannot be expected
that colonel Cosciusko, who has been a good while in this line, and conducted
himself with reputation and satisfaction, will consent to act in a subordinate
capacity to any of the French gentlemen except general Du Portail. * * *

Since I had the honor of writing you on the twenty-fifth instant, I have not
received a single line from general Sullivan. The only intelligence I have from
the eastward is from monsieur Pontjobean. This gentlemen left Rhode Island the
twenty-seventh, and arrived about two hours ago in camp. From him I learn that
our people were still on the island; -- that it was generally thought they had
made effectual provision for a retreat in case of exigency; -- that in the
evening of that day he met monsieur Preville, an officer belonging to the
Languedoc, at Providence, going with dispatches to general Sullivan, -- who
informed him that the French fleet had got into Boston. -- He further adds that
monsieur Ca^oune who was in company with him at Providence, and who had more
conversation with monsieur Preville than he himself had, told him that monsieur
Preville said count D'Estaing had sailed or was on the point of sailing again
for Rhode Island with ten ships of the line and his frigates.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Your favor of the twentieth only came to hand just now.



Headquarters, White-Plains, September 1, 1778, eleven o'clock, A. M. SIR,
I DO myself the honor of transmitting you a copy of a letter I this minute
received from general Sullivan. -- I congratulate Congress on the repulse of
the enemy, and only wish our troops may be able to effect a retreat, which
seems the most eligible measure they can pursue in the present situation of
things.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, Sept. 4, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE been duly honored with your favor of the twenty-eighth and that of the
thirtieth ultimo, with the several enclosures to which they refer.

Congress may rely that I will use every possible means in my power to
conciliate any differences that may have arisen in consequence of the count
D'Estaing's going to Boston, and to prevent a publication of the protest upon
the occasion. -- Several days before the receipt of the resolution, I had
written to the eastward, urging the necessity of harmony, and the expediency of
affording the admiral every assistance to refit his ships. This I repeated
after the resolution came to hand; and I have also taken opportunity to request
all the general officers here to place the matter in the most favorable point
of view whenever they hear it mentioned.

The five hundred guineas, which Congress were pleased to order, came safe to
hand, and shall be appropriated to the purposes they intended, and as the
exigency of the service may require. -- For want of supplies of this sort, we
have been very deficient in intelligence in many important and interesting
points. In some cases, no consideration in paper money has been found
sufficient to effect even an engagement to procure it: and, where it has been
otherwise, the terms of service, on account of the depreciation, have been
high, if not exorbitant.

The design of the enemy, as to their future movements, remain yet entirely [
in the dark]: but the expectation of their leaving the continent is daily
decreasing. The hurricane season seems opposed to their going to the
West Indies; and the passage to Europe in a little time will become more and
more dangerous. Besides these, there is another circumstance, of some weight,
if true, to induce a belief that they mean to stay. It appears by the papers
that part of the regiments lately raised in Britain are ordered to Halifax. If
the troops here were intended to be recalled, it would seem that some of them
would be sent to reinforce that gar^ison sooner than troops from England or
Scotland; and hence I think it may be presumed that another campaign will take
place in America, especially if administration are disappointed in their
expectations from the commission.

Where the theater of war may be, must be a matter of conjecture. But, as it is
an acknowledged fact that an army acting in the eastern states must derive
flour for its support from those more western, I submit to Congress the
expediency, and, in my opinion, the necessity, of establishing, without loss of
time, magazines of this article at convenient places (removed from the Sound)
in Connecticut and Massachusetts. I am the more induced to wish an early
consideration of this point, as, by a sudden move of the army, (should events
make it necessary) the departments of commissary and quartermaster would be
greatly distressed. Nor would such magazines, I should imagine, be attended
with any considerable loss, though the army should not operate in that quarter,
as the flour would answer occasionally for our shipping, and the surplus might
in all probability be otherwise readily disposed of.

I take the liberty of transmitting to Congress a memorial I received from the
reverend Mr. Tetard. -- From the certificates annexed to it, he appears to be a
man of great merit; and from every account, he has suffered in the extreme in
the present contest. His attachment, services, and misfortunes, seem to give
him a claim to a generous notice: but, according to the new establishment of
the army, it is not in my power to make any provision for him. I therefore
recommend his case to the attention and consideration of Congress.

Six o'clock, P. M. -- I this minute received a letter from general Sullivan,
of which the enclosure, No. 2, is a copy. I shall be exceedingly happy if a
perfect reconciliation has taken place between him and the count and all the
officers. -- His letter will show some of the reasons that led to the protest,
and that it was the hope of our officers that it would have operated as a
justification to the admiral, to return against the sentiments of his council,
especially as it coincided (as it is said) with his own inclination. -- I had
these reasons from another hand when the protest first came.

September 5. -- I was duly honored yesterday evening with your favor of the
thirty-first ultimo. -- Though it is not expressed in the resolution of that
date that any other bounty is to be given to the men who engage for three years
or during the war, than twenty dollars, I shall take it for granted they are to
receive the usual allowances of clothing and land. -- There are several
continental troops whose time of service will expire at the end of the fall or
during the winter. I shall consider these within the meaning and operation of
the resolve, though they are not mentioned; and shall direct every necessary
measure to be taken to re-enlist them.

From the exorbitant state, town, and substitute bounties, I am very doubtful
whether twenty dollars will be found sufficient to engage so great a proportion
either of the draughts or continentals, as was at first apprehended. Our
failure in the enterprise against Rhode Island will have its weight; and every
day, from the approach of the fall and winter, will add new difficulties. As it
is a work of the most essential importance, I will order it to be begun the the
instant the money arrives: and, le^t, on experiment, the sum should prove too
small, I would submit it to Congress whether it will not be expedient to pass
another resolve, abthorising a further bounty of ten dollars, to be used as
circumstances may make it necessary. This can remain a secret, and will not be
carried into execution but in case of evident necessity. -- I feel very much
interested upon the occasion, and have submitted this mode, that there may not
be the least possible delay in attempting to engage the men under a second
expedient if the first should not succeed. -- The articles of clothing and
blankets should also employ the utmost attention to provide them: we are now in
great want, particularly of the latter; there not being less than actually
wanted at this moment.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. The return of blankets has not come in; and therefore I cannot ascertain
the deficiency by this conveyance.



Headquarters, White-Plains, September 4, 1778. SIR,
I HAD the pleasure to hear this morning, by a letter from general Sullivan, of
the thirty-first ultimo, that he had effected a retreat to the main, the
preceding night, without any loss either of men or stores. As he has written to
Congress fully upon the subject, and I feel their anxiety to hear it, I shall
not detain major Morris longer than to observe that I think the retreat a most
fortunate, lucky, and well-timed event.

Major Morris informs me he has heard that lord How was off Boston with his
fleet: and it appears by a New York paper of the second, that rear admiral
Parker arrived at Sandy-Hook on this day week with six ships of the line, of
seventy four guns each, -- which is corroborated by other accounts. -- I
transmitted the intelligence to his excellency count D'Estaing yesterday and
the day before, as it acquired more and more the appearance of certainty, -- as
I have regularly done every occurrence interesting to his fleet and our
operations.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, Sept. 7, 1778. SIR,
I TAKE the liberty of laying before Congress the enclosed copies of a
paragraph and schedule contained in a letter from general Heath, which I lately
received. These will apprise Congress, if they are not already informed, of the
supplies of provision and wood wanted by the count D'Estaing, and will
naturally lead to a consideration of the ways and means to be pursued for
furnishing them as soon as possible.

Since I had the honor of addressing you on the fourth and fifth instant, I
have obtained a return of the blankets which are now deficient. This, and the
fast approach of the fall, will suggest the necessity of the most vigorous
exertions being used to procure them. Not a night will pass from this time
without the soldiers feeling the want.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, White-Plains, Sept. 12, 1778. SIR,
I DO myself the honor of returning to Congress the report of their committee
on the subject of an inspectorship (transmitted in your letter of the twentieth
ultimo, which was not received till the thirty-first), with such observations
as have occurred to me in considering the matter, and which I have made with a
freedom that I trust will be agreeable to Congress. I wish it had been in my
power to have returned it before: but the intervention of a variety of other
important business from time to time obliged me to postpone a conclusion upon
the points till yesterday.

I have already, in my letter of the twenty-sixth of July, delivered my
sentiments upon the consequences that would attend the baron Steuben's being
appointed to an actual and permanent command in the line; and therefore I will
not trouble Congress with a repetition of them. However, I will take the
liberty to add that I am more and more convinced that what I then said upon the
occasion was well founded; and that I am certain such a measure will produce at
least infinite discontents and disquietudes among the general officers.

I have also had the honor to receive your favor of the fifth instant, with the
several papers to which it refers. These shall have my attention as far as
practicable. -- I hope all the consederate troops are on the march from
Philadelphia; and, if they are not, that immediate orders will be given for
their joining the army.

The enclosed copy of a letter from general Sullivan, of the tenth instant,
will inform Congress that the enemy have not relinquished their burning plans,
and that in this way they have destroyed several houses, stores, and vessels,
at and near Bedford.

I was advised on wednesday night that a body of them, consisting of four or
five thousand, under general Gray, had made a landing in that quarter, and were
intrenching. In consequence of this, and from an apprehension that general
Clinton might possibly mean to operate to the eastward, and form some project
in concert with lord How against the count D'Estaing's squadron, I determined
to move the troops from this ground to a rear position, better calculated to
afford support to the works on the North-river, in case an attempt should be
made against them, and at the same time more convenient for forwarding
detachments to the eastward, if the enemy point their operations that way.

I was the more induced to come to this determination as most of the accounts
from New York seemed to lead to a belief, as they still do, that a considerable
movement was and is in contemplation, if not an entire evacuation of the city,
and this by water. Besides these reasons, the principal objects for taking post
here do not now exist. One was to create every possible jealousy in favor of
the expedition against Rhode Island; another the consuming the forage within
its vicinity and toward Kingsbridge. The former is now over, and the latter in
a great degree accomplished.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, near Fredericsburgh, September 23, 1778. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the twelfth instant, I have
received your several favors of the tenth, twelfth and sixteenth, with the
resolutions to which they allude. -- I transmitted the British commissioners
the resolve of the fourth instant respecting the convention troops the morning
after it came to hand, and also wrote to sir Henry Clinton upon the subject of
passports. -- I have not received his answer.

With respect to the magazines, I have directed the commissary to form them on
the inland communication from hence to Boston, at proper intervals. The twenty
thousand barrels of flour that Congress have ordered to be purchased will be a
valuable addition, if they can be transported by water; but it seems to me
there will be great risk of its being lost, if it is sent by sea while the
enemy have a superior fleet on our coast.

As the campaign is not closed yet, all our cavalry are of use. -- They lie in
the neighborhood of the enemy's posts, for the purpose of restraining their
parties, and for obtaining and giving intelligence of the enemy's movements;
and they are subsisted upon the forage which would otherwise be exposed to
them. -- I am sensible that these corpse are attended with great expense; and
the moment I think the service will admit of it, they or a part of them shall
be quartered in different places distant from the army, where they may be
provided for on better terms. -- The price of forage; and the difficulty of
getting it, are really objects of great magnitude, and such as should undergo
some regulation, if there is any that can be adopted. -- I received letters a
few days ago from the commissary and quarter master upon this subject, copies
of which, and of my letter in consequence to the several states from
Massachusetts Bay to Pennsylvania inclusive, I take the liberty to enclose.

The resolution prohibiting officers, except such as are specially authorized,
to keep horses in the army or within forty miles of it, has been published in
orders, and I will take every step in my power to give it effect.

I have considered the practicability of reducing the teams employed in the
army, and find, however desirable the object may be, that it cannot be done. We
have not at this time more than are absolutely and indispensably necessary, nor
so many as would be necessary in case of a rapid movement: neither does it
appear to me that there can be a substitution of ox for horse teams, at least
to any great extent; nor that any material advantages would arise from such a
measure. There might perhaps be a small saving in the article of provender: but
this, I fear, would be greatly over-balanced by the loss of cattle that would
be appropriated to the use of the commissary's department. After a full
investigation of the subject, I believe we shall be obliged to adhere to the
kind of teams we now employ, and that the only relief we shall have in point of
expense will arise from sending a part of the horses to places where they can
more easily be foraged, when we have fixed our camp and quarters for the winter.

I beg leave to mention to Congress that there is a necessity of some mode's
being established, by which claims on the old quarter-mastership, that remain
unsatisfied, may be discharged. There are many of this nature; and these,
however well authenticated they may be, the gentlemen now in office do not
conceive themselves at liberty to adjust, without obtaining some special
direction for the purpose. I am every day applied to for payment of such
accounts, and, in many instances, have been obliged, as well for the sake of
justice to individuals as for the public good, to order them to be taken up. It
appears to me that Congress cannot be too early in their resolution upon this
occasion, and that either the present department should be authorized to settle
and pay such claims, or that some persons should be appointed and supplied with
money for the purpose.

The army marched from White-Plains on the sixteenth instant, and is now
encamped in different places. -- Three brigades, composing the Virginia troops,
part of the right wing, under the command of general Putnam, are at Robinson's
near West-Point: and two brigades more, composing the remainder, are with baron
De Kalb at Fishkill plains, about ten miles from the town, on the road lead
leading to Sharon. The second line, with lord Stirling, is in the vicinity of
Fredericsburg; and the whole of the left wing at Danbury under the command of
general Gates. -- These several posts appear to be the best we can occupy in
the present doubtful state of things, as they have relation to the support of
West-Point, in case of an attack in that quarter, and are also on the
communication to the eastward, if the enemy point their operations that way. --
Besides these dispositions, general Scott with a light corpse remains below in
the country about King's-Street.

The letter from sir Henry Clinton which I have the honor of transmitting was
sent to me today by colonel Baylor who is posted at Hackinsac. He says he
received one for me by the same flag; and, from his note, he supposed he had
charged the horseman with it who just arrived at headquarters. Through
accident he forwarded yours to me; and I think it probable that you will be
troubled with mine. If this should be the case, you will be so obliging as to
return it to me by the first conveyance. -- I was also informed by colonel
Baylor that a considerable body of the enemy landed at Paulus' Hook in the
evening of the twenty-second, and were encamped that night in the woods between
four and five miles from the town of Bergen. He had not learned their object:
but it is likely they are after forage.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Sept 29, 1778. SIR,
THE following is an extract of a letter of the seventeenth instant, which I
had the honor to receive from the count D'Estaing.

"I entreat you to promote the exchange of prisoners alreaday planned by
monsieur Girard. The unhappy persons taken before the commencement of
hostilities cannot be fully regarded as prisoners: their lot is dreadful. The
mode adopted for exchanging them by means of your commissary, without
introducing the king's name or mine into the transaction, removes a great part
of the political difficulties which before subsisted."

I am an entire stranger to the plan above referred to, or to the mode that has
been adopted for exchanging by means of our commissary. He is absent from the
army: and I must therefore beg the favor of you to obtain from monsieur Girard
such information as will enable me to give directions for carrying the count's
desires into execution, if practicable.

The marquis De Vienne, at present at Boston, has requested a furlough of
eighteen months to enable him to return to France, whither he is called by some
domestic concerns. I do not conceive myself at liberty to grant his request
without the permission of Congress, to whom I would beg leave to observe, that,
if agreeable to them, he may be indulged without prejudice to the service, as
he is not attached to any particular command.

I have just received an account from Jersey, which I fear is too true, that
colonel Baylor's regiment of dragoons were surprised in their quarters the
night before last, and most of them killed or taken. -- A few of the stragglers
have come in, who can give but a very imperfect account of the matter. They
think the colonel and most of the officers were made prisoners, and that the
privates were put to the sword. -- There were, I imagine, about one hundred men
of the regiment together when this unlucky accident happened.

The stay of the enemy in Jersey being longer than I apprehended, and not
knowing what their real intentions may be, I have ordered general Maxwell to
advance from Elizabethtown to the neighborhood of Aquakenunk bridge, and have
sent over general Woodford's brigade from this side of the river. I have also
ordered general Pulaski to advance with as much expedition as possible, and
join the brigades. -- Lord Stirling has this day gone over to take the command
of the continental forces and militia who are assembling in considerable
numbers. If the enemy mean only to forage, they will be kept from extending
themselves, by these troops: and if they have any designs upon the posts in the
Highlands, they will be prevented from seizing the passes leading to the forts,
by lord Stirling, who will be between them and the enemy, and always ready to
possess them.

I have made proper dispositions on this side the river for the security of the
Highlands in case that body of the enemy, who are on this side Kingsbridge
employed in collecting forage, should advance.

The sketch of Rhode Island, forwarded by this express, was received from
general Sullivan, and left behind by accident when the last dispatches were
sent off.

I have had the honor of receiving yours of the twentieth, enclosing an order
for count Pulaski's legion to advance to Trenton.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Fishkill, October 3, 1778. SIR,
I AM honored with your favor of the twenty-seventh of September, with the
enclosed resoves of Congress, a copy of which has been transmitted to
major general Lincoln for his information and direction.

Being separated from my papers, I am uncertain whether I mentioned in my last,
that, the enemy in the Jerseys having received a reinforcement and made some
forward movements, I had thought it expedient to detach another brigade thither
to act in conjunction with the one already there together with Pulaski's corpse
and the militia, and had sent major general lord Stirling to take the command
of the whole; -- that I had also ordered major general Putnam across the river
for the immediate security of West-Point, and moved a division of troops to
this place, to be nearer that post. -- I have since come here myself, and
propose to remain till the views of the enemy on the Jerseys are decided;
though I have had no reason to alter my opinion that nothing more than a forage
is intended. -- By the last accounts, they had drawn in their out-parties, and
resumed their first bounds behind Hackinsac river, at the libertypole and
Newbridge.

That part of Baylor's regiment which escaped came off in the first instance,
and were afterward brought off in so dipersed a manner that the number has not
been ascertained: but, from what I have learned, I should estimate the loss at
about fifty men and seventy horses. -- Major Clough is dead of his wounds. --
This affair seems to have been attended with every circumstance of cruelty.

It is a small compensation for this accident, that colonel Butler three or
four days ago, with a party of infantry and horse comprehending major Lee's
corpse, surprised about a hundred Yagers below Tarrytown, killed ten on the
spot, and took a lieutenant and eighteen men prisoners. -- The roughness of the
^ountry facilitated the flight of the rest, and prevented the success being
more complete.

The proceedings in the case of general St. Clair accompany this letter.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I have received advice of the arrival of a packet from England.



Headquarters, October 6, 1778. SIR,
THIS will be delivered to you by major general the marquis De la Fayette. --
The generous motives, which first induced him to cross the Atlantic and enter
the army of the United States, are well known to Congress. -- Reasons equally
laudable now engage his return to France, which in her present circumstances
claims his services. -- His eagerness to offer his duty to his prince and
country, however great, could not influence him to quit the continent in any
stage of an unfinished campaign. He resolved to remain at least till the close
of the present, and embraces this moment of suspense to communicate his wishes
to Congress with a view of having the necessary arrangements made in time, and
of being still within reach, should any occasion offer of distinguishing
himself in the field.

The marquis at the same time, from a desire of preserving a relation with us,
and a hope of having it yet in his power to be useful as an American officer,
solicits only a furlough sufficient for the purposes abovementioned. -- A
reluctance to part with an officer, who unites to all the military fire of
youth an uncommon maturity of judgment, would lead me to prefer his being
absent on this footing, if it depended on me. I shall always be happy to give
such a testimony of his services as his bravery and conduct on all occasions
entitle him to; and I have no doubt that Congress will add suitable expressions
of their sense of his merit, and their regret on account of his departure.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. The marquis is so obliging as to take charge of a packet containing the
proceedings of a court martial in general Shuyler's case.



To the Board of War.
Headquarters, near Fredericsburg, October 11, 1778. GENTLEMEN,
THE incessant and pressing applications of the officers, and their real
distress for clothing, oblige me to repeat my wishes to the board, to obtain
the earliest direction of Congress for relieving their wants. -- They are in a
very disagreeable situation in this respect; and, unless some mode can be
adopted for speedily supplying them, many will be obliged involuntarily to quit
the service; or, if this should not be the case, we shall be involved in
perpetual complaints, and the most painful applications.

I do not recollect, when the army was first appointed, that there was any
engagement on the part of the public that the officers should be provided with
clothing through their means; nor has there been any explicit declaration
since, that I remember, for the purpose: but the measure has become
indispensably necessary; and, without the intervention of public aid, they
never can be supplied: for their pay, if the articles proper could be found in
a private way, (from the enormous and exorbitant prices now exacted for every
thing) would prove wholly incompetent to the end.

There is however a resolution of Congress, of the twenty-second of November
last, which points to a provision through the public means and those of the
states individually taken. This has encouraged the officers to look for
supplies in the manner there professed; and their not being able to obtain them
makes them more uneasy perhaps than if the resolution had never passed.

I have written to messieurs Otis and Andrews to make a return of the cloth,
etc. in their hands, proper for officers, and also to advise me what quantities
might be procured in case the board should direct a purchase. This appears to
be the only practicable expedient at this time, from which relief can be drawn:
and, if it is to be adopted, the agents cannot be too soon ordered to carry it
into execution. -- I really wish to be informed by the board by the first
opportunity whether the officers may expect supplies through the public stores,
that I may be able to answer them decisively upon the point when they apply. As
matters now stand, I am in a very awkward and irksome situation.

Since it is evident that the officers cannot provide themselves with clothing,
and that there is a necessity for the intervention of the public aid, I would
submit it to the board whether it may not be proper for them to form an
estimate of clothing, proportioned to the number of officers in the army, for
the consideration of Congress, and to obtain their sanction for importing the
same, if they approve the plan. This measure, it seems to me is the only one
that can ensure relief in future; and it appears the more eligible as the loss
to the public will be infinitely less than if they procure the articles in the
country, supposing that it could be done. Besides this consideration, the
officers then might be properly uniformed and all placed on a just and equal
footing.

If the board should be authorized to direct an immediate purchase of clothing
for the officers, I will take the liberty to suggest that it may not be
improper for them to enjoin on the part of the clothier a stricter compliance
with the resolution of Congress, which I have mentioned, in the sale. The
officers say that hitherto it has not had the necessary and generous operation
intended by Congress; but, on the contrary, in the few instances in which they
have been able to furnish themselves with articles from the public stores, that
they have done it at the current exorbitant prices. -- Indeed there are many
matters in the department which require a more perfect and explicit arrangement
than has ever been made* and at present there is such a clashing of offices and
officers that it is difficult to determine how or with whom business is to be
transacted.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, near Fredericsburgh, October 14, 1778. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the sixth instant by favor of the
marquis De la Fayette, I received your letter of the second with its enclosure.

I do myself the honor of transmitting you an account of the engagement between
the French and British fleets on the twenty-seventh of July, as published by
the British admiralty-board. -- I received a printed copy of it last night from
New York, which I have forwarded to his excellency count D'Estaing. -- It is
evident from admiral Keppel's own relation of the affair, that he was pretty
severely handled, notwithstanding he affects in the conclusion to mention that
he wished extremely for an opportunity to renew the combat the next day.

We are still in great suspense as to the operations and designs of the enemy,
though every practicable measure has been used and is pursuing to come at them.
By late and direct accounts it would seem that some troops at least are going
from New York. A few days, I think, must open their conduct decisively.

I have had the misfortune to hear that the Raleigh frigate has become a prize
to two British ships of war after a long and very gallant resistance. Captain
Barry, finding that the frigate would fall into the enemy's hands, ran her
ashore on Seal-Island, to which he escaped in boats with about eighty of his
hands, and from thence to the main. It is said he took measures for blowing her
up, but was defeated in his purpose by the perfidy of an under officer who
concealed himself and remained on board.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, October 18, 1778. SIR,
I AM honored with yours of the ninth, enclosing the resolves to extend the
embargo, and to prevent forestalling provisions. I hope the latter will have
the desired effect; for, unless that most infamous practice of raising the
prices of the necessaries of life can be stopped, it will be impossible for any
^ands to subsist the army.

Enclosed you have the copy of a petition from the refugees in New York to the
commissioners. You may depend upon the authenticity of it, as it is taken from
a New York paper. It should seem by this that they are extremely solicitous and
anxious to know whether New York is to be garrisoned, which implies a suspicion
on their part that it to be evacuated. -- All accounts, since mine of the
fourteenth, confirm the report of a very considerable embarkation. It is said
to consist of ten British regiments completed to their full establishment, and
their grenadier and light companies added to them. This will make them amount
to upwards of five thousand men. -- They have not ^ailed.

I cannot say that I am satisfied that a total evacuation of the city is
intended this winter, although many inhabitants near the lines, and several out
of the city, are of that opinion. -- I have set every engine at work to procure
full intelligence of their designs; and I hope to succeed. The current opinion
of deserters and others is that the present embarkation is intended for the
West Indies; some few have said that they have a design upon Charleston.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Oct. 24, 1778. SIR,
THE letter which I had the honor of addressing to you the day before yesterday
would inform Congress of the embarkation and sailing of a considerable
detachment of the enemy from New York, and of the measures I had taken in
expectation of and upon the happening of the event. -- Whether this will be
succeeded by a further embarkation, or by a total evacuation of the posts which
they hold within the states, in the course of this year or the ensuing one, I
cannot pretend to determine. But, as it will be right and prudent in us to
provide for every contingency, I would with the greatest deference submit it to
Congress whether it may not be proper for them to call upon the states to
provide men in time for filling their respective battalions, before or at any
rate against the opening of the spring, and in the same manner as if there was
a moral certainty that the war would be prosecuted with all possible vigor on
the part of Britain. Should this not be the case, or should any events cast up
in the mean time to render troops unnecessary, it will be easy to disband the
levies and to keep them from the field, -- while, on the other hand, our
relaxation in not providing them may subject us at least to many disagreeable
consequences.

The general return of the infantry in the month of September, transmitted to
the board of war by the adjutant-general, and to which I beg leave to refer,
will show Congress the whole amount of our reputed force at that time. But I am
to observe, that large, very large deductions are to be made from it on account
of the columns of sick, and the men said to be on command. Many under the
former description, particularly that of sick absent, are actually dead; others
unfit for service; and several, who have recovered, have deserted: nor will the
latter afford more than one half of its number in time of action, as various
duties, such as waggoning, distant guards, escorts, etc. employ a great
proportion of those under this denomination.

Besides the above deductions, Congress will perceive from the return which I
now take the liberty of transmitting, that there are four thousand three
hundred and eighty draughts and others, whose terms of s^rvice will expire
during and by the close of winter: for I am sorry to add that our exertions to
reengage the draughts and old soldiers in this predicament, for the usual
bounty, have proved so far ineffectual and without success. I have not tried
what effect the additional grant of ten dollars might have: but I fear, and it
seems to be the opinion of all I have consulted upon the occasion, that it
would have but little if any influence. I know, in the case of the draughts and
troops of one state, that the offer of twenty dollars on the part of the
continent, with a like allowance and an actual deposit of it by the state, has
been no temptation.

The general reluctance and refusal is founded in the unhappy depreciated light
in which the soldiery view the money, and their expectation of receiving
immense state, district, and substitute bounties. Whether grants or bounties by
Congress, bearing some proportion to these, to such as should enlist for the
war, would be attended with better success, I cannot undertake to decide. The
experiment may be made if they judge it proper: and if it proves an inducement
of any extent, it will be an infinite saving in the end. I believe however our
surest and only certain aids will be derived from draughting, which I trust may
and will be done by the states on the recommendation of Congress, agreeable to
the mode mentioned in my letter to their committee when they first honored me
with a visit at Valley-Forge. The exertions to recruit by voluntary enlistments
may still go on, as both modes in all probability will not produce near as many
men as may be found necessary.

In the case of the Carolina troops whose service is ending every day, the
officers say that nothing will induce them to enlist, unless they can be
permitted to go home on furlough till the spring. On this indulgence they seem
to think several might be engaged. -- The distance is great, and there will be
some uncertainty as to their returning: besides, it will be fixing a precedent
for others. -- If Congress approve the plan, they will be pleased to inform me
by the earliest opportunity.

I am under some difficulty about clothing the draughts, and the old soldiers
whose service is expiring (...) will determine every day. As Congress have
never expressed their sense upon the subject, and this is increased by a letter
which I received some time ago from the board of war, which respects
particularly the draughts, I must earnestly request that Congress will favor me
with the speediest direction in the ca^e, whether they are to be furnished out
of the supplies coming on, equally with the other troops. At the same time I
will take the liberty to offer it as my opinion, that, however inconvenient or
expensive it may appear at the first view to clothe them, the measure will be
necessary, and founded not only in humanity but found policy. We have no
prospect now of levying men in any other way: and if they are not clothed, they
will be exhausted by sickness and death; and not doing it may prove an
insurmountable bar or at least a great obstacle to our obtaining future aids,
though the exigencies of our affairs should be never so pressing. Yet the
clothes may be withheld as long as circumstances will permit, as an inducement
for them to enlist. In the instance of the old soldiers who have not received
the annual allowance of Congress, the point seems clearly in their favor. --
The board suggested that the draughts might be supplied out of the best of the
old clothes which might be given in by the troops on receiving new ones: -- but
unfortunately there will be few of any worth.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, October 26, 1778. SIR,
I HAD the honor of your letter of the twenty-second instant, with its several
enclosures, today at noon. -- I shall pay a proper regard to the act of
Congress respecting monsieur De Vrigney. -- For information on the second
resolve for obtaining a return of the re-enlistments, I must beg leave to refer
Congress to my letter of the twenty-fourth. -- I have complied with the
intention of the third, and transmitted the act to sir Henry Clinton, which
relates to Mr. Franks.

The certain intelligence of a large number of troops having embarked at
New York, -- the sailing of a considerable fleet concurring at the moment their
departure was expected, -- lef^ me no room to doubt that the fleet which went
out of the Hook on the nineteenth and early the twentieth instant contained the
embarkation of which I had been advised. In the persuasion of this, my letter
of the twenty-second to your excellency was written: but, from more recent
advices, and through various channels, bearing every mark of authenticity, I am
to conclude the supposition has been ill founded. -- The above mentioned fleet
appears to have carried away no other troops than invalids, the officers of the
corpse lately reduced, with some refugees. -- The twenty-third instant the
troops which had embarked still remained in the harbor. They are fixed at ten
or twelve British regiments, and six of the new levies. -- This fleet was
probably composed of homeward-bound victuallers, with some merchantmen and
other vessels which chose to take the protection of a convoy. The accounts
still say that they were accompanied by fourteen or fifteen sail of the line
and some frigates.

October 27. -- In my letter of the twenty-second I advised your excellency of
the measures I had taken to ascertain the practicability of an enterprise
against Chemung. -- I have the honor to enclose the report of governor Clinton,
general Schuyler, and general Hand, on the subject. -- I cannot help concurring
with these gentlemen in opinion, and am persuaded from a number of
considerations that we must lay aside all thoughts of an expedition against
that place for the present. Besides other necessary preparations, we have not
yet been able to get forward the clothing for the army. -- The Congress will
also perceive in lieutenant colonel Butler's journal, transmitted to your
excellency in my letter of the twenty-second instant, the great difficulties he
had to encounter (...) crossing the rivers at a much earlier season of the year.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, near Fredericsburg, Oct. 31, 1778. SIR,
YOUR excellency's favor of the twenty-third instant was delivered me
yesterday, with the resolution respecting monsieur L'Eclise. As soon as I am
notified of the place of his residence, I will give the necessary directions
for carrying into execution the humane and benevolent intention of Congress
toward him.

I take the liberty to enclose a letter from doctor Conolly respecting his
situation. His case, I am persuaded, will have due attention, and such a
determination as humanity and policy will justify.

By intelligence received yesterday evening, it is said that transports with
ten regiments on board had fallen down from York to the watering-place; that
there were several other ships laden (not said with what); and that there were
others at the wharfs taking in troops. I cannot tell whether this intelligence
is certain: for we have been deceived of late in points of information that
seemed to carry equal marks of authenticity.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. Just as I was closing my letter I received one from lord Stirling, dated
yesterday at nine o'clock A. M. by which he informs me that on wednesday and
thursday about eighty sail of ships, chiefly transports with troops, fell down
from New York to Staten-Island, and that sixty or s^venty sail lay there before.



Headquarters, November 6, 1778. SIR,
ON wednesday evening I received your excellency's favors of the thirtieth
ultimo and first instant, with their several enclosures. -- I will direct the
best and cheapest disposition I can to be made of the cavalry for their
accommodation in quarters, and will instruct the forage-master on the occasion.
-- The remittance to the paymaster, which you mention, I presume has come to
hand, having been applied to by him to issue an order for the payment of the
troops for August and September. -- I have transmitted the letter from Nicholas
Dupui and others, with the affidavits, to his excellency governor Clinton, and
have ordered colonel Cortland to march with his regiment toward the Mini^i^ks,
and to take such posts as the governor may point out. -- I have made a
distribution of the printed manifestoes; and there is no doubt but the enemy
will very soon be possessed of some of the copies, and of newspapers that
contain them.

By a letter from lord Stirling, of the third instant, he informed me that the
fleet at the Hook the preceding day increased to a hundred and eighty sail;
and, that morning at seven, weighed anchor and stood out to sea. -- I am
impatiently waiting for further advices from New York, and to learn whether any
other and what movements are likely to take place.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 11, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE been honored with yours of the nineteenth, twenty-seventh,
twenty-eighth, and twenty-ninth, ultimo.

A tolerable supply of shoes has lately arrived to the issuing clothier's store
from the eastward, Pennsylvania, and Jersey* and, if the different persons
employed in procuring that article will exert themselves to keep up the supply,
I hope we shall not be much distressed during the winter, provided we remain
quietly in quarters.

It is much to be wished that Congress would come to a speedy resolution
concerning the procuring clothing for the officers at a price in proportion to
their pay, more especially, as they were led to expect this from a resolve
which passed in November 1777. -- If the clothing itself cannot be conveniently
procured, I imagine the alternative of allowing an adequate sum of money in
lieu thereof would be the next best expedient.

As the board must undoubtedly have experienced the many difficulties arising
from the want of a proper arrangement of the clothier's department, I hope they
will press the committee who have that business in charge, to bring in their
report, that the new system may be carried into execution without loss of time.
-- Whether it has been owing to want of conduct in the late officer, or his
want of proper powers and directions, I will not undertake to determine: but
the irregularity in that department has been an endless source of trouble to
me, and a great cause of discontent in the army.

I have given the issuing clothier directions to keep an account of the marks
and numbers of the bales of blankets, and of the quality of their contents,
from whence you will be able to trace from whom those small ones were
purchased. When the issues are completed, you shall have the account. -- The
directions to Mr. Mease were very proper. -- If any corpse want completing in
any particular article which is not to be procured here, I will sign the order
myself.

In the present scarcity of hats, the caps of which you have forwarded a
pattern must be used by way of substitute. But an officer very attentive to the
health of his men informs me that (...) an inconvenience from the use of
woollen caps last winter ^^stead of hats; when the men put them off in the
spring, they ma^^ of them took violent colds from the sudden transition. They
also contribute to keep the head dirty, -- than which nothing is more unhealthy.

I find it impracticable to carry the recommendation of the board, respecting
calling in the old clothes upon delivery of the new, into execution. The
soldiers were not to be convinced of the good policy and economy intended by
the application of the old clothes to hospitals and the followers of the army,
but looked upon it as an unjustifiable attempt to deprive them of what they had
earned by their year's service, and what (considering the scanty supply of some
kinds of covering, blankets in particular) would help to make them more
comfortable during the winter. These discontents were communicated to me, the
moment they arose, by some of the best officers in the line; which determined
me to let the matter drop, more especially as another argument was made use of,
which was unanswerable: this was, that, upon a fair settlement, there would be
found a considerable deficiency of the bounty-clothing for a year or two past,
and that therefore it would be more equitable to make up the deficiency than to
draw in the remains.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, November 11, 1778. SIR,
ON wednesday afternoon I received a letter from the honorable Mr. Lee and Mr.
Lovell of the committee for foreign affairs, enclosing a plan and sundry
resolutions of Congress for attacking Canada the next campaign in conjunction
with the forces of his most christian majesty, -- and requesting my
observations upon the same to be transmitted to Congress, and a copy to be
delivered to the marquis De la Fayette. These dispatches, through the
indisposition of the marquis (who unfortunately was seized with a fever in his
journey from Philadelphia, which still detains him at Fishkill), were prevented
coming to hand till that time: and the great importance and extent of the
subject they comprehend would not permit me the honor of an earlier
communication of my sentiments. -- I hope Congress will excuse my not complying
with that part of the resolution which requires me to deliver a copy of my
observations. to the marquis, as the manner in which I am obliged to treat the
subject opens such a prospect of our wants and our weaknesses, as, in point of
policy, ought only to be knows to ourselves.

I am-always happy to concur in sentiment with Congress; and I view the
emancipation of Canada as an object very interesting to the future prosperity
and tranquillity of these states: but I am sorry to say the plan proposed for
the purpose does not appear to me to be eligible under our present
circumstances. -- I consider it as my duty, and what Congress expects from me,
to give my reasons for this opinion with that frankness and candor which the
importance of the subject demands; and, in doing this, I am persuaded I shall
not fail to meet with their approbation.

It seems to me impolitic to enter into engagements with the court of France
for carrying on a combined operation of any kind without a moral certainty of
being able to fulfill our parts, particularly if the first proposal came from
us. If we should not be able to perform them, it would argue either a want of
consideration, a defective knowledge of our resources, or something worse than
either, which could not fail to produce a degree of distrust and discontent
that might be very injurious to the Union. In the present instance, should the
scheme proposed be adopted, a failure on our part would certainly occasion in
them a misapplication of a considerable land and naval force which might be
usefully employed elsewhere, and probably their total loss. -- It is true, if
we were at this time to enter into the engagement, we should be every day
better able to judge whether it will be in our power to accomplish what may be
expected from us: and, if we should find hereafter that our resources will be
unequal to the undertaking, we may give notice to the court of France in season
to prevent the sailing of the troops and the ill effects that might attend it.
But besides that a project of this kind could not be embraced by France without
its having, an influence on the whole system of operations for the next
campaign, which of course would receive some derangement from its being
abandoned, -- a renunciation of this could not fail to give a very unfavorable
impression of our foresight and providence, and would serve to weaken the
confidence of that court in our public councils.

So far from the^e being a moral certainty of our complying with our
engagements, it may in my opinion be very safely pronounced, that, if the enemy
keep possession of their present posts at New York and Rhode Island, it will be
impracticable either to furnish the men or the other necessary supplies for
prosecuting the plan. They will not attempt to keep those posts with less than
ten thousand men and a considerable navy. -- If it should be thought best for
the advantage of carrying on the expeditions intended, to forego any offensive
operations against these garrisons, and to leave them in quiet possession of
such important places, we shall at least be obliged to provide for the security
of the country against their incursions and depredations, by keeping up a force
sufficient to confine them within their own limits. It is natural too to
suppose that the people's expectations of being protected will grow stronger in
proportion to the diminution of the enemy's force, and the greater facility
with which it can be afforded. They will hardly be content to continue in a
state of alarm and insecurity from a force so inconsiderable, while the
principal strength of the states is drawn out in the prosecution of remote
objects. -- If this reasoning is just, we shall be obliged to have a larger
force than the enemy, posted in different places to prevent sudden inroads
which they would otherwise be able to make at different points: and the number
required cannot be estimated at less than twelve or fifteen thousand men. This
will be two thirds as large a force as we have been able to raise and maintain
during the progress of the war, as these calculations both of the enemy's
strength and of our own are meant to designate the number of effective rank and
file.

If I rightly understand the plan in consideration, it requires for its
execution twelve thousand six hundred men rank and file. Besides these, -- to
open passages through a wilderness for the march of the several bodies of
troops, -- to provide the means of long and difficult transportations by land
and water, -- to establish posts of communication for the security of our
convoys, -- to build and man vessels of force necessary for acquiring a
superiority on the lakes; -- these and many other purposes peculiar to these
enterprises, which would be tedious in detail, -- will demand a much larger
proportion of artificers and persons to be employed in manual and laborious
offices, than are usual in the ordinary course of military operations. When we
add the whole together, the aggregate number of men requisite for the service
of the ensuing campaign will be little less than double the number heretofore
in the field: but to be more certain in the calculation, it may be placed at
only one half more.

Experience is the only rule to judge by in the present case. -- Every
expedient has been exhausted in the preceding campaigns to raise men; and it
was found impossible to get together a greater force than we had, though the
safety and success of the cause seemed absolutely to require it. The natural
and direct inference therefore is, that the resources of the country were
inadequate to a larger supply. I cannot then see that we can hope upon any
principle to be equal to so much greater exertions next year, when the people
and the army appear to grow daily more tired of the war, and the depreciation
of our money continually increasing, and of consequence proving a smaller
temptation to induce them to engage.

The state of our supplies for transporting and subsisting the troops will
stand upon a footing equally bad. We have encountered extreme difficulties in
these respects, and have found that it was full as much as we were competent
to, to food the army we have already had, and enable it to keep the field and
perform the movements required by the contingencies of the service. It is not
likely that these difficulties will diminish; but on the contrary they will
rather multiply as the value of our currency lessens: and the enormous prices
to which provisions have risen, and the artificial scarcity created by
monopolies, with what we have to fear from the effect of the same spirit, give
us no reason to flatter ourselves that our future prospects can be much better.

In this situation of things we are hardly warranted to expect that we shall
have it in our power to satisfy the demands of numbers so much greater than we
have yet had to supply, especially if we consider that the scene of our
operations has hitherto been in the heart of the country furnishing our
resources, which of course facilitated the drawing them out, -- and that we
shall then be carrying on the war at an immense distance, in a country wild and
uncultivated, incapable of affording any aid, and great part of it hostile. We
cannot in this case depend on temporary or occasional supplies, as we have been
accustomed, but must have ample magazines laid up beforehand. The labor and
expense in forming these, and transporting the necessary stores of every kind
for the use of the troops, will be increased to a degree that can be more
easily conceived than described. The transportation must be, a great part of
the way, through deserts affording no other forage than herbage; and, from this
circumstance, our principal subsistence of the flesh kind must be salted, which
would not only be an additional expense in the additional consumption of so
scarce and dear an article as salt, but would greatly increase the difficulty
both of providing and transporting. My letter of the twenty-ninth ultimo
(transmitting a copy of one from the quarter-master-general) which I had the
honor of addressing to Congress, and to which I wish to refer, will point out
the difficulties and daily expense attending our supplies of the article of
flour only, in our present circumstances, exclusive of its cost, -- and lay the
foundation for a fort of comparative estimate to be formed of those that would
attend the support of troops when employed at so great a distance.

If, in addition to all this, we should have the French fleet to supply during
the winter, -- the likelihood of which I have no sufficient information to
ground a judgment upon, -- it will appear still more impracticable to furnish
the supplies requisite for the extensive operations proposed. But, independent
of this, the improbability of doing it is, in my apprehension, infinitely too
great to justify the undertaking.

This reasoning is founded on the supposition that the enemy do not evacuate
their present posts at New York and Rhode Island: nor can we presume upon any
past appearances so far as to determine the contrary, and enter into a national
contract, the fulfillment of which at any rate, in my judgment, will depend on
this event. Opinions on the subject are various, and the arguments on both
sides cogent. Circumstances have hitherto been very indecisive: -- at
Rhode Island there is nothing that looks like an evacuation, that I have heard
of: -- at New York, the length of time that has elapsed since the event has
been expected, which cannot be satisfactorily accounted for, it not a little
doubtful and problematical.

But if it were even certain that the enemy would shortly leave these states, I
should think our ability to carry on the expeditions meditated (from the nature
of the country, and the remoteness from the source of our supplies, joined to
the discouraging situation of our finances) too precarious to authorize a
preconcerted agreement with a foreign power, binding ourselves to the attempt.
On the other hand, if we were certain of doing our part, a cooperation by the
French would, in my opinion, be as delicate and precarious an enterprise as can
be imagined. All the reasons, which induce France and the United States to wish
to wrest Canada and Halifax from the dominion of England, operate with her
perhaps more forcibly to use every possible effort for their defense. The loss
of them would be a deadly blow to her trade and empire. To hope to find them in
a defenseless state, must be founded in a supposition of the total incapacity
of Britain both by land and sea to afford them protection. -- I should
apprehend we may run into a dangerous error by estimating her power so low.

We have been informed that a strong garrison has been lately sent to Halifax,
amounting, by report, to about four thousand men: -- a part of the detachments
which the enemy are now making from New York are currently said to be, and in
all probability are, destined for that place: -- if they evacuate entirely, a
very considerable part of their force will no doubt go there; -- and in any
case we may expect that reinforcements will be thrown from thence into Canada
early in the spring. The English are now greatly superior to the French by sea
in America, and will from every appearance continue so unless Spain interpose,
-- an event which I do not know we are authorized to count upon. However, as I
am destitute of information with respect to the present state of European
politics, this is a point upon which I can form but an imperfect judgment: but
if it should not take place. I think it infinitely probable, from the maritime
situation and advantages of Halifax, which is represented as the finest port
and best naval arsenal in America, -- from the security it is calculated to
give to the general trade and possessions of Britain, both on the continent and
in the West Indies, -- that it will be a station for a larger naval force than
the one intended to to convoy the French troops: -- it will naturally be the
principal rendezvous of the British ships of war in America. If this position
be admitted, -- should the English have any knowledge or even suspicion of the
design of the French court to send a fleet up the river Saint Laurence, nothing
will be easier than to intercept this fleet on its way, or to take or destroy
it after it has got in. Nor can we flatter ourselves with keeping this business
a secret. Congress perhaps will be surprised to be told that it is already in
more hands than they suspect: and, in the progress of the negotiation in
France, it will get into many more. The preparations will announce the
intention. -- It is indeed a part of the plan to avow the destination of the
French troops, though this is to be contradicted by the manner of their
clothing, etc. -- The stationing troops this winter, as is proposed,
particularly on the Mohawk and Connecticut river, would be unequivocal proops
of the design: it must at least excite the strongest suspicion, so as to put
the English nation upon their guard, and make them take precautions to
counteract it.

But if the French troops should arrive before Quebec, I think their success
against that strong place, fortified by every advantage of nature and of art,
would be extremely doubtful. -- It is supposed this capital post will be found
in so weak a condition as to make its surrender a matter of course, owing to
the enemy's having previously drained themselves for the defense of Detroit,
Niagara, Saint John's, Montreal, etc. but we cannot depend that this will be
the case: -- they may esteem it the part of prudence rather to sacrifice or at
least to hazard the extremities in order to collect their strength at the
heart. Montreal indeed, and the posts essential to it, must be defended,
because the possession of them would throw too large a part of the country into
our hands. But if reinforcements are sent to Canada early in the spring, -- a
circumstance extremely likely, -- these may be attended to without too far
weakening the garrison at Quebec; and, as before observed, we cannot build upon
their conduct's being regulated by an ignorance of our plans. The French troops
instead of a coup-de-main, would in this case be reduced to the necessity of
carrying on a blockade.

I will now take the liberty to turn my attention toward the operations of our
own troops. The one against Detroit I shall at present say nothing about: if
well conducted, I should hope that place would fall without very great
difficulty. -- The case is very different with respect to Niagara. This, I am
informed, is one of the strongest fortresses in America, and can only be
reduced by regular approaches or by famine. In accomplishing this, last war,
and a conquest as far as Montreal, I believe general Amherst exhausted two
campaigns, with all the advantages which he derived from the united efforts of
Britain and America, with every convenience for water-transportation, including
plenty of seamen, and with money that commanded every thing which either
country could furnish. The former mode would require great perseverance, time,
and labor, and an apparatus which it would be almost impracticable to
transport. The latter is practicable, but very difficult. To effect it, we must
gain a superiority on the lakes, The enemy have already a respectable force
there: -- if they suspect our design, which they cannot fail to do from the
measures to be taken, they may improve the interval in adding to it; and, by
providing materials and artificers upon the spot, they may be able to increase
it so as to keep pace with us. It is therefore easy to see that we ought not to
be too sanguine in the success of this expedition, and that, if a moderate
force be employed in the defense of Niagara without degarnishing Quebec and the
intermediate posts, its reduction will be a very arduous task.

The body of troops to penetrate by way of the river Saint Francis must meet
with great obstacles: they will have a march of about a hundred and fifty miles
from Cohoss, which is about a hundred and sixty miles beyond Hartford, a great
part of which is through a hitherto-uninhabited and trackless country, with an
immense train of wagons: all the stores and provisions for the whole march,
and the future supply of the troops, at least till they should get footing in
Canada, must accompany them from the beginning. The impediments and delays in
such a march almost exceed conception.

When arrived at the Saint Laurence, fresh obstacles probably would present
themselves. The presumption is, that, if the enemy could not make head there,
they would desolate the country through which they were to pass, destroy all
the provision and forage, remove every kind of water craft, and demolish the
materials for building others. These precautions being taken on the Sorelle and
Saint Laurence would pretty effectually obstruct our progress both to Montreal
and Cadoroqui, -- to say nothing of the rapidity of the current and the
numerous rifts between Montreal and Lagalette.

When we deliberately consider all the obstacles in the execution, and the
difficulties we shall find in preparing the vast magazines required, which have
been already enumerated, if within the compass of our resources, we shall be
led to think it not very improbable that this body may be unable to penetrate
Canada, at least in time to cooperate with the French troops, if a
cooperation should be necessary. The situation of these troops then would be
delicate and dangerous: -- exposed to a defeat from the united force of the
enemy, in great danger of having their retreat cut off by a superior naval
force in the river, they would have every thing to fear. On the other hand, if
our operations should be as successful as we may flatter ourselves, a tempest
or a British fleet may deprive us of our expected aid; and at a critical moment
we may find ourselves in the bosom of an enemy's country, obliged to combat
their whole force with one inferior and reduced by a tedious and wasting march.
The five thousand men, when they arrived in Canada, would probably little
exceed four capable of service; and would be still less, if out of them we
should establish posts as we advanced, to insure a retreat and protect escorts
of provision which must follow for future support. Thus an accident in either
case would involve the defeat of the whole project; and the catastrophe might
be attended with the most unhappy consequences to America.

The plan proposed appears to me not only too extensive and beyond our
abilities, but too complex. To succeed, it requires such a fortunate
coincidence of circumstances as could hardly be hoped, and cannot be relied on;
-- the departure of the enemy from these states, without which we cannot
furnish the stipulated force, or supplies to maintain them, -- such a want of
power or want of foresight in the enemy as will oblige then to neglect the
reinforcement of Halifax and of Canada, and prevent them, however conveniently
situated, from the disputing the passage of the four ships of the line and four
frigates up the river Saint Laurence, or attempting their destruction
afterward, -- such a combination of favorable incidents as will enable
several bodies acting separately and independently by sea and land, and from
different countries, to conform to times and periods so as to ensure a
cooperation; -- these and many other circumstances must conspire, to give
success to the enterprise.

Congress, I am persuaded, had powerful reasons for fixing the convoy at the
number they have: and their superior information respecting the affairs of
Europe at this present juncture enables them to judge much better than I can
pretend to do, of its sufficiency. But from the imperfect view I have of the
matter, I have been led, in considering the subject, to look upon it as
insufficent. From the general tenor of intelligence, the English out-number the
French in the channel: in America, both on the continent and in the islands,
they are greatly superior. If the last Toulon fleet is employed in the
Mediterranean, the French may have the superiority there: but, upon the whole,
the balance of naval force seems hitherto to be on the side of the English. If
we add to this that the number of ships of war in the French ports, built or
building, bears no comparison to the number in the English ports, -- and that
Britain notwithstanding the diminution she has suffered, is still a kingdom of
great maritime resources, -- we shall be disposed to conclude that the
preponderance is too likely to continue where it is. The interposition of Spain
indeed would make a very interesting change; but her backwardness heretofore
seems to be an argument that she is withheld from interfering by some weighty
political motives: and how long these may continue to restrain her, is a
question I am unqualified to determine.

Besides these general objections to the plan which have been stated, there
appear to me to be some particular ones which I shall take the liberty to point
out.

In the first place I observe there are to be five thousand militia employed in
the two expeditions against Detroit and Niagara. -- The drawing into service so
large a number composed chiefly of husbandmen, in addition to what may be found
necessary for other exigencies on the coast at so interesting a season of the
year, will certainly be very injurious to the culture of our lands, and must
tend to add to the deficiency of supplies. But this, though not to be
overlooked, is not the principal objection. -- In the expedition against
Detroit, militia perhaps may answer, as it is not a post of very great
strength, and may possibly be abandoned on or in a little time after the
approach of a force that cannot be opposed in the field, and the garrison
proceed to reinforce that of Niagara. But even here troops of another kind
would be far preferable. However, the case will be very different with respect
to this last: -- it is, as I have before mentioned, one of the strongest
fortresses of America, and demands for its reduction the very best of troops.
Militia have neither patience nor perseverance for a siege. This has been
demonstrated by all the experience we have had. An attempt to carry on one
which should materially depend on them would be liable to be frustrated by
their inconstancy in the most critical moments. -- Agreeable to the plan under
consideration, three thousand five hundred out of five thousand six hundred are
to be militia.

It is a part of the plan that the troops sent against Detroit, whether
successful or not, are to form a junction with those at Niagara. It appears to
me on the contrary, that the expedition against Detroit, under the present
arrangement, must stand on its own bottom, and have no other object than the
reducing that place and destroying the adjacent Indian settlements. Lake Erie
is certainly occupied by two armed vessels of sixteen and eighteen guns, and,
it is said, by five or six others of smaller size, having two, three, or four
guns each, which, while the enemy hold Niagara, will prevent the communication
of our troops by way of the lake, -- to say nothing for want of batteaux for
transportation. A communication by land must be performed through an extent of
more than four hundred miles, and a great part of this at least under many
disadvantages of route, and through tribes of hostile Indians.

My knowledge of the country is not sufficiently accurate to enable me to
discover the reasons which determined Congress to divide the force destined
against Niagara, and to appoint the march of one body from Ononguaga to that
place. It seems to me however that this disposition might be subject to one
great inconvenience, which is, that, if each column be not superior to the
whole collective force of the enemy, they risk being beaten separately and
successively, besides the trouble and expense of preparing as it were for two
expeditions instead of one, -- of opening two roads instead of one, -- and the
uncertainty of a cooperation (if no disaster should happen to either) at the
moment when it might be necessary. The inquiries I have as yet had it in my
power to make are opposed to the practicability of conveying cannon in the
route from Ononguaga to Niagara, or at least place it as a point infinitely
doubtful: and, without cannon, nothing can be effected against that post. Upon
the whole, the great matter essential to success against Niagara is to subdue
the enemy's force on lakes Eric and Ontario, particularly the latter. This once
done, and the garrison by that means cut off from its supplies, the fort will
be likely to fall an easy prey. Here our efforts should be directed: nor do I
at present perceive the purposes to be answered by the body going from
Ononguaga, unless the devastation of the intermediate Indian villages be the
object, -- which perhaps may not be equal to the risk, labor, and expense, and
the more so as they would fall of course if we should succeed in the general
operation.

The cantoning five thousand troops this winter on Connecticut-river, under our
present prospects, will, in my opinion be impracticable, and, in any case,
unadvisable. -- When I had the honor of writing to Congress in September last
on the subject of a winter campaign into Canada, I had been led by [ colonel]
Bailey, and other gentlemen acquainted with the country, to expect that very
considerable magazines of provisions might be laid up on the upper parts of
that river. But it appears on experiment that their zeal for the expedition
made them too sanguine in the matter. The purchases fall far short of what was
expected. The difficulties of transportation, as represented by the
quarter masters and commissaries, supported by facts that speak for themselves,
are so great and so complicated that I should have no hope of being able, from
remote parts of the continent, to throw in the quantity requisite for
subsisting these troops during the winter, and at the same time of forming the
magazines which would be necessary to prosecute the expedition in spring. We
may be endeavoring to form the magazines: but the troops cannot be on the spot
this winter; otherwise they will exhaust the provision as fast as it can be
collected. -- The same objection applies to the stationing troops on the
Mohawkriver.

In estimating our force for the next campaign, it is to be considered that
upwards of four thousand of the present army will have completed their terms of
service by the last of May next, and that a great proportion of the remainder
will have done the same about the close of the ensuing fall, unless they can be
induced to re-engage, -- of which the ill success of our present exertions to
enlist those whose engagements are about to expire afford but an unfavorable
prospect. This and the general temper of the officers, dissatisfied much with
their situation, will suggest a strong argument against the extensive projects
in contemplation.

In whatever point of light the subject is placed, our ability to perform our
part of the contract appears to me infinitely too doubtful and precarious to
justify the undertaking, A failure, as I have already observed, would involve
consequences too delicate and disagreeable to be hazarded. But, at the same
time that my judgment is against this, I am clearly of opinion that we should
attempt every thing that our circumstances will permit: but, as the extent of
our power must be regulated by many possible events, I would wish to hold
ourselves free to act according to either possibility, and as a clearer view of
our future resources may authorize. -- If the enemy entirely leave these
states, it will produce a vast change in our affairs; and new prospects may
open, of which we can at present have but a very imperfect idea. It would be a
great step toward raising the value of our money, which would give a new
spring to our military operations. -- We may be able to undertake much more
than we can now foresee.

If the enemy attempt to keep posts in these states, a primary object will be
to expel them if in our power: -- if not we must make proper provision to bar
their depredations, and must turn our attention to the security of our
frontiers, by pursuing such measures as shall be within the reach of our
abilities. -- Though we may not be able to launch into so wide a field as we
could wish, something upon a more particular scale may be enterprised. Detroit
and Niagara may perhaps be reduced, though Canada may not be an accession to
the confederacy. -- With a view to what is possible, preparations may be going
on, and we can make such an application of them as we shall find practicable.

As there is no time to be lost in doing this, I shall give the necessary
orders so far as relates to the article of provision, which indeed has been
already done it part. Magazines of forage, materials for boat and ship
building, and other articles, must also be provided, -- which will depend on
the final arrangements and more definitive instructions of Congress. These
measures will be necessary to be taken whether the present plan is carried on,
or whether something less extensive, depending wholly on ourselves, is
substituted in its place. -- I shall wait the further orders of Congress for
the government of my conduct in delivering the plan to the marquis as their
resolution seems to require, or in transmitting it immediately to doctor
Franklin as the letter from the committee seems to direct. At present I am
under some doubt concerning the intention of Congress in this particular.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I shall use every means in my power to obtain intelligence in the points
mentioned in the resolution of the twenty-sixth ultimo, and had taken measures
for the purpose with respect to Canada before. -- Mr. Livingston, an officer in
the corpse of guards, will have the honor of presenting these dispatches to your
excellency. Their importance requiring more than a common messenger, he very
obligingly undertook, upon application, to give them a safe conveyance.



Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 12, 1778. SIR,
ENCLOSED I have the honor to transmit the copy of a letter from
brigadier-general Hamilton to general Heath. I did not choose to grant the
request without the concurrence of Congress, though at the same time I think it
may be safe^y done. It will save the trouble and expense of another escort at a
future day. -- I shall be glad of the determination of Congress as speedily as
possible, as the flag vessel, bound to Virginia with the baggage of the
convention troops, will perhaps be detained for the answer.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 13, 1778. SIR,
BARON De Steuben will have the honor of delivering you this. He waits upon
Congress on the subject of the inspectorship, which he is extremely anxious
should be put upon some decided footing. He appears to be sensible of some
difficulties in the plan formerly proposed, and which I had the honor some time
since to transmit my observations upon, -- and desirous that they should not
prove an obstruction to the progress of an institution, which, if accommodated
to the circumstances and sentiments of the army, promises very great advantages
to the service. The success the baron had in the beginning, and the benefits
derived from it, make me regret the obstacles that have so long suspended his
exertions; and I should wish he may have it in his power to resume them on
principles most advancive of the service. On these I have already fully
communicated my ideas, and it is unnecessary I should add.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 14, 1778. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to transmit you the copy of a letter of the tenth
instant, which I received yesterday from sir Henry Clinton, on the subject of
exchanging the prisoners of the convention. -- Should the proposition be
agreeable to Congress, I shall be glad to receive powers to enter into a
negotiation as soon as possible, as it may probably relieve our officers upon
parole from the disagreeable necessity of returning to New York. I will just
observe, that, should an exchange take place upon the terms proposed by sir
Henry, I should suppose we shall not be obliged to give up any considerable
number of privates by way of composition, as the officers of the convention
(should the whole be suffered to be exchanged) would go a great way toward
liberating ours at present in the hands of the enemy. But it cannot be expected
that they will leave their troops entirely destitute of officers. -- Mr.
commissary Clark, mentioned by sir Henry Clinton, was permitted by general
Heath to go from Boston to New York to settle the accounts and procure money
for the discharge of the debts of the troops at Cambridge. -- I have the honor
to be, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 16, 1778. SIR,
I HAD the honor of receiving your favor of the sixth yesterday, with the
enclosed copy of a letter from the president of the council of New Jersey,
relative to an expected attack upon the western frontier of that state. -- I
have just received a letter from general Hand giving intelligence of an attack
upon colonel Alden's regiment at Cherry-Valley, effected by surprise, in
consequence of which, there is too much reason to apprehend that regiment may
fall a sacrifice. I transmit a copy of the dispatches announcing this
disagreeable affair.

These depredations of the enemy give me the most serious concern. I lament
that we have not yet had it in our (...) to give them an effectual check. I am
perfectly convinced that the only certain way of preventing Indian ravages is
to carry the war vigorously into their own country. But as this is thought
impracticable at this late season of the year from the state of the water, and
other impediments, I fear we must content ourselves with defensive precautions
for the present. -- I have already informed Congress that colonel Cortlandt's
regiment had mar^^^^ toward the Minisinks: but, having since directed count
Pulaski to proceed with his corpse to Colesfort in that neighborhood, colonel
Cortlandt will take post somewhere between that place and Rochester. Orders are
now given to colonel Spencer's regiment and colonel Armand's corpse to join
general Pulaski. -- This disposition is agreeable to the opinion of governor
Clinton and other gentlemen acquainted with the country whom I have consulted,
and is calculated to cover the eastern frontier of Pennsylvania, New Jersey,
and the western part of New York. -- I shall also immediately send the
remainder of general Clinton's brigade to Albany. When arrived there, if any
thing offensive can possibly be undertaken, it shall be done: if not, they will
be disposed of in a manner that shall seem best adapted for protection and
defense.

With the greatest respect and esteem, I am, sir, your most obedient servant,
G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 16, 1778. SIR,
BY the time this reaches you, general Du Portail will probably be at
Philadelphia. One part of his business is to prosecute the directions given him
some time since for forming a plan for the defense of the river Delaware, to be
submitted to Congress: another part is to understand from Congress what may be
their views and wishes with respect to his further continuance in America, and
that of the three other gentlemen attached to him.

He informs me that the furlough he obtained from the court of France expires
in February next, and that, unless there is a certain prospect of his being
employed hereafter in a manner useful to the states and honorable to himself,
he intends immediately to return. He therefore wishes some explicit ideas to be
realised on the subject. He is also anxious that something definitive should be
done with respect to the pay and the other appointments both of himself and the
other gentlemen with him, which have been hitherto undecided, and have left
them in an uncertain and disagreeable situation. -- Added to this, he is
desirous to have some arrangement fixed for the rules and manner of service in
his department.

He delivered me, some days since, a memorial intended for Congress, and which
I have now the honor to enclose, containing his ideas on a general system of
fortification for these states, and which he requested me to accompany with my
sentiments. But it includes questions of finance and considerations of policy
the most extensive and important, of which Congress alone can form a competent
judgment. I shall therefore only say, that, considered merely in a military
point of view, the plan appears to me worthy of very serious attention.

It is but justice to general Du Portail to observe that I have a high opinion
of his merit and abilities, and esteem him not only well acquainted with the
particular branch he professes, but a man of sound judgment and real knowledge
in military science in general. I have also a very favorable opinion of the
other gentlemen. I will take the liberty to add that it appears to me that it
will be extremely necessary and useful in our future operations, whether
directed to offense or defense, -- whether to dispossess the enemy of posts in
our front, to assist in carrying on the proposed expedition into Canada, or any
other on a less extensive plan which may be substituted in its stead for the
mere security of our frontier.

Monsieur De Murnon has served in quality of engineer under general Du Portail
since the first of March last, with the promise of a majority from the
committee of arrangement at Valley-Forge. He has never yet received his
commission. This, I presume, has been forgotten in a crowd of more important
affairs. -- With the greatest respect and esteem, I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 18, 1778. SIR,
COUNT Kolhowski, who will have the honor of delivering you this, is a Polish
officer who is desirous of entering into our service. I enclose your excellency
two letters in his favor from doctor Franklin and Mr. Deane; added to which, he
is recommended to me by count Pulaski as a brave and useful officer who served
under him in Poland: He wishes him to be placed in his legion, with the rank of
captain and the pay of lieutenant, -- to perform the duties of the latter till
he can give proofs of his talents and obtain some other employ.

With very great esteem and respect, I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 20, 1778. SIR,
MR. Wheelock will have the honor of presenting this letter to your excellency.
He waits on Congress upon the affairs of a regiment under the command of
colonel Bedel, which, it seems, was raised in the Cohoss county, or at least
has been kept up since March last upon the recommendation of the marquis
Fayette when at Albany. This corpse, according to the enclosed state by Mr.
Wheelock, who is the lieutenant colonel, to which I beg leave to refer
Congress, and according to other information I have received, was at first
assembled under the direction of major general Gates about this time
twelvemonth, for the purpose of a sudden enterprise against St. John's, and the
enemy's armed vessels lying there, and was engaged till the last of March.

I cannot undertake to say in what manner or how usefully this regiment has
been employed, or to what extent in point of men. But Mr. Wheelock says it has
been of great service: and the object of his present journey is to obtain the
direction of Congress for their being paid when proper rolls are produced, and
their determination whether it is to be disbanded now, or continued till April
next, the period for which the men are said to have engaged, though the
marquis's recommendation extended only to the end of the present campaign.

The regiment may or may not be necessary in future. Much will depend on the
system of conduct the enemy pursue the next campaign, and on our own
operations. I would observe, under its present engagement, its services were to
be local, or at least confined to a certain quarter. If it should be deemed
expedient to re-enlist it, if practicable it should be done on the general
scale of acting wherever it may be requisite (though perhaps it may not be
possible to accomplish it): and, in such case, it will also be material for the
public to have a more perfect knowledge of its arrangements than what I
apprehend it has hitherto had. -- I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 21, 1778. SIR,
I HAD the honor of your excellency's two favors of the fourteenth and
fifteenth instant, with their several enclosures. -- The consideration of
doctor Conolly's case, with the resolution of Congress, I have transmitted to
sir Henry Clinton.

In my letter of the sixteenth I communicated to your excellency the attempt on
Fort-Alden by the savages. -- I have since received the enclosed dispatches
confirming that disagreeable account. -- I also informed Congress at the same
time of the steps which were taken for the security of the frontier of
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and the western part of New York, -- and that the two
remaining regiments of general Clinton's brigade were ordered to Albany.

I have to regret that the condition of affairs is such as does not admit of a
compliance with repeated detachments from this army. However, that every thing
possible might be done under our present circumstances, general Hand was
further instructed on the sixteenth instant to confer with general Schuyler at
Albany, and with those persons in that part of the country who could in any
manner assist in forming his judgment on the best measures to be pursued with
the troops which were employed in the several quarters: and yesterday I changed
his command to that of the Minisinks, and forwarded him an extract from colonel
Hartley's letter of the ninth, that he might accommodate his dispositions to
recent events. I have only to add on this subject, that, on the twentieth,
brigadier-general Clinton set out to take the command at Albany, with
directions to consult with general Hand, and to form with him such combined
arrangements as may appear most consistent with their united strength. -- I am,
sir, with great respect, etc.

G. W.
P. S. As the troops of the convention are approaching the North-river, I am
throwing over a part of the army in order to form a line of posts parallel to
their march, for the greater security of the several passes leading to the
river.



Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 23, 1778. SIR,
JOHN Temple, esquire, will have the honor of presenting this to your
excellency. I do not know what Mr. Temple's views are; but it seems he has some
application to make to Congress. I never till now had the pleasure of a
personal acquaintance with him: but, from the terms in which Mr. Bowdoin speaks
of him, as your excellency will perceive by the enclosed letter, -- and from
other recommendations I have had of him, I consider him as a gentleman of sense
and merit, and of warm attachment to the rights of his country, for which he
appears to have suffered greatly in the present contest.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 23, 1778. SIR,
YOUR excellency's letter of the eighteenth, with the enclosure referred to,
came to hand yesterday. -- I had before received the intelligence contained in
Mr. Deane's letter, and in consequence made part of the detachments which have
been mentioned in my late letters. It is highly probable that the late
incursions and outrages were committed by the parties comprehended in Mr.
Deane's intelligence; and I should hope that the force already gone from the
army, together with the season, will prevent them at least from making further
great depredations.

Since I had the honor of addressing your excellency on the twenty-first, I
received a letter from general Hand, of the eighteenth, an extract from which
you will find enclosed, with copies of a letter from major Whiting and one from
a Mr. Clyde. -- These will inform Congress, that, though the ravages at
Cherry-Valley settlement were great in the late attack by the savages, yet our
loss was much less than we had reason to apprehend it from our former advices.
The account of the enemy's having stormed the fort, and cut off Alden's
regiment, happily turns out premature. The enclosure, No. 2, which is a copy of
a letter from lord Stirling of the seventeenth, will advise Congress that the
fleet of transports, which had lain at the Hook for some days before, came up
the preceding night to the watering-place, and also that some of the ships of
war had returned to York dismasted. -- Your excellency will also see by the
enclosure, No. 3, (which contains an extract from a letter from general
Sullivan, of the eighteenth instant) the latest advices I have respecting
admiral Biron's fleet. -- From the loss of the Somerset, and these several
accounts, they suffered severely in their late cruise.

November 24. -- I just received from general Hand the enclosed petition from
major Whitcomb, addressed to Congress, and his letter to general Hand, of the
same date. My information respecting the corpse under major Whitcomb's command
has hitherto been very imperfect; and even now I do not know the terms on which
it was engaged: nor had I, till these letters came to hand, any reason to think
that the troops above had not all been equally paid, having sent up a supply of
money for the purpose soon after I came to this camp, and authorized the
paymaster-general a few days ago to forward a further quantity. -- I shall
immediately write to general Clinton, now on his way to Albany, to send a
proper officer to m^s;ter the corpse, and also three companies (which he calls
provincials) under his direction, said to be engaged to the first of next
month; after which, both will be paid on his presenting proper rolls. -- With
respect to clothing, the only application I recollect to have had from major
Whitcomb was answered with such supplies, both in quantity and quality, as our
stores would admit of. It may perhaps be practicable hereafter to put his corpse
on a better footing in this instance.

The alarm which major Whitcomb speaks of in the beginning of his letter to
general Hand was occasioned (as Congress will perceive by a copy of another
letter from him to general Hand) by a descent made by a body of men in the
country about the south end of lake Champlain, and who, according to his
report, have done considerable damage.

I directed general Portail some time ago to take a view of the works carrying
on in the Highlands for the defense of the North-river, and to make an estimate
of the cannon necessary for the purpose. This he did: and, as he is now at
Philadelphia, I have written to him by this conveyance, and requested him to
present the estimate to Congress. I am sorry the number wanted is so great, and
the more so as I find upon inquiry that the Salisbury furnace in Connecticut,
which used to cast so many, is much out of repair, and could not possibly be
put in order, and in a proper state for supplies, before May. -- The providing
of cannon is a matter of infinite importance; and I am persuaded Congress will
take every means in their power to accomplish it. Besides the pressing and
extensive demand for the works on the North-river, we cannot extend our views
too soon to the obtaining further large supplies. We must in the course of
things have occasion for a great deal of artillery: and, in any enterprise we
may undertake against Canada, whether on a large or small scale, several pieces
of various calibers will be absolutely essential. Besides arming the ships and
vessels we shall be obliged to build to gain the navigation of the lakes, our
land operations will require a great number.

A detachment of continental troops will conduct those of the convention from
the North-river to the Delaware. The German battalion is to compose part of the
escort: and, after the convention troops cross to Pennsylvania, I have directed
it, in consequence of the intelligence transmitted of late by Congress
respecting the frontiers, to proceed to Easton with all its baggage, where it
is to wait till general Hand arrives at the Minisinks, and whence it will be
ready to act as circumstances may require. At the same time, if these frequent
detachments from the army could be avoided, it were much to be wished. The
troops will be by this means in a very dispersed state; and, besides losing
perhaps some advantages which might present themselves if they were more
collected, their discipline will be greatly injured, and it will be extremely
difficult, from a variety of causes, to draw them together again: and, if it
should be practicable, it is highly probable we shall find their number much
impaired by desertion and otherwise.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, November 26, 1778. SIR,
MR. John Dodge will have the honor of delivering this letter to your
excellency. His history is that he is a native of Connecticut, and about eight
years ago, as he informs me, settled in the country between Detroit and
Pittsburg as an Indian trader; -- that he carried on commerce till January
1776, when, for his attachment to our cause and the measures he had taken to
promote it, be became obnoxious to the enemy, was seized by order of the
governor of Detroit, was thrown into prison, and there continued till the
beginning of May last, when he was sent to Quebec; -- that on the ninth of
October he escaped from thence and got into our settlements, through the aid of
a French Caghnewaga who came with him here on friday last.

I find Mr. Dodge an intelligent young man, intimately acquainted with all the
tract of country between Pittsburg and Detroit, and with that lying on Lake
Erie, also with most of the savage tribes in those parts, and with their
languages. He is likewise well acquainted with the communication from
Fort-Stanwix to O^wego and Niagara.

I believe Mr. Dodge's history to be true; and, from a variety of
circumstances, I am persuaded of his firm attachment to us: and I would take
the liberty to suggest to Congress that I think he may be of very important
service to us in any enterprise we may undertake in the western quarter, or
against the force on Lake Erie or Lake Ontario. This consideration, with that
of his losses and sufferings which I am inclined to believe have been
considerable, seems to make him worthy of notice and attention. -- His
information is good and clear in several points which I know myself, and in
many others (from the manner in which he delivered it) far superior and much
more satisfactory than what I have been able to derive from any other person.
-- As I have observed before, Mr. Dodge appears to me a valuable intelligencer;
and, if Congress are pleased to honor him with an opportunity, he will give
them an account of the posts of Detroit and Niagara when he left them, and of
that at Michilimachinac, -- of the enemy's naval force on Lakes Erie and
Ontario, and of such other matters in Canada as he was able to inform himself
of, either by his own observation or the relation of others.

General Gates supplied Mr. Dodge with some money to defray his expenses from
Boston to this place, and I have advanced him today a hundred and fifty
dollars more to carry him to Philadelphia. -- I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.
P. S. Mr. Dodge means to call on major Butler of the light troops, with whom
he says he is well acquainted. He also says he is extremely well acquainted
with colonel Wood of Virginia, -- but he is not in camp; -- and he adds that he
was at Pittsburg in 1775, when doctor Walker, Mr. Wilson, and Lewis Morris
esquire, were there as commissioners, and engaged at that time to use his
influence to keep the savages quiet, etc.



Headquarters, Fredericsburg, Nov. 27, 1778. SIR,
I WAS yesterday honored with your favor of the twentieth, with its several
enclosures. -- Congress will be pleased to accept my acknowledgments for the
communication of the treaties between his most christian majesty and the United
States. The resolve respecting the exchange of prisoners has been transmitted
to sir Henry Clinton, and I have appointed commissioners (if he thinks proper)
to meet his at Amboy the seventh of next month.

I have the pleasure to inform Congress that the whole army (one brigade and
the light corpse excepted) is now in motion to the places of their respective
cantonments for winter quarters. I have thought it prudent to delay this event
a while, to give time for the convention troops to make some progress in
crossing the North-river, to prevent a possibility of accident. The third
division passes this day; and, if no unexpected interruption happens, the whole
will be over, the thirtieth instant. When their passage is completed, the
remaining troops kept in the field will immediately retire to quarters.

The disposition for winter quarters is as follows: -- Nine brigades will be
stationed on the west side of Hudson's river exclusive of the garrison at
West-Point, -- one of which (the North Carolina brigade) will be near Smith's
Clove for the security of that pass, and as a reinforcement to West-Point in
case of necessity; another (the Jersey brigade) will be at Elizabethtown, to
cover the lower part of Jersey; and the other seven, consisting of the
Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, and Pennsylvania troops, will be at Middlebrook.
-- Six brigades will be left on the east side of the river and at West-Point;
-- three of which (of the Massachusetts troops) will be stationed for the
immediate defense of the Highlands; one at West-Point in addition to the
garrison already there; and the other two at Fishkill and the Continental
Village. -- The remaining three brigades, composed of the New Hampshire and
Connecticut troops, and Hazen's regiment, will be posted in the vicinity of
Danbury, for the protection of the country lying along the Sound, to cover our
magazines lying on Connecticut-river, and to aid the Highlands on any serious
movement of the enemy that way. -- The park of artillery will be at Pluckenim.
-- The cavalry will be disposed of thus: -- Bland's regiment at Winchester in
Virginia, Baylor's at Frederic or Hagarstown in Maryland, Moylan's at Lancaster
in Pennsylvania, and Sheldon's at Durham in Connecticut. Lee's corpse will be
with that part of the army which is in the Jerseys acting on the advanced
posts. -- This comprehends the general distribution of the army, except
Clinton's brigade of New York troops, Pulaski's corpse, and some detached
regiments and corpse stationed at Albany and at different parts of the frontier,
of which Congress have already been particularly advised. -- General Putnam
will command at Danbury, General M'Dougal in the Highlands, and my own quarters
will be in the Jerseys, in the neighborhood of Middlebrook.

This disposition appeared to me best calculated to conciliate as far as
possible these several objects, -- the protection of the country, the security
of the important posts in the Highlands, the safety, discipline, and easy
subsistence of the army. -- To have kept the troops in a collected state would
have increased infinitely the expense and difficulty of subsisting them, both
with respect to forage and provisions: to have divided them into smaller
cantonments would have made it far less practicable to maintain order and
discipline among them, and would have put them less in a condition to control
and prevent offensive operations on the side of the enemy, or to assemble to
take advantage of any favorable opening which their future situation may offer,
should they be obliged to weaken themselves by further detachments so far as to
invite an enterprise against them.

By the estimate of the quartermaster and commissary-general, it appears
indispensable to have the principal part of the army on the other side of the
North-river. It was thought impracticable to furnish the necessary supplies of
flour for the whole, on this side the river, from the immense difficulty and
expense of transportation in the winter season, and from the exhausted state of
the country with respect to forage. -- As this subject has been already fully
before Congress, I shall not trouble them with a repetition of the detail. --
In order as much as possible to reduce the demand of forage and facilitate the
supplies, I have given directions, when the several divisions arrive at their
cantonments, to send away to convenient places at a distance from them all the
horses not absolutely requisite to carry on the ordinary business of the army.

It is unnecessary to add that the troops must again have recourse to the
expedient of hutting as they did last year. But, as they are now well clad, and
we have had more leisure to make some little preparations for winter (...), I
hope they will be in a more comfortable situation than they were in the
preceding winter. -- With the highest respect and esteem, I have the honor to
be, etc.

G. W.

Elizabethtown, December 4, 1778. SIR,
BETWEEN Fredericsburg and this place where I arrived yesterday afternoon, I
had the honor to receive your excellency's several favors of the twenty-sixth,
twenty-seventh, and twenty-eighth, in due order, with their several enclosures,
which shall have my attention. My being on the road from the time of their
coming to hand till yesterday prevented me from acknowledging them before.

As many inconveniences would attend the removing of the sick officers and men
of the convention troops by land, and the officers having families, I have
written to general Gates to permit them to proceed to the falls of James'-river
by water, on the officers' giving their paroles that they and the men will
perform the voyage. I have also acquainted him of the meeting in contemplation
for an exchange of prisoners, that the officers may not leave Boston till the
result is known.

With respect to major De Passern of the regiment of Hesse-Hanau, I hope he may
be released by an exchange; after which, it will remain with him to obtain
liberty from sir Henry Clinton to return to Europe. But if the exchange in
agitation should not take place, I should be happy if Congress themselves would
decide whether he is to be allowed his request. -- If on my permission he
should go to Europe without application to and the consent of the British
commander (which seems to be his intention), the enemy might not think
themselves bound upon a future occasion to account for him.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Elizabethtown, December 5, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to address you by command of his excellency, who went from
this place at four o'clock this morning in consequence of advice received last
night that fifty-two vessels great and small, including a bomb-ketch, with
troops on board, had the day before yesterday, moved up the North-river as far
as Cloyster-landing, and yesterday morning got under way and were proceeding
farther up. He proposed to make his first stage at Acquakenunk, and to proceed
as his future intelligence might require. (...) much at a (...) determine the
design of the enemy, but thinks it may either have respect to the forts in the
Highlands or to the convention troops.

When he left Peekskill, the two Massachusetts brigades, on their march thither
from Hartford, were not arrived, so that the troops on the spot were only the
original garrison of West-Point, and Nixon's brigade which lay near the
Continental Village: but, without the most inexplicable delay, those must have
reached their destination some days since. If so, and the enemy should meditate
a stroke against West-Point, they will probably fail in it unless there should
be something like a surprise. -- The general also thinks it probable that the
Maryland division were yesterday evening at the Clove. Their instructions were,
to communicate with West-Point and reinforce it on any emergency. They were, in
addition to them, directed last night by express to move immediately toward
the forts, divested of baggage and artillery, for the more speedy
communication. -- The Carolina brigade has been some time stationed at the
entrance of the Clove.

One brigade of the Virginia troops is at Pompton, and the other two were
expected to reach Springfield yesterday. The Pennsylvania troops, it is
supposed, would be at Acquakenunk or in the neighborhood of Paramus. -- These
troops, immediately on receiving the present intelligence, were ordered to
halt; and his excellency is gone forward to regulate their movements according
to circumstances. -- The brigade in this town is ordered to hold itself in
readiness.

If the convention troops should be their object, it is probable the attempt
will be too late to answer any purpose: the rear division was to cross the
North-river on wednesday last, but must certainly have done it on thursday; the
front must be not far from the Delaware; and the whole too far advanced to be
subject to a risque. Added to this, there is a pretty strong guard with each
division. His excellency however has sent on the intelligence to colonel Bland
who directs their march, urging him to hasten them forward with all possible
dispatch.

One brigade of Connecticut troops was at Danbury, the other at Fredericsburg,
when we came away; and general Poor's was in full march for the former, and
must long since have arrived.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. H. HARRISON.
P. S. Your excellency will excuse this hurried scrawl.



Para^^^s, December 7, 1778. SIR,
I HAD the honor of receiving yours of the second at this place. -- I have
forwarded the brevet to captain Simonet; and shall take such measures in regard
to colonel Fleury's letter as shall seem proper, upon my arrival at Middlebrook
for which I shall set out again tomorrow.

Upon leaving Elizabethtown I directed colonel Harrison to inform you of the
intelligence I had received, and which I thought demanded my personal
attention, as the enemy appeared to be going up the river in considerable
force. Having put the troops destined for the Middlebrook cantonment upon their
march back toward the North-river, I was proceeding that way myself when an
express met me a few miles from this, informing me that the enemy's shipping,
which had been as high as King's ferry, had fallen down again. They landed a
party at the ferry, and set fire to a few small buildings near the water: but,
upon a party of ours advancing, they immediately [ re-embarked.] without
attempting any thing further. -- The boats and stores of every kind had been
previously secured -- I cannot account for this manoenvre but by supposing that
they had been misinformed as to the quantity of stores at the ferry, or that
they expected to find the posts in a defenseless situation; or it may perhaps
have been to favor a forage below.

Finding that the troops destined for the defense of the Highlands had arrived
at their respective posts agreeable to my orders and expectations, I have again
put those intended for Middlebrook into motion; and I hope they will arrive
there while the roads and weather are both fine.

Accounts from New York through a good channel inform me that thirty thousand
tons of shipping had been suddenly taken up for government service, and that a
general embargo is laid. The occasion has not yet transpired; at least it has
not yet reached me. --

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook, Dec. 13, 1778. SIR,
SINCE my last of the seventh, I have been honored with your favors of the
fifth, sixth, and eighth instant, with their enclosures, to which the proper
attention shall be paid. -- I have made the report of the committee on Canada
affairs the subject of a particular letter which I have the honor of
transmitting by this conveyance. -- I have the honor to be, etc.

G. W.
P. S. Lieutenant-colonels Harrison and Hamilton went to Amboy on monday last
to meet the British commissioners: but the weather had been so extremely bad
that they had not met on friday.



Headquarters, Middlebrook, Dec. 13, 1778. SIR,
IT has not been in my power to return an answer to your favor of the sixth
instant till now. The letter met me on the road, separated from my papers; and
I did not reach this place till late on the eleventh, since which I have been
much employed in attending to the dispositions for hutting the army: but in the
mean time the objects of the dispatch have engaged my utmost attention.

The earnest desire I have to pay the strictest compliance in every instance
with the views and instructions of Congress cannot but make me feel the
greatest uneasiness when I find myself in circumstances of hesitation or doubt
with respect to their directions. But the perfect confidence I have in the
justice and candor of that honorable body emboldens me to communicate without
reserve the difficulties which occur in the execution of their present order;
and the indulgence I have experienced on every former occasion induces me to
imagine that the liberty I now take will not meet with their disapprobation.

I have attentively taken up the report of the committee of the fifth (approved
by Congress) on the subject of my letter of the eleventh ultimo on the proposed
expedition into Canada: I have considered it in several lights, and sincerely
regret that I should feel myself under any embarrassment in carrying it into
execution. Still I remain of opinion, from a general review of things and the
state of our resources, that no extensive system of cooperation with the
French, for the complete emancipation of Canada, can be positively decided on
for the ensuing year. -- To propose a plan of perfect cooperation with a
foreign power without a moral certainty in our supplies, and to have that plan
actually ratified with the court of Versailles, might be attended, in case of
failure in the conditions on our part, with very fatal effects.

If I should seem unwilling to transmit the plan as prepared by Congress, with
my observations, it is because I find myself under a necessity (in order to
give our minister sufficient ground to found an application on) to propose
something more than a vague and indecisive plan, which, even in the event of a
total evacuation of these states by the enemy, may be rendered impracticable in
the execution by a variety of insurmountable (...) or if I retain my present
sentiments and act consistently. I must point out the difficulties as they
appear to me; which must embarrass his negotiations, and may disappoint the
views of Congress.

But proceeding on the idea of the enemy's leaving these states before the
active part of the ensuing campaign, I should fear to hazard a mistake as to
the precise aim and extent of the views of Congress. The line of conduct that I
am to observe in writing to our minister at the court of France does not appear
sufficiently delineated: -- were I to undertake it, I should be much afraid of
erring through misconception. In this dilemma I would esteem it a particular
favor to be excused from writing at all on the subject, especially as it is the
part of candor in me to acknowledge that I do not see my way clear enough to
point out such a plan for cooperation as I conceive to be consistent with the
ideas of Congress, and that will be sufficiently explanatory with respect to
time and circumstances, to give efficacy to the measure. But if congress still
think it necessary for me to proceed in the business, I must request their more
definitive and explicit instructions, and that they will permit me, previous to
transmitting the intended dispatches, to submit them to their determination.

I could wish to lay before Congress more minutely the state of the army, the
condition of our supplies, and the requisites necessary for carrying into
execution an undertaking that may involve the most serious events. If Congress
think this can be done more satisfactorily in a personal conference, I hope to
have the army in such a situation before I can receive their answer, as to
afford me an opportunity of giving my attendance. -- I would only add that I
shall cheerfully comply with the directions of Congress relative to making
every preparation in our power for an expedition against Niagara, and for such
further operations to the northward as time and circumstances shall enable us
to carry on. Measures for the purpose have been taken in part for some time
past; and I shall pursue them vigorously. The subject has long engaged my
contemplation; and I am thoroughly convinced of the expediency and policy of
doing every thing practicable on our part, for giving security to our frontiers
by the reduction of those places which facilitate annoying them, and even for
accomplishing the annexation of Canada to the Union. --

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.
P. S. I have detained the letter to the marquis till your further
instructions. The waters have been so high as to prevent the express setting
out yesterday with this dispatch as was intended.



To His Excellency John Jay, President of Congress.
Headquarters, Middlebrook, Dec. 13, 1778. SIR,
IN a letter which I had the honor of receiving from Congress, dated the second
instant, was enclosed the copy of one from lieutenant colonel Fleury, upon the
subject of which, the president desired me to express "my sentiments, as also
of the merits of Mr. Fleury during his services in the army."

I do not conceive that Congress should request a renewal of colonel Fleury's
furlough from the French minister plenipotentiary. An application of that kind
ought, in my opinion, to be made by himself, not only because it is customary,
but because solicitations of a similar nature would in all probability be made
by many not having Mr. Fleury's claim to the favor of the public, and to whom
it would be difficult to give a refusal after a precedent had been established.
I would not be understood to include the case of general Du Portail and the
gentlemen in the engineering department, who are peculiarly circumstanced, and
in whose behalf I have written particularly to Congress.

As to Mr. Fleury's merits as an officer, I can only repeat what I have upon
several occasions mentioned to Congress before, -- that he is brave, active,
and intelligent, and that, should he obtain leave to remain in America, I shall
take an opportunity (agreeable to my promise to him) of employing him in a
manner suitable to his rank, and in such a way as will not clash with the
officers of the line.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Headquarters, Middlebrook, Dec. 16, 1778. SIR,
SINCE I had the honor of addressing you on the thirteenth, the gentlemen
appointed to meet commissioners from sir Henry Clinton have returned to camp.
Your excellency will find, by a copy of their report, No. 7, (which, with the
other papers respecting the meeting, is enclosed) that an exchange of prisoners
has not taken place.

As an exchange has not been effected, and sir Henry Clinton has called for all
our officers on parole, I shall, in consequence of the resolution of the
nineteenth ultimo, order the commissary of prisoners to require the immediate
return of the convention and any other officers with the enemy on parole. I do
not mean however to include general Burgoyne in the demand unless Congress
should direct it, as there appears to me many political reasons for permitting
him to remain in Britain in his present temper. But if Congress should differ
from me in opinion on this point, I shall be happy to be informed, that
measures may be pursued for his recall.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

Philadelphia, Dec. 31, 1778. SIR,
I HAD the honor of addressing Congress some time since on the subject of
general Du Portail and the gentlemen with him. He informs me that his affair
has not yet been decided, and is extremely anxious that it should be in some
way or other. He assigns many powerful reasons to show that it is very
interesting to him (if he is not to continue in our service) to return to
France as speedily as possible. He also informs me that he has reason to think,
in the consideration of his affair, the retaining him in service and the
adopting the plan proposed in his memoir are united, and the decision of the
one suspended on that of the other; and has therefore requested me to represent
to Congress that he should be happy they could be considered separately; and if
his services, abstractedly from the project proposed by him, are deemed
necessary, it will be agreeable to him to remain in the country.

I have already taken the liberty to offer my sentiments on the propriety of
engaging these gentlemen to continue in the service. It really appears to me
that they will be essentially necessary to our future operations, whether
defensive or offensive; and it cannot therefore but give me pleasure if it
shall be consistent with the views of Congress to retain them, and to give
every encouragement which they may reasonably expect.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

