TREATY OF Amity, Commerce and Navigation, BETWEEN His Britannic Majesty AND
The United States of America, WITH THE PRESIDENT's PROCLAMATION, ANNOUNCING ITS
RATIFICATION, AS PUBLISHED IN THE PHILADELPHIA GAZETTE, ON TUESDAY THE 1st OF
MARCH, 1796.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ORMROD and CONRAD, NO. 41, CHESNUT-STREET. 1796.

TREATY.
BY GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA A PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS a Treaty of Amity, Commerce and Navigation, between the United States
of America and his Britannic Majesty, was concluded and signed at London, on
the nineteenth day of November, one thousand seven hundred and ninety four, by
the Plenipotentiaries of the United States and of his Britannic Majesty, duly
and respectively authorized for that purpose.

AND WHEREAS the Senate of the United States, two thirds of the Senators
present concurring, did, by their resolution on the twenty fourth day of June,
one thousand seven hundred and ninety five, consent to and advise the President
of the United States to ratify the said treaty, on condition that there should
be added thereto an article whereby it should be agreed to suspend the
operation of so much of the twelfth article as respects the trade which his
said Majesty thereby consents may be carried on between the United States and
his islands in the West Indies in the manner and on the terms and conditions
therein specified:

AND WHEREAS such an article has been added to the said treaty, which treaty
and additional article are in the words following viz.

TREATY Of AMITY, COMMERCE, and NAVIGATION, between his BRITANNIC MAJESTY and
the UNITED STATES of AMERICA, by their PRESIDENT, with the advice and consent
of their SENATE.
HIS Britannic Majesty and the United States of America, being desirous by a
Treaty of Amity, Commerce and Navigation, to terminate their differences in
such a manner, as without reference to the merits of their respective
complaints and pretentions, may be the best calculated to produce mutual
satisfaction and good understanding; And also to regulate the commerce and
navigation between their respective countries, territories and people, in such
a manner as to render the same reciprocally beneficial and satisfactory; they
have, respectively, named their plenipotentiaries, and given them full powers
to treat of, and conclude, the said treaty, that is to say; His Britannic
Majesty has named for his plenipotentiary, the Right Honorable William Wyndham
Baron Grenville of Wotton, one of his Majesty's Privy Council, and his
Majesty's principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs; and the President
of the said United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate
thereof, has appointed for their Plenipotentiary, the Honorable John Jay,
Chief Justice of the said United States and theirenvoy extraordinary to his
Majesty, who have agreed on and concluded the following articles:

ARTICLE I.
THERE shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace, and a true and sincere
friendship between his Britannic Majesty, his heirs and successors, and the
United States of America; and between their respective countries, territories,
cities, towns and people of every degree, without exception of persons or
places.

ARTICLE II.
HIS Majesty will withdraw all his troops and garrisons, from all posts and
places within the boundary lines assigned by the treaty of peace to the United
States. This evacuation shall take place on or before the first day of June one
thousand seven hundred and ninety six, and all the proper theasures shall in
the interval be taken by concert between the government of the United States,
and his Majesty's Governor General in America, for settling the previous
arrangements which may be necessary respecting the delivery of the said Posts:
The United States in the mean time at their discretion, extending their
settlements to any part within the said boundary line, except within the
precincts or jurisdiction of any of the said Posts. All settlers and traders,
within the precincts or jurisdiction of the said Posts, shall continue to
enjoy, unmolested, all their property of every kind, and shall be protected
therein. They shall be at full liberty to remain there, or to remove with all
or any part of their effects; and it shall also be free to them to sell their
lands, houses, or effects, or to retain the property thereof, at their
discretion; such of them as shall continue to reside within the said boundary
lines, shall not be compelled to become citizens of the United States, or to
take any oath of allegiance to the government thereof, but they shall be at
full liberty so to do if they think proper, and they shall make and declare
their election within one year after the evacuation aforesaid. And all persons
who shall continue there after the expiration of the said year, without having
declared their intention of remaining subjects of his Britannic Majesty, shall
be considered as having elected to become citizens of the United States.

ARTICLE III.
IT is agreed that it shall at all times be free to his Majesty's subjects, and
to the citizens of the United States, and also to the Indians dwelling on
either side of the said boundary line, freely to pass and repass by land or
inland navigation, into the respective territories and countries of the two
parties, on the continent of America (the country within the limits of the
Hudson's Bay Company only excepted) and to navigate all the lakes, rivers, and
waters thereof, and freely to carry on trade and commerce with each other. But
it is understood, that this article does not extend to the admission of vessels
of the United States into the sea ports, harbors, bays, or creeks of his
Majesty's said territories; nor into such parts of the rivers in his Majesty's
said territories as are between the mouth thereof, and the highest Port of
entry from the sea, except in small vessels trading bona fide between Montreal
and Quebec, under such regulations as shall be established to prevent the
possibility of any frauds in this respect. Nor to the admission of British
vessels from the sea into the rivers of the United States, beyond the highest
ports of entry for foreign vessels from the sea. The river Missisippi, shall,
however, according to the treaty of peace, be entirely open to both parties;
and it is further agreed, that all the ports and places on its eastern side, to
whichsoever of the parties belonging, may freely be resorted to and used by
both parties, in as ample a manner as any of the Atlantic ports or places of
the United States, or any of the ports or places of his Majesty in Great
Britain.

All goods and merchandise whose importation into his Majesty's said
territories in America, shall not be entirely prohibited, may freely, for the
purposes of commerce, be carried into the same in the manner aforesaid, by the
citizens of the United States, and such goods and merchandise shall be subject
to no higher or other duties, than would be payable by his Majesty's subjects
on the importation of the same from Europe into the said territories. And in
like manner, all goods and merchandise whose importation into the United States
shall not be wholly prohibited, may freely, for the purposes of commerce, be
carried into the same, in the manner aforesaid, by his Majesty's subjects, and
such goods and merchandise shall be subject to no higher or other duties than
would be payable by the citizens of the United States on the importation of the
same in American vessels into the Atlantic ports of the said States. And all
goods not prohibited to be exported from the said territories respectively, may
in like manner be carried out of the same by the two parties respectively,
paying duty as aforesaid.

No duty of entry shall ever be levied by either party an peltries brought by
land, or inland navigation into the said territories respectively, nor shall
the Indians passing or repassing with their own proper goods and effects of
whatever nature, pay for the same any impost or duty whatever. But goods in
bales, or other large packages unusual among Indians shall not be considered as
goods belonging bona fide to Indians.

No higher or other tolls or rates of ferriage than what are or shall be
payable by natives, shall be demanded on either side; and no duties shall be
payable on any goods which shall merely be carried over any of the portages or
carrying places on either side; for the purpose of being immediately reimbarked
and carried to some other place or places. But as by this stipulation it is
only meant to secure to each party a free passage across the portages on both
sides; it is agreed, that this exemption from duty shall extend only to such
goods as are carried in the usual and direct road across the portage, and are
not attempted to be in any manner sold or exchanged during their passage across
the same, and proper regulations may be established to prevent the possibility
of any frauds in this respect.

As this article is intended to render in a great degree the local advantages
of each party common to both, and thereby to promote a disposition favorable to
friendship and good neighborhood, it is agreed, that the respective governments
will mutually promote this amicable intercourse, by causing speedy and
impartial justice to be done, and necessary protection to be extended to all
who may be concerned therein.

ARTICLE IV.
WHEREAS it is uncertain whether the river Missisippi extends so far to the
northward as to be intersected by a line to be drawn due west from the Lake of
the Woods, in the manner mentioned in the treaty of peace between his majesty
and the United States; it is agreed, that measures shall be taken in concert
between his majesty's government in America and the government of the United
States, for making a joint survey of the said river from one degree of latitude
below the Falls of St. Anthony, to the principal scource or scources of the
said river and also of the parts adjacent thereto; and that if on the result of
such survey, it should appear that the said river, would not be intersected by
such a line as is above mentioned, the two parties will thereupon proceed by
amicable negotiation, to regulate the boundary line in that quarter, as well as
all other points to be adjusted between the said parties, according to justice
and mutual convenience, and in conformity to the intent of the said treaty.

ARTICLE V.
WHEREAS doubts have arisen what river was truly intended under the name of the
river St. Croix, mentioned in the said treaty of peace, and forming a part of
the boundary therein described; that question shall be referred to the final
decision of commissioners to be appointed in the following manner, viz.

One commissioner shall be named by his Majesty, and one by the President of
the United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and the said two commissioners shall agree on the choice of a third; or if they
cannot so agree, they shall each propose one person, and of the two names so
proposed, one shall be drawn by lot in the presence of the two original
commissioners. And the three commissioners so appointed, shall be sworn
impartially to examine and decide the said question according to such evidence
as shall respectively be laid before them on the part of the British government
and of the United States. The said commissioners shall meet at Halifax, and
shall have power to adjourn to such other place or places as they shall think
fit. They shall have power to appoint a secretary, and to employ such surveyors
or other persons as they shall judge necessary. The said commissioners shall by
a declaration under their hands and seals decide what river is the river St.
Croix intended by the treaty. -- The said declaration shall contain a
description of the said river, and shall particularize the latitude and
longitude of its mouth and of its source. Duplicates of this declaration and of
the statements of their accounts, and of the journal of their proceedings shall
be delivered by them to the agent of his Majesty and to tne agent of the United
States, who may be respectively appointed and authorized to manage the business
on behalf of the respective governments. And both parties agree to consider
such decision as final and conclusive, so as that the same shall never
thereafter be called into question, or made the subject of dispute or
difference between them.

ARTICLE VI.
WHEREAS it is alleged by diverse British merchants, and others his Majesty's
subjects, that debts to a considerable amount, which were bona fide contracted
before the peace, still remain owing to them by citizens or inhabitants of the
United States, and that by the operation of various lawful impediments since
the peace, not only the full recovery of the said debts has been delayed, but
also the value and security thereof have been, in several instances, impaired
and lessened, so that by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings, the
British creditors cannot now obtain, and actually have and receive full and
adequate compensation for the losses and damages which they have thereby
sustained: It is agreed, that in all such cases where full compensation for
such losses and damages cannot for whatever reason be actually obtained, had
and received by the said creditors in the ordinary course (...) justice, the
United States will make full and complete compensation for the same to the said
creditors: But it is distinctly understood, that this provision is to extend to
such losses only as have been occasioned by the lawful impediments aforesaid,
and is not to extend to losses occasioned by such insolvency of the debtors, or
other causes as would equally have operated to produce such loss, if the said
impediments had not existed, nor to such losses or damages as have been
occasioned by the manifest delay or negligence, or wilful omission of the
claimant.

For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of any such losses and damages,
five commissioners shall be appointed, and authorized to meet and act in manner
following, viz. Two of them shall be appointed by his Majesty, two of them by
the President of the United States by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate thereof, and the fifth by the unanimous voice of the other four; and if
they should not agree in such choice, then the commissioners named by the two
parties shall respectively propose one person, and of the two names so
proposed, one shall be drawn by lot in the presence of the four original
commissioners. -- When the five commissioners thus appointed shall first meet,
they shall, before they proceed to act, respectively take the following oath or
affirmation, in the presence of each other, which oath or affirmation being so
taken and duly attested, shall be entered on the record of their proceedings,
viz. I A. B, one of the commissioners appointed in pursuance of the sixth
article of the treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, between his Britannic
Majesty and the United States of America, do solemnly swear, ' or affirm' that
I will honestly, diligently, impartially, and carefully examine, and to the
best of my judgment, according to justice and equity, decide all such
complaints, as under the said article shall be preferred to the said
commissioners; and that I will forbear to act as a commissioner, in any case in
which I may be personally interested.

Three of the said commissioners shall constitute a board, and shall have power
to do any act appertaining to the said commission, provided that one of the
commissioners named on each side, and the fifth commissioner shall be present,
and all decisions shall be made by the majority of the voices of the
commissioners then present; eighteen months from the day on which the said
commissioners shall form a board, and be ready to proceed to business, are
assigned for receiving complaints and applications; but they are nevertheless
authorized in any particular cases in which it shall appear to them to be
reasonable and just, to extend the said term of eighteen months, for any term
not exceeding six months, after the expiration thereof. The said commissioners
shall first meet at Philadelphia, but they shall have power to adjourn from
place to place is they shall see cause.

The said commissioners in examining the complaints and applications so
preferred to them, are empowered and required, in pursuance of the true intent
and meaning of this article, to take into their consideration all claims,
whether of principal or interest, or balances of principal and interest, and to
determine the same respectively, according to the merits of the several cases,
due regard being had to all the circumstances thereof, and as equity and
justice shall appear to them to require. And the said commissioners shall have
power to examine all such persons as shall come before them, on oath or
affirmation touching the premises; and also to receive in evidence according as
they may think most consistent with equity and justice, all written
depositions, or books, or papers, or copies, or extracts thereof, every such
deposition, book, or paper, or copy, or extract, being duly authenticated,
either according to the legal forms now respectively existing in the two
countries, or in such other manner as the said commissioners shall see cause to
require or allow.

The award of the said commissioners or of any three of them as aforesaid,
shall in all cases be final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the
claim, and to the amount of the sum to be paid to the creditor or claimant: And
the United States undertake to cause the sum so awarded to be paid in specie to
such creditor or claimant without deduction; and at such time or times, and at
such place or places as shall be awarded by the said commissioners; and on
condition of such releases or assignments to be given by the creditor or
claimant, as by the said commissioners may be directed: Provided always, that
no such payment shall be fixed by the said commissioners to take place sooner
than twelve months from the day of the exchange of the ratifications of this
treaty.

ARTICLE VII.
WHEREAS complaints have heen made by diverse merchants and others, citizens of
the United States, that during the course of the war in which his Majesty is
now engaged, they have sustained considerable losses and damage, by reason of
irregular or illegal captures or condemnations of their vessels and other
property, under color of authority or commissions from his majesty, and that
from various circumstances belonging to the said cases, adequate compensation
for the losses and damages so sustained cannot now be actually obtained, had
and received by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings; it is agreed, that
in all such cases, where adequate compensation cannot, for whatever reason, be
now actually obtained, had and received by the said merchants and others in the
ordinary course of justice, full and complete compensation for the same will be
made by the British Government to the said complainants. But it is distinctly
understood that this provision is not to extend to such losses or damages as
have been occasioned by the manifest delay or negligence, or wilful omission of
the claimant.

That for the purpose of ascetaining the amount of any such losses and damages,
five commissioners shall be appointed and authorized to act in London, exactly
in the manner directed with respect to those mentioned in the preceding
article, and after having taken the same oath or affirmation (mutatis mutandis)
the same term of eighteen months is also assigned for the reception of claims,
and they are in like mannner authorized to extend the same in particular cases.
They shall receive testimony, books, papers and evidence in the same latitude,
and exercise the like discretion and powers respecting that subject, and shall
decide the claims in question according to the merits of the several cases, and
to justice, equity, and the laws of nations. The award of the said
commissioners, or any such three of them as aforesaid, shall, in all cases, be
final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the claim, and the amount of
the sum to be paid to the claimant; and his Britannic Majesty undertakes to
cause the same to be paid to such claimant in specie, without any deduction, at
such place or places, and at such time or times as shall be awarded by the said
commissioners and on condition of such releases or assignments: to be given by
the claimant, as by the said commissioners may be directed.

And whereas certain merchants and others his Majesty's subjects complain that
in the course of the war they have sustained loss and damage, by reason of the
capture of their vessels and merchandise, taken within the limits and
jurisdiction of the states and brought into ports of the same, or taken by
vessels originally armed in ports of the said states.

It is agreed that in all such cases where restitution shall not have been made
agreeably to the tenor of the letter from Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, dated
at Philadelphia, Sep. 5, 1793, a copy of which is annexed to this Treaty; the
complaints of the parties shall be and hereby are referred to the commissioners
to be appointed by virtue of this article, who are hereby authorized and
required to proceed in the like manner relative to these as to the other cases
committed to them; and the United States undertake to pay to the complainants
or claimants in specie, without deduction, the amount of such sums as shall be
awarded to them respectively by the said commissioners, and at the times and
places which in such awards shall be specified; and on condition of such
releases or assignments to be given by the claimants as in the said awards may
be directed: And it is further agreed, that not only the now existing cases of
both descriptions, but also all such as shall exist at the time of exchanging
the ratifications of this treaty, shall be considered as being within the
provisions, intent, and meaning of this article.

ARTICLE VIII.
IT is further agreed, that the commissioners mentioned in this and in the two
preceding articles shall be respectively paid in such manner as shall be agreed
between the two parties; such agreement being to be settled at the time of the
exchange of the ratifications of this treaty. And all other expenses attending
the said commissions shall be defrayed jointly by the two parties, the same
being previously ascertained and allowed by the majority of the commissioners.
And in the case of death, sickness or necessary absence, the place of every
such commissioner respectively shall be supplied in the same manner as such
commissioner was first appointed, and the new commissioners shall take the same
oath or affirmation and do the same duties.

ARTICLE IX.
IT is agreed that British subjects who now hold lands in the territories of
the United States, and American citizens who now hold lands in the dominions of
his Majesty, shall continue to hold them according to the nature and tenure of
their respective estates and titles therein; and may grant, sell or devise the
same to whom they please, in like manner as if they were natives; and that
neither they nor their heirs or assigns shall, so far as may respect the said
lands and the legal remedies incident thereto, be regarded as aliens.

ARTICLE X.
NEITHER the debts due from individuals of the one nation to individuals of the
other, nor shares, nor moneys which they may have (...) the public funds, or in
the public or private, banks, shall ever in any event of war or national
differences be sequestered or confiscaed* it being unjust and impolitic that
debts and engagements contracted and made by individuals having confidence in
each other and in their respective governments, should ever be destroyed or
impaired by national authority on account of national differences and
discontents*

ARTICLE XI.
IT is agreed between his Majesty and the United States of America, that there
shall be a reciprocal and entirely perfect liberty of navigation and commerce
between their respective people, in the manner, under the limitations and on
the conditions specified in the following articles:

ARTICLE XII.
HIS Majesty consents that it shall and may be lawful during the time
hereinafter limited, for the citizens of the United States to carry to any of
his Majesty's islands and ports in the West Indies from the United States, in
their own vessels, not being above the burden of seventy tons, any goods or
merchandises being of the growth, manufacture or produce of the said States,
which it is or may be lawful to carry to the said islands or ports from the
said states in British vessels; and that the said American vessels shall be
subject there to no other or higher tonnage duties or charges, than shall be
payable by British vessels in the ports of the United States; and that the
cargoes of the said American vessels shall be subject there to no other or
higher duties or charges, than shall be payable on the like articles if
imported there from the said states in British vessels.

And his Majesty also consents, that it shall be lawful for the said American
citizens to purchase, load, and car^^ away in their said vessels to the United
States from the said islands and ports, all such articles being of the growth,
manufacture or produce of the said islands, as may now by law be carried from
thence to the said states in British vessels, and subject only to the same
duties and charges on exportation, to which British vessels and their cargoes
are or shall be subject in similar circumstances.

Provided always, that the said American vessels do carry and land their
cargoes in the United States only, it being expressly agreed and declared, that
during the continuance of this article, the United States will prohibit and
restrain the carrying any molasses, sugar, coffee, cocoa or cotton in American
vessels, either from his Majesty's islands, or from the the United States to
any part of the world except the United States, reasonable sea stores excepted.
Provided also, that it shall and may be lawful, during the same period, for
British vessels to import from the said islands into the United States, and to
export from the United States to the said islands, all articles whatever being
of the growth, produce or manufacture of the said islands, or of the United
States respectively, which now may, by the laws of the said states, be so
imported and exported. And that the cargoes of the said British vessels shall
be subject to no other or higher duties or charges than shall be payable on the
same articles if so imported or exported in American vessels.

It is agreed that this article and every matter and thing therein contained,
shall continue to be in force during the continuance of the war in which his
majesty is now engaged; and also for two years from and after the day of the
signature of the preliminary or other articles of peace, by which the same may
be terminated.

And it is further agreed, that at the expiration of the said term, the two
contracting parties will endeavor further to regulate their commerce in this
respect according to the situation in which his majesty may then find himself
with respect to the West Indies, and with a view to such arrangements as may
best conduce to the mutual advantage and extension of commerce. And the said
parties will then also renew their discussions, and endeavor to agree, whether
in any and what cases, neutral vessels shall protect enemy's property; and in
what cases provisions and other articles not generally contraband, may become
such. But in the mean time their conduct toward each other in these respects,
shall be regulated by the articles herein after inserted on those subjects.

ARTICLE XIII.
HIS majesty consents that the vessels belonging to the citizens of the United
States of America, shall be admitted, and hospitably received, in all the
seaports and harbors of the British territories in the East Indies. And that
the citizens of the said United States, may freely carry on a trade between the
said territories and the said United States in all articles of which the
importation or exportation respectively, to or from the said territories, shall
not be entirely prohibited. Provided only, that it shall not be lawful for them
in any time of war between the British government and any other power or state
whatever, to export from the said territories, without the special permission
of the British government there, any military stores, or naval stores, or rice.
The citizens of the United States shall pay for their vessels when admitted
into the said ports no other or higher tonnage duty than shall be payable on
British vessels when admitted into the ports of the United States. And they
shall pay no other or higher duties or charges, on the importation or
exportation of the cargoes of the said vessels, than shall be payable on the
same articles when imported or exported in British vessels. But it is expressly
agreed, that the vessels of the United States shall not carry any of the
articles exported by them from the said British territories, to any port or
place exeept to some port or place in America, where the same shall be unladen
and such regulations shall be adopted by both parties, as shall from time to
time be found necessary to enforce the due and faithful observance of this
stipulation. It is also understood that the permission granted by this article,
is not to extend to allow the vessels of the United States to carry on any part
of the coasting trade of the said British territories; but vessels going with
their original cargoes, or part thereof, from one port of discharge to another,
are not to be considered as carrying on the coasting trade. Neither is this
article to be construed to allow the citizens of the said states to settle or
reside within the said territories, or to go into the interior parts thereof,
without the permission of the British government established there; and if any
transgression should be attempted against the regulations of the British
government in this respect, the observance of the same shall and may be
enforced against the citizens of American in the same manner as against British
subjects or others transgressing the same rule. And the citizens of the United
States whenevet they arrive in any port or harbor in the said territories, or
if they should be permitted in manner aforesaid, to go to any other place
therein, shall always be subject to the laws, government and jurisdiction of
what nature established in such harbor, port or place, according as the same
may be: The citizens of the United States, may also touch for refreshment at
the island of St. Helena, but subect in all respects to such regulations as the
British government may from time to time establish there.

ARTICLE XIV.
THERE shall be between all the dominions of his Majesty in Europe and the
territories of the United States, a reciprocal and perfect liberty of commerce
and navigation. The people and inhabitants of the two countries respectively,
shall have liberty freely and securely, and without hindrance and molestation,
to come with their ships and cargoes to the lands, countries, cities, ports,
places, and rivers, within the dominions and territories aforesaid, to enter
into the same, to resort there, and to remain and reside there, without any
limitation of time: Also to hire and possess houses and warehouses for the
purposes of their commerce, and generally the merchants and traders, on each
side, shall enjoy the most complete protection and security for their commerce;
but subject always as to what respects this article, to the laws and statutes
of the two countries respectively.

ARTICLE XV.
IT is agreed that no other or higher duties shall be paid by the ships or
merchandise of the one party in the ports of the other, than such as are paid
by the like vessels or merchandise of all other nations. Nor shall any other or
higher duty be imposed in one country on the importation of any articles the
growth, produce or manufacture of the other, than are or shall be payable on
the importation of the like articles being of the growth, produce, or
manufacture of any other foreign country. Nor shall any prohibition be imposed
on the exportation or importation of any articles to or from the territories of
the two parties respectively, which shall not equally extend to all other
nations.

But the British government reserves to itself the right of imposing on
American vessels entering into the British ports in Europe, a tonnage duty
equal to that which shall be payable by British vessels in the ports of
America: And also such duty as may be adequate to countervail the difference of
duty now payable on the importation of European and Asiatic goods, when
imported into the United States in British or in American vessels.

The two parties agree to treat for the more exact equalization of the duties
on the respective navigation of their subjects and people, in such manner as
may be most beneficial to the two countries. The arrangements for this purpose
shall be made at the same time, with those mentioned at the conclusion of the
twelfth article of this treaty, and are to be considered as a part thereof. In
the interval it is agreed, that the United States will not impose any new or
additional tonnage duties on British vessels, nor increase the new subsisting
difference between the duties payable on the importation of any articles in
British or in American vessels.

ARTICLE XVI.
IT shall be free for the two contracting parties, respectively to appoint
consuls for the protection of trade, to reside in the dominions and territories
aforesaid, and the said consuls shall enjoy those liberties and rights which
belong to them by reason of their function. But before any consul shall act as
such, he shall be in the usual forms approved and admitted by the party to whom
he is sent; and it is hereby declared to be lawful and proper, that in case of
illegal or improper conduct toward the laws or government, a consul may either
be punished according to law, if the laws will reach the case, or be dismissed,
or even sent back, the offended government assigning to the other their reasons
for the same.

EITHER of the parties may except from the residence of consuls such particular
places, as such party shall judge proper to be so excepted.

ARTICLE XVII.
IT is agreed, that in all cases where vessels shall be captured or detained on
just suspicion of having on board enemy's property, or of carrying to the enemy
any of the articles which are contraband of war; the said vessel shall be
brought to the nearest or most convenient port; and if any property of an enemy
shall be found on board such vessel, that part only which belongs to the enemy
shall be made prize, and the vessel shall be at liberty to proceed with the
remainder without any impediment. And it is agreed, that all proper measures
shall be taken to prevent delay, in deciding the cases of ships or cargoes so
brought in for adjudication; and in the payment or recovery of any
indemnification, adjudged or agreed to be paid to the masters or owners of such
ships.

ARTICLE XVIII.
IN order to regulate what is in future to be esteemed contraband of war, it is
agreed, that under the said denomination shall be comprised all arms and
implements serving for the purposes of war, by land or sea, such as cannon,
muskets, mortars, petards, bombs, grenadoes, carcasses, saucisses, carriages
for cannon, musket rests, bandoliers, gunpowder, match, saltpeter, ball,
pikes, swords, head pieces, cuirasses halberts, lances, javelins horse
furniture, holsters, belts, and generally all other implements of war; as also
timber for ship-building, tar or rozin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp and
cordage, and generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of vessels,
unwrought iron and fir planks only excepted; and all the above articles are
hereby declared to be just objects of confiscation, whenever they are attempted
to be carried to an enemy.

AND whereas the difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases in which alone
provisions, and other articles not generally contraband may be regarded as
such, renders it expedient to provide against the inconveniences and
misunderstandings which might thence arise: it is further agreed, that whenever
any such articles so becoming contraband according to the existing laws of
Nations, shall for that reason be seized, the same shall not be confiscated,
but the owners thereof shall be speedily and completely indemnified; and the
captors, or in their default the government under whose authority they act,
shall pay to the masters or owners of such vessels the full value or all such
articles, with a reasonable mercantile profit thereon, together with the
freight, and also the demurrage incident to such detention.

AND whereas it frequently happens that vessels sail for a port or place
belonging to an enemy, without knowing that the same is either besieged,
blockaded or invested; it is agreed, that every vessel so circumstanced may be
turned away from such port or place, but she shall not be detained, nor her
cargo, If not contraband, be confiscated, unless after notice she shall again
attempt to enter; but she shall be permitted to go to any other port or place
she may think proper: Nor shall any vessel or goods of either party, that may
have entered into such port or place, before the same was besieged, blockaded
or invested by the other, and be found therein after the reduction or surrender
of such place, be liable to confiscation, but shall be restored to the owners
or proprietors thereof.

ARTICLE XIX.
AND that more abundant care may be taken for the security of the respective
subjects and citizens of the contracting parties, and to prevent their
suffering injuries by the men of war, or privateers of either party, all
commanders of ships of war, and privateers and all others the said subjects and
citizens, shall forbear doing any damage to those of the other party, or
committing any outrage against them, and if they act to the contrary, they
shall be punished, and shall also be bound in their persons and estates to make
satisfaction and reparation for all damages, and the interest thereof, of
whatever nature the said damages may be.

FOR this cause all commanders of privateers, before they receive their
commissions, shall hereafter be obliged to give before a competent judge,
sufficient security by at least two responsible sureties, who have no interest
in the said privateer, each of whom, together with the said commander, shall be
jointly and severally bound in the sum of sisteen hundred pounds sterling, or
if such ships be provided with above one hundred and fifty seamen or soldiers,
in the sum of three thousand pounds sterling, to satisfy all damages and
injuries, which the said privateer, or her officers or men, pr any of them may
do or commit during their cruise, contrary to the tenor of this treaty, or to
the laws and instructions for regulating their conduct; and further that in all
cases of aggressions the said commissions shall be revoked and annulled.

IT is also agreed that whenever a judge of a court of admiralty of either of
the parties, shall pronounce sentence against any vessel, or goods or property
belonging to the subjects or citizens of the other party, a formal and duly
authenticated copy of all the proceedings in the cause, and of the said
sentence, shall, if required, be delivered to the commander of the said vessel,
without the smallest delay, he paying all legal fees and demands for the same.

ARTICLE XX.
IT is further agreed that both the said contracting parties, shall not only
refuse to receive any pirates into any of their ports, havens, or towns, or
permit any of their, inhabitants to receive, protect, harbor, conceal or assist
them in any manner, but will bring to condign punishment all such inhabitants
as shall be guilty of such acts or offenses.

AND all their ships with the goods or merchandises taken by them and brought
into the port of either of the said parties, shall be seized as far as they can
be discovered, and shall be restored to the owners, or their factors or agents,
duly deputed and authorized in writing by them, (proper evidence being first
given in the court of admiralty for proving the property) even in case such
effects should have passed into other hands by sale, if it be proved that the
buyers knew or had good reason to believe, or suspect that they had been
piratically taken.

ARTICLE XXI.
IT is likewise agreed, that the subjects and citizens of the two nations,
shall not do any acts of hostility or violence against each other, nor accept
commissions or instructions so to act from any foreign prince or state, enemies
to the other party; nor shall the enemies of one of the parties be permitted to
invite, or endeavor to enlist in their military service any of the subjects or
citizens of the other party; and the laws against all such offenses and
aggressions shall be punctually executed. And if any subject or citizen of the
said parties respectively, shall accept any foreign commission, or letters of
marque, for arming any vessel to act as a privateer against the other party,
and be taken by the other party, it is hereby declared to be lawful for the
said party, to treat and punish the said subject or citizen, having such
commission or letters of marque, as a pirate.

ARTICLE XXII.
IT is expressly stipulated, that neither of the said contracting parties will
order or authorize any acts of reprizal against the other, on complaints of
injuries or damages, until the said party shall first have presented to the
other a statement thereof, verified by competent proof and evidence, and
demanded justice and satisfaction, and the same shall either have been refused
or unreasonably delayed.

ARTICLE XXIII.
THE ships of war of each of the contracting parties shall, at all times, be
hospitably received in the ports of the other, their officers and crews paying
due respect to the laws and government of the country. The officers shall be
treated with that respect which is due to the commissions which they bear, and
if any insult should be offered to them by any of the inhabitants, all
offenders in this respect shall be punished as disturbers of the peace and
amity between the two countries. -- And his majesty consents, that in case an
American vessel should, by stress of weather, danger from enemies or other
misfortune, be reduced to the necessity of seeking shelter in any of his
Majesty's ports, into which such vessel could not in ordinary cases claim to be
admitted, she shall, on manifesting that necessity to the satisfaction of the
government of the place, be hospitably received and be permitted to refit, and
to purchase at the market price, such necessaries as she may stand in need of,
conformably to such orders and regulations as the government of the place,
having respect to the circumstances of each case, shall prescribe. She shall
not be allowed to break bulk or unload her cargo, unless the same should be
bona fide necessary to her being refitted. Nor shall be permitted to sell any
part of her cargo, unless so much only as may be necessary to defray her
expenses, and then not without the express permission of the government of the
place. Nor shall she be obliged to pay any duties whatever, except only on such
articles as she may be permitted to sell for the purpose aforesaid.

ARTICLE XXIV.
IT shall not be lawful for any foreign privateers (not being subjects or
citizens of either of the said parties) who have commissions from any other
prince or state in enmity with either nation, to arm their ships in the ports
of either of the said parties, nor to sell what they may bare taken, nor in any
other manner to exchange the same; nor shall they be allowed to purchase more
provisions, than shall be necessary for their going to the nearest port of that
prince or state from whom they obtained their commissions.

ARTICLE XXV.
IT shall be lawful for the ships of war and privateers belonging to the said
parties respectively, to carry whithersoever they please the ships and goods
taken from their enemies, without being obliged to pay any fee to the officers
of the admiralty, or to any judges whatever; nor shall the said prizes when
they arrive at, and enter the ports of the said parties be detained or seized,
neither shall the searchers or other officers of those places visit such
prizes, (except for the purpose of preventing the carrying of any part of the
cargo thereof on shore in any manner contrary to the established laws of
revenue, navigation, or commerce) nor shall such officers take cognizance of
the validity of such prizes; but they shall be at liberty to hoist sail, and
depart as speedily as may be, and carry their said prizes to the place
mentioned in their commissions or patents, which the commanders of the said
ships of war or privateers shall be obliged to show. No shelter or refuge shall
be given in their ports to such as have made a prize upon the subjects or
citizens of either of the said parties; but if forced by stress of weather, or
the danger of the sea, to enter therein, particular care shall be taken to
hasten their departure, and to cause them to retire as soon as possible.
Nothing in this treaty contained shall, however, be construed or operate
contrary to former and existing public treaties with other sovereigns or
states. But the two parties agree, that while they continue in amity neither of
them will in future make any treaty that shall be inconsistent with this or the
preceding article.

NEITHER of the said parties shall permit the ships or goods belonging to the
subjects or citizens of the other to be taken within cannon shot of the coast,
nor in any of the bays, ports, or rivers of their territories by ships of war,
or others having commission from any prince, republic, or state whatever. But
in case it should so happen, the party whose territorial rights shall thus have
been violated, shall use his utmost endeavors to obtain from the offending
party, full and ample satisfaction for the vessel or vessels so taken, whether
the same be vessels of war or merchant vessels.

ARTICLE XXVI.
IF at any time a rupture should take place (which God forbid) between his
Majesty and the United States, the merchants and others of each of the two
nations, residing in the dominions of the other shall have the privilege of
remaining and continuing their trade, so long as they behave peaceably and
commit no offense against the laws; and in case their conduct should render
them suspected and the respective governments should think proper to order them
to remove, the term of twelve months from the publication of the order shall be
allowed them for that purpose, to remove with their families effects and
property, but this favor shall not be extended to those who shall act contrary
to the established laws; and for greater certainty, it is declared that such
rupture shall not be deemed to exist while negociations for accommodating
differences shall be depending, nor until the respective ambassadors or
ministers, if such there shall be, shall be recalled, or sent home on account
of such differences and not on account of personal misconduct, according to the
nature and degrees of which both parties retain their rights, either to request
the recall, or immediately to send home the ambassador or minister of the
other; and that without prejudice to their mutual friendship and good
understanding.

ARTICLE XXVII.
IT is further agreed, that his Majesty and the United States on mutual
requisitions, by them respectively, or by their respective ministers or
officers authorized to make the same, will deliver up to justice all persons,
who, being charged with murder or forgery, committed within the jurisdiction of
either, shall seek an asylum within any of the countries of the other, provided
that this shall only be done on such evidence of criminality as, according to
the laws of the place, where the fugitive or person so charged shall be found,
would justify his apprehension and commitment for trial, if the offense had
there been committed. The expense of such apprehension and delivery shall be
borne and defrayed, by those who make the requisition and receive the fugitive.

ART. XXVIII.
It is agreed, that the first ten articles of this treaty shall be permanent,
and that the subsequent articles, except the twelfth, shall be limited, in
their duration to twelve years, to be computed from the day on which the
ratifications of this treaty shall be exchanged, but subject to this condition
-- That whereas the said twelfth article will expire by the limitation therein
contained, at the end of two years from the signing the preliminary or other
articles of peace, which shall terminate the present war in which his Majesty
is engaged, it is agreed, that proper measures shall by concert be taken, for
bringing the subject of that article into amicable treaty and discussion, so
early before the expiration of the said term, as that new arrangements on that
head, may by that time be perfected and ready to take place. But if it should
unfortunately happen, that his Majesty and the United States, should not be
able to agree on such new arrangements, in that case all the articles of this
treaty, except the first ten, shall then cease and expire together.

LASTLY. This treaty, when the same shall have been ratified by his Majesty,
and by the President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent
of their Senate, and the respective ratifications mutually exchanged, shall be
binding and obligatory on his Majesty and on the said States, and shall be by
them respectively executed, and observed, with punctuality and the most sincere
regard to good faith; and whereas it will be expedient, in order the better to
facilitate intercourse and obviate difficulties, that other articles be
proposed and added to this treaty, which articles, from want of time and other
circumstances, cannot now be perfected -- it is agreed, that the said parties
will from time, to time, readily treat of and concerning such articles, and
will sincerely endeavor so to form them, as that they may conduce to mutual
convenience, and tend to promote mutual satisfaction and friendship; and that
the said articles, after having been duly ratified, shall be added to, and make
a part of this treaty. In faith whereof, we, the undersigned ministers
plenipotentiary of his Majesty the King of Great Britain, and the United States
of America, have signed this present treaty, and have caused to be affixed
thereto the seal of our arms.

Done at London, this nineteenth day of November, One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Ninety-four. GRENVILLE. (Seal.) JOHN JAY. (Seal.)

Philadelphia, September 5, 1793.
SIR,
I AM honored with yours of August 30. Mine of the 7th of that month assured
you that measures were taken for excluding from all further asylum in our
ports, vessels armed in them to cruize on nations with which we are at peace,
and for the restoration of the prizes the Lovely Lass, Prince William Henry,
and the Jane of Dublin; and that should the measures for restitution fail in
their effect, the President considered it as incumbent on the United States to
make compensation for the vessels.

WE are bound by our treaties with three of the belligerent nations, by all the
means in our power to protect and defend their vessels and effects in our
ports, or waters, or on the seas near our shores, and to recover and restore
the same to the right owners when taken from them. If all the means in our
power are used, and fail in their effect, we are not bound by our treaties with
those nations to make compensation.

THOUGH we have no similar treaty with Great Britain, it was the opinion of the
President, that we should use toward that nation the same rule, which under
this article, was to govern us with the other nations; and even to extend it to
captures made on the high seas, and brought into our ports, if done by vessels
which had been armed within them.

HAVING, for particular reasons, forbore to use all the means in our power for
the restitution of the three vessels mentioned in my letter of August 7th, the
President thought it incumbent on the United States to make compensation for
them: And though nothing was said in that letter of other vessels taken under
like circumstances, and brought in after the 5th of June, and before the date
of that letter, yet when the same forbearance had taken place, it was and is
his opinion, that compensation would be equally due.

AS to prizes made under the same circumstances, and brought in after the date
of that letter, the President determined, that all the means in our power
should be used for their restitution. If these fail, as we should not be bound
by our treaties to make compensation to the other powers in the analogous case,
he did not mean to give an opinion that it ought to be done to Great Britain.
But still if any cases shall arise subsequent to that date, the circumstances
of which shall place them on similar ground with those before it, the President
would think compensation equally incumbent on the United States.

Instructions are given to the governors of the different states, to use all
the means in their power for restoring prizes of this last description found
within their ports. Though they will of course take measures to be informed of
them, and the general government has given them the aid of the custom-house
officers for this purpose, yet you will be sensible of the importance of
multiplying the channels of their information as far as shall depend on
yourself, or any person under your direction, in order that the governors may
use the means in their power for making restitution.

Without knowledge of the capture they cannot restore it. It will always be
best to give the notice to them directly; but any information which you shall
be pleased to send to me also at any time shall be forwarded to them as quickly
as distance will permit.

Hence you will perceive, Sir, that the President contemplates restitution or
compensation in the case before the 7th of August; and after that date,
restitution if it can be effected by any means in our power. And that it will
be important that you should substantiate the fact, that such prizes are in our
ports or waters.

Your list of the privateers illicitly armed in our ports is, I believe,
correct.

With respect to losses by detention, waste, spoliation sustained by vessels
taken as before mentioned, between the dates of June 5th and August 7th, it is
proposed as a provisional measure, that the collector of the customs of the
district, and the British consul, or any other person you please, shall appoint
persons to establish the value of the vessel and cargo, at the time of her
capture and of her arrival in the port into which she is brought, according to
their value in that port. If this shall be agreeable to you, and, you will be
pleased to signify it to me, with the names of the prizes understood to be of
this description, instructions will be given accordingly, to the collector of
the customs where the respective vessels are.

I have the honor to be, etc. THOMAS JEFFERSON.
Geo. Hammond, Esquire.
ADDITIONAL ARTICLE
It is further agreed between the said contracting parties, that the operation
of so much of the twelfth article of the said treaty as respects the trade
which his said Majesty thereby consents may be carried on between the United
States and his islands in the West Indies, in the manner and on the terms and
conditions therein specified, shall be suspended.

AND WHEREAS the said Treaty with the said additional article (which together
constitute one treaty) has by me on the one part, and by his Britannic Majesty
on the other, been duly approved and ratified; and the ratifications were duly
exchanged at London on the twenty eighth day of October one thousand seven
hundred and ninety five: Now therefore to the end that the said treaty may be
executed and observed with punctuality and the most sincere regard to good
faith, on the part of the United States, I hereby make known the premises; and
enjoin and require all persons bearing office civil or military, within the
United States, and all others, citizens or inhabitants thereof, or being within
the same, to execute and observe the said treaty accordingly.

(L. S.) IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, I have caused the Seal of the United States of
America, to be affixed to these presents, and signed the same with my hand.
Done at the City of Philadelphia the 29th day of February one thousand seven
hundred and ninety six, and of the Independence of the United States of
America, the Twentieth. GO: WASHINGTON. By the President
TIMOTHY PICKERING Secretary of State.


