PROCEEDINGS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE UNITED STATES, IN THE CASE
OF Robert Randall and Charles Whitney.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.

PROCEEDINGS, etc.
In the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES of the United States, Monday the 28th of
December, 1795.
INFORMATION being given to the House, by the following members in their
places, to wit; Mr. Smith, of South Carolina, Mr. Murray, of Maryland, and Mr.
Giles, of Virginia, that a person of the name of Robert Randall, had made, or
communicated to them, respectively, certain overtures to obtain their several
support in this House, to a memorial intended to be presented by the said
Robert Randall, on behalf of himself and others, for the grant of a tract of
land, containing eighteen or twenty millions of acres, bordering on lakes Erie,
Michigan and Huron, and lying within the limits of the United States; for which
support, the said members, respectively, were promised to receive of the said
Robert Randall and his associates, a consideration or emolument in lands or
money: and this House regarding the said information as sufficient evidence of
a contempt to, and breach of the privileges of this House, in an unwarrantable
attempt to corrupt the integrity of its members:

Resolved, That Mr. Speaker do issue his warrant directed to the
Serjeant-at-arms attending this House, commanding him to take into custody,
wherever to be found, the body of the said Robert Randall, and the same in his
custody to keep, subject to the farther order and direction of the House.

A warrant, pursuant to the said resolution, was accordingly prepared, signed
by Mr. Speaker under his seal, attested by the Clerk, and delivered to the
Sergeant, with order forthwith to execute the same, and make due return thereof
to the House.

Information being also given to the House, by Mr. Buck, one of the members
from Vermont, of an application to him by a person of the name of Charles
Whitney, by which there is good reason to believe, that the said Whitney is a
partner and associate of the before named Randall, and equally concerned in the
business and overtures of the said Randall; a similar warrant was ordered,
signed, and delivered to the Sergeant, as aforesaid, for taking into his
custody, the body of the said Charles Whitney, subject in like manner to the
further order and direction of the House.

TUESDAY, the 29th of DECEMBER, 1795.
The Serjeant-at-arms having returned, on the warrants issued to him yesterday,
that he had executed the same on the bodies of Robert Randall and Charles
Whitney, the persons therein named, and that he now held them in his custody,
subject to the further order and direction of the House: It was, on motion,

Resolved, That a Committee of Privileges, to consist of seven members, be
appointed, and that the said committee be instructed to report a mode of
proceeding in the case of Robert Randall and Charles Whitney, who were taken
into custody yesterday, by order of the House, and that the said committee have
leave to sit immediately.

Ordered, That Mr. Baldwin, Mr. William Smith, Mr. Giles. Mr. Murray, Mr.
Livingston, Mr. Coit and Mr. Goodhue, be appointed a committee, pursuant to the
said resolution.

Mr. Baldwin, from the Committee of Privileges, to whom it was referred to
report a mode of proceeding in the case of Robert Randall and Charles Whitney,
made a report, which was read, considered, and agreed to by the House, as
follows:

Resolved, That the said Robert Randall and Charles Whitney, be brought to the
bar of the House, and interrogated by the Speaker, touching the information
given against them, on written interrogatories, which, with the answers
thereto, shall be entered on the minutes of the House. And that every question
proposed by a member, be reduced to writing, and a motion made, that the same
may be put by the Speaker. That after such interrogatories are answered, if the
House deem it necessary to make any further enquiry on the subject, the same be
conducted by a committee to be appointed for that purpose.

The said Robert Randall was accordingly brought to the bar of the House, in
custody of the Sergeant; and the charge against him, as stated in the journal
of yesterday, being read, he was interrogated, by Mr. Speaker, "whether he did
admit, or deny the truth of the said charge?" to which interrogatory he
answered, that he was not prepared to admit or deny the same; but requested
that time might be allowed him to make answer, and offer a vindication of his
conduct, until the day after tomorrow: Whereupon,

It was ordered, that the said Robert Randall, do now withdraw in custody,
until the House shall presently decide on his request.

The said Robert Randall accordingly withdrew, in custody, and after debate,

It was resolved by the House, that time be allowed him, until tomorrow,
twelve o'clock, to make answer, in conformity to his request.

Resolved also, That it be an addition to the charge against the said Robert
Randall, "that he informed a member of this House, that a number of the members
of this House, not less than thirty, had engaged, or were engaged to support
his memorial and application; or words to that effect."

The said Robert Randall was then returned to the bar, in custody, and notified
by Mr. Speaker, of the indulgence, and further proceeding of the House
respecting him: after which,

It was ordered, that the said Robert Randall be detained in custody of the
Sergeant, and brought up again to the bar of the House, tomorrow, at twelve
o'clock.

Charles Whitney, the other person named in the warrant of Mr. Speaker, was
then brought to the bar, in custody of the Sergeant, and the charge against
him, as stated in the journal of the proceeding of yesterday, being read, the
following interrogatories were propoundded to him, by Mr. Speaker; to which he
gave the respective answers thereto subjoined --

Question. What is your name?

Answer. Charles Whitney.

Question. Where do you reside?

Answer. In the state of Vermont.

Question. What is your occupation?

Answer. I am a farmer.

Question. When did you come to this city?

Answer. About the first of this month.

Question. Where is your usual abode whilst in this city?

Answer. At the green-tree tavern, in Fourth-street.

Question. Are you, or are you not guilty of the charge which has been read to
you, of being a partner and associate of Robert Randall, and equally concerned
in the business and overtures of the said Randall?

Answer. I am not guilty: I am equally concerned with Mr. Randall in the
present land business, but am ignorant of any improper motives, or improper
conduct of the said Randall therein; and can only answer for myself.

Question. Are any other persons associated with Mr. Randall and yourself, in
this business, and what appropriations or disposition of the said lands did you
design to make?

Answer. Colonel Pepune, and Mr. Jones, of Massachusetts, and colonel Ebenezer
Allen, of Vermont, agreed to associate with us in this business; and it was our
intention to divide it into forty one shares, and associate with us such other
influential characters as we could engage, in order to divide with us the great
expense, and trouble of the undertaking.

Question. Are any persons within the British lines associated with you in this
business?

Answer. Yes. -- Mr. Askins senior, Mr. Askins junior, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Innis,
a Mr. Pattenson, merchants and traders residing at Detroit, and its vicinity,
are concerned with us.

Question. Are any of the persons you have named at Detroit, as concerned with
you, in civil or military commission under the British government?

Answer. Yes. -- Mr. Askins the elder, is said to be in civil commission, as a
judge.

Question. Have you any instrument of association between yourself and partners?

Answer. I have: it is signed by the persons last named, and is I believe now
at my lodgings.

Question. Have you any objections to produce the said instrument?

Answer. I don't know that I have; but being without counsel I wish for time to
reflect upon it.

Question. Are you acquainted with a person of the name of John Gove, and did
you make application to him to become an associate with you?

Answer. I am acquainted with Mr. Gove, and did apply to him, to become an
associate; to which I understood him to have agreed.

Question. Where does Mr. Gove lodge?

Answer. At the green-tree tavern, in Fourth-street.

Question. Was Mr. Gove authorized by you, to apply to any members of Congress
in favor of your proposal?

Answer. I did mention to Mr. Gove, that he might apply to the members in favor
of our proposal.

Question. Were there any shares of the said land to be left open or
unappropriated, between you and your associates?

Answer. There were shares left open to be filled at my pleasure.

Question. Did you make any, and what application to Mr. Buck, one of the
members of this House, from the state of Vermont, to support your application?

Answer. I did apply to Mr. Buck, at his house in Vermont, and represented to
him, generally, the nature and advantages of our plan; but I made no proposal
to him of benefit or advantage to himself, or of other improper inducement.

Mr. Buck then informed the House, that the said Charles Whitney had made
overtures to him in Vermont, offering a share in land, or an equivalent in
money; or words to that effect: Whereupon,

It was moved and seconded, that the said Charles Whitney do now withdraw in
custody, and that all further proceedings respecting him be adjourned, until
tomorrow, twelve o'clock.

And, on a question taken, the same was ordered accordingly; with an
instruction to the Sergeant, to keep him separate and apart from Robert Randall.

WEDNESDAY, the 30th of DECEMBER, 1795.
A petition of Robert Randall, in custody of the Serjeant-at-arms, was
presented to the House and read, praying that he may be indulged with the
assistance of counsel, and a reasonable time to prepare for his defense, on the
charges now depending against him before the House: Whereupon,

It was resolved, that the prayer of the said petition be granted.

The said Robert Randall was then brought to the bar, in custody of the
Sergeant, and it being demanded of him by Mr. Speaker, "what further time he
required to prepare for his defense?" he answered until Friday next.

Resolved, That further time be allowed the said Robert Randall, until Friday
next, to prepare for his defense; and that in the mean time, he be remanded in
custody of the Sergeant, until further order.

The Speaker laid before the House, an instrument of writing, purporting to be,
"articles of agreement entered into and concluded at Detroit, the twenty-sixth
day of September, in the year of our Lord, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five, for the purpose of obtaining the pre-emption right from the United
States of America, and extinguishing the right of the native Indians to a
certain territory therein defined, containing by computation, eighteen or
twenty millions of acres, and lying on lakes Erie, Huron and Michigan, between
Ebenezer Allen and Charles Whitney, of the state of Vermont, and Robert Randall
of the city of Philadelphia, on the one part; and John Askin, Jonathan
Scheiffelin, William Robertson, John Askin, junior, David Robertson, Robert
Innes and Richard Pattenson, all of Detroit, of the other part;" which
instrument of writing had been given up by Charles Whitney to the
Serjeant-at-arms, and by the Sergeant delivered to the Speaker.

The said instrument of writing was read, and ordered to lie on the table.

Charles Whitney was then brought to the bar, in custody of the Sergeant, and
the further information against him, by Mr. Buck, one of the members from
Vermont, as stated in the journal of the proceedings of yesterday, being read
to him, he was interrogated by Mr. Speaker, "whether he did admit or deny the
same?" -- To which he answered, that he did wholly deny the same: Whereupon,

It was ordered, that he be remanded to the custody of the Sergeant, until
further order of the House: and On motion,

It was resolved, that the Committee of Privileges be instructed to consider
and report to this House, the proper mode of conducting the further enquiry,
and the trial in the case of Robert Randall and Charles Whitney.

THURSDAY, the 31st of DECEMBER, 1795.
The Speaker laid before the House, a letter from Robert Randall, in custody of
the Sergeant, "stating, that the engagements of the gentlemen of the bar of
this city, will prevent them from assisting him as counsel, until Saturday
evening; and praying a farther postponement of the proceedings respecting him,
until the earliest part of next week," which was read: Whereupon,

Ordered, That further time be allowed the said Robert Randall, until Monday
next, in conformity to his request.

Mr. Baldwin, from the Committee of Privileges, to whom it was referred to
consider and report on the proper mode of conducting the further enquiry, and
the trial in the case of Robert Randall and Charles Whitney, made a report,
which was read, and debate arising thereon,

An adjournment was called for.

FRIDAY, the 1st of JANUARY, 1796.
The House resumed the consideration of the report from the Committee of
Privileges, to whom it was referred to consider and report the proper mode of
conducting the further enquiry, and the trial in the case of Robert Randall and
Charles Whitney; and the said report being again read, and amended at the
Clerk's table, was, on the question put thereupon, agreed to by the House, as
follows:

That the proper mode of conducting the further enquiry, and the trial in the
case of Robert Randall and Charles Whitney, will be, to proceed, first, with a
further hearing of Robert Randall, at the bar of the House.

That the information that has been given against the said Robert Randall and
Charles Whitney, be reduced to writing, and signed by the informants
themselves, respectively, and entered at large on the journal. That the said
information be read to the prisoners, and that they be called upon by the
Speaker, to declare what they have to say, in their defense.

That if the said prisoners shall offer any parole evidence, in their
exculpation, the same shall be heard, at the bar of the House; excepting the
members of the House, who may give their testimony on oath in their places; and
no question shall be put to any member, on the part of the prisoner, by way of
cross examination, except leave be first given by the House, and every such
question shall be put by the Speaker: and that the judge of the district of
Pennsylvania be requested to attend, for the purpose of administering an oath
or affirmation, to all witnesses. That all questions, on the part of the House,
to be asked of the said witnesses, shall be put by the Speaker.

That, on every debate, the prisoners and their counsel shall be directed to
withdraw; and that, when they shall have concluded their defense, and are
withdrawn, the sense of the House shall be taken, on the guilt or innocence of
the prisoners, respectively.

MONDAY, the 4th of JANUARY, 1796.
Pursuant to the proceedings of the House on Friday last, Mr. Smith of
South Carolina, Mr. Murray of Maryland, Mr. Giles of Virginia, and Mr. Buck of
Vermont, delivered in at the Clerk's table, their several informations, in
writing, subscribed with their names, respectively, in the case of Robert
Randall and Charles Whitney; which are as follow:

William Smith, one of the representatives of the state of South Carolina, in
the Congress of the United States, declares --

That on Tuesday last, the twenty-second instant, a person who called himself
Randall, and who is said to be from the state of Maryland, applied to him at
his lodgings, in the city of Philadelphia, and requested a private and
confidential conversation of an hour, which the informant agreed to; and at the
time appointed, which was the same evening, the said Randall being alone with
the informant, communicated to him a proposal for procuring from the
legislature of the United States, a grant of about eighteen or twenty millions
of acres, in the north western territory, between lakes Michigan, Huron and
Erie. That the said Randall observed, that the grant he proposed, would be of
great service to the United States, from the persons who would be interested
therein, (to wit; certain Canada merchants, at or near Detroit, whose names he
did not mention) having great influence over the Indians, who were not pacified
by the late treaty concluded with general Wayne; and that the said persons
would extinguish the Indian claims, at their own expense; and after setting
forth the saving of expense, by the cessation of the Indian war, and other
reasons to induce a belief that the proposed grant would be of public utility,
he proceeded to inform the informant, that the intention was to divide the land
into about forty shares, twenty-four of which would be allowed to, or
distributed among such persons (meaning, as this informant understood him, from
the whole purport of his conversation, members of Congress) as would favor the
measure: that of these twenty-four shares, he had the management or
distribution of twelve, for the southern part, (meaning, as the informant
understood, the southern members of Congress) and another person, whose name he
did not mention, had the disposition of the other twelve, for the eastern part,
(still, as the informant understood, and believes, meaning as aforesaid.) That
he, the said Randall, proposed subdividing the said shares into so many
portions, as to have a sufficiency to obtain a majority (meaning, as the
informant understood him, a majority of Congress) and that gentlemen, after the
session was over, or when they returned to private life, might then have such
parts of shares, as the said twenty-four shares would be reserved for such of
them as would favor the business, on the same terms as the original
associators. That the view of him, the said Randall, and of those concerned
with him, was to present a memorial, on the following Monday, to Congress, to
obtain the said grant for a small price, mentioning half a million of dollars;
and that he supposed the land was worth more than two shillings an acre. On
taking leave, he pressed the informant for an early and decisive answer to the
foregoing proposals; to which the informant replied, that he would not wish to
see him again before Friday morning, and requested him to call on him at
Congress, and not at his lodgings; but the House did not sit on Friday, and the
informant has not seen him since. The informant further says, that the
foregoing is the substance and purport of the communication to him made by the
said Randall, on the subject above set forth; and that the impression clearly
made on the mind of the informant, by the overtures, was, that under a pretext
of public utility, the object of the application was, to secure the informant's
influence, as a member of Congress, by a temptation of great personal
advantage. That the informant, the next morning, communicated the substance of
the foregoing to Mr. Murray, one of the members from Maryland, and consulted
him on the most proper mode of proceeding on so delicate an occasion; that Mr.
Murray advised a consultation with Mr. Henry, of the Senate; and that, in
consequence of such consultation with Mr. Murray and Mr. Henry, on the
following day (Thursday) it was resolved, that the informant should immediately
communicate the whole transaction to the President of the United States; which
he accordingly did.

(Signed) WILLIAM SMITH.
28th December, 1795.
Mr. Murray declares, that on Wednesday last, the twenty-third instant, Mr.
Smith, member of Congress, of South Carolina, informed him, that a man of the
name of Randall, of Maryland, had the evening before attempted to bribe him in
western lands, on condition of his supporting an application, which Randall
told him he should soon make to Congress; the object of which application was,
a grant from Congress, of from eighteen to twenty millions of acres of land,
between Erie, Huron and Michigan. That Mr. Smith was extremely solicitous, that
some other gentleman should immediately be informed of the infamous proposal,
and that he said he would mention it to Mr. Henry, of the Senate, and advise
with him, upon proper measures for the detecting of the full extent of the
scheme, and crushing it. -- That he had no opportunity of talking to Mr. Henry,
on that day; but early on the morning of the twenty-fourth instant,
communicated the intelligence to Mr. Henry, who recommended, that Mr. Smith
should immediately inform the President: That on the said day, Mr. Randall of
Maryland, was introduced to him, the informant, and requested a confidential
interview, at his, the informant's lodgings, which the informant readily
promised him, to be at five, for the purpose of developing his scheme. That
Randall came at or near five, that day last named, to wit; on Thursday, and
communicated to Mr. Henry and himself, in general terms, the outline of a plan,
by which he, Randall and his Canada friends, would extinguish the Indian title
to all the lands between lakes Erie, Huron and Michigan, as marked on a map
which Randall then showed, containing from eighteen to twenty millions of
acres. That he, the informant, then asked Randall into his apartment, where
they were alone. That Randall expatiated at first upon the public utility of
his scheme, which was, that Congress should grant to him, and his company, all
the land aforesaid mentioned, for five hundred thousand, or at most, one
million of dollars; and that he would undertake, in four months, that the
harmony of the Indians should be secured to the union; or if Congress thought
proper, that the Indian tribes, now on said land, should be removed to the
British side, or down lake Michigan, reserving to some aged chiefs, a few miles
square; that his company and himself had determined to divide the lands
aforesaid, into forty (or forty-one) shares. That of these shares, twenty-four
were to be reserved for the disposal of himself and his partner, now in town,
for such members of Congress as assisted them, by their abilities and votes, in
obtaining the grant aforesaid. -- That of these twenty-four shares, his partner
had twelve under his management, for the eastern members of Congress, and that
he, Randall, had the other twelve shares under his management, for the southern
members of Congress. That these shares were to be so divided as to accomplish
the object by securing a majority of Congress. That the informant started an
objection to land speculation, as troublesome, and that he, Randall, said, if
you (meaning the informant,) do not choose to accept your share of the land, you
shall have cash, in hand, for your share. That the informant appointed Randall
to meet him in the lobby of the House, on Monday, the twenty-eighth instant.
That Randall told him, a memorial was to be handed in, upon this subject, on
said Monday; but refused to inform the informant, what member was to present
it. That Randall told him, that he, Randall, mentioned his plan to some members
in the general way only -- meaning thereby, as he understood him, a view of the
sounder part of the plan, as being conducive to public utility. That, in the
early part of the confidential and secret conversation, Randall said, that the
members of Congress, who would behave handsomely, should come into their
shares, on the same terms upon which the company obtained the grant; but soon
after made proposals, more openly, seductive and corrupt; closing them with the
offer of cash in hand, as aforesaid. -- That the informant on that evening when
Randall went away, told Mr. Henry of the whole of Randall's offers aforesaid;
then called on the Secretary of State, and communicated the same to him; and
next morning early, informed the President of the transaction.

(Signed) W. V. MURRAY.
29th December, 1795.
William B. Giles, a member of the House of Representatives, in the Congress of
the United States, declares --

That in the evening of Thursday, the seventeenth of December, one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-five, as well as this informant recollects, a person
called upon this informant, at his lodgings, under the name of Robert Randall,
with an introductory note from Mr. Gabriel Christie, in the usual form, dated
the fifteenth of the same month.

That the said Robert Randall informed this informant, that he had some
business of importance to communicate to this informant, which would probably
come before Congress: That it respected the fur trade, at present carried on by
the British traders with the Indians, through the lakes. He observed, that it
would be important to change the course of that trade into some channel through
the United States. -- That he believed he could put Congress upon some plan of
effecting that object. -- That the plan was of a secret nature. -- That he was
not then prepared to disclose it, and requested a private interview with this
informant, for that purpose, at some other time. Upon which request, this
informant appointed the next Saturday, at twelve o'clock, (being the nineteenth
of December) to receive the communication.

That about the time appointed, the said Robert Randall called on this
informant, and after some general conversation, informed this informant, that
an association had been formed by himself and others, with some of the most
influential traders at Detroit, for the purpose of purchasing all the lands
contained in the peninsula formed by the lakes Erie, Huron and Michigan, and
the waters connecting those lakes, amounting in the whole to twenty or thirty
millions of acres, if the consent of Congress could be obtained for the
extinguishment of the Indian claims thereto. The said Randall then produced a
map of the peninsula and lakes.

That this tract of country was to be divided into shares, and that a number of
shares was to be left unappropriated, until the necessary law of Congress
should pass, authorizing the extinguishment of the Indian claims; and might
then be filled up by those who might think proper to concur in the plan, and
should give their aid for procuring the passage of such law. Upon this
intimation, this informant observed, that he hoped the said Randall did not
intend to address the information of the unappropriated shares, particularly to
this informant.

To which the said Randall replied, that he did not: That he only meant it as
general information; but he could see no impropriety in the members of Congress
being concerned in the scheme, if the public good was to be promoted by it; and
that thirty or forty members were already engaged in its support; or words to
that effect.

After some further conversation of a general nature, respecting the present
state of the fur trade; the value of the lands contained in the peninsula; and
the probable effect of the late treaty upon that trade and country, the said
Randall enquired of this informant "whether he deemed his plan advisable, and
whether it would meet with the support of this informant, in Congress." To
which this informant replied, that if the said Randall should bring his
proposals before Congress, this informant would give them the consideration
which his duty required, and should give such vote as he deemed right; or words
to the same effect. Very shortly after this observation, Mr. Edward Livingston,
a member of Congress from New York, entered the room, and the said Randall left
it, without further observation, as well as this informant recollects. This
informant immediately communicated the contents of this conversation to Mr.
Livingston, and declared that he considered the proffer of the unappropriated
shares to the members of Congress, a direct attempt at corruption.

This informant, on the same day, communicated the substance of the
conversation to the Speaker of the House of Representatives of the United
States, to Messrs. Blount and Macon of North Carolina, and to Messrs. Madison
and Venable of Virginia. It was deemed advisable by all these gentlemen, as
well as by this informant, to permit the plan to be brought before Congress in
the usual way, by memorial, and to cause a detection, by means of a committee,
to whom the said memorial should be referred: and in the mean time, if the said
Randall should again call on this informant, he should proceed to make further
discovery of the real state and nature of the transaction.

That on the next day, the said Randall did again call on this informant, and
informed him, that he, the said Randall, then proposed to disclose his plan
more particularly; and after some general remarks upon the public utility, as
well as individual benefit of the plan, he said that it was in substance as
follows:

The tract of country before described, was to be divided into forty-one
shares; five of which were to be reserved to the Indian traders at Detroit; the
other thirty-six were to be divided into two departments; eighteen to the
eastern, and eighteen to the southern department. That six, out of the eighteen
shares, were to be reserved to his eastern partner and associates, and six, out
of the remaining eighteen, to himself and his associates. That the remaining
twenty-four shares were to be left unappropriated, for the use of such members
of Congress as should support the measure. That the names of those members were
not to be made known until after the law for the extinguishment of the Indian
claims had passed: and then requested this informant to prepare some writing
which would compel the ostensible persons to surrender the unappropriated
shares to the real supporters of the measure, after it should be effected. That
one million of dollars were spoken of, as the price for the lands; but that he
deemed that sum by far too much; and as Congress would have to fix the price,
they might make the terms such as to ensure considerable emoluments to the
purchasers. That a majority of the Senate had consented to give the plan their
support, and within three of a majority of the House of Representatives. After
much further conversation on the subject, which this informant thinks
unnecessary to particularize, the said Randall promised to wait again on this
informant, at his lodgings, on Tuesday evening, at seven o'clock, and introduce
to this informant, his eastern associate.

The said Randall did not call at the appointed hour, and this informant did
not see him again until Friday, the twenty-fifth of December, when the said
Randall again called on this informant, and after making an apology, for not
calling at the appointed hour of the preceding Tuesday, informed him at the
door of his apartment, that his memorial to Congress would be ready to be
presented on the next Monday; but as several gentlemen were in this informant's
room, at that time, the said Randall did not enter, and no further conversation
was then had: since which time this informant has not seen the said Randall,
until he was brought to the bar of the House of Representatives, in custody.

This informant further says, that he communicated the substance of every
material conversation with the said Randall, to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, and to the several gentlemen before mentioned.

(Signed) WILLIAM B. GILES.
1st January, 1796.
I, Daniel Buck, inform and say, that about ten days previous to my setting out
on my journey to Congress (which was on the thirtieth day of November last,) a
stranger, whom I now know to be Charles Whitney, in custody of the
Serjeant-at-arms, called at my office in Norwich, in the state of Vermont,
introduced himself by the name of Whitney, and informed me, that he had some
business of importance which he wished to converse with me upon. I asked if he
wished to be in private, he signified that he did, upon which my clerk
withdrew; and the said Whitney proceeded to inform me that the business of
which he wished to converse, was of great importance to the public, as well as
to the individuals immediately concerned. -- That it would come before
Congress, but was so circumstanced as to render it necessary to make a previous
statement to some of the members, that they might be able to explain to others;
and the whole thereby be better prepared to judge upon the business: he
declared he wished for nothing improper, and that he did not want that I should
favor the plan, unless I saw it to be consistent; for he said he wanted nothing
but what was perfectly just and honorable, and was confident that if the matter
could be understood, it would appear to be of great public utility: he then
stated, that he and his associates had discovered a large and immensely
valuable tract of land, between, or contiguous to, lakes Erie, Huron and
Michigan, (if I mistake not the names) which he said might be purchased of the
Indians, at a low rate: That this purchase would conciliate the affections, and
secure the friendship of the hostile tribes. -- That he, the said Whitney,
together with Ebenezer Allen, doctor Randall, and a number of Canadian
merchants at Detroit, had formed an association for the purpose of
extinguishing the Indian title, and petitioning Congress for the pre-emption
right to those lands; that if they succeeded, it was their intention
immediately to make settlement on them. -- That those merchants had such
influence with, and control over the Indians, that there would be no
difficulty with them; and that such a settlement would be a barrier against the
savages, and effectually secure peace to the United States. -- That those
merchants were then employed in the business, among the Indians; and that his
partner, doctor Randall and his other associates, had such connections, that
there was a fair prospect of success. -- That it was not their intention,
however, to engross all this property to themselves; but that it was to be
divided into a number of shares, and that he and the said Randall had the
disposal of them. -- That he, the said Whitney, was then directly from
Philadelphia, and that it was agreed that Randall should dispose of a part
amongst his friends, and the influential characters in the southern states;
that he, the said Whitney, was to distribute the other part amongst his the
said Whitney's friends, and the influential characters in the eastern and
northern states. -- That they had already got a number engaged, but that the
subscription was not full, and that I might become an adventurer, if I wished
for it; and as he conceived that I could make myself acquainted with the facts,
they, the said associates, would be able so clearly to demonstrate the public
utility of the measure, that there could be no impropriety in my being
concerned in the business, as I should thereby only connect my private interest
with the public good; and while I was advancing the greatest interest of my
country, might put two or three thousand dollars in my own pocket. Upon my
suggesting that, by a late treaty, a peace was already concluded with the
Indians: and that this was a business that might involve in it an important
national question, as, by the treaty, the right of purchasing lands of the
Indians, was reserved to the United States, the said Whitney replied and said,
that the Indians were greatly dissatisfied with the treaty, and would not keep
it; and that another war would be the certain consequence, unless other
measures were adopted. He then renewed the protestations of the purity of his
intentions, and said, that he conceived that they (meaning himself and
associates, as I understood him) should so clearly evince the utility of the
plan, as that there could be no doubt of its propriety in the mind of any
well-wisher to his country; and said, that he thought it would be hard to
suppose that members of Congress were, in consequence of their appointment, to
be deprived of those advantages to acquire property which might be taken by
others. The said Whitney showed me a plan of the country, and the articles of
agreement between the associates, which appear to be the same as have been read
in Congress: he also said much upon the magnitude of the object, in respect to
the subscribers and partners: and though I cannot now repeat his expressions,
yet I can truly assert, that I then clearly understood him, that if I would
subscribe as a partner, my name might be kept secret, and after the grant was
obtained, if I chose to relinquish my share in the lands, I might receive money
in lieu of it; though no specified sum was mentioned, other than has already
been stated; and the conversation finally broke off upon my declaring that I
would make no engagement in the business, until I was better informed as to the
merits of the question.

(Signed) DANIEL BUCK.
2d January, 1796.
The House then proceeded to a further hearing in the case of Robert Randall;
and the said Robert Randall being brought to the bar, in the custody of the
Sergeant, and attended by his counsel, the informations, in writing, of Mr.
Smith of South Carolina, Mr. Murray of Maryland, and Mr. Giles of Virginia,
were read to him.

It was then demanded of him, by Mr. Speaker, "what he had to say in his
defense?" to which he answered, that he was not guilty.

It was further demanded of him, by Mr. Speaker, "whether he had any witnesses
that he wished to be examined in proof of his innocence?" to which he answered,
that he had not.

Application was then made to the House, by the prisoner's counsel, that the
informations which had been delivered in against him, may be attested by the
oaths of the informant members, and that he may be permitted to examine them,
on oath, touching the same, subject to the order of the House: Whereupon,

The prisoner, with his counsel, having withdrawn from the bar; it was, after
debate,

Resolved, That the prisoner be informed, that if he has any question to
propose to the informants, or other members of the House, he is at liberty to
put them in the mode already prescribed: that the said informant members be
sworn to the declaration just read, and also, to answer such questions, as
shall be asked of them, touching the same.

The prisoner, with his counsel, having then returned to the bar, and being
informed of the further proceeding respecting him; the informant members were
respectively sworn to the truth of the written informations which they had
severally delivered in against him; and also true answer to make to such
questions as should be asked of them, touching the same: the said oaths being
administered to them, by the judge of the district of Pennsylvania, who
attended for that purpose.

The House then resumed the hearing of the said trial, and having made some
progress therein,

It was, on motion, resolved, that farther proceeding be adjourned until
tomorrow, twelve o'clock.

TUESDAY, the 5th of JANUARY, 1796.
The House resumed the adjourned hearing in the case of Robert Randall; and the
prisoner, by his counsel, being fully heard at the bar of the House, and his
defense closed; it was, on motion,

Resolved, That this House will, tomorrow, at twelve o'clock, proceed to a
final decision on the said case.

WEDNESDAY, the 6th of JANUARY, 1796.
On motion of Mr. Christie of Maryland, and Mr. Sedgwick of Massachusetts, the
several informations heretofore given by them on oath, in the case of Robert
Randall, and now delivered in, in writing, at the Clerk's table, subscribed
with their names, respectively, were read, and ordered to be inserted in the
journal, as follow:

The declaration of Gabriel Christie is, that some time in the month of October
or November last, this informant was in Philadelphia, when he saw Robert
Randall, who had, as he informed this informant, just returned from Canada,
where he had been disappointed in the business he went to that country on; but
he, Randall, informed this informant, that on his way home, he had called at
Detroit, where he had spent some time; and had, he believed, entered into an
association, to which, if he got the consent of the government of the United
States, would be of considerable advantage to him, and those who chose to
associate with him; and informed this informant, that he might be concerned
with him, provided he liked the speculation: he then informed this informant,
that he had associated with a number of influential persons at Detroit, for the
purpose of obtaining the pre-emption right to a large tract of country within
the territory of the United States, and produced to this informant, the
original association. After this informant had heard all that Randall had to
communicate to him, this informant told Randall, that he considered his scheme
as a wild goose one; and that this informant would not have any concern in it.
Randall then requested this informant, to give him his opinion in what manner
he, Randall, ought to proceed: this informant told him, that the most proper
person to apply to, was Mr. Randolph, the late secretary of state; and if he,
Randall, thought proper, this informant would inform Mr. Randolph of it, and
get his advice, which Randall agreed to: this informant then went to Mr.
Randolph, and gave him all the information that the informant had received from
Randall. After considering the business some time, Mr. Randolph advised, that
an application should be made to the President of the United States; which
advice, the informant gave to Randall, who seemed, at that time, fully
satisfied with the proposal, and requested the informant to introduce him to
the President, for that purpose; but as this informant was going out of town in
a day or two, he told Randall, that he would introduce him to the President, on
his return to Congress. When the informant came to Philadelphia, in December,
he found Randall in the city; and after asking Randall, what he had done in his
business, and whether he still meant to apply to the President, Randall then
informed the informant, that his friend and associate, Mr. Whitney, had arrived
in Philadelphia, and that upon consulting with him, they came to a
determination not to apply to the President, as he heretofore had agreed, but
had determined to present a memorial to the legislature, for a grant of the
said land. This informant told Randall, that he disapproved of this mode, and
asked Randall who had advised him to it. Randall then informed the informant,
that this said Mr. Whitney had informed him, that he had consulted with a
number of the eastern members of Congress, and in particular, with Mr.
Sedgwick, who had advised this mode of proceeding. Randall also informed this
informant, that Mr. Sedgwick had agreed to draw up, and present his memorial.
This informant then informed Randall, that by this mode of proceeding, he had
put it out of this informant's power to be concerned with him, if he thought
ever so well of it. Randall asked the informant the reason; the informant
answered, that it would be improper in any member of Congress, to be concerned
in any thing that he was to vote on. This informant was not able to impress
Randall with the propriety of his remark. The informant never understood, that
Mr. Sedgwick was, in any manner, concerned with Randall, or his associates; but
that he, Mr. Sedgwick, thought the thing a public benefit, and would support
it. That Randall never informed this informant, that any of the members of
Congress were concerned, but that a majority of them thought favorably of the
plan, and would support it. In all the conversation the informant had with
Randall, this informant told him, that he could not expect this informant's
assistance, as the informant would never agree to sell any of the lands of the
United States, for less than a dollar per acre. Randall then informed the
informant, before a witness, that it was strange, that the informant was the
only person in Congress, that he had applied to, but what seemed to think
favorably of his plan; the informant told Randall, that his opinion was fixed,
and still advised his application to the President, which Randall declined.

(Signed) G. CHRISTIE.
5th January, 1796.
The informant, Theodore Sedgwick, a member of the House of Representatives of
the United States, declares, that some time before he left the place of his
residence in Massachusetts, one Israel Jones, esquire of Adams, in that state,
waited on him and introduced to him, a man whom he now knows by the name of
Charles Whitney, of the state of Vermont. That Mr. Jones is a man of
respectable character, a magistrate, a member of the state legislature, (as the
informant believes) and a trustee of the corporation of Williams college. That
Mr. Jones informed the informant, that he, with others, had in contemplation an
application to Congress, for a grant of a tract of country lying between the
lakes Huron, Michigan and Erie. -- Considerations of a public nature having
been stated and enlarged upon, the opinion of the informant was requested,
relative to the propriety and success of the proposed application. He answered
in substance, that he believed it was to be doubted whether the legislature
would undertake actually to contract for any of the vacant public lands, and
that the doubt was still stronger respecting these lands, the Indian claim to
which had not been previously extinguished. He stated to Mr. Jones that, by
reason of sickness in his family, it was not probable he should attend the next
session of Congress; at all events, however, he advised Mr. Jones not to make
an early application, as it was probable the subject of disposing of the public
lands would occupy the attention of Congress, during the then ensuing session;
and that, by the delay, Mr. Jones could form a more correct judgment of the
course which it would be most eligible for him to pursue, relative to this
subject. That while the informant was waiting on Mr. Jones to the door, at his
departure, Mr. Jones asked him if there would be any impropriety in a member of
Congress being concerned in an application for a grant of lands? The informant
answered, that it would depend on the circumstances under which the application
was made; proper, if the application was made to a land-office, but otherwise,
if to the legislature; because in the latter case it would be for a man to
contract with himself: to this answer Mr. Jones gave an explicit assent. That
the informant never at any time before or afterward, to his remembrance, saw
the said Whitney, until he saw him in this city, during the present session.
That the informant came from his own home to New York, in company with col.
Pepoon, stated by the said Whitney, as one of his associates. That the
informant has been informed and believes that the said Pepoon is now in this
city; but that he had never spoken to the informant on the subject of the said
land speculation. That not long after the arrival of the informant in this
city, the said Whitney, one morning waited on him, and stated to him an
intended memorial respecting the tract of land aforesaid, and urged on the
consideration of the informant, the motives of a public nature for a grant
thereof. That the informant enquired of the said Whitney, to what state he
belonged, and being answered to Vermont, he recommended to him to request the
representatives of that state to present his memorial. That the said Whitney
requested the informant to peruse his memorial when it should be prepared,
which he understood was not then the case. That he answered, according to his
best recollection, that whenever he had leisure he should be willing to do it;
or to that effect. That the whole time of the interview he believes did not
exceed six, he is very confident, could not exceed ten minutes. That twice
afterward, the informant's servant informed him, that the said Whitney wished
to see him, and that he caused himself to be denied; and the informant is very
confident he never undertook either to draft, or to present any memorial, for
the said Whitney.

On the morning of the twenty-eighth of December, Mr. Smith of South Carolina,
informed the informant of what he afterward stated in evidence to the House,
respecting Robert Randall. The informant advised Mr. Smith, as soon as
possible, to make the same known to the House of Representatives, (which Mr.
Smith informed the informant he had determined to do) and the informant having
previously advised the said Whitney to apply to the Representatives of Vermont,
he thought it his duty, and he accordingly took the earliest opportunity to
request Mr. Smith of that state, to avoid presenting any memorial with which he
might be entrusted for a grant of land, and desired him to make the same
request to Mr. Buck, the other member from the same state.

The informant further declares, that he never, to his remembrance, saw Robert
Randall, till he saw him at the bar of the House.

THEODORE SEDGWICK.
January 5th, 1796.
The House, then, according to the order of the day, proceeded to a final
decision, in the case of Robert Randall; and,

A motion being made and seconded, that the House do come to the following
resolution:

Whereas any attempt to influence the conduct of this House, or its members, on
subjects appertaining to their legislative functions, by motives, other than
the public advantage, is a high contempt of this House, and a breach of its
privileges: And whereas it does appear to this House, by the information, on
oath, of sundry members, and by the proceedings thereon had before the House,
that Robert Randall did attempt to influence the conduct of the said members,
in a matter relating to their legislative functions, to wit, the sale of a
large portion of the public property, by motives of private emolument to the
said members, other than, and distinct from, the public advantage; Therefore,

Resolved, That the said Robert Randall has thereby committed a high contempt
of this House, and a breach of its privileges: --

The previous question thereon was called for by five members, to wit; -- Shall
the main question, to agree to the said resolution, be now put?

And, on the question; -- Shall the said main question be now put?

It passed in the negative.

A motion was then made and seconded, that the House do come to the following
resolution:

Resolved, That it appears to this House, that Robert Randall has been guilty
of a contempt to, and a breach of the privileges of this House, by attempting
to corrupt the integrity of its members, in the manner laid to his charge,

And, on the question thereupon,

It was resolved in the affirmative -- YEAS 78. NAYS 17.

The yeas and nays being demanded by one fifth of the members present,

Those who voted in the affirmative, are
David Baird, Abraham Baldwin, Thomas Blount, Benjamin Bourne, Theophilus
Bradbury, Nathan Bryan, Daniel Buck, Dempsey Burges, Samuel J. Cabell, Joshua
Coit, Isaac Coals, William Cooper, Henry Dearborn, George Dent, Gabriel Duvall,
William Findley, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster, Jesse Franklin, Albert Gallatin,
Ezekiel Gilbert, James Gillespie, William B. Giles, Nicholas Gilman, Henry
Glen, Benjamin Goodhue, Chauncey Goodrich, Andrew Gregg, Christopher Greenup,
Roger Griswold, William B. Grove, George Hancock, Carter B. Harrison, Robert
Goodloe Harper, Thomas Hartley, Jonathan N. Havens, Daniel Heister, Thomas
Henderson, James Hillhouse, William Hindman, Aaron Kitchell, John Wilkes
Kittera, George Leonard, Edward Livingston, Samuel Lyman, William Lyman,
Francis Malbone, John Milledge, Andrew Moore, Frederick A. Muhlenberg, William
Vans Murray, Anthony New, Josiah Parker, John Patten, Francis Preston, John
Reed, Theodore Sedgwick, John S. Sherburne, Samuel Sitgreaves, Jeremiah Smith,
Nathaniel Smith, Isaac Smith, Samuel Smith, William Smith, John Swanwick,
Zephaniah Swift, Absalom Tatom, George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thompson,
Uriah Tracey, John E. Van Allen, Philip Van Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum,
Abraham Venable, Peleg Wadsworth, John Williams, and Richard Winn,
Those who voted in the negative, are
Theodorus Bailey, Richard Brent, Gabriel Christie, Thomas Claiborne, John
Clopton, Samuel Earl, Nathaniel Freeman, jun. John Hathorn, James Holland,
George Jackson, Matthew Lock, Samuel Maclay, Nathaniel Macon, James Madison,
John Nicholas, John Page, and Israel Smith.
Another motion was then made and seconded, that the House do come to the
following resolution. --

Resolved, That the said Robert Randall be brought to the bar, reprimanded by
the Speaker, and committed to the custody of the Serjeant-at-arms, until the
further order of this House.

And, on the question thereupon,

It was resolved in the affirmative.

Pursuant thereto, the said Robert Randall was brought to the bar in custody;
reprimanded by Mr. Speaker, and remanded in custody of the Serjeant-at-arms,
until further order of the House.

THURSDAY, the 7th of JANUARY, 1796.
The House according to the order of the day, proceeded to the further hearing
and trial in the case of Charles Whitney: Whereupon,

The said Charles Whitney being brought to the bar, in custody of the
Serjeant-at-arms, the information in writing, delivered in against him by Mr.
Buck, one of the members from Vermont, was read, and it was demanded of him by
Mr. Speaker, "what he had to say in his defense?" to which he answered, that he
was not prepared to make defense, and requested that further time might be
allowed him for that purpose, until Monday next.

The said Charles Whitney, then withdrew from the bar in custody, and the House
proceeded to consider of his request; when,

A motion being made and seconded that the House do come to the following
resolution,

Resolved, That Charles Whitney be discharged from the custody of the
Serjeant-at-arms.

It was resolved in the affirmative -- YEAS 52. NAYS 30.

The yeas and nays being demanded by one fifth of the members present,

Those who voted in the affirmative, are
Theodorus Bailey, Abraham Baldwin, Benjamin Bourne, Theophilus Bradbury,
Dempsey Burges, Samuel J. Cabell, Gabriel Christie, Thomas Claiborne, Joshua
Coit, William Cooper, Henry Dearborn, Samuel Earl, William Findley, Nathaniel
Freeman, junior Albert Gallatin, Ezekiel Gilbert, William B. Giles, Nicholas
Gilman, Henry Glen, Chauncey Goodrich, Andrew Gregg, William B. Grove, Wade
Hampton, George Hancock, Carter B. Harrison, Robert Goodloe Harper, John
Hathorn, Jonathan N. Havens, William Hindman, James Holland, George Jackson,
Aaron Kitchell, George Leonard, Samuel Maclay, Nathaniel Macon, John Milledge,
John Nicholas, John Page, Josiah Parker, John Patten, Francis Preston, Theodore
Sedgwick, Samuel Sitgreaves, Nathaniel Smith, Israel Smith, Isaac Smith, Samuel
Smith, Zephaniah Swift, Mark Thompson, Joseph B. Varnum, and Richard Winn.
Those who voted in the negative, are
David Baird, Thomas Blount, Daniel Buck, Isaac Coals, George Dent, Gabriel
Duvall, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster, Jesse Franklin, Benjamin Goodhue, Daniel
Heister, James Hillhouse, John Wilkes Kittera, Edward Livingston, Samuel Lyman,
William Lyman, Francis Malbone, Andrew Moore, John Reed, John S. Sherburne,
Jeremiah Smith, William Smith, Absalom Tatom, George Thatcher, Richard Thomas,
John E. Van Allen, Philip Van Cortlandt, Abraham Venable, Peleg Wadsworth, and
John Williams.
FRIDAY, the 8th of JANUARY, 1796.
A petition of Charles Whitney, was presented to the House and read, praying
that certain testimony, in his behalf, applying to the late charges against
him, may be entered on the journal of the House.

Ordered, That the said petition do lie on the table.

TUESDAY, the 12th of JANUARY, 1796.
A petition of Robert Randall, was presented to the House and read, praying to
be released from the imprisonment to which he is subjected by the order of this
House, of the sixth instant.

Ordered, That the said petition do lie on the table.

WEDNESDAY, the 13th of JANUARY, 1796.
The House proceeded to consider the petition of Robert Randall, which lay on
the table: Whereupon,

Resolved, That Robert Randall be discharged from the custody of the
Serjeant-at-arms, upon the payment of fees.

Extract from the Journal.

JOHN BECKLEY, Clerk.


