TREATY OF Peace and Amity, CONCLUDED SEPTEMBER 5, 1795, BETWEEN HASSAN BASHAW,
Dey of Algiers, his Divan and Subjects; AND GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the
United States of North America, and the Citizens of the said United States.

WITH THE PRESIDENT's PROCLAMATION, ANNOUNCING ITS RATIFICATION, AS PUBLISHED
IN THE PHILADELPHIA GAZETTE, MARCH 9, 1796.

PRINTED BY ORMROD and CONRAD, NO. 41, CHESNUT-STREET. 1796.

Algerine Treaty.
GEORGE WASHINGTON PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
To all to whom these presents shall come, -- Greeting:
WHEREAS a Treaty of Peace and Amity has been concluded in the manner
herein-after-mentioned, by the Plenipotentiary of the United States of America,
and the Dey and Regency of Algiers; which Treaty, written in the Arabic
language, being translated into the language of the United States is in the
words following, to wit: A TREATY of Peace and Amity concluded this present Day
Iima artasi, the twenty first of the Luna safer year of the Hegira 1210,
corresponding with Saturday the fifth of September, one thousand seven hundred
and ninety five, between HASSAN BASHAW, Dey of Algiers, his Divan and subjects,
and GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United States of North America, and the
citizens of the said United States.

ARTICLE 1st. From the date of the present treaty, there shall subsist a firm
and sincere peace and amity between the PRESIDENT and citizens of the United
States of North America, and HASSAN BASHAW, Dey of Algiers, his Divan and
subjects; the vessels and subjects of both nations reciprocally treating each
other with civility, honor and respect.

ARTICLE the 2d. All vessels belonging to the citizens of the United States of
North America, shall be permitted to enter the different ports of the Regency,
to trade with our subjects, or any other persons residing within our
jurisdiction, on paying the usual duties at our custom house that is paid by
all nations at peace with this Regency; observing that all goods disembarked
and not sold here shall be permitted to be reimbarked without paying any duty
whatever, either for disembarking or embarking. All naval and military stores,
such as gun powder, lead, iron, plank, sulphur, timber for building, tar,
pitch, rosin, turpentine, and any other goods denominated naval and military
stores, shall be permitted to be sold in this Regency, without paying any
duties whatever at the custom house of this Regency.

ARTICLE 3d. The vessels of both nations shall pass each other without any
impediment or molestation; and all goods, moneys or passengers, of whatsoever
nation, that may be on board of the vessels belonging to either party, shall be
considered as inviolable, and shall be allowed to pass unmolested.

ARTICLE 4th. All ships of war belonging to this Regency, on meeting with
merchant vessels belonging to citizens of the United States, shall be allowed
to visit them with two persons only beside the rowers; -- these two only
permitted to go on board said vessel, without obtaining express leave from the
commander of said vessel, who shall compare the passport, and immediately
permit said vessel to proceed on her voyage unmolested. All ships of war
belonging to the United States of North America, on meeting with an Algerine
cruiser, and shall have seen her passport and certificate from the Consul of
the United States of North America, resident in this Regency, shall be
permitted to proceed on her cruise unmolested: no passport to be issued to any
ships but such as are absolutely the property of citizens of the United States:
and eighteen months shall be the term allowed for furnishing the ships of the
United States with passports.

ARTICLE 5th. No commander of any cruiser belonging to this regency, shall be
allowed to take any person, of whatever nation or denomination, out of any
vessel belonging to the United States of North America, in order to examine
them, or under pretense of making them confess any thing desired; neither shall
they inflict any corporal punishment, or any way else molest them.

ARTICLE 6th. If any vessel belonging to the United States of North America,
shall be stranded on the coast of this Regency, they shall receive every
possible assistance from the subjects of this Regency: all goods saved from the
wreck shall be permitted to be reimbarked on board of any other vessel, without
paying any duties at the custom house.

ARTICLE 7th. The Algerines are not, on any pretense whatever, to give or sell
any vessel of war to any nation at war with the United States of North America,
or any vessel capable of cruising to the detriment of the commerce of the
United States.

ARTICLE the 8th. Any citizen of the United States of North America, having
bought any prize condemned by the Algerines, shall not be again captured by the
cruisers of the Regency then at sea, although they have not a passport; a
certificate from the Consul resident being deemed sufficient, until such time
they can procure such passport.

ARTICLE the 9th. If any of the Barbary states at war with the United States of
North America, shall capture any American vessel and bring her into any of the
ports of this Regency, they shall not be permitted to sell her, but shall
depart the port on procuring the requisite supplies of provision.

ARTICLE the 10th. Any vessel belonging to the United States of North America,
when at war with any other nation, shall be permitted to send their prizes into
the ports of the Regency, have leave to dispose of them, without paying any
duties on sale thereof. All vessels wanting provisions or refreshments, shall
be permitted to buy them at market price.

ARTICLE the 11th. All ships of war belonging to the United States of North
America, on anchoring in the ports of the Regency, shall receive the usual
presents of provisions and refreshments, gratis. Should any of the slaves of
this Regency make their escape on board said vessels, they shall be immediately
returned: No excuse shall be made that they have hid themselves amongst the
people and cannot be found, or any other equivocation.

ARTICLE the 12th. No citizen of the United States of North America, shall be
obliged to redeem any slave against his will, even should he be his brother:
neither shall the owner of a slave be forced to sell him against his will: but
all such agreements must be made by consent of parties. Should any American
citizen be taken on board an enemy-ship, by the cruisers of this Regency,
having a regular passport, specifying they are citizens of the United States,
they shall be immediately set at liberty. On the contrary, they having no
passport, they and their property shall be considered lawful prize; as this
Regency know their friends by their passports.

ARTICLE the 13th. Should any of the citizens of the United States of North
America, die within the limits of this Regency, the Dey and his subjects shall
not interfere with the property of the deceased; but it shall be under the
immediate direction of the consul; unless otherwise disposed of by will. Should
there be no consul, the effects shall be deposited in the hands of some person
worthy of trust, until the party shall appear who has a right to demand them;
when they shall render an account of the property. Neither shall the Dey or
Divan give hindrance in the execution of any will that may appear.

ARTICLE the 14th. No citizen of the United States of North America, shall be
obliged to purchase any goods against his will; but on the contrary, shall be
allowed to purchase whatever it pleases him. The consul of the United States
of North America, or any other citizen, shall not be amenable for debts
contracted by any one of their own nation; unless previously they have given a
written obligation so to do. Should the Dey want to freight any American vessel
that may be in the Regency, or Turkey, said vessel not being engaged; in
consequence of the friendship subsisting between the two nations, he expects to
have the preference given him, on his paying the same freight offered by any
other nation.

ARTICLE the 15th. Any disputes or suits at law, that may take place between
the subjects of the Regency and the citizens of the United States of North
America, shall be decided by the Dey in person, and no other. Any disputes that
may arise between the citizens of the United States, shall be decided by the
consul; as they are in such cases not subject to the laws of this Regency.

ARTICLE the 16th. Should any citizen of the United States of North America,
kill, wound, or strike a subject of this Regency, he shall be punished in the
same manner as a Turk, and not with more severity. Should any citizen of the
United States of North America, in the above predicament, escape prison, the
Consul shall not become answerable for him.

ARTICLE the 17th. The Consul of the United States of North America, shall have
every personal security given him and his household: he shall have liberty to
exercise his religion in his own house. All slaves of the same religion shall
not be impeded in going to said Consul's house, at hours of prayer. The Consul
shall have liberty and personal security given him to travel whenever he
pleases, within the Regency: he shall have free license to go on board any
vessel lying in our roads, whenever he shall think fit. The Consul shall have
leave to appoint his own Drogaman and Broker.

ARTICLE the 18th. Should a war break out between the two nations, the Consul
of the United States of North America, and all citizens of said States, shall
have leave to embark themselves and property unmolested, on board of what
vessel or vessels they shall think proper.

ARTICLE the 19th. Should the cruisers of Algiers capture any vessel, having
citizens of the United States of North America on board, they having papers to
prove they are really so, they and their property shall be immediately
discharged. And should the vessels of the United States capture any vessels of
nations at war with them, having subjects of this Regency on board, they shall
be treated in like manner.

ARTICLE the 20th. On a vessel of war belonging to the United States of North
America anchoring in our ports, the Consul is to inform the Dey of her arrival;
and she shall be saluted with twenty one guns; which she is to return in the
same quantity or number. And the Dey will send fresh provisions on board, as is
customary, gratis.

ARTICLE the 21st. The Consul of the United States of North America, shall not
be required to pay duty for any thing he brings from a foreign country for the
use of his house and family.

ARTICLE the 22d. Should any disturbance take place between the citizens of the
United States and the subjects of this Regency, or break any article of this
treaty, war shall not be declared immediately; but every thing shall be
searched into regularly: the party injured shall be made reparation.

On the 21st of the Luna of Safer, 1210, corresponding with the 5th September
1795, JOSEPH DONALDSON, jun. on the part of the United States of North America,
agreed with HASSAN BASHAW, Dey of Algiers, to keep the articles contained in
this treaty sacred and inviolable; which we the Dey and Divan promise to
observe, on consideration of the United States paying annually the value of
twelve thousand Algerine sequins in maritime stores. Should the United States
forward a larger quantity, the overplus shall be paid for in money, by the Dey
and Regency. Any vessel that may be captured from the date of this treaty of
peace and amity, shall immediately be delivered up on her arrival in Algiers.

Signed, VIZIR HASSAN BASHAW Seal of Algiers stamped at the foot of the
original Treaty in Arabic. JOSEPH DONALDSON, jun.

To all to whom these presents shall come, or be made known,
WHEREAS the underwritten David Humphreys, has been duly appointed
Commissioner Plenipotentiary by letters patent under the signature of the
President and seal of the United States of America, dated the 30th of March
1795, for negotiating and concluding a treaty of peace with the Dey and
Governors of Algiers; whereas by instructions given to him on the part of the
Executive, dated the 28th of March and 4th of April 1795, he has been further
authorized to employ Joseph Donaldson, junior, on an agency in the said
business; whereas by a writing under his hand and seal, dated the 21st of May
1795, he did constitute and appoint Joseph Donaldson, junior, agent in the
business aforesaid; and the said Joseph Donaldson junior, did on the 5th of
September 1795, agree with Hassan Bashaw, Dey of Algiers, to keep the articles
of the preceding treaty sacred and inviolable:

Now, know ye, That I David Humphreys, Commissioner Plenipotentiary aforesaid,
do approve and conclude the said treaty, and every article and clause therein
contained; reserving the same nevertheless for the final ratification of the
President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent
of the Senate of the said United States.

(Seal) In testimony whereof, I have signed the same with my hand and seal, at
the city of Lisbon, this 28th of November 1795. DAVID HUMPHREYS
.


Now be it known, That I GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United States of
America, having seen and considered the said treaty, do, by and with the advice
and consent of the Senate, accept, ratify, and confirm the same, and every
clause and article thereof. And to the end that the said treaty may be observed
and performed with good faith on the part of the United States, I have ordered
the premises to be made public; and I do hereby enjoin and require all persons
bearing office civil or military within the United States, and all others
citizens or inhabitants thereof, faithfully to observe and fulfill the said
treaty and every clause and article thereof.

In testimony whereof, I have caused the seal of the United States of America
to be affixed to these presents, and signed the same with my hand.

(Seal) Done at the city of Philadelphia, the seventh day of March, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety six, and of the Independence of the United
States of America, the twentieth. GO: WASHINGTON.
By the President. TIMOTHY PICKERING, Secretary of State.


