A COLLECTION OF THE SPEECHES OF THE President of the United States TO BOTH
HOUSES OF CONGRESS, At the OPENING of every SESSION, WITH THEIR ANSWERS.

ALSO, THE ADDRESSES to the PRESIDENT, WITH HIS ANSWERS, FROM THE TIME OF HIS
ELECTION: WITH AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING The CIRCULAR LETTER of GENERAL
WASHINGTON to the GOVERNORS of the several STATES, and his FAREWELL ORDERS, to
the ARMIES of AMERICA, and the ANSWER.

DEDICATED TO THE Citizens of the United States of America.

Published according to Act of Congress.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY MANNING AND LORING, For SOLOMON COTTON, jun. BOOKSELLER
and STATIONER, Sold by him, at his Bookstore, No. 51, Marlborough-Street.

JULY, 1796.

TO THE CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA THIS COLLECTION IS
RESPECTFULLY Dedicated, BY THEIR MOST OBEDIENT, AND VERY HUMBLE SERVANT,

THE PUBLISHER.
BOSTON, (Mass.) July, 1796.
DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS -- TO WIT.
BE it remembered, That on the eleventh day of July, in the twenty-first year
of the Independence of the United States of America, SOLOMON COTTON, jun. has
deposited in this office the Title of a Book, the right whereof he claims as
Proprietor, in the words following, to wit -- " A collection of the Speeches of
the President of the United States, to both Houses of Congress, at the opening
of every Session, with their Answers: Also, the Addresses to the President,
with his Answers, from the time of his election; with an Appendix, containing
the Circular Letter of General Washington to the Governors of the several
States, and his Farewell Orders to the Armies of America, and the Answer."
Dedicated to the Citizens of the United States:

In conformity to the Act of the Congress of the United States, entitled, "An
Act for the encouragement of Learning, by securing the Copies of Maps, Charts
and Books, to the Authors and Proprietors," during the times therein mentioned.

N. GOODALE, Clerk of the District Court of Massachusetts District.
A true Copy of Record, Attest -- N. GOODALE, Clerk.

Advertisement.
TO the Patrons of this Work, the Publisher presents his most sincere thanks.
He should consider himself highly wanting in gratitude, to the memory of that
illustrious character, the late Honorable THOMAS RUSSELL, Esquire. were he not
particularly to mention the distinguished kindness of that gentleman, by whose
patronage and advice the Proposals for this work were issued. The Members of
Harvard University have a claim upon the Publisher's gratitude, which he
flatters himself will never be ^ffaced from his memory. It was the Publisher's
intention to have inserted all the Complimentary Addresses and Answers; but a
number of the Subscribers having expressed a wish that the "Circular Letter" of
General Washington to the Governors of the several States, and his "Farewell
Orders" to the Armies of America, and the "Answer," might be inserted in lieu
of some of those Addresses, they are accordingly printed in an Appendix.

The Proprietor of the work having now done every thing in his power to
contribute to its beauty and usefulness, should any thing have escaped his
observation, in this arduous and expensive undertaking, he would thank any
friendly hand to point it out; and should he meet with encouragement (of which
there is little doubt, from the patronage afforded to works of this kind, by
American citizens) sufficient to issue a second edition, additions shall be
made, if possible, to universal satisfaction. How far he has succeeded in his
feeble though well-meant exertions, is left to an indulgent Public to determine.

BOSTON, July, 1796.
LIST of SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES that were received in season for insertion.
BOSTON. ADAMS His Excellency Samuel Angel David Adams Abraham jun. Baxter
Daniel Bell Shubael Bates Elihu Blanchard George Bulfinch Samuel Barker Francis
Blake William P. Breck Robert jun. Bennock J. Cotton Solomon sen. Cotton Joseph
Cotton John Cabot Charles Chandler William Cushman Elkanah Dillaway Samuel
Davies Joshua Gee Dow Wear Fayres Thomas S. Forest Robert Green Joseph Goodhue
Samuel B. Harwood William Haswell Capt. Robert Hunnewell Jonathan Hearsey Levi
Homans John M. D. How Joseph Ingersoll Daniel sen. Jackson Genesis Henry Jones
John C. Esquire. Jarvis Charles M. D. Johnson Nathaniel Knox Genesis Henry 3 copies
Leach William Linnell Josiah Lathrop J. jun. Esquire. Mozard Citizen Consul of the
French Republic 2 copies More Charles Macfarlane John Morse Rev. Jedidiah Morse
Samuel Patten Thomas Pons Thomas Pierpent William Russell Hon. Thomas 12 copies
Reed Sampson Robbins Robert Rice John Smith Samuel Sears Daniel Thompson James
Thompson Josiah Thomas Dr. Joshua Trott Peter Thomas K. Thomas Wood Samuel
MEMBERS OF HARVARD UNIVERSITY.
Tutors. Barron William A. Hedge Levi Popkins J. S. Stearns Luther
Students. Adams Daniel Adams Moses jun. Abbot William Abbot Henry Atherton
William A. Abbot John Bates Daniel jun. Bracket Joshua Bond Nathaniel Brown
Samuel Balch William Brown Barthol Barnap Gates Bartlett Abner Church John H.
Cabot Charles Clap Elisha Cushing Isaiah Clarke John Caldwell William jun.
Chandler Abiel Cleaveland Parker Coolidge Cornelius Cole Thomas Channing
William Clap Ebenezer Carry Thomas Davis Wendell Davis Charles Denney Thomas
Dane Joseph Emerson Joseph Edes Henry French Ralph H. Faulkner William Emerson
Fiske Isaac Gould Lewis Gardner Henry Gilmore Robert Hodge Michael Howard Jason
Hatch Nymphas Hook Moses Haskell Elnathan Harris John Hodgdon Moses Hastings
Walter Howard Daniel Hurd Joseph jun. Joy John jun. Kneeland Samuel A. Kendall
James Longfellow Stephen jun. Lancaster Sewal Lane Otis Macomber Charles
Manning Samuel Mell^^ Leonard Pickering John jun. Pickering William Pickering
Timothy jun. Phillips Jonathan Richardson William M. Rice Benjamin jun.
Richardson James Randall Abraham jun. Richardson Luther Robbins Samuel P.
Smiley David Sumner Charles P. Spalding Matthias Sawyer Artemas Sheafe Henry
Story Joseph Sullivan Richard Snell Issachar jun. Shattuck Benjamin Salisbury
Josiah Shaw William S. Tilton Joseph Tebbets Samuel Tilden James Thayer Gideon
Tuckerman Joseph Varnum John Wellington Isaac White Daniel Wells Samuel Wright
Luther Williams William Walter Arthur M. Williston Joseph Welsh Thomas jun.
Wright Abel Wyman Rufus Young Jonathan

DORCHESTER. Blake Nathaniel Badlam Stephen Esquire. Blackman Unite Carter Josiah
Everett Moses Esquire. Harris Rev. Thaddeus M. How James B. A. B. Leeds Daniel A.
M. Leeds Benjamin B. Robinson Capt. James Robinson Capt. Edward Withington
Ebenezer 3d. Withington Samuel
MILTON. Babcock Joseph Esquire. Humphreys Nathaniel
TAUNTON. Allen Robert Crocker Samuel Crossman Robert Dean Capt. Nathaniel
Fales Samuel Esquire. Gulliver Capt. Gershom Godfrey Job jun. Hodges James Leonard
Apollos Leonard William Leonard Nathaniel Paddleford Seth Esquire. Swift Foster
Esquire. Sprout James Esquire. Stale William Seaver Ebenezer Seabury John W. Tisdale
Simeon Tisdale Joseph Tillinghast N. jun. Esquire.
NORTON. Elisha Wetherle. IPSWICH. Joseph M'Kean. RANDOLPH. Thomas B. Wales.
TOPSHAM. Joseph Sprague. PORTSMOUTH, (N. H.) Charles Pierce, Printer and
Bookseller 12 copies DOVER. Samuel Bragg, jun. ANDOVER. Rev. Jonathan French
Jonathan Swift
RHODE ISLAND. Joseph Wiseman, Esquire. NEW YORK. Nathaniel Birdfall, Printer.
CONTENTS.
PRESIDENT's Speech at the opening of the First Congress, First Session Page 14
Answer of the Senate Page 18 Reply Page 21 Answer of the House of
Representatives ibid Reply Page 22 President's Speech at the opening of the
Second Session Page 23 Answer of the Senate Page 26 Reply Page 28 Answer of the
House of Representatives ibid Reply Page 30 President's Speech at the opening
of the Third Session Page 31 Answer of the Senate Page 35 Reply Page 36 Answer
of the House of Representatives Page 37 Reply Page 39 President's Speech at the
opening of the Second Congress, First Session Page 40 Answer of the Senate Page
47 Reply Page 48 Answer of the House of Representatives ibid* Reply Page 49
President's Speech at the opening of the Second Session Page 51 Answer of the
Senate Page 57 Reply Page 58 Answer of the House of Representatives Page 59
Reply Page 61 President's Speech at the opening of the Third Congress, First
Session Page 62 Answer of the Senate Page 67 Reply Page 68 Answer of the House
of Representatives Page 69 Reply Page 71 President's Speech at the opening of
the Second Session Page 72 Answer of the Senate Page 80 Reply Page 82 Answer of
the House of Representatives ibid Reply Page 85 President's Speech at the
opening of the Fourth Congress, First Session Page 87 Answer of the Senate Page
93 Reply Page 94 Answer of the House of Representatives Page 95 Reply Page 96
President's Message relative to the Treaty Page 98
ADDRESSES.
Of the Citizens of Baltimore Page 102 The Answer Page 104 Of the Supreme
Executive Council of Pennsylvania Page 105 Answer Page 106 Of the Judges of the
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania Page 107 Answer Page 108 Of the Trustees and
Faculty of the University of Pennsylv. Page 110 Answer Page 111 Of the State
Society of the Cincinnati Page 112 Answer Page 113 Of the Mayor, Corporation,
etc. of Alexandria Page 114 Answer Page 115 Of the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen,
etc. of Philadelphia Page 116 Answer Page 118 Of the Ministers and Elders of
the Reformed Congregations Page 119 Answer Page 120 Of the Ministers, Church
Wardens, etc. of the German Lutheran Congregations Page 121 Answer Page 122 Of
the Delaware Society Page 124 Answer Page 125 Of the Mayor, Aldermen, etc. of
the City of New York Page 126 Answer Page 128 Of the General Assembly of the
Presbyterian Church Page 129 Answer Page 131 Of the Bishops of the Methodist
Episcopal Church of New York Page 133 Answer Page 134 Of the Corporation of the
Visitors, etc. of Washington College Page 135 Answer Page 137 Of the Governor
and Council of the State of N. Carolina Page 138 Answer Page 140 Of the
Bishops, Clergy and Laity of the Protestant Episcopal Church Page 141 Answer
Page 145 Of the Representatives of the Freemen of Pennsylvania Page 147 Answer
Page 148 Of the Religious Society of Quakers Page 150 Answer Page 152 Of the
Society of Cincinnati in the State of Rhode Island Page 153 Answer Page 154 Of
the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the City of Hartford Page 155 Answer
Page 156 Of the First Presbytery of the Eastward ibid Answer Page 158 Of the
Synod of the Reformed Dutch Church Page 159 Answer Page 161 Of the Legislature
of Massachusetts Page 162 Answer Page 164 Of the Governor and Council of
Massachusetts Page 165 Answer Page 166 Of the Members of the Cincinnati of
Massachusetts Page 167 Answer Page 168 Of the Trustees of Dartmouth College
Page 169 Answer Page 171 Of the Legislature of Connecticut Page 172 Answer Page
173 Of the Congregational Ministers of the City of New Haven Page 174 Answer
Page 175 Of the President and Fellows of Harvard University Page 176 Answer
Page 178 Of the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston Page 179 Answer Page 181 Of
the Inhabitants of the Town of Marblehead Page 182 Answer Page 184 Of the
Inhabitants of the Town of Salem Page 185 Answer Page 186 Of the Inhabitants of
the Town of Newbury-Port Page 187 Answer Page 188 Of the Inhabitants of the
Town of Portsmouth Page 189 Answer Page 191 Of the Executive of New Hampshire
Page 192 Answer Page 193 Of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey Page 194
Answer Page 195 Of the Society of Cincinnati in the State of S. Carolina Page
197 Answer Page 198 Of the Roman Catholics Page 200 Answer Page 202 Of the
General Assembly of the State of Georgia Page 203 Answer Page 205 Of the
Delegates of the State Societies of the Cincinnati Page 207 Answer Page 208 Of
the Convention of South Carolina Page 210 Answer Page 213 Of the Providence
Association of Mechanics, etc. Page 215 Answer Page 216 Of the Convention of
the Universal Church Page 217 Answer Page 218 Of the Inhabitants of Camden and
its Vicinity Page 219 Answer Page 220 Of the Inhabitants of Providence Page 221
Answer Page 222 Of the Corporation of Rhode Island College Page 223 Answer Page
225 Of the Master, Warden, etc. of King David's Lodge Page 226 Answer Page 227
Of the Hebrew Congregation in Newport (Rhode Island) ibid Answer Page 229 Of
the Inhabitants of Elizabeth Town Page 230 Answer Page 231 Address of the
Hebrew Congregation in the City of New York, Philadelphia, Charleston, etc.
ibid Answer Page 233 Of the Grand Lodge of Ancient York Masons in Pennsylvania
Page 234 Answer Page 235 Of the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts ibid Answer Page 237 Of the Merchants and Traders
of the City of Philadelphia Page 238 Answer Page 239 Of the Merchants and
Traders of Baltimore ibid Answer Page 240 Of the Baltimore Mechanical Society
Page 241 Answer Page 242 Of the Inhabitants of Alexandria Page 243 Answer Page
244 Of the People of Fairfax County Page 245 Answer Page 246 Of the Trustees of
a School in Germantown Page 247 Answer Page 248 Of the Artillery Company of the
Town of Newport Page 249 Answer Page 250 Of the Burgesses of the City of
Harrisburg ibid Answer Page 251 Answer to the Resolutions of the Town of Boston
Page 252 Dissent Page 253 Answer Page 254 Of the Merchants and Traders of
Philadelphia Page 255 Answer Page 256 Of the Inhabitants of Frederick County
ibid Answer Page 257 Of the French Minister, on delivering the Flag Page 258
Answer Page 260 Of the Emigrant Society Page 261 Answer Page 262 President's
Circular Letter Page 263 Farewell Orders to the Armies of America Page 275
Answer Page 280
THE SPEECHES OF THE PRESIDENT, etc.
First Congress -- First Session.
NEW YORK, April 30, 1789.
THIS day the great and illustrious WASHINGTON, the favorite son of liberty,
and deliverer of his country, entered upon the execution of the office of First
Magistrate of the United States of America; to which important station he had
been unanimously called by the united voice of the people. The ceremony which
took place on this occasion was truly grand and pleasing, and every heart
seemed anxious to testify the joy it felt on so memorable an event. His
Excellency was escorted from his house, by a troop of light dragoons, and the
legion under the command of colonel LEWIS, attended by a committee of the
Senate and House of Representatives, to Federal Hall, where he was formally
received by both houses of Congress, assembled in the Senate Chamber; after
which he was conducted to the gallery in front of the hall, accompanied by all
the members, when the oath prescribed by the Constitution was administered to
him by the Chancellor of this State, who then said, "LONG LIVE GEORGE
WASHINGTON, President of the United States;" which was answered by an immense
concourse of citizens, assembled the occasion, by the loudest plaudit and
acclamation, that love and veneration ever inspired. He then made the following
speech.

The President's Speech.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE, AND OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
AMONG the vicissitudes incident to life, no event could have filled me with
greater anxieties than that of which the notification was transmitted by your
order, and received on the 14th day of the present month. On the one hand, I
was summoned by my country, whose voice I can never hear but with veneration
and love, from a retreat which I had chosen with the fondest predilection, and,
in my flattering hopes, with an immutable decision as the asylum of my
declining years: A retreat which was rendered every day more necessary as well
as more dear to me, by the addition of habit to inclination, and of frequent
interruptions in my health to the gradual waste committed on it by time. On the
other hand, the magnitude and difficulty of the trust to which the voice of my
country called me, being sufficient to awaken in the wisest and most
experienced of her citizens, a distrustful scrutiny into his qualifications,
could not but overwhelm with despondence one, who, inheriting inferior
endowments from nature, and unpractised in the duties of civil administration,
ought to be peculiarly conscious of his own deficiencies. In this conflict of
emotions, all I dare aver is, that it has been my faithful study to collect my
duty from a just appreciation of every circumstance by which it might be
affected. All I dare hope is, that if in executing this task I have been too
much swayed by a grateful remembrance of former instance* or by an affectionate
sensibility to this transcendent proof of the confidence of my fellow-citizens;
and have thence too little consulted my incapacity as well as disinclination
for the weighty and untried cares before me; my error will be palliated by the
motives which misled me, and its consequences be judged by my country, with
some share of the partiality in which they originated.

Such being the impressions under which I have, in obedience to the public
summons, repaired to the present station, it would be peculiarly improper to
omit in this first official act, my servent supplications to that Almighty
Being, who rules over the universe, who presides in the councils of nations,
and whose providential aids can supply every human defect, that his benediction
may consecrate to the liberties and happiness of the people of the United
States, a government instituted by themselves for these essential purposes, and
may enable every instrument employed in its administration, to execute with
success, the functions allotted to his charge. In tendering this homage to the
great Author of every public and private good, I assure myself that it
expresses your sentiments not less than my own; nor those of my fellow citizens
at large, less than either. No people can be bound to acknowledge and adore the
invisible hand, which conducts the affairs of men, more than the people of the
United States. Every step, by which they have advanced to the character of an
independent nation, seems to have been distinguished by some token of
providential agency. And in the important revolution just accomplished in, the
system of their united government, the tranquil deliberations and voluntary
consent of so many distinct communities, from which the event has resulted,
cannot be compared with the means by which most governments have been
established, without some return of pious gratitude along with an humble
anticipation of the future blessings which the past seem to presage. These
reflections, arising out of the present crisis, have forced themselves too
strongly on my mind to be suppressed. You will join with me, I trust, in
thinking that there are none under the influence of which, the proceedings of a
new and free government can more auspiciously commence.

By the article establishing the executive department, it is made, the duty of
the President "to recommend to your consideration, such measures as he shall
judge necessary and expedient." The circumstances under which I now meet you,
will acquit me from entering into that subject farther than to refer you to the
great Constitutional Charter under which we are assembled; and which, in
de^ining your powers, designates the objects to which your attention is to be
given. It will be more consistent with those circumstances, and far more
congenial with the feelings which actuate me, to substitute in place of a
recommendation of particular measures, the tribute that is due to the talents,
the rectitude, and the patriotism which adorn the characters selected to devise
and adopt them. In these honorable qualifications, I behold the furest
pledges, that as on one side, no local prejudices or attachments, no separate
views nor party animosities, will misdirect the comprehensive and equal eye
which ought to watch over this great assemblage of communities and interests:
so, on another, that the foundations of our national policy will be laid in the
pure and immutable principles of private morality; and the pre-eminence of a
free government be exemplified by all the attributes which can win the
affections of its citizens, and command the respect of the world.

I dwell on this prospect with every satisfaction which an ardent love for my
country can inspire; since there is no truth more thoroughly established, than
that there exists in the economy and course of nature, an indissoluble union
between virtue and happiness -- between duty and advantage -- between the
genuine maxims of an honest and magnanimous policy, and the solid rewards of
public prosperity and felicity. Since we ought to be no less persuaded that the
propitious smiles of Heaven can never be expected on a nation that disregards
the eternal rules of order and right, which Heaven itself has ordained. And
since the preservation of the sacred fire of liberty, and the destiny of the
republican model of government, are justly considered as deeply, perhaps, as
finally staked, on the experiment entrusted to the hands of the American people.

Besides the ordinary objects submitted to your care, it will remain with your
judgment to decide how far an exercise of the occasional power delegated by the
Fifth Article of the Constitution is rendered expedient at the present juncture
by the nature of objections which have been urged against the system, or by the
degree of inquietude which has given birth to them. Instead of undertaking
particular recommendations on this subject, in which I could be guided by no
lights derived from official opportunities, I shall again give way to my entire
confidence in your discernment and pursuit of the public good: For I assure
myself, that whilst you carefully avoid every alteration which might endanger
the benefits of an united and effective government, or which ought to await the
future lessons of experience; a reverence for the characteristic rights of
freemen, and a regard for the public harmony, will sufficiently influence your
deliberations on the question, how far the former can be more impregnably
fortified, or the latter be safely and advantageously promoted.

To the preceding observations I have one to add, which will be most properly
addressed to the House of Representatives. It concerns myself, and will
therefore be as brief as possible. When I was first honored with a call into
the service of my country, then on the eve of an arduous struggle for its
liberties, the light in which I contemplated my duty, required that I should
renounce every pecuniary compensation. From this resolution I have in no
instance departed. And being still under the impressions which produced it, I
must decline as inapplicable to myself, any share in the personal emoluments,
which may be indispensably included in a permanent provision for the executive
department; and must accordingly pray that the pecuniary estimates for the
station in which I am placed, may, during my continuation in it, be limited to
such actual expenditures as the public good may be thought to require.

Having thus imparted to you my sentiments, as they have been awakened by the
occasion which brings us together, I shall take my present leave; but not
without reforting once more to the benign Parent of the human race, in humble
supplication, that since he has been pleased to favor the American people
with, opportunities for deliberating in perfect tranquillity, and dispositions
for deciding with unparalleled unanimity on a form of government for the
security of their Union, and the advancement of their happiness; so his divine
blessing may be equally conspicuous in the enlarged views, the temperate
consultations, and the wise measures on which the success of this government
must depend.

GEORGE WASHINGTON.

Answer of the Senate.
SIR,
WE, the Senate of the United States, return you our sincere thanks for your
excellent speech, delivered to both Houses of Congress, congratulate you on the
complete organization of the federal government, and felicitate ourselves and
our fellow-citizens, on your elevation to the office of President, an office,
highly important by the powers constitutionally annexed to it, and extremely
honorable from the manner in which the appointment is made. The unanimous
suffrage of the elective body in your favor, is peculiarly expressive of the
gratitude, confidence and affection of the citizens of America, and is the
highest testimonial at once of your merit, and of their esteem. We are
sensible, Sir, that nothing but the voice of your fellow-citizens, could have
called you from a retreat, chosen by the fondest predilection, endeared by
habit, and consecrated to the repose of declining years; we rejoice, and with
us, all America, that, in obedience to the call of our common country, you have
returned once more to public life. In you all parties confide, in you all
interests unite, and we have no doubt, that your past services, great as they
have been, will be equalled by your future exertions; and that your prudence
and sagacity as a statesman, will tend to avert the dangers to which we were
exposed, to give stability to the present government, and dignity and splendor
to that country, which your skill and valor as a soldier, so eminently
contributed to raise to independence and empire.

When we contemplate the coincidence of circumstances, and wonderful
combination of causes, which gradually prepared the people of this country for
independence; when we contemplate the rise, progress and termination of the
late war, which gave them a name among the nations of the earth, we are, with
you, unavoidably led to acknowledge and adore the great Arbiter of the
universe, by whom empires rise and fall. A review of the many signal instances
of divine interposition in favor of this country, claims our most pious
gratitude. And permit us, Sir, to observe, that among the great events which
have led to the formation and establishment of a federal government, we esteem
your acceptance of the office of President as one of the most propitious and
important.

In execution of the trust reposed in us, we shall endeavor to pursue that
enlarged and liberal policy, to which your speech so happily directs. We are
conscious that the prosperity of each State is inseparably connected with the
welfare of all, and that in promoting the latter, we shall effectually advance
the former. In full persuasion of this truth, it shall be our invariable aim to
divest ourselves of local prejudices and attachments, and to view the great
assemblage of communities and interests committed to our charge with an equal
eye. We feel, Sir, the force, and acknowledge the justness of the observation,
that the foundation of our national policy should be laid in private morality.
If individuals be not influenced by moral principles, it is in vain to look for
public virtue; it is, therefore, the duty of legislators to enforce, both by
precept and example, the utility as well as the necessity of a strict adherence
to the rules of distributive justice. We beg you to be assured, that the Senate
will at all times cheerfully co-opererate in every measure, which may
strengthen the Union, conduce to the happiness, or secure and perpetuate the
liberties of this great Consederated Republic.

We commend you, Sir, to the protection of Almighty GOD, earnestly beseeching
him long to preserve a life so valuable and dear to the people of the United
States; and that your administration may be prosperous to the nation and
glorious to yourself.

In SENATE, May 16, 1789. Signed by order, JOHN ADAMS, President of the Senate
of the United States.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
I THANK you for your address, in which the most affectionate sentiments are
expressed in the most obliging terms. The coincidence of circumstances which
led to this auspicious crisis; the confidence reposed in me by my
fellow-citizens, and the assistance I may expect from counsels which will be
dictated by an enlarged and liberal policy, seem to presage a more prosperous
issue to my administration, than a diffidence of my abilities had taught me to
anticipate. I now feel myself inexpressibly happy in a belief, that Heaven,
which has done so much for our infant nation, will not withdraw its
providential influence before our political felicity shall have been completed;
and in a conviction that the Senate will at all times cooperate in every
measure which may tend to promote the welfare of this Confederated Republic.

Thus supported by a firm trust in the great Arbiter of the universe, aided by
the collected wisdom of the Union, and imploring the divine benediction on our
joint exertions in the service of our country, I readily engage with you in the
arduous but pleasing task of attempting to make a nation happy.

G. WASHINGTON.

Answer of the House of Representatives.
SIR,
THE Representatives of the people of the United States present their
congratulations on the event by which your fellow-citizens have attested the
pre-eminence of your merit. You have long held the first place in their esteem;
you have often received tokens of their affection; you now possess the only
proof that remained of their gratitude for your service, of their reverence for
your wisdom, and of their confidence in your virtues. You enjoy the highest,
because the truest honor, of being the First Magistrate, by the unanimous
choice of the freest people on the face of the earth.

We well know the anxieties with which you must have obeyed a summons, from the
repose reserved for your declining years, into public scenes, of which you had
taken your leave forever; but the obedience was due to the occasion. It is
already applauded by the universal joy which welcomes you to your station, and
we cannot doubt but that it will be rewarded with all the satisfaction, with
which an ardent love for your fellow citizens must review successful efforts to
promote their happiness.

This anticipation is not justified merely by the past experience of your
signal services. It is particularly suggested by the pious impressions under
which you commence your administration, and the enlightened maxims by which you
mean to conduct it. We feel with you the strongest obligations to adore the
invisible hand which has led the American people through so many difficulties,
to cherish a conscious responsibility for the destiny of republican liberty,
and to seek the only sure means of preserving and recommending the precious
deposit in a system of legislation, founded on the principles of an honest
policy, and directed by the spirit of a diffusive patriotism.

The question arising out of the Fifth Article of the Constitution, will
receive all the attention demanded by its importance, and will, we trust, be
decided under the influence of all the considerations to which you allude.

In forming the pecuniary provisions for the executive department, we shall not
lose sight of a wish resulting from motives which give it a peculiar claim to
our regard. Your resolution in a moment critical to the liberties of your
country, to renounce all personal emolument, was among the many presages of
your patriotic services, which have been amply fulfilled; and your scrupulous
adherence now to the law then imposed on yourself, cannot fail to demonstrate
the purity, whilst it increases the luster of a character, which has so many
titles to admiration.

Such are the sentiments which we have thought fit to address to you: They flow
from our own hearts, and we verily believe, that among the millions we
represent, there is not a virtuous citizen whose heart will disown them.

All that remains is, that we join in your fervent supplication for the
blessings of Heaven on our country; and that we add our own for the choicest of
those blessings on the most beloved of her citizens.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
YOUR very affectionate address produces emotions which I know not how to
express. I feel that my past endeavors in the service of my country are far
overpaid by its goodness; and I fear much that my future ones may not fulfill
your kind anticipation. All that I can promise is, that they will be invariably
directed by an honest and an ardent zeal. Of this resource my heart assures me.
For all beyond, I rely on the wisdom and patriotism of those with whom I am to
cooperate, and a continuance of the blessings of Heaven on our beloved country.

C. WASHINGTON.

First Congress -- Second Session.
The President's Speech.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
I EMBRACE with great satisfaction the opportunity which now presents itself,
of congratulating you on the present favorable prospects of our public
affairs. The recent accession of the important State of North Carolina to the
Constitution of the United States (of which official information has been
received) the rising credit and respectability of our country, the general and
increasing good will toward the government of the Union, and the concord,
peace and plenty, with which we are blessed, are circumstances auspicious, in
an eminent degree, to our national prosperity.

In resuming your consultations for the general good, you cannot but derive
encouragement from the reflection, that the measures of the last session have
been as satisfactory to your constituents, as the novelty and difficulty of the
work allowed you to hope. Still further to realize their expectations, and to
secure the blessings which a gracious Providence has placed within our reach,
will, in the course of the present important session, call for the cool and
deliberate exertion of your patriotism, firmness, and wisdom.

Among the many ^nteresting objects which will engage your attention, that of
providing for the common defense will merit particular regard. To be prepared
for war is one of the most effectual means of preserving peace.

A free people ought not only to be armed, but disciplined; to which end a
uniform and well-digested plan is requisite: And their safety and interest
require that they should promote such manufactories, as tend to render them
independent on others, for essential, particularly for military supplies.

The proper establishment of the troops which may be deemed indispensable, will
be entitled to mature consideration. In the arrangements which may be made
respecting it, it will be of importance to conciliate the comfortable support
of the officers and soldiers, with a due regard to economy.

There was reason to hope, that the pacific measures adopted with regard to
certain hostile tribes of Indians, would have relieved the inhabitants of our
southern and western frontiers from their depredations. But you will perceive,
by the informations contained in the papers, which I shall direct to be laid
before you, (comprehending a communication from the Commonwealth of Virginia)
that we ought to be prepared to afford protection to those parts of the Union;
and, if necessary, to punish aggressors.

The interest of the United States requires, that our intercourse with other
nations shall be facilitated by such provisions as will enable me to fulfill my
duty in that respect, in the manner which circumstances may render most
conducive to the public good: And to this end, that the compensations to be
made to the persons who may be employed, should, according to the nature of
their appointments, be defined by law; and a competent fund designated for
defraying the expenses incident to the conduct of our foreign affairs.

Various considerations also render it expedient, that the terms on which
foreigners may be admitted to the rights of citizens, should be speedily
ascertained by a uniform rule of naturalization.

Uniformity in the currency, weights and measures of the United States, is an
object of great importance, and will, I am persuaded, be duly attended to.

The advancement of agriculture, commerce, and manufactures, by all proper
means, will not, I trust, need recommendation. But I cannot forbear intimating
to you the expediency of giving effectual encouragement as well to the
introduction of new and useful inventions from abroad, as to the exertions of
skill and genius in producing them at home; and of facilitating the intercourse
between the distant parts of our country, by a due attention to the post office
and post roads.

Nor am I less persuaded, that you will agree with me in opinion, that there is
nothing which can better deserve your patronage, than the promotion of science
and literature. Knowledge is in every country the surest basis of public
happiness. In one, in which the measures of government receive their impression
so immediately from the sense of the community, as in ours, it is
proportionably essential. To the security of a free constitution it contributes
in various ways. By convincing those who are entrusted with the public
administration, that every valuable end of government is best answered by the
enlightened confidence of the people: And by teaching the people themselves to
know, and to value their own rights; to discern and provide against invasions
of them; to distinguish between oppression and the necessary exercise of lawful
authority; between burdens proceeding from a disregard to their convenience,
and those resulting from the inevitable exigencies of society; to discriminate
the spirit of liberty from that of licentiousness, cherishing the first,
avoiding the last, and uniting a speedy, but temperate vigilance against
encroachments, with an inviolable respect to the laws.

Whether this desirable object will be the best promoted by affording aids to
seminaries of learning already established, by the institution of a national
university, or by any other expedients, will be well worthy of a place in the
deliberations of the Legislature.

GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

I SAW with peculiar pleasure, at the close of the last session, the resolution
entered into by you, expressive of your opinion, that an adequate provision for
the support of the public credit is a matter of high importance to the national
honor and prosperity. In this sentiment I entirely concur. And to a perfect
confidence in your best endeavors to devise such a provision, as will be truly
consistent with the end, I add an equal reliance on the cheerful cooperation of
the other branch of the legislature. It would be superfluous to specify
inducements to a measure in which the character and permanent interests of the
United States are so obviously and so deeply concerned; and which has received
so explicit a sanction from your declaration.

GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

I HAVE directed the proper officers to lay before you respectively such papers
and estimates as regard to affairs particularly recommended to your
consideration, and necessary to convey to you that information of the state of
the Union, which it is my duty to afford.

The welfare of our country is the great object to which our cares and efforts
ought to be directed. And I shall derive great satisfaction from a cooperation
with you, in the pleasing though arduous talk of ensuring to our fellowcitizens
the blessings which they have a right to expect, from a free, efficient, and
equal government.

G. WASHINGTON.

Answer of the Senate.
SIR,
WE, the Senate of the United States, return you our thanks for your speech
delivered to both Houses of Congress. The accession of the State of
North Carolina to the confederation of the United States, gives us much
pleasure; and we offer you our congratulations on that event, which at the same
time adds strength to our Union, and affords a proof that the more the
Constitution has been considered, the more the goodness of it has appeared. The
information which we have received, that the measures of the last session have
been as satisfactory to our constituents as we had reason to expect from the
difficulty of the business in which we were engaged, will afford us much
consolation and encouragement in resuming our deliberations in the present
session for the public good; and every exertion on our part shall be made to
reasize and secure to our country those blessings which a gracious Providence
has placed within her reach. We are persuaded that one of the most essential
means of preserving peace, is to be prepared for war, and our attention shall
be directed to the objects of common defense, and to the adoption of such plans
as shall appear the most likely to prevent our dependence on other countries
for essential supplies. In the arrangements to be made respecting the
establishment of such troops as may be deemed indispensable, we shall with
pleasure provide for the comfortable support of the officers and soldiers, with
a due regard to economy. We regret that the pacific measures adopted by
government with regard to certain hostile tribes of Indians, have not been
attended with the beneficial effects toward the inhabitants of our southern
and western frontiers, which we had reason to hope; and we shall cheerfully
cooperate in providing the most effectual means for their protection; and if
necessary, for the punishment of aggressors. The uniformity of the currency,
and of weights and measures; the introduction of new and useful inventions from
abroad, and the exertion of skill and genius in producing them at home; the
facilitating the communication between the distant parts of our country, by
means of the post office and post roads; a provision for the support of the
department of foreign affairs, and a uniform rule of naturalization, by which
foreigners may be admitted to the rights of citizens, are objects which shall
receive such early attention as their respective importance requires.
Literature and science are essential to the preservation of a free
constitution; the measures of government should therefore be calculated to
strengthen the confidence that is due to that important truth. Agriculture,
commerce and manufactures, forming the basis of the wealth and strength of our
confederated republic, must be the frequent subject of our deliberation, and
shall be advanced by all proper means in our power. Public credit being an
object of great importance, we shall cheerfully cooperate in all proper
measures for its support. Proper attention shall be given to such papers and
estimates as you may be pleased to lay before us. Our ^ares and efforts shall
be directed to the welfare of our country; and we have the most perfect
dependence upon your cooperating with us, on all occasions, in such measures
as will ensure to our fellow-citizens the blessings which they have a right to
expect from a free, efficient and equal government.

In SENATE, January 11, 1790. Signed by order, JOHN ADAMS, Vice President of
the United States, and President of the Senate.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
I THANK you for your address, and for the assurances, which it contains, of
attention to the several matters suggested by me to your consideration.

Relying on the continuance of your exertions for the public good, I anticipate
for our country the salutary effects of upright and prudent counsels.

G. WASHINGTON.

Answer of the House of Representatives.
SIR,
THE Representatives of the people of the United States have taken into
consideration your speech to both Houses of Congress at the opening of the
present session.

We reciprocate your congratulations on the accession of the State of
North Carolina; an event which, while it is a testimony of the increasing good
will toward the government of the Union, cannot fail to give additional
dignity and strength to the American Republic, already rising in the esti^^^ion
of the world in national character and respectability.

The information that our measures of the lust session have not proved
dissatisfactory to our constituents, affords us much encouragement at this
juncture, when we are resuming the arduous task of legislating for so extensive
an empire.

Nothing can be more gratifying to the Representations of a free people than
the reflection, that their labors are rewarded by the approbation of their
fellow-citizens. Under this impression we shall make every exertion to realize
their expectations, and to secure to them those blessings which Providence has
placed within their reach. Still prompted by the same desire to promote their
interests which then actuated us, we shall, in the present session, diligently
and anxiously pursue those measures which shall appear to us conducive to that
end.

We concur with you in the sentiment, that agriculture, commerce and
manufactures, are entitled to legislative protection; and that the promotion of
science and literature will contribute to the security of a free government; in
the progress of our deliberations, we shall not lose sight of objects so worthy
of regard.

The various and weighty matters which you have judged necessary to recommend
to our attention, appear to us essential to the tranquillity and welfare of the
Union, and claim our early and most serious consideration. We shall proceed,
without delay, to bestow on them that calm discussion which their importance
requires.

We regret that the pacific arrangements pursued with regard to certain hostile
tribes of Indians, have not been attended with that success which we had reason
to expect from them; we shall not hesitate to concur in such further measures
as may best obviate any ill effects which might be apprehended from the failure
of those negociations.

Your approbation of the vote of this House at the last session, respecting the
provision for the public creditors, is very acceptable to us: The proper mode
of carrying that resolution into effect, being a subject in which the future
character and happiness of these States are deeply involved, will be among the
first to deserve our attention.

The prosperity of the United States is the primary object of all our
deliberations, and we cherish the reflection, that every measure which we may
adopt for its advancement, will not only receive your cheerful concurrence, but
will at the same time derive from your cooperation, additional efficacy, in
ensuring to our fellow-citizens the blessings of a free, efficient, and equal
government.

FREDERICK A. MUHLENBURG, Speaker of the House of Representatives.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
I RECEIVE with pleasure the assurances you give me, that you will diligently
and anxiously pursue such measures as shall appear to you conducive to the
interests of your constituents; and that an early and serious consideration
will be given to the various and weighty matters recommended by me to your
attention.

I have full confidence, that your deliberations will continue to be directed
by an enlightened and virtuous zeal for the happiness of our country.

G. WASHINGTON.

First Congress -- Third Session.
The President's Speech.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
IN meeting you again, I feel much satisfaction, in being able to repeat my
congratulations on the favorable prospects which continue to distinguish our
public affairs. The abundant fruits of another year have blessed our country
with plenty, and with the means of a flourishing commerce. The progress of
public credit is witnessed by a considerable rise of American stock abroad, as
well as at home; and the revenues allotted for this and other national purposes
have been productive beyond the calculations by which they were regulated. This
latter circumstance is the more pleasing, as it is not only a proof of the
fertility of our resources, but as it assures us of a further increase of the
national respectability and credit; and, let me add, as it bears an honorable
testimony to the patriotism and integrity of the mercantile and marine part of
our citizens. The punctuality of the former in discharging their engagements
has been exemplary.

In conforming to the powers vested in me by the acts of the last session, a
loan of 3,000,000 of florins, toward which some provisional measures had
previously taken place, has been completed in Holland. As well the celerity
with which it has been filled, as the nature of the terms (considering the more
than ordinary demand for borrowing, created by the situation of Europe) give a
reasonable hope, that the further execution of those powers may proceed with
advantage and success. The secretary of the treasury has my directions to
communicate such further particulars as may be requisite for more precise
information.

Since your last sessions, I have received communications by which it appears,
that the district of Kentucky, at present a part of Virginia, has concurred in
certain propositions in a law of that State, in consequence of which the
district is to become a distinct member of the Union; in case the requisite
sanction of Congress be added. For this sanction application is now made. I
shall cause the papers on this very important transaction to be laid before
you. The liberality and harmony with which it has been conducted, will be found
to do great honor to both the parties; and the sentiments of warm attachment
to the Union and its present government, expressed by our fellow-citizens of
Kentucky, cannot fail to add an affectionate concern for their particular
welfare, to the great national impressions under which you will decide on the
case submitted to you.

It has been heretofore known to Congress, that frequent incursions have been
made on our frontier settlements by certain banditti of Indians, from the
north-west side of the Ohio. These, with some of the tribes dwelling on and
near the Wabash, have of late been particularly active in their depredations;
and, being emboldened by the impunity of their crimes, and aided by such parts
(the neighboring tribes as could be seduced to join in their hostilities, or
afford them a retreat for their prisoners and plunder, they have, instead of
listening to the humane invitations and overtures made on the part of the
United States, renewed their violences with fresh alacrity and greater effect.
The lives of a number of valuable citizens have thus been sacrificed, and some
of them under circumstances particularly shocking, whilst others have been
carried into a deplorable captivity.

These aggravated provocations rendered it essential to the safety of the
western settlements, that the aggressors should be made sensible that the
government of the Union is not less capable of punishing their crimes, than it
is disposed to respect their rights and reward their attachments. As this
object could not be effected by defensive measures, it became necessary to put
in force the act which empowers THE PRESIDENT to call out the militia for the
protection of the frontiers: And I have accordingly authorized an expedition,
in which the regular troops in that quarter are combined with such drafts of
militia as were deemed sufficient. The event of the measure is yet unknown to
me. The Secretary at War is directed to lay before you a statement of the
information on which it is founded, as well as an estimate of the expense with
which it will be attended.

The disturbed situation of Europe, and particularly the critical posture of
the great maritime powers, whilst it ought to make us more thankful for the
general peace and security enjoyed by the United States, reminds us at the same
time of the circumspection with which it becomes us to preserves these
blessings. It requires also, that we should not overlook the tendency of a war,
and even of preparations for a war among the nations most concerned in active
commerce with this country, to abridge the means, and thereby at least enhance
the price of transporting its valuable productions to proper markets. I
recommend it to your serious reflections, how far and in what mode it may be
expedient to guard against embarrassments from these contingencies, by such
encouragements to our own navigation as will render our commerce and
agriculture less dependent on foreign bottoms, which may fail us in the very
moments most interesting to both of these great objects. Our fisheries, and the
transportation of our own produce, offer us abundant means for guarding
ourselves against this evil.

Your attention seems to be not less due to that particular branch of our trade
which belongs to the Mediterranean. So many circumstances unite in rendering
the present state of it distressful to us, that you will not think any
deliberations misemployed which may lead to its relief and protection.

The laws you have already passed for the establishment of a judiciary system,
have opened the doors of justice to all descriptions of persons. You will
consider in your wisdom, whether improvements in that system may yet be made,
and particularly whether an uniform process of execution on sentences issuing
from the federal courts, be not desirable through all the States.

The patronage of our commerce, of our merchants and seamen, has called for the
appointment of confuls in foreign countries. It seems expedient to regulate by
law the exercise of that jurisdiction and those functions which are permitted
them, either by express convention, or by a friendly indulgence in the places
of their residence. The Consular Convention too, with his Most Christian
Majesty, has stipulated, in certain cases, the aid of the national authority to
his consuls established here. Some legislative provision is requisite to carry
these stipulations into full effect.

The establishment of the militia, of a mint, of standards of weights and
measures, of the post office and post roads, are subjects which (I presume) you
will resume of course, and which are abundantly urged by their own importance.

GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

THE sufficiency of the revenues you have established for the objects to which
they are appropriated, leaves no doubt that the residuary provisions will be
commensurate to the other objects for which the public faith stands now
pledged. Allow me, moreover, to hope, that it will be a favorite policy with
you, not merely to secure a payment of the interest of the debt funded, but as
far and as fast as the growing resources of the country will permit, to
exonerate it of the principal itself. The appropriation you have made of the
western lands explains your dispositions on this subject, and I am persuaded
the sooner that valuable fund can be made to contribute, along with other
means, to the actual reduction of the public debt, the more salutary will the
measures be to every public interest, as well as be more satisfactory to our
constituents.

GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

IN perusing the various and weighty business of the present session, I indulge
the fullest persuasion, that your consultations will be equally marked with
wisdom, and animated by the love of your country. In whatever belongs to my
duty you shall have all the cooperation which an undiminished zeal for its
welfare can inspire. It will be happy for us both, and our best reward, if, by
a successful administration of our respective trusts, we can make the
established government more and more instrumental in promoting the good of our
fellow-citizens, and more and more the object of their attachment and
confidence.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, December 8, 1790.
Answer of the Senate.
WE receive, Sir, with particular satisfaction, the communications contained in
your speech, which confirm to us the progressive state of the public credit,
and afford at the same time a new proof of the solidity of the foundation on
which it rests; and we cheerfully join in the acknowledgment which is due to
the probity and patriotism of the mercantile and maritime part of our
fellow-citizens, whose enlightened attachment to the principles of government
is not less conspicuous in this, than it has been in other important respects.

In confidence that every constitutional preliminary has been observed, we
assure you of our disposition to concur in giving the requisite sanction to the
admission of Kentucky, as a distinct member of the Union; in doing which, we
shall anticipate the happy effects to be expected from the sentiments of
attachment toward the Union and its present government, which have been
expressed by the patriotic inhabitants of that district.

While we regret that the continuance and increase of the hostilities and
depredations which have distressed our north-western frontiers, should have
rendered offensive measures necessary, we feel an entire confidence in the
sufficiency of the motives which have produced them, and in the wisdom of the
dispositions which have been concerted, in pursuance of the powers vested in
you; and whatever may have been the event, we shall cheerfully concur in the
provisions, which the expedition that has been undertaken may require on the
part of the legislature, and in any other which the future peace and safety of
our frontier settlements may call for.

The critical situation of the European powers will engage a due portion of our
attention; and we shall be ready to adopt any measures which a prudent
circumspection may suggest, for the preservation of the blessings of peace. The
navigation and the fisheries of the United States, are objects too interesting
not to inspire a disposition to promote them, by all the means which shall
appear to us consistent with their natural progress and permanent prosperity.

Impressed with the importance of a free intercourse with the Mediterranean, we
shall not think any deliberation misemployed which may conduce to the adoption
of proper measures for removing the impediments that obstruct it.

The improvement of the judiciary system, and the other important objects to
which you have pointed our attention, will not fail to engage the consideration
they respectively merit.

In the course of our deliberations upon every subject, we shall rely upon that
cooperation, which an undiminished zeal and incessant anxiety for the public
welfare, on your part, so thoroughly ensure; and as it is our anxious desire,
so it shall be our constant endeavor, to render the established government
more and more instrumental in promoting the good of our fellow-citizens, and
more and more the object of their attachment and confidence.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
THESE assurances of favorable attention to the subjects I have recommended,
and of entire confidence is my views, make the impression on me, which I ought
to feel. I thank you for them both, and shall continue to rely much, for the
success of all our measures for the public good, on the aid they will receive
from the wisdom and integrity of your counsels.

G. WASHINGTON.

Answer of the House of Representatives.
SIR,
THE Representatives of the people of the United States have taken into
consideration your address to the two Houses at the opening of the present
session of Congress.

We share in the satisfaction inspired by the prospects which continue to be so
auspicious to our public affairs. The blessings resulting from the smiles of
Heaven on our agriculture, the rise of public credit, with the further
advantages promised by it, and the fertility of resources which are found so
little burdensome to the community, fully authorize our mutual congratulations
on the present occasion. Nor can we learn without an additional gratification,
that the energy of the laws for providing adequate revenues have been so
honorably seconded by those classes of citizens whose patriotism and probity
were more immediately concerned.

The success of the loan opened in Holland, under the disadvantages of the
present moment, is the more important, as it not only denotes the confidence
already placed in the United States, but as the effect of a judicious
application of that aid, will still further illustrate the solidity of the
foundation on which the public credit rests.

The preparatory steps taken by the State of Virginia in concert with the
district of Kentucky toward the erection of the latter into a distinct member
of the Union, exhibit a liberality mutually honorable to the parties. We shall
bestow on this important subject the favorable consideration which it merits;
and with the national policy which ought to govern our decision, shall not fail
to mingle the affectionate sentiments, which are awakened by by those expressed
in behalf of our fellow-citizens of Kentucky.

Whilst we regret the necessity which has produced offensive hostilities
against some of the Indian tribes northwest of the Ohio, we sympathize too much
with our western brethren not to behold with approbation the watchfulness and
vigor which have been exerted by the executive authority, for their
protection; and which, we trust, will make aggressors sensible that it is their
interest to merit by a peaceable behavior the friendship and humanity which
the United States are always ready to extend to them.

The encouragement of our own navigation, has, at all times, appeared to us
highly important. The point of view under which you recommended it to us is
strongly enforced by the actual state of things in Europe. It will be incumbent
on us to consider in what mode our commerce and agriculture can be best
relieved from an injurious dependence on the navigation of other nations, which
the frequency of their wars renders a too precarious resource for conveying the
productions of our country to market.

The present state of our trade to the Mediterranean, seems not less to demand,
and will accordingly receive, the attention which you have recommended.

Having already concurred in establishing a judiciary system, which opens the
door of justice to all, without distinction of persons, it will be our
disposition to incorporate every improvement which experience may suggest: and
we shall consider in particular, how far the uniformity which in other cases is
found convenient in the administration of the general government through all
the States, may be introduced into the forms and rules of executing sentences
issuing from the federal courts.

The proper regulation of the jurisdiction and functions which may be exercised
by consuls of the United States in foreign countries, with the provisions
stipulated to those of his Most Christian Majesty established here, are
subjects of too much consequence to the public interest and honor, not to
partake of our deliberations.

We shall renew our attention to the establishment of the militia and the other
subjects unfinished at the last session, and shall proceed in them with all the
dispatch, which the magnitude of all, and the difficulty of some of them, will
allow.

Nothing has given us more satisfaction than to find that the revenues
heretofore established have proved adequate to the purposes to which they were
allotted. In extending the provision to the residuary objects, it will be
equally our care to secure sufficiency and punctuality in the payments due from
the treasury of the United States. We shall also never lose sight of the policy
of diminishing the public debt, as fast as the increase of the public resources
will permit; and are particularly sensible of the many considerations which
press a resort to the auxiliary resource furnished by the public lands.

In pursuing every branch of the weighty business of the present session, it
will be our constant study to direct our deliberations to the public welfare.
Whatever our success may be, we can at least answer for the fervent love of our
country, which ought to animate our endeavors. In your cooperation, we are
sure of a resource, which fortifies our hopes, that the fruits of the
established government will justify the confidence which has been placed in it,
and recommend it more and more to the affection and attachment of our
fellow-citizens.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
THE sentiments expressed in your Address, are entitled to my particular
acknowledgment. Having no object but the good of our country, this testimony of
approbation and confidence, from its immediate representatives, must be amongst
my best rewards, as the support of your enlightened patriotism has been among
my greatest encouragements. Being persuaded that you will continue to be
actuated by the same auspicious principle, I look forward to the happiest
consequences from your deliberations, during the present session.

G. WASHINGTON.

Second Congress -- First Session.
The President's Speech.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
I MEET you, upon the present occasion, with the feelings, which are naturally
inspired by a strong impression of the prosperous situation of our common
country, and by a persuasion equally strong, that the labors of the session,
which has just commenced, will, under the guidance of the spirit, no less
prudent than patriotic, issue in measures conducive to the stability and
increase of national prosperity.

Numerous as are the providential blessings which demand our grateful
acknowledgments; the abundance with which another year has again rewarded the
industry of the husbandman, is too important to escape recollection.

Your own observations, in your respective situations, will have satisfied you
of the progressive state of agriculture, manufactures, commerce and navigation:
in tracing their causes, you will have remarked, with particular pleasure, the
happy effects of that revival of confidence, public as well as private, to
which the constitution and laws of the United States have so eminently
contributed; and you will have observed, with no less interest, new and
decisive proofs of the increasing reputation and credit of the nation. But you,
nevertheless, cannot fail to derive satisfaction from the confirmation of these
circumstances, which will be disclosed in the several official communications
that will be made to you in the course of your deliberations.

The rapid subscriptions to the Bank of the United States, which completed the
sum allowed to be subscribed in a single day, is among the striking and
pleasing evidences which present themselves, not only of confidence in the
government, but of resource in the community.

In the interval of your recess, due attention has been paid to the execution
of the different objects which were specially provided for by the laws and
resolutions of the last session.

Among the most important of these, is the defense and security of the Western
Frontiers. To accomplish it on the most humane principles, was a primary wish.

Accordingly, at the same time that treaties have been provisionally concluded,
and other proper means used to attach the wavering, and to confirm in their
friendship, the well-disposed tribes of Indians -- effectual measures have been
adopted to make those of a hostile description sensible, that a pacification
was desired upon terms of moderation and justice.

These measures having proved unsucessful, it became necessary to convince the
refractory of the power of the United States to punish their depredations;
offensive operations have therefore been directed; to be conducted, however, as
consistently as possible with the dictates of humanity. Some of these have been
crowned with full success, and others are yet depending. The expeditions which
have been completed, were carried on under the authority and at the expense of
the United States, by the militia of Kentucky; whose enterprise, intrepidity
and good conduct are entitled to peculiar commendation.

Overtures of peace are still continued to the deluded tribes, and considerable
numbers of individuals belonging to them have lately renounced all further
opposition, removed from their former situations, and placed themselves under
the immediate protection of the United States.

It is sincerely to be desired, that all need of coercion, in future, may
cease; and that an intimate intercourse may succeed, calculated to advance the
happiness of the Indians, and to attach them firmly to the United States.

In order to this, it seems necessary -- That they should experience the
benefits of an impartial dispensation of justice -- That the mode of alienating
their lands, the main source of discontent and war should be so defined and
regulated, as to obviate imposition, and, as far as may be practicable,
controversy, concerning the reality and extent of the alienations which are
made -- That commerce with them should be promoted under regulations tending to
secure an equitable deportment toward them, and that such rational experiments
should be made, for imparting to them the blessings of civilization, as may,
from time to time, suit their condition -- That the Executive of the United
States should be enabled to employ the means, to which the Indians have been
long accustomed, for uniting their immediate interests with the preservation of
peace -- And that efficacious provision should be made for inflicting adequate
penalties upon all those, who, by violating their rights, shall infringe the
treaties, and endanger the peace of the Union.

A system corresponding with the mild principles of religion and philanthropy
toward an unenlightened race of men, whose happiness materially depends on the
conduct of the United States, would be as honorable to the national character,
as conformable to the dictates of sound policy.

The powers specially vested in me by the act, laying certain duties on
distilled spirits, which respect the subdivisions of the districts into
surveys, the appointment of officers, and the assignment of compensations, have
likewise been carried into effect. In a matter, in which both materials and
experience were wanting to guide the calculation, it will be readily conceived
that there must have been difficulty in such an adjustment of the rates of
compensation as would conciliate a reasonable competency, with a proper regard
to the limits prescribed by the law. It is hoped that the circumspection which
has been used will be found in the result to have secured the last of the two
objects; but it is probable, that with a view to the first, in some instances a
revision of the provision will be found advisable.

The impressions with which this law has been received by the community, have
been, upon the whole, such as were to be expected among enlightened and
well-disposed citizens, from the propriety and necessity of the measure. The
novelty, however, of the tax, in a considerable part of the United States, and
a misconception of some of its provisions, have given occasion in particular
places to some degree of discontent. But it is satisfactory to know, that this
disposition yields to proper explanations and more just apprehensions of the
true nature of the law. And I entertain a full confidence, that it will, in
all, give way to motives which arise out of a just sense of duty, and a
virtuous regard to the public welfare.

If there are any circumstances, in the law, which, consistently with its main
design, may be so varied as to remove any well-intentioned objections that may
happen to exist, it will consist with a wise moderation to make the proper
variations. It is desirable, on all occasions, to unite with a steady and firm
adherence to constitutional and necessary acts of government, the fullest
evidence of a disposition, as far as may be practicable, to consult the wishes
of every part of the community, and to lay the foundations of the public
administration in the affections of the people.

Pursuant to the authority contained in the several acts on that subject, a
district of ten miles square, for the permanent seat of the government of the
United States, has been fixed, and announced by proclamation; which district
will comprehend lands on both sides of the river Potowmac, and the towns of
Alexandria and Georgetown. A city has also been laid out agreeably to a plan
which will be placed before Congress; and as there is a prospect favored by
the rate of sales which have already taken place, of ample funds for carrying
on the necessary buildings, there is every expectation of their due progress.

The completion of the census of the inhabitants, for which provision was made
by a law, has been duly notified, (excepting in one instance, in which the
return has been informal; and another, in which it has been omitted or
miscarried) and the returns of the officers who were charged with this duty,
which will be laid before you, will give you the pleasing assurance, that the
present population of the United States borders on four millions of persons.

It is proper also to inform you, that a further loan of two millions and an
half of florins has been completed in Holland; the terms of which are similar
to those of the one last announced, except as to a small reduction of charges.
Another, on like terms, for six millions of florins, had been set on foot,
under circumstances that assured immediate completion.

GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE,

TWO treaties which have been provisionally concluded with the Cherokees, and
Six Nations of Indians, will be laid before you for your consideration and
ratification.

GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

IN entering upon the discharge of your Legislative trust, you must anticipate
with pleasure, that many of the difficulties, necessarily incident to the first
arrangement of a new government, for an extensive country, have been happily
surmounted by the zealous and judicious exertions of your predecessors in
cooperation with the other branch of the Legislature. The important objects
which remain to be accomplished, will, I am persuaded, be conducted upon
principles equally comprehensive, and equally well calculated for the
advancement of the general weal.

The time limited for receiving subscriptions to the loans proposed by the act
making provision for the debt of the United States, having expired, statements
from the proper department, will, as soon as possible, apprize you of the exact
result. Enough, however, is already known to afford an assurance that the views
of that act have been substantially fulfilled. The subscription in the domestic
debt of the United States, has embraced by far the greatest proportion of that
debt; affording at the same time, proof of the general satisfaction of the
public creditors with the system which has been proposed to their acceptance,
and of the spirit of accommodation to the convenience of the government with
which they are actuated. The subscriptions in the debts of the respective
states, as far as the provisions of the law have permitted, may be said to be
yet more general. The part of the debt of the United States which remains
unsubscribed, will naturally engage your further deliberations.

It is particularly pleasing to me to be able to announce to you, that the
revenues which have been established, promise to be adequate to their objects,
and may be permitted, if no unforeseen exigency occurs, to supersede, for the
present, the necessity of any new burdens upon our constituents.

An object which will claim your early attention, is a provision for the
current service of the ensuing year, together with such ascertained demands
upon the treasury as require to be immediately discharged, and such casualties
as may have arisen in the execution of the public business, for which no
specific appropriation may have yet been made; of all which, a proper estimate
will be laid before you.

GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

I SHALL content myself with a general reference to former communications for
several objects, upon which the urgency of other affairs has hitherto postponed
any definitive resolution. Their importance will recall them to your attention;
and I trust that the progress already made in the most arduous arrangements of
the government will afford you leisure to resume them with advantage.

There are, however, some of them of which I cannot forbear a more particular
mention; these are, the Militia -- The Post Office and Post-Roads -- The Mint
-- Weights and Measures -- a Provision for the Sale of the Vacant Lands of the
United States.

The first is certainly an object of primary importance, whether viewed in
reference to the national security, to the satisfaction of the community, or
the preservation of order. In connection with this, the establishment of
competent magazines and arsenals, and the fortification of such places as are
peculiarly important and vulnerable, naturally present themselves to
consideration. The safety of the United States, under divine protection, ought
to rest on the basis of systematic and solid arrangement; exposed as little as
possible to the hazards of fortuitous circumstances.

The importance of the Post Office and Post Roads, on a plan sufficiently
liberal and comprehensive, as they respect the expedition, safety and facility
of communication, is increased by the instrumentality in diffusing a knowledge
of the laws and proceedings of the government; which, while it contributes to
the security of the people, serves also to guard them against the effects of
misrepresentation and misconception. The establishment of additional cross
posts, especially to some of the important points in the western and northern
parts of the Union, cannot fail to be of material utility.

The disorders in the existing currency, and especially the scarcity of small
change, a scarcity so peculiarly distressing to the poorer classes, strongly
recommend the carrying into immediate effect the resolution already entered
into concerning the establishment of a Mint. Measures have been taken pursuant
to that resolution for procuring some of the most necessary articles, together
with the requisite apparatus.

An uniformity in the weights and measures of the country is among the
important objects submitted to you by the Constitution, and if it can be
derived from a standard at once invariable and universal, must be no less
honorable to the public councils than conducive to the public convenience.

A provision for the sale of the vacant lands of the United States, is
particularly urged, among other reasons, by the important considerations --
that they are pledged as a fund for reimbursing the public debt; -- that if
timely and judiciously applied, they may save the necessity of burthening our
citizens with new taxes for the extinguishment of the principal; and that being
free to discharge the principal, but in a limited proportion, no opportunity
ought to be lost for availing the public of its rights.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, Oct. 25, 1791.
Answer of the Senate.
SIR,
THE Senate of the United States have received with much satisfaction the
assurance of public prosperity contained in your speech to both Houses. The
multiplied blessings of Providence have not escaped our notice, or failed to
excite our gratitude.

The benefits which flow from the restoration of public and private confidence,
are conspicuous and important; and the pleasure with which we contemplate them
is heightened by your assurance of those farther communications, which shall
confirm their existence, and indicate their source.

While we rejoice in the success of those military operations which have been
directed against the hostile Indians, we lament with you the necessity that has
produced them; and we participate the hope that the present prospect of a
general peace, on terms of moderation and justice, may be brought into complete
and permanent effect; and that the measures of government, for the security of
our frontiers, may equally embrace the general interests of humanity. Our
solicitude to obtain, will ensure our zealous attention to an object so warmly
espoused by the dictates of benevolence, and so highly interesting to the
honor and welfare of the nation.

The several subjects which you have particularly recommended, and those which
remain of former sessions, will engage our early consideration. We are
encouraged to presecute them with alacrity and steadiness, by the belief, that
they will interest no passion but that for the general welfare, by the
assurance of concert, and by a view of those arduous and important arrangements
which have been already accomplished.

We observe, Sir, the constancy and activity of your zeal for the public good.
The example will animate our efforts to promote the happiness of our country.

Signed by order and in behalf of the Senate, JOHN ADAMS, Vice President of the
United States, and President of the Senate.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
THIS manifestation of your zeal for the honor and the happiness of our
country, derives its full value from the share which your deliberations have
already had in promoting both.

I thank you for the favorable sentiments with which you view the part I have
borne in the arduous trust committed to the government of the United States;
and desire you to be assured that all my zeal will continue to second those
further efforts for the public good, which are ensured by the spirit in which
you are entering on the present session.

G. WASHINGTON.

Answer of the House of Representatives.
SIR,
IN receiving your address at the opening of the present session, the House of
Representatives have taken an ample share in the feelings inspired by the
actual prosperity and flattering prospects of our country; and whilst, with
becoming gratitude to Heaven, we ascribe this happiness to the true source from
which it flows, we behold with animating pleasure, the degree in which the
constitution and laws of the United States have been instrumental in dispensing
it.

It yields us particular satisfaction to learn the success with which the
different important measures of the government have proceeded; as well those
specially provided for at the last session, as those of preceding date.

The safety of our Western Frontiers, in which the lives and repose of so many
of our fellow-citizens are involved, being peculiarly interesting, your
communications on that subject are proportionably grateful to us.

The gallantry and good conduct of the militia, whose services were called for,
is an honorable confirmation of the efficacy of that precious resource of a
free state; and we anxiously wish, that the consequences of their successful
enterprises, and of the other proceedings to which you have referred, may leave
the United States free to pursue the most benevolent policy toward the unhappy
and deluded race of people in our neighborhood.

The amount of the population of the United States, determined by the returns
of the census, is a source of the most pleasing reflections, whether it be
viewed in relation to our national safety and respectabllity, or as a proof of
that felicity in the situation of our country, which favors so unexampled a
rapidity in its growth: nor ought any to be insensible to the additional
motives suggested by this important fact, to perpetuate the free government
established, with a wise administration of it, to a portion of the earth which
promises such an increase of the number which is to enjoy these blessings
within the limits of the United States.

We shall proceed, with all the respect due to your patriotic recommendations,
and with a deep sense of the trust committed to us by our fellow-citizens, to
take into consideration the various and important matters falling within the
present session. And in discussing and deciding each, we shall feel every
disposition, whilst we are pursuing the public welfare, which must be the
supreme object with all our constituents, to accommodate, as far as possible,
the means of attaining it to the sentiments and wishes of every part of them.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
THE pleasure I derive from an assurance of your attention to the objects I
have recommended to you, is doubled by your concurrence in the testimony I have
borne to the prosperous condition of our public affairs. Relying on the
sanctions of your enlightened judgment, and on your patriotic aid, I shall be
the more encouraged in all my endeavors for the public weal; and particularly
in those which may be required on my part for executing the salutary measures I
anticipate from your present deliberations.

G. WASHINGTON.

Second Congress -- Second Session.
The President's Speech.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE, AND OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
IT is some abatement of the satisfaction, with which I meet you on the present
occasion, that in felicitating you on a continuance of the national prosperity,
generally, I am not able to add to it information that the Indian hostilities,
which have, for some time past distressed our north* western frontier, have
terminated.

You will, I am persuaded learn, with no less concern than I communicate it,
that reiterated endeavors toward effecting a pacification have hitherto
issued only in new and outrageous proofs of persevering hostility on the part
of the tribes with whom we are in contest. An earnest desire to procure
tranquillity to the frontiers -- to stop the further effusion of blood -- to
arrest the progress of expense -- to forward the prevalent wish of the nation,
for peace, has led to strenuous efforts, through various channels, to
accomplish these desirable purposes; in making which efforts, I consulted less
my own anticipations of the event, or the scruples which some considerations
were calculated to inspire, than the wish to find the object attainable; or if
not attainable, to ascertain, unequivocally, that such is the case.

A detail of the measures which have been pursued, and of their consequences,
which will be laid before you, while it will confirm to you the want of
success, thus far, will, I trust, evince that means, as proper and as
efficacious as could have been devised, have been employed. The issue of some
of them, indeed, is still depending; but a favorable one, though not to be
despaired of, is not promised by any thing that has yet happened.

In the course of the attempts which have been made, some valuable citizens
have fallen victims to their zeal for the public service. A sanction commonly
respected, even among savages, has been found, in this instance, insufficient
to protect from massacre, the emissaries of peace; it will, I presume, be duly
considered, whether the occasion does not call for an exercise of liberality
toward the families of the deceased.

It must add to your concern, to be informed that besides the continuation of
hostile appearances, among the tribes north of the Ohio, some threatening
symptoms have of late been revived among some of those south of it.

A part of the Cherokees, known by the name of Chickamagas, inhabiting five
villages on the Tennessee river, have long been in the practice of committing
depredations on the neighboring settlements.

It was hoped that the treaty of Holston, made with the Cherokee nation, in
July, 1791, would have prevented a repetition of such depredations. But the
event has not answered this hope The Chickamagas, aided by some banditti of
another tribe in their vicinity, have recently perpetrated wanton and
unprovoked hostilities upon the citizens of the United States, in that quarter.
The information which has been received on this subject will be laid before
you. Hitherto defensive precautions, only have been strictly enjoined and
observed.

It is not understood that any breach of treaty, or aggresson whatsoever, on
the part of the United States, or their citizens, is even alleged as a pretext
for the spirit of hostility in this quarter.

I have reason to believe, that every practicable exertion has been made,
(pursuant to the provision by law for that purpose) to be prepared for the
alternative of a prosecution of the war, in the event of a failure of pacific
overtures. A large proportion of the troops, authorized to be raised, have been
recruited, though the number is still incomplete; and pains have been taken to
discipline, and put them in condition for the particular ^ind of service to be
performed. A delay of operations (besides being dictated by the measures which
were pursuing toward a pacific termination of the war) has been in itself
deemed preferable to immature efforts. A statement, from the proper department,
with regard to the number of troops raised, and some other points which have
been suggested, will afford more precise information, as a guide to the
legislative consultations; and among other things, will enable Congress to
judge whether some additional stimulus to the recruiting service may not be
advisable.

In looking forward to the future expense of the operations, which may be found
inevitable, I derive consolation from the information I receive, that the
product of the revenues for the present year, is likely to supercede the
necessity of additional burdens on the community, for the service of the
ensuing year. This, however, will be better ascertained in the course of the
session; and it is proper to add, that the information alluded to proceeds from
the supposition of no material extension of the spirit of hostilities.

I cannot dismiss the subject of Indian affairs, without again recommending to
your consideration the expediency of more adequate provision for giving energy
to the laws throughout our interior frontier; and for restraining the
commission of outrages upon the Indians; without which all pacific plans must
prove nugatory To enable, by competent rewards, the employment of qualified and
trusty persons to reside among them, as agents, would also contribute to the
preservation of peace and good neighborhood. If in addition to these
expedients, an eligible plan could be devised for promoting civilization among
the friendly tribes, and for carrying on trade with them upon a scale equal to
their wants, and under regulations calculated to protect them from imposition
and extortion, its influence in cementing their interests with ours could not
but be considerable.

The prosperous state of our revenue has been intimated. This would be still
more the case, were it not for the impediments which in some places continue to
embarrass the collection of the duties on spirits, distilled within the United
States. These impediments have lessened, and are lessening in local extent;
and, as applied to the community at large, the contentment with the law appears
to be progressive.

But symptoms of increased opposition having lately manifested themselves in
certain quarters, I judged special interposition on my part, proper and
advisable; and under this impression have issued a Proclamation, warning
against all unlawful combinations and proceedings, having for their object, or
tending to obstruct the operation of the law in question, and announcing that
all lawful ways and means would be strictly put in execution, for bringing to
justice the infractors thereof, and securing obedience thereto.

Measures have also been taken for the prosecution of offenders. And Congress
may be assured, that nothing within constitutional and legal limits, which may
depend on me, shall be wanting to assert and maintain the just authority of the
laws. In fulfilling this trust, I shall count entirely upon the full
cooperation of the other departments of the government, and upon the zealous
support of all good citizens.

I cannot forbear to bring again into the view of the legislature, the subject
of a revision of the judiciary system. A representation from the Judges of the
Supreme Court, which will be laid before you, points out some of the
inconveniences that are experienced. In the course of the execution of the
laws, considerations rise out of the structure of that system, which in some
cases tend to relax their efficacy. As connected with this subject, provisions
to facilitate the taking of bail upon processes out of the courts of the United
States, and supplementary definition of offenses against the constitution and
laws of the Union, and of the punishment for such offenses, will, it is
presumed, be found worthy of particular attention.

Observations on the value of peace with other nations are unnecessary. It
would be wise, however, by timely provisions, to guard against those acts of
our own citizens, which might tend to disturb it, and to put ourselves in a
condition to give that satisfaction to foreign nations, which we may sometimes
have occasion to require from them. I particularly recommend to your
consideration the means of preventing those aggressions by our citizens on the
territory of other nations, and other infractions of the law of nations, which
furnishes just subject of complaint, and might endanger our peace with them.
And, in general, the maintenance of a friendly intercourse with foreign powers
will be presented to your attention by the expiration of the law for that
purpose, which takes place, if not renewed, at the close of the present session.

In execution of the authority given by the legislature, measures have been
taken for engaging some artists from abroad to aid in the establishment of our
mint: others have been employed at home. Provision has been made of the
requisite buildings, and these are now putting into proper condition for the
purposes of the establishment. There has also been a small beginning in the
coinage of half dimes; the want of small coins in circulation calling the first
attention to them.

The regulation of foreign coins, in correspondency with the principles of our
national coinage, as being essential to their due operation, and to order in
our money concerns, will, I doubt not, be resumed and completed.

It is represented that some provisions in the law, which establishes the
post office, operate, in experiment, against the transmission of newspapers, to
distant parts of the country. Should this, upon due inquiry, be found to be the
fact, a full conviction of the importance of facilitating the circulation of
political intelligence and information, will, I doubt not, lead to the
application of a remedy.

The adoption of a constitution for the State of Kentucky, has been notified to
me. The legislature will share with me in the satisfaction which arises from an
event, interesting to the happiness of the part of the nation to which it
relates, and conducive to the general order.

It is proper likewise to inform you, that since my last communication on the
subject, and in further execution of the acts, severally making provision for
the public debt, and for the reduction thereof, three new loans have been
effected, each for three millions of florins; one at Antwerp, at the annual
interest of four and one half per cent. with an allowance of four per cent. in
lieu of all charges; and the other two at Amsterdam, at the annual interest of
four per cent. with an allowance of five and one half per cent* in one case,
and of five per cent. in the other, in lieu of all charges. The rates of these
loans, and the circumstances under which they have been made, are confirmations
of the high state of our credit abroad.

Among the objects to which these funds have been directed to be applied, the
payment of the debts due to certain foreign officers, according to the
provision made during the last session, has been embraced.

GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

I ENTERTAIN a strong hope, that the state of the national finances is now
sufficiently matured to enable you to enter upon a systematic and effectual
arrangement for the regular redemption and discharge of the public debt,
according to the right which has been reserved to the government. No measure
can be more desirable, whether viewed with an eye to its intrinsic importance,
or to the general sentiment and wish of the nation.

Provision is likewise requisite for the reimbursement of the loan which has
been made for the Bank of the United States, pursuant to the eleventh section
of the act by which it is incorporated. In fulfilling the public stipulations
in this particular, it is expected a valuable saving will be made.

Appropriations for the current service of the ensuing year, and for such
extraordinaries as may require provision, will demand, and I doubt not will
engage your early attention.

GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

I CONTENT myself with recalling your attention, generally, to such objects,
not particularized in my present, as have been suggested in my former
communications to you.

Various temporary laws will expire during the present session. Among these,
that which regulates trade and intercourse with the Indian tribes, will merit
particular notice.

The results of your common deliberations hitherto, will, I trust, be
productive of solid and durable advantages to our constituents; such as, by
conciliating more and more their ultimate suffrage, will tend to strengthen and
confirm their attachment to that constitution of government, upon which, under
Divine Providence, materially depend their union, their safety, and their
happiness.

Still further to promote and secure these inestimable ends, there is nothing
which can have a more powerful tendency, than the careful cultivation of
harmony, combined with a due regard to stability in the public councils.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, November 6, 1792.
Answer of the Senate.
ACCEPT, Sir, our grateful acknowledgments for your address at the opening of
the present session. We participate with you in the satisfaction arising from
the continuance of the general prosperity of the nation; but it is not without
the most sincere concern that we are informed, that the reiterated efforts
which have been made to establish peace with the hostile Indians have hitherto
failed to accomplish that desired effect. Hoping that the measures still
depending may prove more successful than those which have preceded them, we
shall nevertheless concur in every necessary preparation for the alternative;
and, should the Indians on either side of the Ohio persist in their
hostilities, fidelity to the Union, as well as affection for our
fellow-citizens on the frontiers, will ensure our decided cooperation in every
measure, which shall be deemed requisite for their protection and safety.

At the same time that we avow the obligation of the government to afford its
protection to every part of the Union, we cannot refrain from expressing our
regret, that even a small portion of our fellow-citizens in any quarter of it,
should have combined to oppose the operation of the law for the collection of
duties on spirits distilled within the United States; a law repeatedly
sanctioned by the authority of the nation, and at this juncture materially
connected with the safety and protection of those who oppose it* Should the
means already adopted, fail in securing obedience to this law, such further
measures as may be thought necessary to carry the same into complete operation,
cannot fail to receive the approbation of the Legislature, and the support of
every patriotic citizen.

It yields us particular pleasure to learn, that the productiveness of the
revenue of the present year, will probably supersede the necessity of any
additional tax for the service of the next.

The organization of the government of the State of Kentucky, being an event
peculiarly interesting to a part of our fellow-citizens, and conducive to the
general order, affords us peculiar satisfaction.

We are happy to learn, that the high state of our credit abroad has been
evinced by the terms on which the new loans have been negociated.

In the course of the session, we shall proceed to take into consideration the
several objects, which you have been pleased to recommend to our attention;
and, keeping in view the importance of union and stability in the public
councils, we shall labor to render our decisions conducive to the safety and
happiness of our country.

We repeat with pleasure our assurances of confidence in your administrations,
and our ardent wish that your unabated zeal for the public good may be rewarded
by the durable prosperity of the nation, and every ingredient of personal
happiness.

JOHN LANGDON, President, pro tempore, of the Senate.

The President's Reply.
I DERIVE much pleasure, gentlemen, from your very satisfactory address. The
renewed assurances of your confidence in my administration, and the expression
of your wish for my personal happiness, claim and receive my particular
acknowledgments. In my future endeavors for the public welfare, to which my
duty may call me, I shall not cease to count upon the firm, enlightened and
patriotic support of the Senate.

G. WASHINGTON.

Answer of the House of Representatives.
SIR,
THE House of Representatives, who always feel satisfaction in meeting you, are
much concerned that the occasion for mutual felicitation, afforded by
circumstances favorable to the national prosperity, should be abated by a
continuance of the hostile spirit of many of the Indian tribes; and
particularly, that the reiterated efforts for effecting a general pacification
with them, should have issued in new proofs of their persevering enmity, and
the barbarous sacrifice of citizens who, as the messengers of peace, were
distinguishing themselves by their zeal for the public service. In our
deliberations on this important department of our affairs, we shall be disposed
to pursue every measure that may be dictated by the sincerest desire on one
hand, of cultivating peace, and manifesting, by every practicable regulation,
our benevolent regard for the welfare of those misguided people; and by the
duty we feel, on the other, to provide effectually for the safety and
protection of our fellow-citizens.

While with regret we learn, that symptoms of opposition to the law imposing
duties on spirits distilled within the United States, have manifested
themselves, we reflect, with consolation, that they are confined to a small
portion of our fellow-citizens. It is not more essential to the preservation of
true liberty, that a government should be always ready to listen to the
representations of its constituents, and to accomodate its measures to the
sentiments and wishes of every part of them, as far as will consist with the
good of the whole, than it is, that the just authority of the laws should be
steadfastly maintained.

Under this impression, every department of the government, and all good
citizens, must approve the measures you have taken, and the purpose you have
formed, to execute this part of your trust with firmness and energy; and be
assured, Sir, of every constitutional aid and cooperation which may become
requisite on our part. And we hope, that while the progress of contentment
under the law in question, is as obvious as it is rational, no particular part
of the community may be permitted to withdraw from the general burdens of the
country, by a conduct as irreconcilable to national justice, as it is
inconsistent with public decency.

The productive state of the public revenue, and the confirmation of the credit
of the United States abroad, evinced by the loans at Antwerp and Amsterdam, are
communications the more gratifying, as they enforce the obligation to enter on
systematic and effectual arrangements for discharging the public debt, as far
as the conditions of it will permit. And we take pleasure in the opportunity to
assure you of our entire concurrence in the opinion, that no measure can be
more desirable, whether viewed with an eye to the urgent wish of the
community, or the intrinsic importance of promoting so happy a change in our
situation.

The adoption of a constitution for the State of Kentucky, is an event in which
we join in all the satisfaction you have expressed. It may be considered as
particularly interesting, since, besides the immediate benefits resulting from
it, it is another auspicious demonstration of the facility and success with
which an enlightened people are capable of providing, by free and deliberate
plans of government, for their own safety and happiness.

The operation of the law establishing the Post Office, as it relates to the
transmission of newspapers, will merit our particular inquiry and attention;
the circulation of political intelligence, through these vehicles, being justly
reckoned among the surest means of preventing the degeneracy of a free
government, as well as of recommending every salutary public measure, to the
confidence and cooperation of all virtuous citizens.

The several other matters which you have communicated and recommended, will in
their order receive the attention due to them; and our discussion will, in all
cases, we trust, be guided by a proper respect for harmony and stability in the
public councils, and a desire to conciliate more and more, the attachment of
our constituents to the constitution, by measures accommodated to the true ends
for which it was established.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
IT gives me pleasure to express to you the satisfaction which your address
affords me. I feel, as I ought, the approbation you manifest of the measures I
have taken, and the purpose I have formed, to maintain, pursuant to the trust
reposed in me by the constitution, the respect which is due to the laws, and
the assurance which you, at the same time, give me of every constitutional aid
and cooperation, that may become requisite on your part.

This is a new proof of that enlightened solicitude for the establishment and
confirmation of public order, which, embracing a zealous regard for the
principles of true liberty, has guided the deliberations of the House of
Representatives; a perseverance, which can alone secure, under the divine
blessing, the real and permanent felicity of our common country.

G. WASHINGTON.

Third Congress -- First Session.
The President's Speech.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
SINCE the commencement of the term, for which I have been again called into
office, no sit occasion has arisen for expressing to my fellow-citizens at
large, the deep and respectful sense, which I feel, of the renewed testimony of
public approbation. While on the one hand, it awakened my gratitude for all
those instances of affectionate partiality, with which I have been honored by
my country; on the other, it could not prevent an earnest wish for that
retirement, from which no private consideration should ever have torn me. But
influenced by the belief, that my conduct would be estimated according to its
real motives; and that the people, and the authorities derived from them, would
support exertions, having nothing personal for their object, I have obeyed the
suffrage which commanded me to resume the executive power; and I humbly implore
that Being, on whose will the fate of nations depends, to crown with success
our mutual endeavors for the general happiness.

As soon as the war in Europe had embraced those powers with whom the United
States have the most extensive relation; there was reason to apprehend that our
intercourse with them might be interrupted, and our disposition for peace,
drawn into question, by the suspicions, too often entertained by belligerent
nations. It seemed therefore to be my duty, to admonish our citizens of the
consequences of a contraband trade, and of hostile acts to any of the parties;
and to obtain, by a declaration of the existing legal state of things, an
easier admission of our rights to the immunities, belonging to our situation.
Under these impressions, the proclamation, which will be laid before you, was
issued.

In this posture of affairs, both new and delicate, I resolved to adopt general
rules which should conform to the treaties, and assert the privileges of the
United States. These were reduced into a system, which will be communicated to
you. Although I have not thought myself at liberty to forbid the sale of the
prizes, permitted by our treaty of commerce with France to be brought into our
ports; I have not refused to cause them to be restored, when they were taken
within the protection of our territory; or by vessels commissioned or equipped
in a warlike form within the limits of the United States.

It rests with the wisdom of Congress to correct, improve or enforce this plan
of procedure, and it will probably be found expedient to extend the legal code,
and the jurisdiction of the Courts of the United States, to many cases which,
though dependent on principles already recognized, demand some further
provisions.

When individuals shall, within the United States, array themselves in
hostility against any of the powers at war; or enter upon military expeditions,
or enterprises within the jurisdiction of the United States; or usurp and
exercise judicial authority within the United States; or where the penalties on
violations of the law of nations may have been indistinctly marked, or are
inadequate; these offenses cannot receive too early and close an attention, and
require prompt and decisive remedies.

Whatsoever those remedies may be, they will be well administered by the
Judiciary, who possess a long established course of investigation, effectual
process, and officers in the habit of executing it. In like manner, as several
of the courts have doubted, under particular circumstances, their power to
liberate the vessels of a nation at peace, and even of a citizen of the United
States, although seized under a false color of being hostile property; and
have denied their power to liberate certain captures within the protection of
our territory; it would seem proper to regulate their jurisdiction in these
points. But if the Executive is to be the resort in either of the two last
mentioned cases, it is hoped, that he will be authorized by law, to have facts
ascertained by the courts, when, for his own information, he shall request it.

I cannot recommend to your notice measures for the fulfillment of our duties to
the rest of the world, without again pressing upon you the necessity of placing
ourselves in a condition of complete defense, and of exacting from them the
fulfillment of their duties toward us. The United States ought not to indulge a
persuasion, that, contrary to the order of human events, they will forever keep
at a distance those painful appeals to arms with which the history of every
other nation abounds. There is a rank due to the United States among nations;
which will be withheld, if not absolutely lost, by the reputation of weakness.
If we desire to avoid insult, we must be able to repel it; if we desire to
secure peace, one of the most powerful instruments of our rising prosperity, it
must be known, that we are at all times ready for war.

The documents which will be presented to you, will show the amount, and kinds
of arms and military stores now in our magazines and arsenals; and yet an
addition even to these supplies cannot with prudence be neglected; as it would
leave nothing to the uncertainty of procuring a warlike apparatus in the moment
of public danger. Not can such arrangements, with such objects, be exposed to
the censure or jealousy of the warmest friends of republican government. They
are incapable of abuse in the hands of the militia, who ought to possess a
pride in being the depository of the force of the Republic, and may be trained
to a degree of energy, equal to every military exigency of the United States.
But it is an inquiry, which cannot be too solemnly pursued, whether the act,
"more effectually to provide for the national defense by establishing an
uniform militia throughout the United States," has organized them so as to
produce their full effect; whether your own experience in the several States
has not detected some imperfections in the scheme; and whether a material
feature in an improvement of it, ought not to be to afford an opportunity for
the study of those branches of the military art, which can scarcely ever be
attained by practice alone?

The connection of the United States with Europe, has become extremely
interesting. The occurrences which relate to it, and have passed under the
knowledge of the Executive, will be exhibited to Congress in a subsequent
communication.

When we contemplate the war on our frontiers, it may be truly affirmed that
every reasonable effort has been made to adjust the causes of dissension with
the Indians, north of the Ohio. The instructions given to the commissioners
evince a moderation and equity, proceeding from a sincere love of peace, and a
liberality having no restriction but the essential interests and dignity of the
United States. The attempt, however, of an amicable negotiation having been
frustrated, the troops have marched to act offensively. Although the proposed
treaty did not arrest the progress of military preparation, it is doubtful,
how, far the advance of the season, before good faith justified active
movements, may retard them, during the remainder of the year. From the papers
and intelligence which relate to this important subject, you will determine,
whether the deficiency in the number of troops, granted by law, shall be
compensated by succors of militia; or additional encouragements shall be
proposed to recruits. An anxiety has been also demonstrated by the Executive,
for peace with the Creeks and the Cherokees. The former have been relieved with
corn and with clothing, and offensive measures against them prohibited, during
the recess of Congress. To satisfy the complaints of the latter, prosecutions
have been instituted for the violences committed upon them. But the papers,
which will be delivered to you, disclose the critical footing on which we stand
in regard to both those tribes, and it is with Congress to pronounce what shall
be done.

After they shall have provided for the present emergency, it will merit their
most ferious labors, to render tranquillity with the savages, permanent, by
creating ties of interest. Next to a rigorous execution of justice on the
violators of peace, the establishment of commerce with the Indian nations in
behalf of the United States, is most likely to conciliate their attachment. But
it ought to be conducted without fraud, without extortion, with constant and
plentiful supplies, with a ready market for the commodities of the Indians, and
a stated price for what they give in payment, and receive in exchange.
Individuals will not pursue such a traffic, unless they be allured by the hope
of profit; but it will be enough for the United States to be reimbursed only.
Should this recommendation accord with the opinion of Congress, they will
recollect, that it cannot be accomplished by any means yet in the hands of the
Executive.

GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

THE commissioners, charged with the settlement of accounts between the United
and individual States, concluded their important functions, within the time
limited by law; and the balances, struck in their report, which will be laid
before Congress, have been placed on the books of the treasury.

On the first day of June last, an installment of one million of florins became
payable on the loans of the United States in Holland. This was adjusted by a
prolongation of the period of reimbursement, in the nature of a new loan, at
interest at five per cent, for the term of ten years; and the expenses of this
operation were a commission of three per cent.

The first installment of the loan of two millions of dollars from the bank of
the United States, has been paid, as was directed by law. For the second, it is
necessary that provision should be made.

No pecuniary consideration is more urgent, than the regular redemption and
discharge of the public debt; on none, can delay be more injurious, or an
economy of time more valuable.

The productiveness of the public revenues hitherto, has continued to equal the
anticipations which were formed of it; but it is not expected to prove
commensurate with all the objects which have been suggested. Some auxiliary
provisions will, therefore, it is presumed, be requisite; and it is hoped that
these may be made, consistently with a due regard to the convenience of our
citizens, who cannot but be sensible of the true wisdom of encountering a small
present addition to their contribution, to obviate a future accumulation of
burdens.

But here I cannot forbear to recommend a repeal of the tax on the
transportation of public prints. There is no resource so firm for the
government of the United States, as the affections of the people, guided by an
enlightened policy; and to this primary good, nothing can produce more, than a
faithful representation of public proceedings, diffused without restraint,
throughout the United States.

An estimate of the appropriations, necessary for the current service of the
ensuing year, and a statement of a purchase of arms and military stores, made
during the recess, will be presented to Congress.

GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

THE several subjects, to which I have now referred, open a wide range to your
deliberations; and involve some of the choicest interests of our common
country. Permit me to bring to your remembrance the magnitude of your task.
Without an unprejudiced coolness, the welfare of the government may be
hazarded; without harmony, as far as consists with freedom of sentiment, its
dignity may be lost. But as the legislative proceedings of the United States
will never, I trust, be reproached for the want of temper or of candor; so
shall not the public happiness languish, from the want of my strenuous and
warmest cooperations.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, Dec. 3, 1793.
Answer of the Senate.
ACCEPT, Sir, the thanks of the Senate, for your Speech delivered to both
Houses of Congress at the opening of the session. Your re-election to the Chief
Magistracy of the United States, gives us sincere pleasure. We consider it as
an event every way propitious to the happiness of our country; and your
compliance with the call, as a fresh instance of the patriotism which has so
repeatedly led you to sacrifice private inclination to the public good. In the
unanimity which a second time marks this important national act, we trace with
particular satisfaction, besides the distinguished tribute paid to the virtues
and abilities which it recognizes, another proof of that just discernment, and
constancy of sentiments and views, which have hitherto characterized the
citizens of the United States.

As the European powers with whom the United States have the most extensive
relations, were involved in war, in which we had taken no part -- it seemed
necessary that the disposition of the nation for peace, should be promulgated
to the world, as well for the purpose of admonishing our citizens of the
consequences of a contraband trade, and of acts hostile to any of the
belligerent parties, as to obtain, by a declaration of the existing legal state
of things, an easier admission of our right to the immunities of our situation;
we therefore contemplate with pleasure, the Proclamation by you issued, and
give it our hearty approbation. We deem it a measure well timed, and wise;
manifesting a watchful solicitude for the welfare of the nation, and calculated
to promote it.

The several important matters presented to our consideration, will, in the
course of the session, engage all the attention to which they are respectively
entitled; and as the public happiness will be the sole guide of our
deliberations, we are perfectly assured of receiving your strenuous and most
zealous cooperation.

JOHN ADAMS, Vice President of the United States, and President of the Senate.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
THE pleasure expressed by the Senate, on my re-election to the station which I
fill, commands my sincere and warmest acknowledgments. If this be an event,
which promises the smallest addition to the happiness of our country, as it is
my duty, so shall it be my study, to realize the expectation.

The decided approbation, which the Proclamation now receives from your House,
by completing the proof, that this measure is considered as manifesting a
vigilant attention to the welfare of the United States, brings with it a
peculiar gratification to my mind.

The other important subjects, which have been communicated to you, will, I am
confident, receive a due discussion, and the result will, I trust, prove
fortunate to the United States.

G. WASHINGTON.

Answer of the House of Representatives.
SIR,
THE Representatives of the people of the United States, in meeting you for the
first time since you have been again called by an unanimous suffrage to your
present station, find an occasion which they embrace with no less sincerity
than promptitude, for expressing to you their congratulations on so
distinguished a testimony of public approbation, and their entire confidence in
the purity and patriotism of the motives which have produced this obedience to
the voice of your country. It is to virtues which have commanded long and
universal reverence, and services from which have flowed great and lasting
benefits, that the tribute of praise may be paid without the reproach of
flattery; and it is from the same sources that the fairest anticipations may be
derived in favor of the public happiness.

The United States having taken no part in the war which has embraced in Europe
the power with whom they have the most extensive relations, the maintenance of
peace was justly to be regarded as one of the most important duties of the
Magistrate charged with the faithful execution of the laws. We accordingly
witness with approbation and pleasure the vigilance with which you have guarded
against an interruption of that blessing, by your Proclamation, admonishing our
citizens of the consequences of illicit or hostile acts toward the belligerent
parties; and promoting, by a declaration of the existing legal state of things,
an easier admission of our right to the immunities belonging to our situation.

The connection of the United States with Europe has evidently become extremely
interesting. The communications which remain to be exhibited to us, will, no
doubt, assist in giving us a fuller view of the subject, and in guiding our
deliberations to such results as may comport with the rights and true interests
of our country.

We learn with deep regret that the measures dictated by a love of peace for
obtaining an amicable termination of the afflicting war on our frontier should
have been frustrated, and that a resort to offensive measures should have again
become necessary. As the latter, however, must be rendered more satisfactory in
proportion to the solicitude for peace manifested by the former, it is to be
hoped, they will be pursued under the better auspices on that account, and be
finally crowned with more happy success.

In relation to the particular tribes of Indians, against whom offensive
measures have been prohibited, as well as on all the other important subjects
which you have presented to our view, we shall bestow the attention which they
claim. We cannot, however, refrain at this time, from particularly expressing
our concurrence in your anxiety for the regular discharge of the public debts,
as fast as circumstances and events will permit; and in the policy of removing
any impediments that may be found in the way of a faithful representation of
public proceedings throughout the United States, being persuaded with you, that
on no subject more than the former, can delay be more injurious, or an economy
of time more valuable, and that with respect to the latter, no resource is so
firm for the government of the United States, as the affections of the people,
guided by an enlightened policy.

Throughout our deliberations we shall endeavor to cherish every sentiment
which may contribute to render them conducive to the dignity, as well as to the
welfare of the United States; and we join with you in imploring that Being, on
whose will the fate of nations depends, to crown with success our mutual
endeavors.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
I SHALL not affect to conceal the cordial satisfaction which I derive from the
address of the House of Representatives. Whatsoever those services may be which
you have sanctioned by your favor, it is a sufficient reward, that they have
been accepted, as they were meant. For the fulfillment of your anticipations of
the future, I can give no other assurance, than that the motives, which you
approve, shall continue unchanged.

It is truly gratifying to me, to learn, that the Proclamation has been
considered as a seasonable guard against the interruption of the public peace.
Nor can I doubt, that the subjects which I have recommended to your attention,
as depending upon legislative provisions, will receive a discussion suited to
their importance. With every reason, then, it may be expected, that your
deliberations, under the Divine blessing, will be matured to the honor and
happiness of the United States.

G. WASHINGTON.

Third Congress -- Second Session.
The President's Speech.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE, AND OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
WHEN we call to mind the gracious indulgence of Heaven, by which the American
People became a nation; when we survey the general prosperity of our country,
and look forward to the riches, power and happiness, to which it seems
destined; with the deepest regret do I announce to you, that during your
recess, some of the citizens of the United States have been found capable of an
insurrection. It is due, however, to the character of our government, and to
its stability, which cannot be shaken by the enemies of order, freely to unfold
the course of this event.

During the session of the year 1790, it was expedient to exercise the
legislative power granted by the constitution of the United States, "to lay and
collect excises." In a majority of the States, scarcely an objection was heard
to this mode of taxation. In some, indeed, alarms were at first conceived,
until they were banished by reason and patriotism. In the four western counties
of Pennsylvania, a prejudice, fostered and embittered by the artifice of men
who labored for an ascendency over the will of others, by the guidance of
their passions, produced symptoms of riot and violence. It is well known, that
Congress did not hesitate to examine the complaints which were presented, and
to relieve them, as far as justice dictated, or general convenience would
permit. But the impression which this moderation made on the discontented did
not correspond with what it deserved; the arts of delusion were no longer
continued to the efforts of designing individuals.

The very forbearance to press prosecutions, was misinterpreted into a fear of
urging the execution of the laws; and associations of men began to denounce
threats against the officers employed. From a belief that, by a more formal
concert, their operation might be defeated, certain self-created societies
assumed the tone of condemnation. Hence, while the greater part of Pennsylvania
itself were conforming themselves to the acts of excise, a few counties were
resolved to frustrate them. It was now perceived, that every expectation from
the tenderness which had hitherto been pursued, was unavailing, and that
further delay could only create an opinion of impotency, or irresolution in the
government. Legal process, was, therefore, delivered to the Marshal, against
the rioters and delinquent distillers.

No sooner was he understood to be engaged in this duty, than the vengeance of
armed men was aimed at his person, and the personal property of the Inspector
of the Revenue. They fired upon the Marshal, arrested him, and detained him for
some time as a prisoner. He was obliged, by the jeopardy of his life, to
renounce the service of other process, on the west side of the Allegany
mountain; and a deputation was afterward sent to him to demand a surrender of
that which he had served. A numerous body repeatedly attacked the house of the
Inspector, seized his papers of office, and finally destroyed, by fire, his
buildings, and whatsoever they contained. Both of these officers, from a just
regard to their safety, fled to the seat of government; it being avowed, that
the motives of such outrages were, to compel the resignation of the Inspector;
to withstand by the force of arms, the authority of the United States, and
thereby to extort a repeal of the laws of excise, and an alteration in the
conduct of government.

Upon the testimony of these facts, an associate justice of the supreme court
of the United States notified to me, that "in the counties of Washington and
Allegany, in Pennsylvania, laws of the United States were opposed, and the
execution thereof obstructed, by combinations, too powerful to be suppressed by
the ordinary course of judicial proceedings, or by the powers vested in the
Marshal of that district." On this call, momentous in the extreme, I sought and
weighed what might best subdue the crisis. On the one hand, the judiciary was
pronounced to be stripped of its capacity to enforce the laws: Crimes, which
reached the very existence of social order, were perpetrated without control;
the friends of government were insulted, abused, and overawed into silence, or
an apparent acquiescence; and to yield to the treasonable fury of so small a
portion of the United States, would be to violate the fundamental principle of
our constitution, which enjoins, that the will of the majority shall prevail.
On the other, to array citizen against citizen -- to publish the dishonor of
such excesses -- to encounter the expense, and other embarrassments of so
distant an expedition, were steps too delicate, too closely interwoven with
many affecting considerations, to be lightly adopted. I postponed, therefore,
the summoning the militia immediately into the field; but I required them to be
held in readiness, that if my anxious endeavors to reclaim the deluded, and to
convince the malignant of their danger, should be fruitless, military force
might be prepared to act, before the season should be too far advanced.

My proclamation of the 7th of August last, was accordingly issued, and
accompanied by the appointment of commissioners, who were charged to repair to
the scene of insurrection. They were authorized to confer with any bodies of
men, or individuals. They were instructed to be candid and explicit, in stating
the sensations which had been excited in the Executive, and his earnest wish to
avoid a resort to coercion; to represent, however, that without submission,
coercion must be the resort; but to invite them, at the same time, to return to
the demeanor of faithful citizens, by such accommodations as lay within the
sphere of the executive power -- pardon, too, was tendered to them by the
government of the United States, and that of Pennsylvania; upon no other
condition, than a satisfactory assurance of obedience to the laws.

Although the report of the Commissioners marks their firmness and abilities,
and must unite all virtuous men, by showing that the means of conciliation have
been exhausted; all of those who had committed, or abetted the tumults, did not
subscribe the mild form, which was proposed as the atonement; and the
indications of a peaceable temper were neither sufficiently general, nor
conclusive to recommend or warrant a further suspension of the march of the
militia.

Thus the painful alternative could not be discarded. I ordered the militia to
march, after once more admonishing the insurgents, in my proclamation of the
25th of September last.

It was a task, too difficult to ascertain, with precision, the lowest degree
of force competent to the quelling of the insurrection. From a respect, indeed,
to economy and the ease of my fellow-citizens* belonging to the militia, it
would have gratified me to accomplish such an estimate. My very great
reluctance to ascribe too much importance to the opposition, had its extent
been accurately seen, would have been a decided inducement to the smallest
efficient numbers. In this uncertainty, therefore, I put into motion fifteen
thousand men, as being an army, which, according to all human calculation,
would be prompt, and adequate, in every view, and might perhaps, by rendering
resistance desperate, prevent the effusion of blood. Quotas had been assigned
to the States of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland and Virginia; the Governor
of Pennsylvania having declared on this occasion, an opinion which justified a
requisition to the other States.

As Commander in Chief of the militia, when called into the actual service of
the United States, I have visited the places of general rendezvous, to obtain
more exact information, and to direct a plan for ulterior movements. Had there
been room for a persuasion that the laws were secure from obstruction; that the
civil magistrate was able to bring to justice such of the most culpable as have
not embraced the proffered terms of amnesty, and may be deemed fit objects of
example; that the friends of peace and good government were not in need of that
aid and countenance, which they ought always to receive, and I trust ever will
receive, against the vicious and turbulent, I should have caught with avidity
the opportunity of restoring the militia to their families and home. But
succeeding intelligence has tended to manifest the necessity of what has been
done; it being now confessed, by those who were not inclined to exaggerate the
ill conduct of the insurgents, that their malevolence was not pointed merely to
a particular law, but that a spirit inimical to all order, has actuated many of
the offenders. If the state of things had afforded reason for the continuance
of my presence with the army, it would not have been withholden; but every
appearance assuring such an issue as will redound to the reputation and
strength of the United States, I have judged it most proper to resume my duties
at the seat of government, leaving the chief command with the Governor of
Virginia.

Still, however, as it is probable, that in a commotion like the present,
whatsoever may be the pretense, the purposes of mischief and revenge may not be
laid aside; the stationing of a small force for a certain period, in the four
western counties of Pennsylvania, will be indispensable, whether we contemplate
the situation of those who are connected with the execution of the laws, or of
others, who may have exposed themselves by an honorable attachment to them.

Thirty days from the commencement of this session, being the legal limitation
of the employment of the militia, Congress cannot be too early occupied with
this subject.

Among the discussions which may arise from this aspect of our affairs, and
from the documents which will be submitted to Congress, it will not escape
their observation, that not only the Inspector of the Revenue, but other
officers of the United States in Pennsylvania, have, from their fidelity in the
discharge of their functions, sustained material injuries to their property.
The obligation and policy of indemnifying them, are strong and obvious. It may
also merit attention, whether policy will not enlarge this provision to the
retribution of our citizens, who, though not under the ties of office, may have
suffered damage by their generous exertions for upholding the constitution and
the laws. The amount, even if all the injured were included, would not be
great; and on future emergencies, the government would be amply repaid by the
influence of an example, that he who incurs a loss in its defense, shall find a
recompense in its liberality.

While there is cause to lament that occurrences of this nature should have
disgraced the name, or interrupted the tranquillity of any part of our
community, or should have diverted to a new application, any portion of the
public resources, there are not wanting real and substantial consolations for
the misfortune. It has demonstrated that our prosperity rests on solid
foundations; by furnishing an additional proof, that my fellow-citizens
understand the true principles of government and liberty; that they feel their
inseparable union; that, notwithstanding all the devices that have been made
use of to sway them from their interest and duty, they are now as ready to
maintain the authority of the laws against licentious invasions, as they were
to defend their rights against usurpation. It has been a spectacle, displaying
to the highest advantage, the value of republican government, to behold the
most and least wealthy of our citizens standing in the same ranks as private
soldiers; pre-eminently distinguishing by being the army of the constitution;
undeterred by a march of three hundred miles, over rugged mountains, by the
approach of an inclement season, or by any other discouragement. Nor ought I to
omit to acknowledge the efficacious and patriotic cooperation which I have
experienced from the Chief Magistrates of the States to which my requisitions
have been addressed.

To every description, indeed, of citizens, let praise be given; but let them
persevere in their affectionate vigilance over that precious depository of
American happiness, the Constitution of the United States. Let them cherish it
too, for the sake of those, who, from every clime, are daily seeking a dwelling
in our land. And when, in the calm moments of reflection, they shall have
retraced the origin and progress of the insurrection, let them determine,
whether it has not been fomented by combinations of men, who, careless of
consequences, and disregarding the unerring truth, that those who rouse, cannot
always appease a civil convulsion, have disseminated, from an ignorance or
perversion of facts, suspicions, jealousies, and accusations of the whole
government.

Having thus fulfilled the engagement which I took, when I entered into office,
"to the best of my ability to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of
the United States," on you, gentlemen, and the people by whom you are deputed,
I rely for support.

In the arrangements to which the possibility of a similar contingency will
naturally draw your attention, it ought not to be forgotten, that the militia
laws have exhibited such striking defects, as could not have been supplied but
by the zeal of our citizens. Besides the extraordinary expense and waste, which
are not the least of the defects, every appeal to those laws is attended with a
doubt of its success.

The devising and establishing of a well-regulated militia, would be a genuine
source of legislative honor, and a perfect title to public gratitude. I
therefore entertain a hope, that the present session will not pass, without
carrying to its full energy, the power of organizing, arming and disciplining
the militia; and thus providing, in the language of the constitution, for
calling them forth to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrection, and
repel invasion.

As auxiliary to the state of our defense to which Congress cannot too
frequently recur, they will not omit to inquire whether the fortifications
which have been already licensed by law, be commensurate with our exigencies.

The intelligence from the army under the command of General Wayne, is a happy
presage to our military operations against the hostile Indians north of the
Ohio. From the advices which have been forwarded, the advance he has made must
have damped the ardour of the savages, and weakened their obstinacy in waging
war against the United States; and yet, even at this late hour, when our power
to punish them cannot be questioned, we shall not be unwilling to cement a
lasting peace, upon terms of candor, equity, and good neighborhood.

Toward none of the Indian tribes have overtures of friendship been spared.
The Creeks in particular are covered from encroachment by the interposition of
the General Government, and that of Georgia. From a desire also to remove the
discontents of the Six Nations, a settlement, meditated at Presque Isle, or
Lake Erie, has been suspended; and an agent is now endeavoring to rectify any
misconceptions into which they may have fallen. But I cannot refrain from again
pressing upon your deliberations, the plan which I recommended at the last
session, for the improvement of harmony within our limits, by the fixing and
conducting of trading houses, upon the principles then expressed.

GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

THE time which has elapsed since the commencement of our fiscal measures, has
developed our pecuniary resources, so as to open a way for a definitive plan
for the redemption of our public debt. It is believed, that the result is such
as to encourage Congress to consummate this work without delay. Nothing can
more promote the permanent welfare of the nation, and nothing would be more
grateful to our constituents. Indeed, whatsoever is unfinished of our system of
public credit, cannot be benefited by procrastination, and, as far as may be
practicable, we ought to place that credit on grounds which cannot be
disturbed, and to prevent that progressive accumulation of debt, which must
ultimately endanger all governments.

An estimate of the necessary appropriations, including the expenditures into
which we have been driven by the insurrection, will be submitted to Congress.

GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE, AND OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

THE Mint of the United States has entered upon the coinage of the precious
metals, and considerable sums of defective coins and bullion have been lodged
with the director by individuals. There is a pleasing prospect, that the
institution will, at no remote day, realize the expectation which was
originally formed of its utility.

In subsequent communications, certain circumstances of our intercourse with
foreign nations will be transmitted to Congress; however, it may not be
unseasonable to announce, that my policy, in our foreign transactions, has
been, to cultivate peace with all the world -- to observe treaties with pure
and absolute faith -- to check every deviation from the line of impartiality --
to explain what may have been misapprehended, and correct what may have been
injurious to any nation; and having thus acquired the right, to lose no time in
acquiring the ability, to insist upon justice being done ourselves.

Let us unite, therefore, in imploring the Supreme Ruler of nations to spread
his holy protection over these United States -- to turn the machinations of the
wicked to the confirming of our constitution -- to enable us at all times to
root out internal sedition, and put invasion to flight -- to perpetuate to our
country that prosperity which his goodness has already conferred, and to verify
the anticipation^ of this government being a safeguard to human rights.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, Nov. 19, 1794.
Answer of the Senate.
SIR,
WE receive, with pleasure, your speech to the two Houses of Congress. In it we
perceive renewed proofs of that vigilant and paternal concern for the
prosperity, honor and happiness of our country, which has uniformly
distinguished your past administration.

Our anxiety, arising from the licentious and open resistance to the laws, in
the western counties of Pennsylvania, has been increased by the proceedings of
certain self-created societies, relative to the laws and administration of the
government; proceedings, in our apprehension, founded in political error,
calculated, if not intended, to disorganize our government, and which, by
inspiring delusive hopes of support, have been influential in misleading our
fellow-citizens in the scene of insurrection.

In a situation so delicate and important, the lenient and persuasive measures,
which you adopted, merit and receive our affectionate approbation. These
failing to procure their proper effects, and coercion having become inevitable;
we have derived the highest satisfaction from the enlightened patriotism, and
animating zeal, with which the citizens of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland
and Virginia have rallied around the standard of government, in opposition to
anarchy and insurrection.

Our warm and cordial acknowledgments are due to you, Sir, for the wisdom and
decision, with which you arrayed the militia, to execute the public will; and
to them, for the disinterestedness and alacrity with which they obeyed your
summons.

The example is precious to the theory of our government, and confers the
brightest honor upon the patriots who have given it.

We shall readily concur in such farther provisions for the security of
internal peace, and a due obedience to the laws, as the occasion manifestly
requires.

The effectual organization of the militia, and a prudent attention to the
fortifications of our ports and harbors, are subjects of great national
importance, and, together with the other measures you have been pleased to
recommend, will receive our deliberate consideration.

The success of the troops, under the command of General Wayne, cannot fall to
produce essential advantages. The pleasure, with which we acknowledge the
merits of that gallant General and army, is enhanced by the hope, that their
victories will lay the foundation for a speedy and durable peace with the
Indian tribes.

At a period, so momentous in the affairs of nations, the temperate, just and
firm policy, that you have pursued in respect to foreign powers, has been
eminently calculated to promote the great and essential interests of our
country, and has created the fairest title to the public gratitude and thanks.

JOHN ADAMS, Vice President of the United States, and President of the Senate.
November 22, 1794.
The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
AMONG the occasions, which have been afforded for expressing my sense of the
zealous and steadfast cooperation of the Senate, in the maintenance of
government, none has yet occurred, more forcibly demanding my unqualified
acknowledgments, than the present.

Next to the consciousness of upright intentions, it is the highest pleasure to
be approved by the enlightened Representatives of a free nation. With the
satisfaction, therefore, which arises from an unalterable attachment to public
order, do I learn, that the Senate discountenances those proceedings, which
would arrogate the direction of our affairs without any degree of authority
derived from the people.

It has been more than once the lot of our government, to be thrown into new
and delicate situations; and of these the insurrection has not been the least
important. Having been compelled, at length, to lay aside my repugnance to
resort to arms, I derive much happiness, from being confirmed, by your
judgment, in the necessity of decisive measures, and from the support of my
fellow-citizens of the militia, who were the patriotic instruments of that
necessity.

With such demonstrations of affection for our constitution -- with an adequate
organization of the militia -- with the establishment of necessary
fortifications -- with a continuance of those judicious and spirited exertions,
which brought victory to our western army -- with a due attention to public
credit, and an unsullied honor toward all nations, we may meet, under every
assurance of success, our enemies from within and from without.

G. WASHINGTON.

Answer of the House of Representatives.
SIR,
THE House of Representatives, calling to mind the blessings of the people of
the United States, and especially the happiness of living under constitutions
and laws, which rest on their authority alone, could not learn, with other
emotions than those you have expressed, that any part of our fellow-citizens
should have shown themselves capable of an insurrection; and we learn, with the
greatest concern, that any misrepresentations, whatever, of the government and
its proceedings, either by individuals, or combinations of men, should have
been made, and so far credited, as to foment the flagrant outrage, which has
been committed on the laws.

We feel with you the deepest regret, at so painful an occurrence in the annals
of our country. As men, regardful of the tender interests of humanity, we look
with grief at scenes which have stained our land with civil blood. As lovers of
public order, we lament that it has suffered so flagrant a violation. As
zealous friends of a republican government, we deplore every occasion which, in
the hands of its enemies, may be turned into calumny against it.

This aspect of the crisis, however, is happily not the only one which it
presents. There is another which yields all the consolations which you have
drawn from it. It has demonstrated to the candid world, as well as to the
American people themselves, that the great body of them, every where, are
equally attached to the luminous and vital principle of our constitution, which
enjoins, that the will of the majority shall prevail; that they understand the
indissoluble union between true liberty and regular government; that they feel
their duties no less than they are watchful over their rights; that they will
be as ready at all times to crush licentiousness, as they have been to defeat
usurpation. In a word, that they are capable of carrying into execution that
noble plan of self-government which they have chosen as the guarantee of their
own happiness, and the asylum for that of all from every clime, who may wish to
unite their destiny with ours.

These are the just inferences flowing from the promptitude with which the
summons to the standard of the laws has been obeyed; and from the sentiments
which have been witnessed in every description of citizens, in every quarter of
the Union. The spectacle, therefore, when viewed in its true light may well be
affirmed to display in equal luster the virtues of the American character, and
the value of Republican government. All must particularly acknowledge and
applaud the patriotism of that portion of citizens, who have freely sacrificed
every thing less dear than the love of their country, to the meritorious task
of defending its happiness.

In the part which you yourself have borne through this delicate and
distressing period, we trace the additional proofs it has afforded of y^^^
solicitude for the public good. Your laudable and successful endeavors to
render lenity in executing the laws conducive to their real energy, and to
convert tumult into order, without the effusion of blood, form a particular
title to the confidence and praise of your constituents. In all that may be
found necessary, on our part to complete this benevolent purpose, and to secure
the ministers and friends of the laws against the remains of danger, our due
cooperation will be afforded.

The other subjects which you have recommended, or communicated, and of which
several are particularly interesting, will all receive the attention which they
demand. We are deeply impressed with the importance of an effectual
organization of the Militia.

We rejoice at the intelligence of the advance and success of the army under
the command of General Wayne. Whether we regard it as a proof of the
perseverance, prowess and superiority of our troops, or as a happy presage to
our military operations against the hostile Indians, as a probable prelude to
the establishment of a lasting peace, upon terms of candor, equity and good
neighborhood -- we receive it with the greater pleasure, as it increases the
probability of sooner restoring a part of the public resources to the desirable
object of reducing the public debt.

We shall on this, as on all occasions, be disposed to adopt any measure which
may advance the safety and prosperity of our country.

In nothing can we more cordially unite with you than imploring the Supreme
Ruler of Nations to multiply his blessings on the United States -- to guard our
free and happy Constitution against every machination and danger -- and to make
it the best source of public happiness, by verifying its character of being the
best safeguard of human rights.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
I ANTICIPATED with confidence, the concurrence of the House of
Representatives, in the regret produced by the insurrection. Every effort ought
to be used to discountenance what has contributed to foment it, and thus
discourage a repetition of like attempts. For, notwithstanding the consolations
which may be drawn from the issue of this event, it is far better that the
artful approaches on such a situation of things should be checked by the
vigilant and duly admonished patriotism of our fellow-citizens, than that the
evil should increase until it become necessary to crush it by the strength of
their arm.

I am happy that the part which I have myself borne on this occasion, receives
the approbation of your house. For the discharge of a constitutional duty, it
is a sufficient reward to me to be assured that you will unite in consummating
what remains to be done.

I feel also great satisfaction in learning that the other subjects which I
have communicated or recommended, will meet with due attention; that you are
deeply impressed with the importance of an effectual organization of the
militia; and that the army under the command of General Wayne, is regarded by
you, no less than myself, as a proof of the perseverance, prowess and
superiority of our troops.

G. WASHINGTON.

Fourth Congress -- First Session.
The President's Speech.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE, AND OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
I TRUST I do not deceive myself, while I indulge the persuasion, that I have
never met you at any period, when, more than at the present, the situation of
our public affairs has afforded just cause for mutual congratulation, and for
inviting you to join with me in profound gratitude to the Author of all good,
for the numerous and extraordinary blessings we enjoy.

The termination of the long, expensive and distressing war, in which we have
been engaged with certain Indians, northwest of the Ohio, is placed in the
option of the United States, by a treaty, which the commander of our army has
concluded provisionally, with the hostile tribes in that region.

In the adjustment of the terms, the satisfaction of the Indians was deemed an
object worthy no less of the policy, than of the liberality of the United
States, as the necessary basis of durable tranquillity. This object, it is
believed, has been fully attained. The articles agreed upon, will immediately
be laid before the Senate, for their consideration.

The Creek and Cherokee Indians, who alone of the southern tribes had annoyed
our frontiers, have lately confirmed their pre-existing Treaties with us; and
were giving evidence of a sincere disposition to carry them into effect, by the
surrender of the prisoners and property they had taken. But we have to lament,
that the fair prospect in this quarter, has been once more clouded by wanton
murders, which some citizens of Georgia are represented to have recently
perpetrated on hunting parties of the Creeks; which have again subjected that
frontier to disquietude and danger; which will be productive of further
expense, and may occasion more effusion of blood. Measures are pursuing to
prevent or mitigate the usual consequences of such outrages; and with the hope
of their succeeding, at least to avert general hostility.

A letter from the Emperor of Morocco announces to me his recognition of our
Treaty, made with his father the late Emperor; and, consequently, the
continuance of peace with that power. With peculiar satisfaction I add, that
information has been received from an Agent deputed on our part to Algiers,
importing that the terms of the Treaty with the Dey and Regency of that country
had been adjusted in such a manner, as to authorize the expectation of a speedy
Peace, and the restoration of our unfortunate fellow-citizens, from a grievous
captivity.

The latest advices from our Envoy at the court of Madrid, give, moreover, the
pleasing information, that he had received assurances of a speedy and
satisfactory conclusion of his negotiation. While the event depending upon
unadjusted particulars, cannot be regarded as ascertained, it is agreeable to
cherish the expectation of an issue, which, securing amicably very essential
interests of the United States, will at the same time, lay the foundation of
lasting harmony with a power whose friendship we have uniformly and sincerely
desired to cultivate.

Though not before officially disclosed to the House of Representatives, you,
gentlemen, are all apprized, that a Treaty of Amity, Commerce and Navigation,
has been negociated with Great Britain; and that the Senate have advised and
consented to its ratification, upon a condition which excepts part of one
article. Agreeably thereto, and to the best judgment I was able to form of the
public interest, after full and mature deliberation, I have added my sanction.
The result on the part of his Britannic Majesty, is unknown. When received, the
subject will, without delay, be placed before Congress.

This interesting summary of our affairs, with regard to the foreign powers,
between whom and the United States controversies have subsisted; and with
regard also to those of our Indian neighbors with whom we have been in a state
of enmity or misunderstanding, opens a wide field for consoling and gratifying
reflections. If by prudence and moderation on every side, the extinguishment of
all the causes of external discord, which have heretofore menaced our
tranquillity, on terms compatible with our national rights and honor, shall be
the happy result; how firm and how precious a foundation will have been laid
for accelerating, maturing and establishing the prosperity of our country.

Contemplating the internal situation, as well as the external relations of the
United States, we discover equal cause for contentment and satisfaction. While
many of the nations of Europe, with their American dependencies, have been
involved in a contest unusually bloody, exhausting and calamitous; in which the
evils of foreign war have been aggravated by domestic convulsion and
insurrection; in which many of the arts most useful to society have been
exposed to discouragement and decay; in which scarcity of subsistence has
embittered other sufferings; while even the anticipations of a return of the
blessings of peace and repose, are alloyed by the sense of heavy and
accumulating burdens, which press upon all the departments of industry, and
threaten to clog the future springs of government; -- our favored country,
happy in a striking contrast, has enjoyed general tranquillity; a tranquillity
the more satisfactory, because maintained at the expense of no duty. Faithful
to ourselves, we have violated no obligation to others. Our agriculture,
commerce and manufactures prosper beyond former example; the molestations of
our trade (to prevent a continuance of which, however, very pointed
remonstrances have been made) being overbalanced by the aggregate benefits
which it derives from a neutral position. Our population advances with a
celerity which, exceeding the most sanguine calculations, proportionally
augments our strength and resources, and guarantees our future security. Every
part of the Union displays indications of rapid and various improvement, and
with burdens so light as scarcely to be perceived; with resources fully
adequate to our present exigencies; with governments founded on the genuine
principles of rational liberty, and with mild and wholesome laws; -- is it too
much to say, that our country exhibits a spectacle of national happiness never
surpassed, if ever before equalled?

Placed in a situation every way so auspicious, motives of commanding force
impel us, with sincere acknowledgment to Heaven, and pure love to our country,
to unite our efforts to preserve, prolong and improve, our immense advantages.
To cooperate with you in this desirable work, is a fervent and favorite wish
of my heart.

It is a valuable ingredient, in the general estimate of our welfare, that the
part of our country, which was lately the scene of disorder and insurrection,
now enjoy the blessings of quiet and order. The misled have abandoned their
errors, and pay the respect to our constitution and laws which is due from good
citizens to the public authorities of the society. These circumstances have
induced me to pardon, generally, the offenders here referred to; and to extend
forgiveness to those who had been adjudged to capital punishment. For though I
shall always think it a sacred duty, to exercise with firmness and energy the
constitutional powers with which I am vested; yet it appears to me no less
consistent with the public good, than it is with my personal feelings, to
mingle in the operations of government every degree of moderation and
tenderness which the national justice, dignity and safety may permit.

GENTLEMEN,

Among the objects which will claim your attention in the course of the
session, a review of our military establishment is not the least important. It
is called for by the events which have changed, and may be expected still
further to change the relative situation of our frontiers. In this review, you
will doubtless allow due weight to the considerations, that the questions
between us and certain foreign powers, are not yet finally adjusted; that the
war in Europe is not yet terminated; and that our Western Posts, when
recovered, will demand provision for garrisoning and securing them. A statement
of our present military force will be laid before you by the department of war.

With the review of our army establisment is naturally connected that of the
militia. It will merit inquiry, what imperfections in the existing plan,
further experience may have unfolded. The subject is of so much moment in my
estimation, as to excite a constant solicitude, that the consideration of it
may be renewed, till the greatest attainable perfection shall be accomplished.
Time is wearing away some advantages for forwarding the object, while none
better deserves the persevering attention of the public councils.

While we indulge the satisfaction, which the actual condition of our Western
borders so well authorizes, it is necessary that we should not lose sight of an
important truth, which continually receives new confirmations, namely, that the
provisions heretofore made with a view to the protection of the Indians from
the violences of the lawless part of our frontier inhabitants are insufficient.
It is demonstrated that these violences can now be perpetrated with impunity;
and it can need no argument to prove, that unless the murdering of Indians can
be restrained by bringing the murderers to condign punishment, all the
exertions of the government to prevent destructive retaliations by the Indians,
will prove fruitless, and all our present agreeable prospects illusory. The
frequent destruction of innocent women and children, who are chiefly the
victims of retaliation, must continue to shock humanity; and an enormous
expense, to drain the treasury of the Union.

To enforce upon the Indians the observance of justice, it is indispensable
that there shall be competent means of rendering justice to them. If these
means can be devised by the wisdom of Congress; and especially if there can be
added an adequate provision for supplying the necessities of the Indians, on
reasonable terms, (a measure, the mention of which I the more readily repeat,
as in all the conferences with them, they urge it with solicitude) I should not
hesitate to entertain a strong hope of rendering our tranquillity permanent. I
add, with pleasure, that the probability even of their civilization, is not
diminished by the experiments which have been thus far made, under the auspices
of government. The accomplishment of this work, if practicable, will reflect
undecaying luster on our national character, and administer the most grateful
consolations that virtuous minds can know.

GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

THE state of our revenue, with the sums which have been borrowed and
re-imbursed, pursuant to different acts of Congress, will be submitted from the
proper departments; together with an estimate of the appropriations necessary
to be made for the service of the ensuing year.

Whether measures may not be advisable to reinforce the provision for the
redemption of the public debt, will naturally engage your examination. Congress
have demonstrated their sense to be, and it were superfluous to repeat mine,
that whatsoever will tend to accelerate the honorable extinction of our public
debt, accords as much with the true interest of our country as with the general
sense of our constituents.

GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE, AND OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

THE statements which will be laid before you relative to the mint, will show
the situation of that institution; and the necessity of some further
legislative provisions, for carrying the business of it more completely into
effect, and for checking abuses which appear to be arising in particular
quarters.

The progress in providing materials for the frigates, and in building them;
the state of the fortifications of our harbors; the measures which have been
pursued for obtaining proper scites for arsenals, and for replenishing our
magazines with military stores; and the steps which have been taken toward the
execution of the law for opening a trade with the Indians, will likewise be
presented for the information of Congress.

Temperate discussion of the important subjects which may arise in the course
of the session; and mutual forbearance where there is a difference of opinion,
are too obvious and necessary for the peace, happiness and welfare of our
country, to need any recommendation of mine.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, Dec. 8, 1795.
Answer of the Senate.
SIR,
IT is with peculiar satisfaction that we are informed by your Speech to the
two Houses of Congress, that the long and expensive war, in which we have been
engaged with the Indians northwest of the Ohio, is in a situation to be finally
terminated; and though we view with concern the danger of an interruption of
the peace so recently confirmed with the Creeks, we indulge the hope, that the
measure you have adopted to prevent the same, if followed by those legislative
provisions that justice and humanity equally demand, will succeed in laying the
foundation of a lasting peace with the Indian tribes, on the Southern as well
as on the Western frontiers.

The confirmation of our treaty with Morocco, and the adjustment of a treaty of
peace with Algiers, in consequence of which our captive fellow-citizens shall
be delivered from slavery, are events that will prove no less interesting to
the public humanity, than they will be important in extending and securing the
navigation and commerce of our country.

As a just and equitable conclusion of our depending negociations with Spain
will essentially advance the interest of both nations, and thereby cherish and
confirm the good understanding and friendship which we have at all times
desired to maintain, it will afford us real pleasure to receive an early
confirmation of our expectations on this subject.

The interesting prospect of our affairs with regard to the foreign powers,
between whom and the United States controversies have subsisted, is not more
satisfactory, than the review of our internal situations; if from the former we
derive an expectation of the extinguishment of all the causes of external
discord, that have heretofore endangered our tranquillity, and on terms
consistent with our national honor and safety; in the latter we discover those
numerous and wide spread tokens of prosperity, which in so peculiar a manner
distinguish our happy country.

Circumstances thus every way auspicious, demand our gratitude and sincere
acknowledgment to Almighty God, and require that we should unite our efforts in
imitation of your enlightened, firm, and persevering example, to establish and
preserve the peace, freedom, and prosperity of our country.

The objects which you have recommended to the notice of the Legislature, will,
in the course of the session, receive our careful attention; and with a true
zeal for the public welfare, we shall cheerfully cooperate in every measure
that shall appear to us best calculated to promote the same.

JOHN ADAMS, Vice President of the United States, and President of the Senate.
December 12, 1795.
The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
WITH real pleasure I receive your address, recognizing the prosperous
situation of our public affairs, and giving assurances of your careful
attention to the objects demanding legislative consideration; and that with a
true zeal for the public welfare, you will cheerfully cooperate in every
measure which shall appear to you best calculated to promote the same.

But I derive peculiar satisfaction from your concurrence with me in the
expressions of gratitude to Almighty God, which a review of the auspicious
circumstances that distinguish our happy country have excited; and I trust that
the sincerity of our acknowledgments will be evinced by a union of efforts to
establish and preserve peace, freedom and prosperity.

G. WASHINGTON.

Answer of the House of Representatives.
SIR,
AS the Representatives of the People of the United States, we cannot but
participate in the strongest sensibility to every blessing which they enjoy,
and cheerfully join with you in profound gratitude to the Author of all good,
for the numerous and extraordinary blessings which he has conserved on our
favored country.

A final and formal termination of the distressing war which has ravaged our
northwestern frontier, will be an event which must afford a satisfaction
proportioned to the anxiety with which it has long been sought; and in the
adjustment of the terms, we perceive the true policy of making them
satisfactory to the Indians, as well as to the United States, as the best basis
of a durable tranquillity. The disposition of such of the southern tribes, as
had also heretofore annoyed our frontier, is another prospect in our situation
so important to the interest and happiness of the United States, that it is
much to be lamented that any clouds should be thrown over it, more especially
by excesses on the part of our own citizens.

While our population is advancing with a celerity which exceeds the most
sanguine calculations -- while every part of the United States displays
indications of rapid and various improvements -- while we are in the enjoyment
of protection and security, by mild and wholesome laws, administered by
governments founded on the genuine principles of rational liberty, a secure
foundation will be laid for accelerating, maturing, and establishing the
prosperity of our country, if, by treaty and amicable negotiation, all those
causes of external discord which heretofore menaced our tranquillity shall be
extinguished on terms compatible with our national rights and honor, and with
our constitutional, and great commercial interest*

Among the various circumstances in our internal situation, none can be viewed
with more satisfaction and exultation, than that the late scene of disorder and
insurrection, has been completely restored to the enjoyment of order and
repose. Such a triumph of reason and of law, is worthy of the free government
under which it happened, and was justly to be hoped from the enlightened and
patriotic spirit which pervades and actuates the people of the United States.

In contemplating that spectacle of national happiness which our country
exhibits, and of which, you, Sir, have been pleased to make an interesting
summary, permit us to acknowledge and declare the very great share which your
zealous and faithful services have contributed to it, and to express the
affectionate attachment which we feel for your character.

The several interesting subjects which you recommend to our consideration will
receive every degree of attention which is due to them: and whilst we feel the
obligation of temperance and mutual indulgence in all our discussions, we trust
and pray that the result to the happiness and welfare of our country may
correspond with the pure affection we bear to it.

The President's Reply.
GENTLEMEN,
COMING as you do from all parts of the United States, I receive great
satisfaction from the concurrence of your testimony in the justness of the
interesting summary of our national happiness, which, as the result of my
inquities, I presented to your view. The sentiments we have mutually expressed
of profound gratitude to the source of those numerous blessings, the Author of
all good, are pledges of our obligations to unite our sincere and zealous
endeavors, as the instruments of Divine Providence, to preserve and perpetuate
them.

Accept, gentlemen, my thanks for your declaration, that to my agency you
ascribe the enjoyment of a great share of these benefits. So far as my services
contribute to the happiness of my country, the acknowledgment thereof by my
fellow-citizens, and their affectionate attachment, will ever prove an abundant
reward.

G. WASHINGTON.

Important and Interesting Message Of the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES to the
HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, in consequence of their requesting the Papers
relative to the British Treaty. Delivered since the proposals were issued for
printing this work.

GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
WITH the utmost attention I have considered your resolution of the 24th inst.
requesting me to lay before your House a copy of the instructions to the
minister of the United States, who negociated the treaty with the king of Great
Britain, together with the correspondence and other documents relative to that
treaty, excepting such of the said papers as any existing negotiation may
render improper to be disclosed.

In deliberating on this subject, it was impossible for me to lose sight of the
principle which some have avowed in its discussion, or to avoid extending my
views to the consequences which must flow from the admission of that principle.

I trust that no part of my conduct has ever indicated a disposition to
withhold any information which the Constitution has enjoined upon the President
as a duty to give, or which could be required of him by either House of
Congress as a right; and with truth I affirm, that it has been, as it will
continue to be while I have the honor to preside in the government, my
constant endeavor to harmonize with the other branches thereof, so far as the
trust delegated to me by the people of the United States, and my sense of the
obligation it imposes to "preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution," will
permit.

The nature of foreign negociations requires caution; and their success must
often depend on secrecy, and even when brought to a conclusion, a full
disclosure of all the measures, demands or eventual concessions which may have
been proposed or contemplated, would be extremely impolitic; for this might
have a pernicious influence on future negociations, or produce immediate
inconveniences; perhaps danger and mischief, in relation to other powers. The
necessity of such caution and secrecy was one cogent reason for vesting the
power of making treaties in the President, with the advice and consent of the
Senate; the principle on which that body was formed, confining it to a small
number of members. To admit, then, a right in the House of Representatives, to
demand, and to have, as a matter of course, all the papers respecting a
negotiation with a foreign power, would be to establish a dangerous precedent.

It does not occur, that the inspection of the papers asked for, can be
relative to any purpose under the cogni^ance of the House of Representatives,
except that of an impeachment, which the resolution has not expressed. I
repeat, that I have no disposition to withhold any information which the duty
of my station will permit, or the public good shall require, to be disclosed;
and, in fact, all the papers affecting the negotiation with Great Britain, were
laid before the Senate, when the treaty itself was communicated for their
consideration and advice.

The course which the debate has taken on the resolution of the House, leads to
some observations on the mode of making treaties under the Constitution of the
United States.

Having been a member of the General Convention, and knowing the principles on
which the Constitution was formed, I have ever entertained but one opinion on
this subject; and from the first establishment of the government to this
moment, my conduct has exemplified that opinion, that the power of making
treaties is exclusively vested in the President, by and with the advice of the
Senate, provided two-thirds of the Senators present concur; and that every
treaty so made and promulgated, thenceforward became the law of the land. It is
thus that the treaty making power has been understood by foreign nations; and
in all treaties made with them, we have declared, and they have believed, that
when ratified by the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate, they
became obligatory. In this construction of the Constitution, every House of
Representatives has heretofore acquiesced; and until the present time, not a
doubt or suspicion has appeared to my knowledge, that this construction was not
the true one. Nay, they have more than acquiesced; for until now, without
controverting the obligation of such treaties, they have made all the requisite
provisions for carrying them into effect.

There is also reason to believe that this construction agrees with the
opinions entertained by the State Conventions, when they were deliberating on
the Constitution; especially by those who objected to it, because there was not
required in commercial treaties the consent of two-thirds of the whole Senate,
instead of two-thirds of the Senators present; and because in treaties
respecting territorial and certain other rights and claims, the concurrence of
three-fourths of the whole number of the members of both Houses respectively
was not made necessary.

It is a fact declared by the General Convention, and universally understood,
that the Constitution of the United States was the result of a spirit of amity
and mutual concession. And it is well known that under this influence, the
smaller States were admitted to an equal representation in Senate, with the
larger States; and that this branch of the government was invested with great
powers; for on the equal participation of those powers the sovereignty and
political safety of the smaller States were deemed essentially to depend.

If other proofs than these, and the plain letter of the Constitution itself be
necessary to ascertain the point under consideration, they may be found in the
journals of the General Convention, which I have deposited in the office of the
department of state. In those journals it will appear that a proposition was
made, "that no treaty should be binding on the United States which was not
ratified by a law;" and that the proposition was explicitly rejected.

As, therefore, it is perfectly clear to my understanding, that the assent of
the House of Representatives is not necessary to the validity of a treaty; as
the treaty with Great Britain exhibits, in itself, all the objects requiring
legislative provision, and on which these papers called for can throw no light;
and as it is essential to the due administration of the government, that the
boundaries fixed by the Constitution, between the different departments should
be preserved -- a just regard to the Constitution, and to the duty of my
office, under all the circumstances of this case, forbid a compliance with your
request.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, March 30, 1796.
Address Of the CITIZENS of BALTIMORE to GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the
UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
WE feel the honor you have this day conferred on the town of Baltimore, by
favoring it with your presence, infinitely heightened and enhanced by the
desirable event which has produced it. Happy to behold your elevation permit us
to re-assure you of our purest love and affection.

In considering the occasion that has once more drawn you from the scenes of
domestic ease and private tranquillity, our thoughts naturally turn on the
situation of our country, previous to the expedient of the late General
Convention. When you became a member of that body which framed our new and
excellent Constitution, you dissipated the fears of good men, who dreaded the
disunion of the States, and the loss of our liberties in the death of our
enfeebled and expiring Confederation: and now, Sir, by accepting the high
authorities of President of the United States of America, you teach us to
expect every blessing that can result from the wisest recommendations to
Congress, and the most prudent and judicious exercise of those authorities;
thus relieving us, in the one instance, from the most gloomy apprehensions, as
when, in a different capacity, you re-crossed the Delaware; and in the other,
opening to our view the most animating prospects, as when you captured
Cornwallis.

But it is from the tenor of your own life, and your uniform and upright
political principles and conduct, that we derive the fullest assurance that our
hopes will be realized. Believing that a faithful performance of public
engagements is essential to the prosperity of a people, and their implicit
reliance on the promises of government, to its stability, we recollect with
pleasure your well known sentiments on this subject, and have no doubt but the
other branches of Congress will concur with you in placing public credit on the
most solid foundation. We have also every reason to conclude, that under the
administration of a WASHINGTON, the useful and ingenious arts of peace* the
agriculture, commerce, and manufactures of the United States, will be duly
favored and improved, as being far more certain sources of national wealth
than the richest mines; and surer means to promote the felicity of a people,
than the most successful wars. Thus, Sir, we behold a new era springing out of
our independence, and a field displayed, where your talents for governing will
not be obscured by the splendor of the greatest military exploits. We behold
too, an extraordinary thing in the annals of mankind, a free and enlightened
people, choosing, by a free election, without one dissenting voice, the late
Commander in Chief of their armies, to watch over and guard their civil rights
and privileges.

We sincerely pray that you may long enjoy your present health, and the
citizens of the United States have frequent opportunities to testify their
veneration of your virtues, by continuing you through many successive elections
in the first station of human honor and dignity. In these expressions of our
affections and attachment, we are sensible we do not speak the wishes of a town
only, but the united feelings of a whole people.

In behalf of the citizens of Baltimore, we have the honor to be, etc. etc.

JAMES M'HENRY, NICHOLAS ROGERS, JOSHUA BARNEY, PAUL BENTALAU, JOHN BANKSON,
ISAAC GRIEST* ROBERT SMITH, O. H. WILLIAMS, THOROWGOOD SMITH, WILLIAM CLEMM,
JOHN SWANN.


The Answer. To the CITIZENS of BALTIMORE.
GENTLEMEN,
THE tokens of regard and affection which I have often received from the
citizens of this town, were always acceptable because I believed them always
sincere. Be pleased to receive my best acknowledgments for the renewal of them
on the present occasion.

If the affectionate partiality of my fellow-citizens has prompted them to
ascribe greater effects to my conduct and character than were justly due, I
trust the indulgent sentiment on their part, will not produce any presumption
on mine.

I cannot now, gentlemen, resist my feelings so much as to withhold the
communication of my ideas respecting the actual situation of our national
affairs. It appears to me that little more than common sense and common honesty
in the transactions of the community at large, would be necessary to make us a
happy nation. For if the general government, lately adopted, shall be arranged
and administered in such a manner as to acquire the full confidence of the
American people, I sincerely believe they will have greater advantages from
their natural, moral and political circumstances, for public felicity, than any
other people ever possessed.

In the contemplation of those advantages, now soon to be realized, I have
reconciled myself to the sacrifice of my fondest wishes, so far as to enter
again upon the stage of public life. I know the delicate nature of the duties
incident to the part which I am called to perform, and I feel my incompetence,
without the singular assistance of Providence, to discharge them in a
satisfactory manner. But having undertaken the task, from a sense of duty, no
fear of encountering difficulties, and no dread of losing popularity, shall
ever deter me from pursuing what I con^^ive to be the true interests of my
country.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address To the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES, from the PRESIDENT and SUPREME
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL of PENNSYLVANIA.
SIR,
THE President and Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania, cheerfully
embrace this interesting occasion to congratulate you upon the establishment of
the Federal Constitution, and to felicitate ourselves and our country upon your
unanimous appointment to the Presidency of the United States.

In reflecting upon the vicissitudes of the late war -- in tracing its
difficulties, and in contemplating its success, we are uniformly impressed with
the extent and magnitude of the services which you have rendered to your
country; and by that impression, we are taught to expect that the exercise of
the same virtues and abilities which have been thus happily employed in
obtaining the prize of liberty and independence, must be effectually
instrumental in securing to your fellow-citizens and their posterity, the
permanent blessings of a free and efficient government. And although the
history of the revolution will furnish the best evidence of the invariable
attachment of this Commonwealth to the interests and honor of the Union, yet
we cannot resist this favorable opportunity of personally assuring you, that
in every measure which tends to advance the national character, you may rely on
the zealous cooperation of the executive authority of Pennsylvania.

In discharging the duties of your present important station, it must, Sir, be
a never-failing source of consolation and support, that the unbounded love and
confidence of the people, will produce a favorable construction of all your
actions, and will contribute to the harmony and success of your administration.
For we know, that eventually your happiness must depend upon the happiness of
your country; and we believe that in wishing an adequate execution of your
intentions and designs, we comprehend all that is necessary to both.

Uniting with our sister States in the admiration of those motives, which, at
this interesting era of our affairs, have induced you again to relinquish the
enjoyment of domestic peace, for a conspicuous and laborious participation in
the cares and toils of public life, -- we fervently pray for the preservation
of your health; and we confidently hope that the consummation of a patriot's
wishes, the glory and felicity of your country, will crown the period of a long
and illustrious existence, and prepare you for the enjoyment of an everlasting
reward.

THOMAS MIFFLIN.
Council Chamger.
The Answer. To the PRESIDENT and SUPREME EXECUTIVE COUNCIL of PENNSYLVANIA.
GENTLEMEN,
I RECEIVE with great satisfaction the affectionate congratulations of the
President and Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania, on my appointment to
the Presidency of the United States.

If, under favor of the Divine Providence, and with the assistance of my
fellow-citizens, it was my fortune to have been in any degree instrumental in
vindicating the liberty and confirming the independence of my country, I now
find a full compensation for my services in a belief that those blessings will
be permanently secured by the establishment of a free and efficient government.
And you will permit me to say, on this occasion, that as nothing could add to
the evidence I have formerly received of the invariable attachment of your
Commonwealth to the interests and honor of the Union, so nothing could have
been more agreeable to me at this time than the assurances you have given me of
the zealous cooperation of its executive authority in facilitating the
accomplishment of the great objects which are committed to my charge.

While I feel my sensibility strongly excited by the expressions of affection
and promises of support, which I every where meet with from my countrymen, I
entertain a consolatory hope, that the purity of my intentions, and the
perseverance of my endeavors to promote the happiness of my country, will
atone for any of the slighter defects which may be discovered in my
administration. For, whatever may be the issue of our public measures, or
however I may err in opinion, I trust it will be believed, that I could not
have been actuated by any interests separate from those of my country.

Suffer me, Gentlemen, to conclude by assuring you that I am well pleased with
the justice you have done to the motives from which I have acted, and by
thanking you for the tender concern you have been pleased to manifest for my
personal felicity.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address To GEORGE WASHINGTON, President and Commander in Chief of the Army and
Navy of the United States of America, etc.
SIR,
WE, the Judges of the Supreme Court of the State of Pennsylvania, do most
heartily congratulate your accession to the high and important office of
President of the United States.

We are deeply sensible of what we owe to Almighty God, for the great
deliverance he has wrought for us by your Excellency, when General and
Commander in Chief of the armies of our country, and for having inspired the
people with the wisdom of appointing you, by an unanimous suffrage, to the
chair of First Magistrate over them.

The tender regard which heretofore you always paid to the laws and liberties
of these States, when you possessed almost dictatorial power, gives us a
certain prospect of a mild, legal, and upright government in future. We are
duly impressed with the mercies of God in preserving you hitherto, in so many
public and private dangers to which your person has been exposed; and we hope
and pray the same Providence will carry you through the great work (which seems
reserved for you) of establishing justice, ensuring tranquillity, promoting the
general welfare, and securing the blessings of liberty and independence to the
good people of your native country, and their latest posterity.

We want words to express our satisfaction on this occasion; and beg leave to
assure you of our affectionate attachment to your person, and our best
endeavors to render your administration happy and glorious.

THOMAS M'KEAN, C. J. WILLIAM A. ATLEE, JACOB RUSH, GEORGE BRYAN.

Philadelphia, April 20, 1789.
The Answer. To the JUDGES of the SUPREME COURT of PENNSYLVANIA.
GENTLEMEN,
IT affords me the most sensible pleasure to be informed, that my accession to
the Chief Magistracy of the United States has met the approbation of my
fellow-citizens in general, and particularly that of the Judges of the Supreme
Court of Pennsylvania.

Your recapitulation of the deliverance, in which Almighty God has been
pleased, in some sort, to make use of me as his instrument, ought only to
awaken the deepest gratitude for his mercies in the time past, and an humble
reliance on them for the time to come.

Feeling how greatly I shall stand in need of the patriotic assistance of every
good citizen of America, the confidence they continue to express in the
rectitude of my dispositions will always be, as it ever has been, an unfailing
source of consolation to me, in every hour of difficulty or distress. While the
whole course of my part conduct will be a better security for my future
transactions than any verbal assurances I can give, I will only say, that I
should find myself singularly happy in contributing to realize the glorious
work, which your partiality for me has been indulgent enough to anticipate, of
establishing justice, ensuring tranquillity, promoting the general welfare, and
ensuring the blessings of liberty and independence to the good people of our
native country, and their latest posterity.

I entreat you to be persuaded, Gentlemen, that, although it was with the
utmost difficulty I could prevail upon myself to enter again on the stage of
public life, yet, since I have done it, the unequivocal encouragement of
support, given by the most respectable citizens and magistrates, will tend very
much to remove my embarrassments, and I hope to open the way for a prosperous
administration.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the TRUSTEES and FACULTY of the UNIVERSITY of the State of
PENNSYLVANIA, to GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United State of America,
Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy thereof, etc.
PERMIT, Sir, the University of the State of Pennsylvania to join in the
general joy, occasioned by your accession to the first office in the FEDERAL
EMPIRE. It is by this honor (the highest that America can bestow) that a
grateful people express the affection which your eminent services have excited
in their bosoms. It is this that has given them but ONE VOICE in their,
delegation of this important trust, and that unites the homage of the heart
with the duty of the citizen. To be the first magistrate of a great empire, is
a station that many have attained: but to acquire it by the UNANIMOUS VOICE of
a free people, is an event in the history of the world, as rare as those
illustrious virtues, of which it is the just reward. We rejoice in an event so
auspicious to our country; and we confidently hope, that your endeavors to
extend the blessings of good government will be crowned with a success as
brilliant as that which distinguished your exertions in defense of our freedom.

As guardians of this University, (which boasts the honor of enrolling the
name of your Excellency among those of her sons) we anticipate the
encouragement which such institutions will receive under your administration.
The influence of sound learning on religion and manners -- on government,
liberty and laws, will make it a favorite object in every civilized society:
and the sciences having experienced your protection amidst the convulsions of
war, reasonably expect a distinguished patronage in the calm of peace.

We devoutly pray the Almighty Ruler of the Universe, that you may long enjoy
the felicity of that country which you have rescued from tyranny, and
established in the blessings of freedom and independence; and that finally you
may meet the reward which awaits his good and faithful servants.

THOMAS M'KEAN, President.
Philadelphia, April 20, 1789.
The Answer. To the TRUSTEES and FACULTY of the UNIVERSITY of the State of
PENNSYLVANIA.
GENTLEMEN,
I ACCEPT with peculiar pleasure the Address of the University of the State of
Pennsylvania, upon my appointment to the first office in the Union.

Notwithstanding I had most seriously determined never more to take any part in
transactions of a public nature, yet a conviction of duty would not suffer me,
on the present occasion, to refuse a compliance with the unanimous call of my
country.

Nor could I remain insensible to the honor that was conferred upon me by this
fresh and distinguished proof of its approbation. Probably my fellow-citizens
anticipate too many and too great advantages from the appointment. It will,
however, be an object indeed near to my heart, to verify, as far as may be in
my power, those favorable presentiments, by endeavoring to secure the
liberty, and promote the happiness, of the American people.

I am not a little flattered by being considered by the patrons of literature
as one of their number. Fully apprized of the influence which sound learning
has on religion and manners, on government, liberty and laws, I shall only
lament my want of ability to make it still more extensive, I conceive hopes,
however, that we are at the eve of a very enlightened era. The same unremitting
exertions, which, under all the blasting storms of war, caused the arts and
sciences to flourish in America will doubtless bring them nearer to maturity
when they shall have been sufficiently invigorated by the milder rays of peace.

I return you my hearty thanks for your devout intercession at the throne of
grace, for my felicity both here and hereafter. May you also, Gentlemen, after
having been the happy instruments of diffusing the blessings of literature, and
the comforts of religion, receive the just compensation for your virtuous deeds.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address To GEORGE WASHINGTON, President and Commander in Chief of the Army and
Navy of the United States of America, etc. etc.
SIR,
THE Standing Committee of the Pennsylvania State Society of the Cincinnati,
embrace this early opportunity of waiting on your Excellency with their
congratulations on your unanimous appointment, by the People, to the office of
First Magistrate of this great empire; it being the strongest evidence of your
unrivalled merit, and of their exalted wisdom. Permit us to express our
peculiar joy and pride upon the occasion, that our beloved General, and the
President General of our Society, has received the free suffrage of each of our
fellow-citizens of these States. We have now the most perfect assurance, that
the inestimable rights and liberties of human nature, for which we have toiled,
fought and bled, under your command, will be preserved inviolate; and we
felicitate our country, that their national safety and dignity are secure, and
that they have the best grounded prospects of all that happiness, which a good
Constitution, under a wise and virtuous administration, can afford. As we have
the fullest confidence that our Society, whose basis is friendship and charity,
will, equally with others, enjoy these blessings, and partake of your regard,
so we beg leave to assure you, that we shall never be wanting in our endeavors
to contribute all in our power to your personal comfort and honor, and the
prosperity and glory of your government.

Signed by order of the Committee. THOMAS M'KEAN, Vice President.
Philadelphia, April 20, 1789.
The Answer. To the STATE SOCIETY of the CINCINNATI of PENNSYLVANIA.
GENTLEMEN,
THE congratulations of my fellow soldiers and faithful followers in the
military line of this State, on my election to the Chief Magistracy of the
Union, cannot but be exceedingly flattering and pleasing to me; for my mind has
been so deeply affected with a grateful sense of the attachment and aid I have
experienced from them, during the course of our arduous struggle for liberty,
that the impression will never be effaced.

Heaven alone can foretell whether any, or what advantages are to be derived by
my countrymen from my holding the office, which they have done me the honor of
conferring upon me, not only without my solicitations, but even contrary to my
inclinations.

I promise nothing but an unremitted attention to the duties of the office. If
by that attention I may be so fortunate as still to continue to possess the
affectionate regard of my fellow-citizens, and particularly of that body of
which you are the representatives, it will be no small addition to my
happiness. The support which they and you have promised cannot fail, under the
smiles of Providence, to contribute largely to the accomplishment of my wishes,
by promoting the prosperity of our common country. In the mean time I thank
you, Gentlemen, for the interest you so kindly take in my personal comfort and
honor, as well as in the prosperity and glory of the general government.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the MAYOR, CORPORATION and CITIZENS of ALEXANDRIA to the PRESIDENT
of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
AGAIN your country demands your care. Obedient to its wishes -- unmindful of
your own ease -- we see you again relinquishing the bliss of retirement; and
this, too, at a period of life, when nature itself seems to authorize a
preference of repose!

Not to extol your glory as a Soldier -- not to pour forth our gratitude for
past services -- not to acknowledge the justice of the unexampled honor, which
has been conferred upon you, by the spontaneous and unanimous suffrage of Three
Millions of Freemen, in your election to the Supreme Magistracy -- not to
admire the patriotism which directs your conduct, -- do your neighbors and
friends now address you. Themes less splendid, but more endearing, impress our
minds. The first and best of citizens must leave us. Our aged must loss their
ornament! -- our youth their model! -- our agriculture its improver! -- our
commerce its friend! -- our infant academy its patron! our poor their
benefactor! -- and the interior navigation of the Potowmak (an event replete
with the most extensive utility, already, by your unremitted exertions, brought
into partial use) its institutor and promoter!

Farewell! -- Go, and make a grateful people happy; -- a people who will be
doubly grateful when they contemplate this recent sacrifice for their interest.

To that Being, who makes and unmaketh at his will, we commend you; and, after
the accomplishment of the arduous business to which you are called, may he
restore to us again the best of men, and the most beloved fellow-citizen.

In behalf of the People of Alexandria, D. RAMSAY, Mayor.
April 16, 1789.
The Answer. To the MAYOR, CORPORATION, and CITIZENS of ALEXANDRIA.
GENTLEMEN,
ALTHOUGH I ought not to conceal, yet I cannot describe, the painful emotions
which I felt, in being called upon to determine whether I would accept or
refuse the Presidency of the United States. The unanimity in the choice -- the
opinion of my friends, communicated from different parts of Europe as well as
of America -- the apparent wish of those who were not entirely satisfied with
the Constitution in its present form -- and an ardent desire on my own part to
be instrumental in conciliating the good will of my countrymen toward each
other, have induced an acceptance.

Those who know me best, (and you, my fellow-citizens, are, from your
situation, in that number) know better than any others, my love of retirement
is so great, that no earthly consideration, short of a conviction of duty,
could have prevailed upon me to depart from my resolution "never more to take
any share in transactions of a public nature." For, at my age, and in my
circumstances, what possible advantage could I propose to myself, from
embarking again in the tempestuous and uncertain ocean of public life?

I do not feel myself under the necessity of making public declarations in
order to convince you, Gentlemen, of my attachment to yourselves, and regard
for your interests. The whole tenor of my life has been open to your
inspection; and my past actions rather than my present declarations, must be
the pledge of my future conduct.

In the mean time, I thank yon most sincerely for the expressions of kindness
contained in your valedictory address. It is true just after having bade adieu
to my domestic connexions, this tender proof of your friendship is but too well
calculated still further to awaken my sensibility, and increase my regret, at
parting from the enjoyments of private life.

All that now remains for me, is, to commit myself and you to the protection of
that beneficent Being, who, on a former occasion, has happily brought us
together, after a long and distressing separation. Perhaps ihe same gracious
Providence will again indulge us with the same heartfelt felicity. But words,
my fellow-citizens, fail me. Unutterable sensations must then be left to more
expressive silence; while, from an aching heart, I bid you all, my affectionate
friends and kind neighbors, farewell!

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the MAYOR, RECORDER, ALDERMEN and COMMON COUNCIL of the city of
PHILADELPHIA, in Common Council assembled, to GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of
the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
WE, the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Common Council of the city of
Philadelphia, have assembled, to present you our sincere congratulations on
your appointment to the station of President of the United States of America.

We rejoice, Sir, that the citizens of America, so long accustomed to claim
your services in every hour of public difficulty, have again given the most
affectionate and honorable testimony to your distinguished worth, by calling
you, with united suffrage, to take the highest seat, of power amongst freemen.

When the gloom which overcast the cause of liberty at the opening of the late
war, occasioned by the alarm of a mighty nation, armed to suppress the voice of
freedom in this infant land, for a moment sunk the spirits of its sons -- you.
Sir, arose! instantaneous confidence possessed the minds of your
fellow-citizens; under your auspices, they fought, they bled, and, through
unparalleled distress of war, you led them to freedom, the choicest gift of
Heaven.

Scarce had that solemn scene passed over, when a triumphant victor returned
his sword to the hands of the civil rulers of his country.

Scarce had you retired to the calm retreat of domestic peace, when the civil
rule, which we had suddenly established amidst the busy tumult of war, proved
unequal to secure the blessings to be derived from a well-digested
Constitution. You, Sir, were again called forth; and, presiding over our wisest
councils, have handed to your country a system of civil policy, happily uniting
civil liberty with effective government.

What then remained undone, is now accomplished; and you are called to preside
in dispensing the blessings of that government, in the forming of which you
took so distinguished a part.

May your administration derive blessings to your country, and honor and
happiness to yourself.

In the name of the citizens of Philadelphia, we bid you welcome; and assure
you, that we, and those we represent, have the warmest personal attachment to
you, and shall always rejoice to meet you singly, or connected with that august
body over whom you are going to preside.

Signed by order of the Mayor, Aldermen, etc. A. WILCOCKS, Recorder.

The Answer. To the MAYOR, RECORDER, ALDERMEN and COMMON COUNCIL of the City of
PHILADELPHIA.
I CONSIDER myself particularly obliged to you, Gentlemen, for your
congratulatory address on my appointment to the station of President of the
United States.

Accustomed as I have been to pay a respectful regard to the opinion of my
countrymen, I did not think myself at liberty to decline the acceptance of the
high office, to which I had been called by their united suffrage.

When I contemplate the interposition of Providence, as it was visibly
manifested, in guiding us through the Revolution, in preparing us for the
reception of a general government, and in conciliating the good will of the
people of America toward one another after its adoption; I feel myself
oppressed, and almost overwhelmed with a sense of the divine munificence. I
feel that nothing is due to my personal agency in all these complicated and
wonderful events, except what can simply be attributed to the exertions of an
honest zeal for the good of my country.

If I have distressing apprehensions, that I shall not be able to justify the
too exalted expectations of my countrymen, I am supported under the pressure of
such uneasy reflections by a confidence, that the most gracious Being, who has
hitherto watched over the interests and averted the perils of the United
States, will never suffer so fair an inheritance to become a prey to anarchy,
despotism, or any other species of oppression.

I thank you sincerely for your kind wishes, that my administration may be
honorable and happy to myself and country.

I pray you, Gentlemen, will accept, on your own behalf, as well as on that of
the citizens you represent, my heartfelt acknowledgments for the polite
welcome I have received upon my arrival in your city. In tendering these
acknowledgments, I must also desire it may be fully understood, that I
entertain the same reciprocal sensatione of attachment for the good people of
Philadelphia, which they have on all occasions evinced in my favor.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the MINISTERS and ELDERS of the GERMAN REFORMED CONGREGATIONS in
the UNITED STATES, at their General Meeting, held at Philadelphia, to the
PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
WHILST the infinite goodness of Almighty God, in his gracious providence over
the people of the United States of America, calls for our sincerest and most
cordial gratitude to him that rules supremely, and orders all things in
heaven and on earth in unerring wisdom and righteousness; the happy, the
peaceable establishment of the new government, over which you so deservedly
preside, cannot fail but inspire our souls with new and the most lively
emotions of adoration, praise and thanksgiving unto his holy name.

As it is our most firm purpose to support in our persons a government founded
in justice and equity, so it shall be our constant duty to impress the minds of
the people entrusted to our care, with a due sense of the necessity of uniting
reverence to such a government and obedience to its laws, with the duties and
exercise of religion. Thus we hope, by the blessing of God, to be in some
measure instrumental of alleviating the burden of that weighty and important
charge, to which you have been called by the unanimous voice of your
fellow-citizens, and which your love to your country has constrained you to
take upon you.

Deeply possessed of a sense of the goodness of God in the appointment of your
person to the high station in the national government, we shall continue, in
our public worship and all our devotions before the throne of grace, to pray
that it may please God to bless you in your person, your family, and your
government, with all temporal and spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus.

Signed by order of the meeting, W. HENDEL, p. t. Praeses. F. DELLIKER, p. t.
Scriba.


The Answer. To the MINISTERS and ELDERS of the GERMAN REFORMED CONGREGATIONS
in the UNITED STATES.
GENTLEMEN,
I AM happy in concurring with you in the sentiments of gratitude and piety
toward Almighty God, which are expressed with such fervency of devotion in
your address; and in believing that I shall always find in you and the German
Reformed Congregations in the United States, a conduct correspondent to such
worthy and pious expressions.

At the same time I return you my thanks for the manifestation of your firm
purpose to support in your persons a government founded in justice and equity;
and for the promise that it will be your constant study to impress the minds of
the people entrusted to your care with a due sense of the necessity of uniting
reverence to such a government, and obedience to its laws, with the duties and
exercises of religion. Be assured, Gentlemen, it is by such conduct, very much
in the power of the virtuous members of the community to alleviate the burden
of the important office which I have accepted, and to give me occasion to
rejoice in this world, for having followed therein the dictates of my
conscience.

Be pleased also to accept my acknowledgments for the interest you so kindly
take in the prosperity of my person, family, and administration. May your
devotions before the throne of grace be prevalent in calling down the blessings
of Heaven upon yourselves and your country.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the MINISTERS, CHURCH WARDENS and VESTRYMEN of the GERMAN LUTHERAN
CONGREGATION, in and near the City of PHILADELPHIA, to the PRESIDENT of the
UNITED STATES.
SIR,
IT is with inexpressible satisfaction, that we, the Ministers, Church Wardens,
and Vestrymen of the German Lutheran Congregation, in and near the city of
Philadelphia, address your Excellency on the present great occasion. The entire
esteem, the exalted consideration with which we view your character,
delightfully combine with the duty we owe to this our country, and the love we
bear to every fellow-citizen throughout these States, in exciting us to
announce the joy we entertain on your appointment to the station of President
in Chief.

The affairs of America, in which your Excellency bore so illustrious a part
from the very beginning of a most arduous contest -- all along exhibited more
than the symptoms of a great and general prosperity to be at length completed.
The most clouded portions of our time were not without some rays of hope; and
numerous occurrences, through the blessings of Divine Providence, were
brilliant and eminently fortunate. The present happy crisis sheds a luster on
the past events of our Union, and it seems to be the presage of every thing
desirable to come. Pleasingly do we anticipate the blessings of a wise,
efficient government -- equal freedom -- perfect safety -- a sweet contentment
spreading through the whole land -- irreproachable manners with pure religion,
and that righteousness which exalts a nation. Though as individuals we can be
but very little known to you, yet as representat^ves, in some respect, of a
numerous people in this city* and being so situated as to know well the minds
of our German brethren nearly through this State, we can with some propriety
come forward in this manner. It is therefore with assurance and pleasure we
affirm, that there is no body of people whatsoever, that can or ever shall
exceed those with whom we are connected, in affection for your person, and
confidence in your abilities, patriotism and distinguished goodness. You are
the MAN of their bosoms and veneration. On this ground may we be entitled to
some excuse for what might seem to be an intrusion in the midst of your
numerous weighty engagements. And here permit us to subjoin, that we shall
never cease to address the throne of grace, with the same warmth and sincerity
of heart for your present and everlasting happiness, as for our own.

The Answer. To the MINISTERS, CHURCH WARDENS and VESTRYMEN of the GERMAN
LUTHERAN CONGREGATION, in and near the City of PHILADELPHIA.
GENTLEMEN,
WHILE I request you to accept my thanks for your kind address, I must profess
myself highly gratified by the sentiments of esteem and consideration contained
in it. The approbation my past conduct has received from so worthy a body of
citizens as that whose joy for my appointment you announce, is a proof of the
indulgence with which my future transactions will be judged by them.

I could not, however, avoid apprehending, that the partiality of my countrymen
in favor of the measures now pursued, had led them to expect too much from the
present government; did not the same Providence which has been visible in every
stage of our progress to this interesting crisis, from a combination of
circumstances, give us cause to hope for the accomplishment of all our
reasonable desires.

Thus partaking with you in the pleasing anticipation of the blessings of a
wise and efficient government, I flatter myself that opportunities will not be
wanting for me to show my disposition to encourage the domestic and public
virtues of industry, economy, patriotism, philanthropy, and that righteousness
which exalts a nation.

I rejoice in having so suitable an occasion to testify the reciprocity of my
esteem for the numerous people whom you represent. From the excellent character
for diligence, sobriety and virtue, which the Germans in general, who are
settled in America, have ever maintained; I cannot forbear felicitating myself
on receiving from so respectable a number of them such strong assurances of
their affection for my person, confidence in my integrity, and zeal to support
me in my endeavors for promoting the welfare of our common country.

So long as my conduct shall merit the approbation of the wise and the good, I
hope to hold the same place in your affections, which your friendly
declarations induce me to believe I possess at present; and amidst all the
vicissitudes that may await me in this mutable existence, I shall earnestly
desire the continuation of an interest in your intercession at the throne of
grace.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the DELAWARE SOCIETY for PROMOTING DOMESTIC MANUFACTURES, to GEORGE
WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT GENERAL of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
WE, the members of the Delaware Society for promoting domestic manufactures,
beg leave to present your Excellency with our warmest congratulations on your
appointment to the presidency of the United States.

Deeply penetrated with the most indelible sentiments of gratitude for your
former inestimable services, we participate the lively effusions of joy so
universally communicated by your consenting to accept the high trust to which
you have been so honorably elected.

We are sensible that the establishment of a general government, in which
freedom and energy are so happily blended, is an object of the highest
consequence, and will require the restoration of that confidence in the
administration of public affairs, which the general opinion of your
disinterested virtue, moderation, and other eminent qualities alone can inspire.

As your Excellency has been pleased to relinquish the enjoyment of a dignified
retirement, and in compliance with the ardent solicitations of a numerous and
grateful people, once more to afford us the benefit of your sage direction and
illustrious example, we contemplate with peculiar satisfaction the credit and
renown our new government will acquire, even in distant nations, by its
commencement under the glorious auspices of your distinguished abilities and
celebrated name.

We are conscious of our unspeakable obligation to Providence for the
preservation of your invaluable life to a period so important; and our most
fervent wishes will be unceasing that your Excellency may long preside in the
councils of America, with uninterrupted harmony, and the superior delight of
promoting the happiness and prosperity of a rising empire.

Being fully convinced of your Excellency's indulgent attention to whatever is
designed to be of public utility, we flatter ourselves, the Society who have
the honor to present this Address, having associated under an engagement to
clothe themselves in complete suits of domestic manufactures, and encourage
every branch of the same in America, will meet your Excellency's approbation,
and be favorably considered as an additional instance of the federal and
patriotic sentiments of the citizens of Delaware.

In behalf of the Society, THOMAS MAY, Vice President.

The Answer. To the DELAWARE SOCIETY, for PROMOTING DOMESTIC MANUFACTURES.
GENTLEMEN,
I RETURN you my sincere thanks for your congratulations and good wishes on my
appointment to the Presidency of the United States.

Convinced that the happy effects which may be derived from our government,
must depend, in a considerable degree, on the determination of the people to
support the person entrusted with the administration, I shall rejoice to find
that my acceptance has met with their approbation.

The promotion of domestic manufactures, will, in my conception, be among the
first consequences which may naturally be expected to result from an energetic
government. For myself, having equal regard for the prosperity of the farming,
trading, and manufacturing interests, I will only observe, that I cannot
conceive the extension of the latter (so far as it may afford employment to a
great number of hands which would be otherwise idle) can be detrimental to the
former. On the contrary, the concurrence of virtuous individuals, and the
combination of economical societies to rely as much as possible on the
resources of our own country, may be productive of great national advantages,
by establishing the habits of industry and economy. The objects, therefore, of
your institution are, in my opinion, highly commendable; and you will permit me
to add, Gentlemen, that I propose to demonstrate the sincerity of my opinion,
on this subject, by the uniformity of my practice, in giving a decided
preference to the produce and fabrics of America, whenever it may be done
without involving unreasonable expenses, or very great inconveniences.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the MAYOR, ALDERMEN and COMMONALTY of the City of NEW YORK to the
PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
THE Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the City of New York, beg leave to offer
you our most respectful and affectionate congratulations on your safe arrival
in this metropolis, and at the same time to express the general joy of our
fellow-citizens, of every order, on this auspicious event.

In thus presenting ourselves before you, we experience all the emotions which
naturally arise from a high veneration for your character -- an exalted sense
of your services -- and a perfect conviction that a trust, the most momentous
which could be conferred by a free people, has been committed to a citizen, who
has given unequivocal proofs of his possessing all the good and great
qualities, requisite to its successful discharge.

With peculiar pleasure, Sir, we recall to mind that illustrious display of
wisdom, virtue and valor, which distinguished your military command. With equal
pleasure we recollect the exemplary moderation which marked your retreat from
the head of a victorious army to the shade of private life. Permit us to add
that we contemplate with pious gratitude that unparalleled coincidence of
circumstances which has constrained you, by motives that patriotism could not
resist, to re-engage in the arduous duties of a public station.

Long in the habit of revering you as the Father of our country, we rejoice at
the happiness of being once more placed under your protection; we consider the
unanimity which prevailed in your appointment, as a presage that our national
government will be firmly established in the hearts of all the people, and
receive their united and zealous support; and we are fully persuaded that under
the Divine favor, its operation will be productive of the most extensive
benefits and blessings, and render the Union respectable in peace, as, under
your auspices, it was triumphant in war.

To our most servent wishes for your personal happiness, and for the success of
your administration, we should not do justice to the sentiments of our
fellow-citizens, if we did not add the strongest assurances of their inviolable
attachment to you, and of their earnest disposition to render you all the
support which can flow from the most cordial respect, gratitude and confidence.

Signed in behalf of the Corporation. JAMES DUANE, Mayor.
May 9, 1789.
The Answer. To the MAYOR, ALDERMEN and COMMONALTY of the City of NEW YORK.
GENTLEMEN,
THE affectionate Address presented by the Magistrates, and the general joy
testified by the citizens of New York, on my arrival in this metropolis, have
filled my mind with the mingled emotions of gratitude and satisfaction.

In accepting the momentous trust, which has been spontaneously committed to me
by a free people, it was not enough to have felt a consciousness of having
acted in conformity to the dictates of patriotism; it was not enough to have
known that I met the wishes of my fellow-citizens; but it seemed that these
farther pledges were wanting to overcome the diffidence I had in my own
abilities, and the reluctance I experienced at engaging in such new and arduous
affairs.

Unelated by your too favorable appreciation of my past services, I can only
pour forth the effusions of a grateful heart to Heaven, if I have been made in
any degree an instrument of good to my country. And, although I am far from
claiming any merit for retiring in the manner I did, from a military command,
to the shade of private life; yet I am pleased to find that your candor has
done justice to the principles by which I have been actuated on the present
occasion: No circumstance, in my conception, can be more consolatory to a
public man, especially to one truly sensible that the purest intentions cannot
always preserve him from error, than a knowledge that his countrymen are
disposed to consider the motives for his conduct with that liberality, which is
reciprocally necessary for all who are subject to the frailties of human nature.

In this place I cannot avoid expressing an anxious apprehension, that the
partiality of my countrymen in my favor has induced them to expect too much
from the exertions of an individual. It is from their cooperation alone, I
derive all my expectations of success. Indeed, the unanimity which has
prevailed in some instances, is a happy presage that our national government
will be firmly established in the hearts of the people, and receive their
united and zealous s^pport. From the accommodating spirit which has been
displayed in respect to the constitution, I anticipate that the government
will, in its operation, be productive of the most extensive utility, by
rendering the Union as respectable in peace as it was triumphant in war.

I feel a just sense of your servent wishes for my personal happiness and the
success of my administration. I pray you, Gentlemen, to accept in return, my
cordial thanks for these demonstrations of your affection, as well as for the
assurances you have given of the attachment of our fellow-citizens.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH to the PRESIDENT of
the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
THE General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, in the United States of
America, embrace the earliest opportunity in their power, to testify the lively
and unseigned pleasure which they, with the rest of their fellow-citizens, feel
on your appointment to the first office in the nation.

We adore Almighty God, the author of every perfect gift, who has endued you
with such a rare and happy assemblage of talents, as has rendered you equally
necessary to your country in war and in peace.

Your military achievements ensured safety and glory to America, in the late
arduous conflict for freedom; while your disinterested conduct, and uniformly
just discernment of the public interest, gained you the entire confidence of
the people. And in the present interesting period of public affairs, the
influence of your personal character moderates the divisions of political
parties, and promises a permanent establishment of the civil government.

From a retirement more glorious to you than thrones and sceptres, you have
been called to your present elevated station, by the voice of a great and free
people; and with an unanimity of suffrage that has few if any examples in
history. A man more ambitious of fame, or less devoted to his country, would
have refused an office in which his honors could not be augmented, and where
they might possibly be subject to a reverse.

We are happy that God has inclined your heart to give yourself once more to
the public. And we derive a favorable presage of the event from the zeal of
all classes of the people, and their confidence in your virtues; as well as
from the knowledge and dignity with which the federal councils are filled. But
we derive a presage even more flattering from the piety of your character.
Public virtue is the most certain mean of public felicity, and religion is the
surest basis of virtue. We therefore esteem it a peculiar happiness to behold
in our Chief Magistrate a steady, uniform, avowed friend of the Christian
religion; who has commenced his administration in rational and exalted
sentiments of piety, and who, in his private conduct, adorns the doctrines of
the gospel of Christ; and on the most public and solemn occasions devoutly
acknowledges the government of Divine Providence.

The example of distinguished characters will ever possess a powerful and
extensive influence on the public mind; and when we see, in such a conspicuous
station, the amiable example of piety to God, of benevolence to men, and of a
pure and virtuous patriotism, we naturally hope that it will diffuse its
influence, and that eventually the most happy consequences will result from it.
To the force of imitation we will endeavor to add the wholesome instructions
of religion. We shall consider ourselves as doing an acceptable service to God
in our profession, when we contribute to render men sober, honest, and
industrious citizens, and the obedient subjects of a lawful government. In
these pious labors, we hope to imitate the most worthy of our brethren of
other Christian denominations, and to be imitated by them; assured, that if we
can, by mutual and generous emulation, promote truth and virtue, we shall
render essential service to the Republic; we shall receive encouragement from
every wise and good citizen, and above all, meet the approbation of our Divine
Master.

We pray Almighty God to have you always in his holy keeping. May he prolong
your valuable life, an ornament and a blessing to your country; and at last
bestow on you the glorious reward of a faithful servant.

Signed by order of the General Assembly. JOHN RODGERS, Moderator.
Philadelphia, May 26, 1789.
The Answer. To the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH in the UNITED
STATES of AMERICA.
GENTLEMEN,
I RECEIVE, with great sensibility, the testimonial given by the General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America, of the
lively and unfeigned pleasure experienced by them, on my appointment to the
first office in the nation.

Although it will be my endeavor to avoid being elated, by the too favorable
opinion which your kindness for me may have induced you to express of the
importance of my former conduct, and the effect of my future services: yet,
conscious of the disinterestedness of my motives, it is not necessary for me to
conceal the satisfaction I have felt upon finding that my compliance with the
call of my country, and my dependence on the assistance of Heaven to support me
in my arduous undertakings, have, so far as I can learn, met the universal
approbation of my countrymen.

While I reiterate the professions of my dependence upon Heaven as the source
of all public and private blessings; I will observe that the general prevalence
of piety, philanthropy, honesty, industry and economy seems, in the ordinary
course of human affairs, particularly necessary for advancing and confirming
the happiness of our country. While all men within our territories are
protected in worshipping the Deity according to the dictates of their
consciences; it is rationally to be expected from them in return, that they
will all be emulous of evincing the sincerity of their professions, by the
innocence of their lives and the beneficence of their actions. For no man who
is profligate in his morals, or a bad member of the civil community, can
possibly be a true Christian or a credit to his own religious society.

I desire you to accept my acknowledgments for your laudable endeavors to
render men sober, honest and good citizens, and the obedient subjects of a
lawful government; as well as for your prayers to Almighty God for his blessing
on our common country, and the humble instrument which he has been pleased to
make use of in the administration of its government.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the BISHOPS of the METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH to the PRESIDENT of
the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
WE, the Bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church, humbly beg leave, in the
name of our Society collectively, in these United States, to express to you the
warm feelings of our hearts, and our sincere congratulations on your
appointment to the Presidentship of these States. We are conscious, from the
signal proofs you have already given, that you are a friend of mankind; and,
under this established idea, place as full a confidence in your wisdom and
integrity, for the preservation of those civil and religious liberties which
have been transmitted to us by the providence of God and the glorious
Revolution, as we believe ought to be reposed in man.

We have received the most grateful satisfaction from the humble and entire
dependence on the great Governor of the Universe, which you have repeatedly
expressed, acknowledging him the source of every blessing, and particularly of
the most excellent Constitution of these States, which is at present the
admiration of the world, and may in future become its great exemplar for
imitation. And hence we enjoy a holy expectation, that you will always prove a
faithful and impartial patron of genuine, vital religion -- the grand end of
our creation and present probationary existence. And we promise you our fervent
prayers to the throne of grace, that God Almighty may endue you with all the
graces and gifts of his Holy Spirit that may enable you to fill up your
important station to his glory, the good of his church, the happiness and
prosperity of the United States, and the welfare of mankind.

Signed in behalf of the Methodist Episcopal Church. THOMAS COKE, FRANCIS
ASBURY.

New York, May 29, 1789.
The Answer. To the BISHOPS of the METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH in the UNITED
STATES of AMERICA.
GENTLEMEN,
I RETURN to you individually, and (through you) to your Society collectively,
in the United States, my thanks, for the demonstration of affection, and the
expressions of joy, offered in their behalf, o^ my late appointment. It shall
still be my endeavor to manifest the purity of my inclinations, for promoting
the happiness of mankind; as well as the sincerity of my desires to contribute
whatever may be in my power toward the preservation of the civil and religious
liberties of the American people. In pursuing this line of conduct, I hope, by
the assistance of Divine Providence, not altogether to disappoint the
confidence which you have been pleased to repose in me.

It always affords me satisfaction, when I find a concurrence in sentiment and
practice between all conscientious men, in acknowledgments of homage to the
great Governor of the Universe, and in professions of support to a just civil
government. After mentioning that, I trust the people of every denomination,
who demean themselves as good citizens, will have occasion to be convinced,
that I shall always strive to prove a faithful and impartial patron of genuine,
vital religion; I must assure you in particular, that I take in the kindest
part the promise you make of presenting your prayers at the throne of grace for
me, and that I likewise implore the divine benedictions on yourselves and your
religious community.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address To the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
WE, the Corporation of Visitors and Governors, and the Principal and Faculty
of Professors of Washington College, in the State of Maryland, actuated by the
sincerest personal affection, as well as the purest public considerations, beg
leave to embrace the present occasion of our Anniversary Meeting and
Commencement, to felicitate ourselves and our country, upon your unanimous
appointment to the Chief Magistracy in the general government of the United
States.

Revolving upon the vicissitudes and eventful history of the late war, every
page of which bears ample and honorable testimony to the services which you
have rendered to your country, and the exertion of those virtues and talents
which have exalted your name to the first rank among the Heroes and Benefactors
of mankind; we cannot but recall to mind the occasion of our former Address to
you, and your benevolent Answer to the same.

The General Assembly of Maryland, upon the establishment of this Seminary,
having dignified the same with the auspicious name of "Washington College, in
honorable and perpetual memory of the services of the illustrious and virtuous
Commander in Chief of the armies of the United States;" we expressed our
confidence -- "that, amidst all the public monuments which your country fought
to erect to you even while living, none would be more acceptable than a
Seminary of universal learning, expressly dedicated to your name, with a view
to instruct and animate the youth of many future generations, to admire and to
imitate those public virtues and patriot labors which had created for you a
monument in the heart of every good citizen; that we hope you would permit your
name to be placed at the head of the Visitors and Governors of the college,
trusting that the time was then not very remote, when, by the termination of
war, the infant institution might be enabled to salute you in person, and, like
a dutiful child, as one of its first works, present the olive wreath and other
emblems of peace, to its Father, Guardian and Friend."

Highly encouraging to us was your answer -- "That, with pleasure, you would
consent to have your name enrolled among the Visitors and Governors of the
college, if it were not to the exclusion of some other, whose proximity and
other circumstances might enable him to be a more useful member; and that as
the act of the General Assembly, which had given your name to the college,
would remain a monument of their esteem, it made an impression on your mind
which could only be exceeded by the flattering assurance of the lasting and
extensive usefulness of the seminary; and when that period should arrive when
we could hail the blessed return of Peace, it would add to your pleasure to see
the infant seat of learning rising into consistency and proficiency in the
sciences, under the nurturing hands of its founders."

The happy period is now arrived when, through the blessing of God, upon the
return of peace, this seat of learning has attained to such proficiency in the
sciences, as to wait upon you with the promised wreath of literary honor, The
wreath of literary honor referred to in the above address, and the answer to
the same, is the academical degree of Doctor of Laws; and as we have been
favored with a copy of the preamble to the diploma, we are happy to lay it
before our readers, as the first specimen we have seen of the present title and
past services of our illustrious and beloved President, attempted in truly
classical latin.

"Cum eum in sinem Gradus Academici a Majoribus nostris prudenter instituti
fuerint, ut V^ris qui de Religione, Republica et Literis optime sint meriti
publici honores decernerentur; Cumque Nobis et Omnibus praeclare compertum sit,
GEORGIUM WASHINGTON faederatatum Americae Civitatum Praesidem, non solum de
Religione, Literis, Republica, et toto etiam humano genere been semper et
multum meruisse; sed, Bello aeque ac Pace, communis omnium salutis
appetenussimum, per gravissima Rerum Discrimina, s^se Civem praestantissimum,
Libertatis ulterum felicissimum, Patriaeque Patrem a mentissimum, ostendisse;
nos igitur, etc."


which we trust you will not reject, although from an institution of inferior
standing, yet not of inferior gratitude and affection, to the chief of those
which have already dignified themselves by presenting you with the like honors.

Bearing an ardent and unfeigned part in the admiration and applause of those
virtuous and magnanimous sentiments, which in obedience to the voice of your
country have led you forth once more from the enjoyment of domestic happiness
to a laborious and conspicuous participation of the cares of public life, at a
most interesting crisis of our affairs; we fervently pray that the glory and
felicity of our country -- the true consummation of the patriot's labors, may
be your crown in this world, and assure you an everlasting crown in the world
to come!

Signed by order, WILLIAM SMITH, D. D. President of the Corporation, and
Principal of the Faculty.
June 24, 1789.
The Answer. To the CORPORATION of VISITORS and GOVERNORS, and the PRINCIPAL
and FACULTY of PROFESSORS of WASHINGTON COLLEGE, in the State of MARYLAND.
GENTLEMEN,
YOUR very affectionate Address, and the honorary testimony of your regard
which accompanied it, call forth my grateful acknowledgments.

A recollection of past events, and the happy termination of our glorious
struggle for the establishment of the rights of man, cannot fall to inspire
every feeling heart with veneration and gratitude toward the great RULER of
events, who has so manifestly interposed in our behalf.

Among the numerous blessings which are attendant upon Peace, and as one whose
consequences are of the most important and extensive kind, may be reckoned the
prosperity of Colleges and Seminaries of Learning.

As, in civilized societies, the welfare of the State and happiness of the
people are advanced or retarded, in proportion as the morals and education of
the youth are attended to; I cannot forbear, on this occasion, to express the
satisfaction which I feel on seeing the increase of our seminaries of learning
through this extensive country, and the general wish which seems to prevail for
establishing and maintaining these valuable institutions.

It affords me peculiar pleasure to know that the seat of learning under your
direction has attained to such proficiency in the sciences since the peace;
and I sincerely pray that the great Author of the Universe may smile upon the
institution, and make it an extensive blessing to this country.

G. WASHINGTON.
New York, July 11, 1789.
Address Of the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL of the STATE of NORTH CAROLINA, to GEORGE
WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
AMIDST the congratulations which surround you from all quarters, we, the
Governor and Council of the State of North Carolina, beg leave to offer ours,
with equal sincerity and fervency with any which can be presented to you.
Though this State be not yet a member of the Union under the new form of
government, we look forward with the pleasing hope of its shortly becoming
such; and in the mean time consider ourselves bound in a common interest and
affection with the other States, waiting only for the happy event of such
alterations being proposed as will remove the apprehensions of many of the good
citizens of this State, for those liberties for which they have fought and
suffered in common with others. This happy event, we doubt not, will be
accelerated by your Excellency's appointment to the first office in the Union,
since we are well assured the same greatness of mind, which in all scenes has
so eminently characterized your Excellency, will induce you to advise every
measure calculated to compose party divisions, and to abate any animosity that
may be excited by a mere difference in opinion. Your Excellency will consider
(however others may forget) how extremely difficult it is to unite all the
people of a great country in one common sentiment upon almost any political
subject, much less upon a new form of government materially different from one
they have been accustomed to, and will therefore rather be disposed to rejoice
that so much has been effected, than regret that more could not all at once be
accomplished. We sincerely believe America is the only country in the world
where such a deliberate change of government could take place under any
circumstances whatever.

We hope your Excellency will pardon the liberty we take in writing so
particularly on this subject; but this State, however it may differ in any
political opinions with the other States, cordially joins with them in
sentiments of the utmost gratitude and veneration for those distinguished
talents and that illustrious virtue, which we feel a pride in saying we
believe, under God, have been the principal means of preserving the liberty and
procuring the independence of our country. We cannot help considering you, Sir,
in some measure, as the father of it, and hope to experience the good effects
of that confidence you so justly have acquired, in an abatement of the party
spirit which so much endangers a union on which the safety and happiness of
America can alone be founded. May that union, at a short distance of time, be
as perfect and more safe than ever! And in the mean while, may the State of
North Carolina be considered, as it truly deserves to be, attached with equal
warmth with any State in the Union, to the true interest, prosperity and glory
of America, differing only in some particulars in opinion as to the means of
promoting them.

SAMUEL JOHNSON.
By order and on behalf of the Council, JAMES IREDELL, PRESIDENT.
By order, WILLIAM JOHNSTON DAWSON, Clerk Council.
May 10, 1789.
The Answer. To the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL of the State of NORTH CAROLINA.
GENTLEMEN,
IT was scarcely possible for any Address to have given me greater pleasure
than that which I have just received from you; because I consider it not only
demonstrative of your approbation of my conduct in accepting the first office
in the Union, but also indicative of the good dispositions of the citizens of
your State toward their sister States, and of the probability of their
speedily acceding to the new General Government.

In justification of the opinion which you are pleased to express of my
readiness to advise every "measure calculated to compose party divisions, and
to abate any animosity that may be excited by mere difference of opinion," I
take the liberty of referring you to the sentiments communicated by me, to the
two Houses of Congress. On this occasion, I am likewise happy in being able to
add the strongest assurances, that I entertain a well-grounded expectation that
nothing will be wanting on the part of the different branches of the General
Government to render the union as perfect and more safe than ever it has been.

A difference of opinion on political points is not to be imputed to freemen as
a fault; since it is to be presumed that they are all actuated by an equally
laudable and sacred regard for the liberties of their country. If the mind is
so formed in different persons as to consider the same object to be somewhat
different in its nature and consequences, as it happens to be placed in
different points of view; and if the oldest, the ablest, and the most virtuous
statesmen have often differed in judgment as to the best forms of government,
-- we ought, indeed, rather to rejoice that so much has been effected, than to
regret that more could not all at once be accomplished.

Gratified by the favorable sentiments which are evinced in your Address to
me, and impressed with an idea that the citizens of your State are sincerely
attached to the interest, the prosperity, and the glory of America, I most
earnestly implore the divine benediction and guidance in the councils which are
shortly to be taken by their delegates on a subject of the most momentous
consequence; I mean the political relation which is to subsist hereafter,
between the State of North Carolina, and the States now in union under the new
General Government.

G. WASHINGTON.
New York, June 19, 1789.
Address To the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
WE, the Bishops, the Clergy, and Laity of the Protestant Episcopal Church in
the States of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
and South Carolina, in General Convention assembled, beg leave, with the
highest veneration and the most animated national considerations, at the
earliest moment in our power, to express our cordial joy on your election to
the Chief Magistracy of the United States.

When we contemplate the short but eventful history of our nation -- when we
recollect the series of essential services performed by you in the course of
the revolution, the temperate, yet efficient exertion of the mighty powers with
which the nature of the contest made it necessary to invest you -- and
especially when we remember the voluntary and magnanimous relinquishment of
those high authorities at the moment of peace -- we anticipate the happiness of
our country under your future administration.

But it was not alone from a successful and virtuous use of those extraordinary
powers that you were called from your honorable retirement, to the first
dignities, of out government. An affectionate admiration of your private
character, the impartiality, the persevering fortitude, and the energy with
which your public duties have been invariably performed, and the paternal
solicitude for the happiness of the American people, together with the wisdom
and consummate knowledge of our affairs, manifested in your last military
communication, have directed to your name the universal wish, and have
produced, for the first time in the history of mankind, an example of unanimous
consent in the appointment of the governor of a free and enlightened nation.

To these considerations, inspiring us with the most pleasing expectations, as
private citizens, permit us to add, that as the representatives of a numerous
and extended church, we most thankfully rejoice in the election of a civil
ruler deservedly beloved, and eminently distinguished among the friends of
genuine religion, who has happily united a tender regard for other churches
with an inviolable attachment to his own.

With unfeigned satisfaction we congratulate you on the establishment of the
new Constitution of government for the United States, the mild, yet efficient
operations of which, we confidently trust, will remove every remaining
apprehension of those, with whose opinions it may not entirely coincide, and
will confirm the hopes of its numerous friends. Nor do these expectations
appear too sanguine, when the moderation, patriotism, and wisdom of the
honorable members of the federal legislature are duly considered.

From a body thus eminently qualified, harmoniously cooperating with the
executive authority in constitutional concert, we confidently hope for the
restoration of order and our ancient virtues; the extension of genuine
religion, and the consequent advancement of our respectability abroad, and of
our substantial happiness at home.

We devoutly implore the Supreme Ruler of the Universe to preserve you long in
health and prosperity an animating example of all public and private virtues --
the friend and guardian of a free, enlightened, and grateful people; and that
you may finally receive the reward which will be given to those, whose lives
have been spent in promoting the happiness of mankind.

WILLIAM WHITE, Bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, and President of the Convention.
SAMUEL PROVOST, D. D. Bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church, in the State
of New York, though prevented, by indisposition, from attending the late
General Convention, he concurs sincerely in this particular act, and subscribes
the present Address with the greatest satisfaction.
NEW YORK. BENJAMIN MOORE, D. D. Assistant Minister of Trinity Church in the
city of New York.
ABRAHAM BEACH, D. D. Assistant Minister of Trinity Church in the city of New
York.
MOSES ROGERS.
NEW JERSEY. WILLIAM FRAZIER, Rector of St. Michael's Church, Trenton, and St.
Andrew's Church, Amwell.
UZAL OGDEN, Rector of Trinity Church, in Newark.
HENRY WADDELL, Rector of the Churches of Shrewsbury and Middleton, New Jersey.
GEORGE H. SPIEREN, Rector of St. Peter's Church, Perth Amboy, New Jersey.
JOHN COX.
SAMUEL OGDEN.
R. STRETTELL JONES.
PENNSYLVANIA. SAMUEL MAGAW, D. D. Rector of St. Paul's, and Vice Provost of
the University of Pennsylvania.
ROBERT BLACKWELL, D. D. Senior Assistant Minister of Christ Church, and St.
Peter's, Philadelphia.
JOSEPH PILMORE, Rector of the United Churches of Trinity, St. Thomas, and All
Saints.
JOSEPH G. T. BEND, Assistant Minister of Christ Church, and St. Peter's,
Philadelphia.
FRANCIS HOPKINSON.
GERARDUS CLARKSON.
TENCH COXE.
SAMUEL POWELL.
DELAWARE. SAMUEL COUDON, Rector of St. Ann's.
STEPHEN SYKES, A. M. Rector of the United Churches of St. Peter, and St.
Matthew, in Sussex county.
JAMES SYKES.
MARYLAND. WILLIAM SMITH, D. D. now Provost of the College and Academy of
Philadelphia; but appointed Clerical Deputy for Maryland, as Rector of Chester
Parish, in Kent county.
THOMAS JOHN CLAGGET, Rector of St. Paul's, Prince George county.
COLIN FERGUSON, D. D. Rector of St. Paul's.
JOHN BISSET, A. M. Rector of Shrewsbury Parish, Kent county.
WILLIAM FRISBY.
RICHARD B. CARMICHAEL.
VIRGINIA. ROBERT ANDREWS.
SOUTH CAROLINA. BOBERT SMITH, Rector of St. Philip's Church, Charleston.
W. W. BURROWS.
WILLIAM BRISBANE.

The Answer. To the BISHOPS, CLERGY, and LAITY of the PROTESTANT EPISCOPAL
CHURCH in the States of NEW YORK, NEW JERSEY, PENNSYLVANIA, DELAWARE, MARYLAND,
VIRGINIA, and SOUTH CAROLINA, in General Convention assembled.
GENTLEMEN,
I SINCERELY thank you for your affectionate congratulations, on my election to
the Chief Magistracy of the United States.

After having received from my fellow-citizens in general the most liberal
treatment -- after having found them disposed to contemplate, in the most
flattering point of view, the performance of my military services, and the
manner of my retirement at the close of the war, I feel that I have a right to
console myself, in my present arduous undertakings, with a hope that they will
still be inclined to put the most favorable constructions on the motives which
may influence me in my future public transactions.

The satisfaction arising from the indulgent opinion entertained by the
American people of my conduct, will, I trust, be some security for preventing
me from doing any thing which might justly incur the forfeiture of that
opinion. And the consideration that human happiness and moral duty are
inseparably connected, will always continue to prompt me to promote the
progress of the former, by inculcating the practice of the latter.

On this occasion it will ill become me to conceal the joy I have felt in
perceiving the fraternal affection which appears to increase every day among
the friends of genuine religion. It affords edifying prospects indeed, to see
Christians of different denominations dwell together in more charity, and
conduct themselves in respect to each other with a more Christian-like spirit
than ever they have done in any former age, or in any other nation.

I receive with the greater satisfaction your congratulations on the
establishment of the new Constitution of Government, because I believe its mild
yet efficient operations will tend to remove every remaining apprehension of
those with whose opinions it may not entirely coincide, as well as to confirm
the hopes of its numerous friends: and because the moderation, patriotism, and
wisdom of the present federal legislature, seem to promise the restoration of
order and our ancient virtues; the extension of genuine religion, and the
consequent advancement of our respectability abroad, and of our substantial
happiness at home.

I request, most reverend and respected Gentlemen, that you will accept my
cordial thanks for your devout supplications to the Supreme Ruler of the
Universe in behalf of me. May you, and the people whom you represent, be the
happy subjects of the Divine benedictions both here and hereafter.

G. WASHINGTON.
August 19, 1789.
Address Of the REPRESENTATIVES of the FREEMEN of the Commonwealth of
PENNSYLVANIA, in General Assembly met, to the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
THE Representatives of a free people cannot comply with their duty to their
constituents more to their satisfaction, than by paying a just tribute to the
merits of one, whose important exertions, unexampled perseverance, and
distinguished military talents, have eminently contributed to the establishment
of their liberties. Impressed with the most lively sense of your love for your
country, invariably evidenced in the course of your past services, and of which
you have given a new proof, by sacrificing your predilection for private life
to the desires of your fellow-citizens, and again appearing on the public
stage, we most sincerely congratulate you on your elevation to the high station
you now fill.

The citizens of this State, having been among the first to adopt the system of
federal government on which they so much depend for their portion of the
national prosperity, cannot but be highly gratified by the progress which has
been made toward its complete organization; and they have a pleasing addition
to their satisfaction, by your having been so unanimously placed at the head of
it. We are confident that we declare the sense of the people of Pennsylvania,
when we assure you of the firm and constant support of this State in all
measures, in which its aid shall be necessary, for rendering your
administration easy to yourself, and beneficial to your country.

We deem it a circumstance which strongly marks the good sense and virtue of
our countrymen, that they peaceably and deliberately concurred in a frame of
general government, which, we firmly trust, will, in its operation, dignify our
character, entitle us to respect among the nations, and ensure happiness and
safety to us and our posterity. With hearts expanded beyond the limits of our
own country, we most ardently hope that the influence of this novel but bright
example, may be extended, till freedom, under governments of laws, not of men,
shall bless the oppressed of every climate and country. The old will then be
experimentally taught by the new world, that reason, virtue, union, moderation
and patriotism, can, under the smiles of Heaven, without the sword, accomplish
the happiness of nations by pacific revolutions in their political systems,
whenever they require them.

With the warmest wishes for your personal happiness, we fervently beseech the
great Author and Supporter of our existence, that he will, by granting you a
continuance of health, long preserve a life so dear to your country, and
exemplary to mankind.

The Answer. To the REPRESENTATIVES of the FREEMEN of the Commonwealth of
PENNSYLVANIA, in General Assembly met.
GENTLEMEN,
WHEN the Representatives of a free people, delivering the sense of their
constituents, give such marks of affectionate attachment to an individual as
are contained in your Address to me, it must call forth the warmest
acknowledgment of a grateful heart. Under this impression, I beg you to believe
that your favorable opinion of my past conduct, and kind congratulations on my
elevation to the high station which I now fill, are indelibly marked on my mind.

The early and decided part which the citizens of Pennsylvania took in behalf
of the present system of government, cannot be forgotten by the people of these
United States; and, in acknowledging the grateful sense which I have of your
assurances of the firm and constant support of your State, in all measures in
which its aid shall be necessary, for rendering my administration easy to
myself and beneficial to our country, I trust that I meet the concurrence of
all good citizens.

The virtue, moderation and patriotism which have marked the steps of the
American people, in framing, adopting, and thus far carrying into effect our
present system of government, has excited the admiration of nations; and it now
only remains for us to act up to those principles which should characterize a
free and enlightened people, that we may gain respect abroad, and ensure
happiness to ourselves and to our posterity. It should be the highest ambition
of every American to extend his views beyond himself, and to bear in mind that
his conduct will not only affect himself, his country, and his immediate
posterity; but that its influence and effect, may be coextensive with the
world, and stamp political happiness or misery on ages yet unborn. To obtain
this desirable end, and to establish the government of laws, the union of these
States is absolutely necessary; therefore, in every proceeding, this great,
this important object should ever be kept in view; so long as our measures tend
to this, and are marked with the wisdom of a well-informed, enlightened people,
we may reasonably hope, under the smiles of Heaven, to convince the world, that
the happiness of nations can be accomplished by pacific revolutions in their
political systems, without the destructive intervention of the sword.

Your wishes for my personal happiness, and fervent prayers for the
preservation of my existence, have made a grateful impression upon me; and I
shall not fail to implore the Divine Author of the Universe to bestow those
blessings upon you and your constituents that can make a people happy.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the Religious Society of QUAKERS, from their Yearly Meeting for
PENNSYLVANIA, NEW JERSEY, DELAWARE and the Western Parts of MARYLAND and
VIRGINIA, to the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
BEING met in this our annual Assembly, for the well ordering the affairs of
our religious society, and the promotion of universal righteousness, our minds
have been drawn to consider, that the Almighty, who rules in Heaven and in the
kingdoms of men, having permitted a great revolution to take place in the
government of this country; we are fervently concerned that the Rulers of the
people may be favored with the counsel of God, the only sure means of enabling
them to fulfill the important trust committed to their charge; and in an
especial manner, that divine wisdom and grace, vouchsafed from above, may
qualify thee to fill up the duties of the exalted station to which thou art
appointed.

We are sensible thou have obtained great place in the esteem and affections of
people of all denominations over whom thou presidest; and many eminent talents
being committed to thy trust, we much desire they may be fully devoted to the
Lord's honor and service -- that thus thou may be an happy instrument in
his hand, for the suppression of vice, infidelity and irreligion, and every
species of oppression on the persons or consciences of men, so that
righteousness and peace which truly exalts a nation, may prevail throughout
the land, as the only solid foundation that can be laid for the prosperity and
happiness of this or any country.

The free toleration which the citizens of these States enjoy in the public
worship of the Almighty, agreeable to the dictates of their consciences, we
esteem among the choicest of blessings; and as we desire to be filled with
fervent charity for those who differ from us in matters of faith and practice,
believing that the general assembly of Saints is composed of the sincere and
upright hearted of all nations, kingdoms and people -- so, we trust, we may
justly claim it from others; and in a full persuasion that the divine principle
we profess, leads unto harmony and concord, we can take no part in carrying on
war on any occasion, or under any power, but are bound in conscience to lead
quiet and peaceable lives, in godliness and honesty, amongst men, contributing
freely our proportion to the indigencies of the poor, and to the necessary
support of civil government, acknowledging those that rule well to be worthy of
double honor; and if any professing with us, are or have been of a contrary
disposition or conduct, we own them not therein, having never been chargeable,
from our first establishment as a religious society, with fomenting or
countenancing tumults or conspiracies, or disrespect to those who are placed in
authority over us.

We wish not improperly to intrude on thy time or patience, nor is it our
practice to offer adulation to any; but as we are a people whose principles and
conduct have been misrepresented and traduced, we take the liberty to assure
thee, that we feel our hearts affectionately drawn toward thee and those in
authority over us, with prayers that thy Presidency may, under the blessing of
Heaven, be happy to thyself and to the people; that through the increase of
morality and true religion, divine Providence may condescend to look down upon
our land with a propitious eye, and bless the inhabitants with the continuance
of peace, the dew of Heaven, and the fatness of the earth; and enable us
gratefully to acknowledge his manifold mercies; and it is our earnest concern,
that he may be pleased to grant thee every necessary qualification to fill thy
weighty and important station to his glory, and that finally, when all
terrestrial honors shall fail and pass away, thou and thy respectable consort
may be found worthy to receive a crown of unfading righteousness in the
mansions of peace and joy forever.

Signed in and on behalf of the said meeting, held in Philadelphia by
adjournments from the 28 th of the 9 th month, to the third day of the 10 th
month, inclusive, 1789. RICHARD WALN, Clerk.

The Answer. To the Religious Society of QUAKERS, convened at their Yearly
Meeting for PENNSYLVANIA, NEW JERSEY, DELAWARE, and the Western Parts of
MARYLAND and VIRGINIA.
GENTLEMEN,
I RECEIVE with pleasure your affectionate address, and thank you for the
friendly sentiments and good wishes which you express for the success of my
administration and for my personal happiness.

We have reason to rejoice in the prospect, that the national government which
by the favor of divine Providence was formed by the common councils, and
peaceably established with the common consent of the people, will prove a
blessing to every denomination of them; to render it such my best endeavors
shall not be wanting. Government being among other purposes instituted to
protect the persons and consciences of men from oppression, it certainly is the
duty of rulers not only to abstain from it themselves, but according to their
stations to prevent it in others.

The liberty enjoyed by the people of these States of worshipping Almighty God
agreeably to their consciences, is not only among the choicest of their
blessings, but also of their rights. While men perform their social duties
faithfully, they do all that society or the State can with propriety expect or
demand, and remain responsible only to their Maker for the religion or mode of
faith which they may prefer or profess. Your principles and conduct are well
known to me, and it is doing the people called Quakers no more than justice to
say, that (except their declining to share with others the burdens of the
common defense) there is no denomination among us who are more exemplary and
useful citizens. I assure you very explicitly that in my opinion the
conscientious scruples of all men should be treated with great delicacy and
tenderness; and it is my wish and desire that the laws may always be as
extensively accommodated to them as a due regard to the protection and
essential interests of the nation may justify and permit.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the Society of CINCINNATI in the STATE of RHODE ISLAND, to the
PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
EXPRESSIONS of respect and attachment are a tribute which the citizens of
America owe to your prudence, your patriotism, and valor; to the successful
display of which, they are already indebted for their freedom; and from a
continuance of the exercise of those qualities they may anticipate the highest
state of political happiness. Under these impressions, Sir, we the Society of
the Cincinnati of the State of Rhode Island, most sincerely congratulate you
upon your appointment to the Chief Magistracy of the Union, by the unanimous
suffrage of more than three millions of free citizens; an appointment rendered
the more dignified by the manner in which it was conferred, and the more
pleasing to your fellow-citizens from a conviction that they could no where
place the sacred deposit, for which they have so long and arduously contended,
with equal safety to themselves, and honor to their country. We cannot help
expressing at the same time the strong obligations we feel for the sacrifice of
domestic ease and retirement, to which we are sensible the love of your country
alone could have prompted you. And although we are not admitted to a
participation of the good effects of the government over which you so
deservedly preside, yet we fondly flatter ourselves that the period is not far
distant, when the mistaken zeal which has lately prevailed in this State will
give way to a more enlightened policy. We can only add, Sir, our ardent wishes
for your health and happiness. Long, long may the United States be blessed with
a life to which they are so highly indebted, and may the close of your days be
as peaceful and happy to yourself, as the meridian of them has been useful and
glorious to your country.

ISAAC SENTER, President. ROBERT ROGERS, Secretary.

Rhode Island, September 3, 1789.
The Answer. To the PRESIDENT and MEMBERS of the RHODE ISLAND STATE SOCIETY of
the CINCINNATI.
GENTLEMEN.
IN returning my grateful thanks for the flattering and affectionate sentiments
expressed in your address of the 3d instant, I beg you will do justice to the
sincerity of my regard, which reciprocates, with great pleasure, the warmest
wishes for your happiness, political and personal.

Under a persuasion of the candor and support of my fellow-citizens, I yielded
obedience to the voice of my country; and, impressed with a sense of duty, I
forsook the pleasures of domestic retirement, to promote (if my best exertions
can have such tendency) the object of a dearer interest. Those expectations of
support have been amply fulfilled, and my fondest hope of their candor has
been gratified by a kind and partial country.

I am much pleased, Gentlemen, with the hope which you entertain, that mistaken
zeal will give way to enlightened policy; and I desire to repeat to your
society, assurances of the most affectionate esteem.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, September 14, 1789.
Address Of the MAYOR, ALDERMEN, and COMMON COUNCIL of the City of HARTFORD to
GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
THE Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the city of Hartford, beg leave
most respectfully to congratulate the President of the United States on his
accession to the high office of Chief Magistrate, and with cordial hearts to
welcome his arrival in this city.

We feel ourselves bound by every tie of duty and patriotism to acknowledge, in
common with the people of America, our gratitude for your signal and
disinterested services during the late war, by which the citizens of the United
States have been protected in their claims for liberty and independence; that
you have been pleased to relinquish the pleasures of retirement, to ensure, by
a wise administration, the continuance of those blessings to the people. Also
to profess our sincere attachment to your person, and determination to support
the honor and welfare of your government.

THOMAS SEYMOUR* Mayor.

The Answer. To the MAYOR, ALDERMEN, and COMMON COUNCIL of the City of HARTFORD.
GENTLEMEN,
GRATEFUL for the favorable disposition discovered toward me in your Address,
I receive your congratulations with pleasure, and I thank your goodness with
sincerity.

The indulgent partiality with which my fellow-citizens are pleased to regard
my public services, is the most acceptable compensation they can receive, and
amply reward them.

While industry gives an assurance of plenty, and respect for the laws
maintains the harmony of society, there is every reason to hope for the
individual happiness of our citizens, and the dignity of our government, in
conduct like yours.

G. WASHINGTON.
Hartford, October 21, 1789.
Address Of the FIRST PRESBYTERY of the EASTWARD, to GEORGE WASHINGTON,
PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
"WE, the Ministers and ruling Elders, delegated to represent the churches in
Massachusetts and New Hampshire, which compose the first Presbytery of the
Eastward, now holding a stated session in this town, beg leave to approach your
presence with genuine feelings of the deepest veneration and highest esteem.

"In unison with rejoicing millions, we felicitate our country, and ourselves,
on your unanimous election to the highest office a nation can bestow; and on
your acceptance of the trust, with every evidence which a citizen can give, of
being actuated thereto by the purest principles of patriotism, of piety, and of
self-denial.

"Great was the joy of our hearts to see the late tedious and destructive war
at length terminated, in a fair and honorable peace -- to see the liberty and
independence of our country happily secured -- to see wise constitutions of
civil government peaceably established in the several States -- and especially
to see a confederation of them all, finally agreed on by the general voice.

"But, amid all our joys, we ever contemplated with regret the want of
efficiency in the federal government; we ardently wished for a form of national
union, which should draw the cord of amity more closely around the several
States; which should concentrate their interests, and reduce the freemen of
America to one great body, ruled by one head, and animated by one soul.

"And now we devoutly offer our humble tribute of praise and thanksgiving, to
the all-gracious Father of Lights, who has inspired our public councils with a
wisdom and firmness which have effected that desirable purpose, in so great a
measure, by the national Constitution; and who has fixed the eyes of all
America on you, as the worthiest of their citizens, to be entrusted with the
execution of it.

"Whatever any have supposed wanting in the original plan, we are happy to see
so wisely providing in its amendments: and it is with peculiar satisfaction
that we behold how easily the entire confidence of the people, in the man who
sits at the helm of government, has eradicated every remaining objection to its
form.

"Among these we never considered the want of a religious test, that grand
engine of persecution in every tyrant's hand: but, we should not have been
alone in rejoicing, to have seen some explicit acknowledgment of the only true
God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, inserted, somewhere, in the Magna
Charta of our country.

"Under the nurturing hand of a Ruler of such virtues, and one so deservedly
revered by all ranks, we joyfully indulge the hope, that virtue and religion
will revive and flourish; that infidelity, and the vices ever attendant in its
train, will be banished every polite circle; and that national piety will soon
become fashionable there, and from thence be diffused among all ranks in the
community,"

Newbury Port, Oct. 28, 1739.
The Answer.
GENTLEMEN,
THE affectionate welcome, which you are pleased to give me to the eastern
parts of the Union, would leave me without excuse, did I fail to acknowledge
the sensibility which it awakens, and to express the most sincere return that a
grateful sense of your goodness can suggest.

To be approved by the praiseworthy, is a wish as natural to becoming ambition
as its consequence is flattering to our self love.

I am, indeed, much indebted to the favorable sentiments which you entertain
toward me, and it will be my study to deserve them.

The tribute of thanksgiving, which you offer to the gracious Father of Lights,
for his inspiration of our public councils with wisdom and firmness to complete
the national Constitution, is worthy of men, who, devoted to the pious purposes
of religion, desire their accomplishment by such means as advance the temporal
happiness of their fellow men. And here, I am persuaded, you will permit me to
observe, that the path of true piety is so plain as to require but little
political direction.

To this consideration we ought to ascribe the absence of any regulation
respecting religion from the Magna Charta of our country. To the guidance of
the Ministers of the Gospel, this important object is, perhaps, more properly
committed. It will be your care to instruct the ignorant, and to reclaim the
devious: and in the progress of morality and science, to which our government
will give every furtherance, we may confidently expect the advancement of true
religion, and the completion of our happiness.

I pray the munificent Rewarder of virtue, that your agency in this good work
may receive its compensation here and hereafter.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the SYNOD of the REFORMED DUTCH CHURCH, in NORTH AMERICA, to GEORGE
WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
THE Synod of the Reformed Dutch Church in North America, embrace the occasion
of their annual session, being the first since your appointment, to present you
their sincere congratulation, and to join in that great and general joy
testified by all descriptions of citizens on your acceptance of the highest
office in the nation.

We cannot forbear expressing our gratitude to God for preserving your valuable
life amidst so many dangers till this time; for inspiring you with a large
portion of the martial spirit, and forming you also for the milder and more
agreeable arts of government and peace; for endowing you with great virtues,
and calling them into exercise by great events; for distinguishing you with
honors, and giving you remarkable prudence and moderation; and for making your
extraordinary talents the more conspicuous, useful and durable, by
superinducing the noble ornament of humility. Your country has, with one voice,
attested your excellence by inviting you again to public life, and you have
confirmed its judgment by returning to fresh scenes and toils after you had
retired to the shade from the burden and heat of a long day.

Among the many signal interpositions of Divine Providence, we remark the late
important change in the General Government; a change neither effected by
accident, nor imposed by force; but adopted in the bosom of peace, after a free
and mature deliberation; and in which a people widely extended, and various in
their habits, are united beyond the most raised expectations. In these respects
the United States of America stand single among all the nations of the earth.
Other revolutions may have been more diversified and splendid, but none more
honorable to human nature, and none so likely to produce such happy effects.
This government being now completely organized, and all its departments filled,
we trust that, God will give wisdom to its councils, and justice to its
administration; and that we shall at length realize those blessings which
animated our hopes through a difficult and ruinous war.

To our constant prayers for the welfare of our country, and of the whole human
race, we shall esteem it our duty and happiness, to unite our earnest
endeavors to promote the pure and undefiled religion of Christ; for as this
secures eternal felicity to men in a future state, so we are persuaded that
good Christians will always be good citizens, and that where righteousness
prevails among individuals, the nation will be great and happy. Thus while just
government protects all in their religious rights, true religion affords to
government its surest support.

We implore the Lord God to be your sun and shield, May your administration be
prosperous. May the blessings of millions come upon you, and your name be
grateful to all posterity. Above all, may you finish your course with joy, be
numbered among the redeemed of the Lord, and enter into everlasting rest.

In the Name and by the Order of the Synod, JOHN H. LIVINGSTON, WILLIAM LINN,
GERARDUS A. KUYPERS, PETER LOUW, DIRCK LEFFERTS, ISAAC ROSEVELT, RICHARD
VARICK, HENRY ROOM.

New York, October 9, 1789.
The Answer. To the SYNOD of the REFORMED DUTCH CHURCH in NORTH AMERICA.
GENTLEMEN,
I RECEIVE with a grateful heart your pious and affectionate Address; and with
truth declare to you that no circumstance of my life has affected me more
sensibly, or produced more pleasing emotions than the friendly congratulations
and strong assurances of support which I have received from my fellow-citizens
of all descriptions, upon my election to the Presidency of these United States.

I fear, Gentlemen, your goodness has led you to form too exalted an opinion of
my virtues and merits. If such talents as I possess have been called into
action by great events, and those events have terminated happily for our
country, the glory should be ascribed to the manifest interposition of an
overruling Providence. My military services have been abundantly recompensed
by the flattering approbation of a grateful people; and if a faithful discharge
of my civil duties can ensure a like reward, I shall feel myself richly
compensated for any personal sacrifice I may have made, by engaging again in
public life.

The citizens of the United States of America have given as signal a proof of
their wisdom and virtue in framing and adopting a constitution of government
without bloodshed or the intervention of force, as they, upon a former
occasion, exhibited to the world of their valor, fortitude, and perseverance;
and it must be a pleasing circumstance to every friend of good order and social
happiness, to find that our new government is gaining strength and
respectability among the citizens of this country, in proportion as its
operations are known and its effects felt.

You, Gentlemen, act the part of pious Christians and good citizens, by your
prayers and exertions to preserve that harmony and good will among men, which
must be the basis of every political establishment; and I readily join with
you, that "while just government protects all in their religious rights, true
religion affords to government its surest support."

I am deeply impressed with your good wishes for my present and future
happiness; and I beseech the Almighty to take you under his special care.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the LEGISLATURE, of MASSACHUSETTS to GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT
of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
YOUR acceptance of your present exalted and important station, affords
universal joy to the people of Massachusetts. They have felt the most grateful
veneration for your character, and attachment to your person; and they reflect
with pleasure on the ardour which your presence inspired in the alarming and
novel circumstances of a war within their country, and on their civil security,
so soon restored, by the discipline and success of the army under your command.

The unaninity of the suffrages of these States in your election, is no less a
testimony of your merit, than of the gratitude of this extensive community.
They have declared, by investing you with the powers of their President, their
confidence in you from their experience of your wisdom and virtues, and they
delight to honor you; for your services in their estimation will yet exceed
their rewards.

The union of these States by a form of government intended to secure the
blessings of liberty, is rendered more perfect under you, as their Chief. All
the advantages of that government, of our national independence and civil
liberty, may be rationally expected under your administration. From you, we
shall receive those examples of public and private economy, of prudence,
fortitude and patriotism, of justice, morality and religion, which, by the aid
of Divine Providence, ensure the welfare of the community.

To express the voice of our constituents, we join in the congratulations of
United America, on this great event; and we earnestly implore the protection of
Almighty God, upon your person and family, that he would afford you his divine
aid in the duties of your important station, and would long continue you as a
blessing to the United States.

The Answer. To the SENATE and HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES of the STATE of
MASSACHUSETTS.
GENTLEMEN,
YOUR Address with which I have been honored, has made a most sensible
impression upon me. That my acceptance of the Presidency of these United
States, should have given joy to the people of Massachusetts -- and that my
conduct through our late arduous struggle for liberty and independence, has
met the approbation of the citizens of that Commonwealth, -- will be considered
by me, as among the most pleasing circumstances of my life.

In executing the duties of my present important station, I can promise nothing
but purity of intentions; and in carrying these into effect, fidelity and
diligence. If these, under the guidance of a superintending Providence, shall
continue to me the approbation and affection of my fellow-citizens of the
Union, it will be the highest gratification and the most ample reward that my
mind can form any conception of, in this life.

The adoption of the present government by so large a majority of the States,
and their citizens -- and the growing dispositions which are discoverable among
all descriptions of men, to give support and energy to it, are indications of
its merit, auspicious of the future greatness and welfare of the empire, which
will grow under it -- and is the foundation on which I build my hopes of public
felicity. The best efforts of mine toward the accomplishment of these great
and glorious objects, can only be secondary.

For the benedictions which you have been pleased to implore the Parent of the
Universe on my person and family, I have a grateful heart; and the most ardent
wish, that we may all, by rectitude of conduct, and a perfect reliance on his
beneficence, draw the smiles of Heaven on ourselves and posterity to the latest
generation.

G. WASHINGTON.
New York, July 9, 1789.
Address Of the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL of the Commonwealth of MASSACHUSETTS, to
the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
WE meet you, at this time, with our hearts replete with the warmest affection
and esteem, to express the high satisfaction we feel in your visit to the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

We can never forget the time, when, in the earliest stage of the war, and the
day of our greatest calamity, we law you at the head of the army of the United
States, commanding troops determined, though then undisciplined, by your wisdom
and valor preventing a sanguinary and well appointed army of our enemies from
spreading devastation through our country, and sooner than we had reason to
expect, obliging them to abandon the capital.

We have since seen you in your high command, superior to the greatest fatigues
and hardships, successfully conducting our armies through a long war, until our
enemies were compelled to submit to terms of peace, and acknowledge that
independence which the United States in Congress assembled had before asserted
and proclaimed.

We now have the pleasure of seeing you in a still more exalted station, to
which you have been elected by the unanimous suffrages of a free, virtuous and
grateful country. From that attachment which you manifestly discovered while in
your military command, to the civil liberties of your country, we do assure
ourselves that you will ever retain this great object in your view, and that
your administration will be happy and prosperous.

It is our earnest prayer that the divine benediction may attend you here and
hereafter; and we do sincerely wish that you may, through this life, continue
to enjoy that greatest of earthly blessings, to be accepted by the multitude of
your brethren.

Council Chamber, Boston, October 27, 1789.
The Answer. To his EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR and the HONORABLE the MEMBERS of
COUNCIL of the COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS.
GENTLEMEN,
TO communicate the peculiar pleasure which I derive from your affectionate
welcome of me to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, requires a force of
expression beyond that which I possess. I am truly grateful for your goodness
toward me, and I desire to thank you with the unfeigned sincerity of a feeling
heart.

Your obliging remembrance of my military services is among the highest
compensation they can receive; and, if rectitude of intention may authorize the
hope, the favorable anticipations which you are pleased to express of my civil
administration, will not, I trust, be disappointed.

It is your happiness, Gentlemen, to preside in the councils of a Commonwealth,
where the pride of independence is well assimilated with the duties of society,
and where the industry of the citizens gives the fullest assurance of public
respect and private prosperity. I have observed too, with singular
satisfaction, so becoming an attention to the militia of the State, as presents
the fairest prospects of support to the invaluable objects of national safety
and peace. Long may these blessings be continued to the commonwealth of
Massachusetts! And may you, Gentlemen, in your individual capacities,
experience every satisfaction which can result from public honor and private
happiness.

G. WASHINGTON.
Boston, October 27, 1789.
Address Of the MEMBERS of the SOCIETY of the CINCINNATI in the Commonwealth of
MASSACHUSETTS, to the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
AMIDST the various gratulations which your arrival in this metropolis has
occasioned, permit us, the Members of the Society of the Cincinnati in this
Commonwealth, most respectfully to assure you of that ardour of esteem and
affection which you have so indelibly fixed in our hearts as our glorious
leader in war, and illustrious exemplar in peace.

After the solemn and endearing farewell on the banks of the Hudson, which our
anxiety presaged as final, most peculiarly pleasing is the present unexpected
meeting. On this occasion we cannot avoid the recollection of the various
scenes of toil and danger through which you conducted us; and while w^
contemplate the trying periods of the war, and the triumphs of peace, we
rejoice to behold you, induced by the unanimous voice of your country, entering
upon other trials and other services alike important, and, in some points of
view, equally hazardous. For the completion of the great purposes which a
grateful country has assigned you, long very long, may your invaluable life be
preserved. And as an admiring world, while considering you as a soldier have
long wanted a comparison, may your virtues and talents as a (...) man leave
them again without a parallel.

It is not in words to express an attachment founded li^e ours. We can only
say, that when soldiers, our greatest pride was a promptitude of obedience to
your orders -- (...) citizens, our supreme ambition is to maintain the
character of firm supporters of that noble fabric of Federal Government, over
which you preside.

As Members of the Society of the Cincinnati, it will be our endeavor to
cherish those sacred principles of charity and fraternal attachment which our
institution inculcates. And while our conduct is thus regulated, we can never
want the patronage of the first of patriots and the best of men.

WILLIAM EUSTIS, Vice President.
Boston, October 27, 1789.
The Answer. To the MEMBERS of the SOCIETY of the CINCINNATI, in the
COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS.
GENTLEMEN,
IN reciprocating with gratitude and sincerity the multiplied and affecting
gratulations of my fellow-citizens of this Commonwealth, they will all of them
with justice allow me to say that none can be dearer to me than the
affectionate assurances which you have expressed. Dear indeed is the occasion
which restores an intercourse with my faithful associates in prosperous and
adverse fortune; and enhanced are the triumphs of peace, participated with
those whose virtue and valor so largely contributed to procure them. To that
virtue and valor your country has confessed her obligations. Be mine the
grateful task to add the testimony of a conviction, which it was my pride to
own in the field, and it is now my happiness to acknowledge in the enjoyments
of peace and freedom.

Regulating your conduct by those principles which have heretofore governed
your actions as men, soldiers and citizens, you will repeat the obligations
conferred on your country, and you will transmit to posterity an example which
must command their admiration, and obtain their grateful praise. Long may you
continue to enjoy the endearments of fraternal attachment, and the heartfelt
happiness of reflecting that you have faithfully done your duty.

While I am permitted to possess the consciousness of that worth which has long
bound me to you by every tie of affection and esteem, I will continue to be
your sincere and faithful friend.

G. WASHINGTON.
Boston, October 27, 1789.
Address Of the TRUSTEES of DARTMOUTH COLLEGE, to GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT
of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
A PROVIDENCE, that overrules the affairs of men and of nations, has made in
every age of the world some extraordinary display of power and goodness in
favor of the human race. Greater events have been assigned for the eighteenth
century, than ever before took place in the annals of time. Among these events,
the revolution of our day in North America may be recorded as the most
important. The discovery of the new world was made by a spirit of enterprise
and perseverance; the advancement of it in people, in arts, and in wealth, was
effected by prudence, economy and industry: -- But a revolution from a state of
oppression to that of freedom and independency; and a political resurrection
from a state without harmony, dispatch and power, to that of order, vigor and
glory, have been the achievements of all the combined virtues, which can adorn
the statesman and the hero. Through these most interesting scenes the eyes of
mankind were turned to you, and in you they confided. Guarded and directed by
the auspices of our Divine Parent, you have justly merited those sublime and
endearing epithets -- the Savior of your Country, and the Founder of a new
Empire.

Influenced by those ideas, and impressed with a sense of that duty and
gratitude which are claimed by services for humanity, and arts unrivalled in
the annals of fame, we embrace the first opportunity, as a Corporation, to
express those feelings of obligation, which can never be erased through the
devastations of time. We beg, Sir, of you to accept our sincere desire, that
the Father of Mercies may protract your life and health to a remote period of
time, before you are invited to angelic joys and sublimer triumphs. We pray,
that you may uninterruptedly experience all that felicity, which the virtuous,
wise and beloved Chief of millions has reason to expect or desire; and that
every blessing may be extended to your illustrious family.

In the sincerest sentiments of duty and gratitude, we use the liberty of
subscribing ourselves, Sir, your most obedient and very humble servants.

Signed in behalf of the Board of Trustees of Dartmouth College, at their
annual meeting at said college, this 22 d day of August, 1789. JOHN WHEELOCK.

The Answer. To the BOARD of TRUSTEES of DARTMOUTH COLLEGE.
GENTLEMEN,
IN assigning so important an agency to the endeavors of an individual, as
mentioned in your Address, you render a tribute to my services which a sense of
propriety forbids me to assume. For the flattering terms in which you are
pleased to express your sentiments of those services, and for the kind wishes
which you prefer in my behalf, I thank you with grateful sincerity.

To the animated spirit of freedom that pervaded our country, and to the firm
temper of our citizens, which braved all dangers in defense of their privileges
(under the protecting care of Divine Providence) are we indebted for the
blessings of political independence. To the enlightened policy which has
directed our public councils, we owe the reform and establishment of our
Federal Constitution. Under its auspicious influence, aided by the industry of
those citizens, who compose the great family of our Union, we may hope for the
substantial enjoyments of individual happiness and national honor. From your
superintending care, Gentlemen, as the guardians of a seminary and an important
source of science, we are to derive great assistance in accomplishing these
desiderata.

That your labor may be crowned with success, and render you happy in its
consequences, is my sincere prayer.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the LEGISLATURE of CONNECTICUT to GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of
the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
IMPRESSED with the sentiments which animate the millions of our
fellow-citizens, we, the Legislature of the State of Connecticut, cannot, on
this occasion, be silent.

Your presence recals to our admiration that assemblage of talents, which with
impenetrable secrecy, and unvarying decision, under the smiles of Divine
Providence, guided to victory and peace the complicated events of the late long
and arduous war.

The scenes of perilous horror through which you conducted the American arms,
taught your country and mankind to receive you as the greatest of heroes. Your
sacred regard to the rights of freemen, and the virtues of humanity, inspired
the united voic^ of all America to hail you as the first and worthiest of
citizens.

With grateful veneration we behold the father of his country -- our friend --
our fellow-citizen -- our supreme magistrate.

When peace had succeeded to the vicissitudes of war, your ardent desire for
retirement was sanctioned by the voice of patriotism.

Your country has again solicited your aid. In obedience to her wishes, you
have sacrificed the felicity of dignified retirement, and have hazarded on the
tempestuous ocean of public life the rich treasure of your fame. This display
of patriot zeal gives you a new right to what you before possessed, the hearts
of all your fellow-citizens.

While we thus express our sentiments, and those of the freemen whom we
represent, we beg liberty to assure you of our zeal to support your public
administrations.

May the Divine Being, who has given you as an example to the world, ever have
you in his holy keeping. May he long preserve you, the happiness and the glory
of our country. May the assurance, that the government formed under your
auspices will bless future generations, rejoice the evening of your life; and
may you be finally rewarded with the full glories of immortality.

In the name and behalf of the Legislature of the State of Connecticut,

SAMUEL HUNTINGTON, Governor.

The Answer. To the LEGISLATURE of the State of CONNECTICUT.
GENTLEMEN,
COULD any acknowledgments which language might convey, do justice to the
feelings excited by your partial approbation of my past services, and your
affectionate wishes for my future happiness, I would endeavor to thank you:
But to minds disposed as yours' are, it will suffice to observe, that your
Address meets a most grateful reception, and is reciprocated in all its wishes
with unseigned sincerity.

If the prosperity of our common country has in any degree been promoted by my
military exertions, the toils which attended them, have been amply rewarded by
the approving voice of my fellow-citizens. I was but the humble agent of
favoring Heaven, whose benign interference was so often manifested in our
behalf, and to whom the praise of victory alone is due.

In launching again on the ocean of events, I have obeyed a summons to which I
can never be insensible. When my country demands the sacrifice, personal ease
will always be a secondary consideration.

I cannot forego this opportunity to felicitate the Legislature of Connecticut
on the pleasing prospect which an abundant harvest presents to its citizens.
May industry like theirs ever receive its reward, and may the smiles of Heaven
crown all endeavors which are prompted by virtue, among which it is justice to
estimate your assurance of supporting our equal government.

G. WASHINGTON.
New Haven, October 17, 1789.
Address Of the CONGREGATIONAL MINISTERS of the City of NEW HAVEN, to the
PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
THE Congregational Ministers of the city of New Haven, beg leave to make their
most respectful address to the President of the United States. We presume that
we join with the whole collective body of the congregational Pastors and
presbyterian ministers throughout these States, in the most cordial
congratulations of themselves, of their country, and of mankind, on your
elevation to the head of the combined American Republic. As Ministers of the
blessed Jesus, the Prince of Peace, we rejoice, and have inexpressible pleasure
in the demonstrations you have given of your sincere affection toward the holy
religion, which is the glory of Christian States, and will become the glory of
the world itself, at that happy period, when liberty, public right, and the
veneration of the Most High, who presides in the Universe with a most holy and
benevolent sovereignty, shall triumph among all the Nations, Kingdoms, Empires,
and Republics on earth. We most sincerely rejoice in the kind and gracious
providence of Almighty God, who has been pleased to preserve your life, during
your late dangerous sickness, and to restore you to such a degree of health, as
gives us this opportunity to express our joy, and affords us the most pleasing
hopes that your health may be firmly established. We pray the Lord of Hosts, by
whose councils and wisdom you have been carried triumphantly and gloriously
through the late war, terminating in the establishment of American Liberty, and
perhaps in the liberty of all nations, -- that he would be please (...) to have
you under his holy protection, continue you a blessing to Church and State,
support you under your arduous cares, and perpetuate that estimation and honor
which you have justly acquired of your country. May this new and rising
Republic become, under your auspices, the most glorious for population,
perfection of policy and happy administration of government, that ever appeared
on earth. And may you, Sir, having finished a course of distinguished
usefulness, receive the reward of public virtue in the kingdom of eternal glory,

EZRA STYLES, JAMES DANA, JONATHAN EDWARDS, SAMUEL WALES, SAMUEL AUSTIN, jun.

City of New Haven, October 17, 1789.
The Answer. To the CONGREGATIONAL MINISTERS of the City of NEW HAVEN.
GENTLEMEN,
THE kind congratulations contained in your Address, claim and receive my
grateful and affectionate thanks. Respecting, as I do, the favorable opinions
of men distinguished for science and piety, it would be false delicacy to
disavow the satisfaction, which I derive from their approbation of my public
services and private conduct.

Regarding that deportment, which consists with true religion, as the best
security of temporal peace, and the sure mean of attaining eternal felicity, it
will be my earnest endeavor (as far as human frailty can resolve) to inculcate
the belief and practice of opinions which lead to the consummation of those
desirable objects.

The tender interest which you have taken in my personal happiness, and the
obliging manner in which you express yourselves on the restoration of my
health, are so forcibly impressed on my mind, as to render language inadequate
to the utterance of my feelings. If it shall please the Great Disposer of
Events to listen to the pious supplication which you have presented in my
behalf, I trust the remainder of my days will evince the gratitude of a heart
devoted to the advancement of those objects which receive the approbation of
Heaven, and promote the happiness of our fellow-men.

My best prayers are offered to the throne of grace for your happiness, and
that of the Congregations committed to your care.

G. WASHINGTON.
City of New Haven, October 17, 1789.
Address To GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
IT is with singular pleasure that we, the President and Fellows of Harvard
University in Cambridge, embrace the opportunity, which your most acceptable
visit to this part of the country gives us, of paying our respects to the First
Magistrate of the United States.

It afforded us the highest satisfaction, to find this large and respectable
nation unanimous, in placing at the head of the new government, the firm and
disinterested Patriot -- the illustrious and intrepid Soldier, who, during her
struggles in the cause of liberty, braving every difficulty and danger in the
field, under the smiles of a kind Providence, led her armies to victory and
triumph, and finally established her freedom and independence. Nor were we less
gratified, when we found, that the person whose military skill and exertions
had been so happily succeeded, actuated by the same spirit of patriotism, did
not decline the arduous and toilsome office; but, listening to the voice of his
country, left the tranquil scenes of private life, to secure those national
blessings we were in the utmost danger of losing. We were fully persuaded, that
the Man, who during so great a length of time, and in the most trying
circumstances, had been accepted by the multitude of his brethren, would, in
this new station, enjoy their entire confidence, and ensure their highest
esteem; nor have we been disappointed.

Permit us, Sir, to congratulate you on the happy establishment of the
Government of the Union, on the patriotism and wisdom, which have marked its
public transactions, and the very general approbation, which the people have
given to its measures.

At the same time, Sir, being fully sensible that you are strongly impressed
with the necessity of religion, virtue and solid learning, for supporting
freedom and good government, and fixing the happiness of the people upon a firm
and permanent basis, we beg leave to recommend to your favorable notice, the
University entrusted to our care, which was early founded for promoting these
important ends.

When you took the command of the troops of your country, you saw the
University in a state of depression -- its members dispersed -- its literary
treasures removed -- and the Muses fled from the din of arms, then heard within
its walls. Happily restored, in the course of a few months, by your glorious
successes, to its former privileges, and to a state of tranquillity, it
received its returning members; and our youth have since pursued, without
interruption, their literary courses, and fitted themselves for usefulness in
Church and State. The public rooms, which you formerly saw empty, are now
replenished with the necessary means of improving the human mind in literature
and science; and every thing within the walls wears the aspect of peace, so
necessary to the cultivation of the liberal arts.

While we exert ourselves, in our corporate capacity, to promote the great
objects of this institution, we rest assured of your protection and patronage.

We wish you, Sir, the aid and support of Heaven, while you are discharging the
duties of your most important station. May your success, in promoting the best
interests of the nation, be equal to your highest wishes! And after you shall
have long rejoiced in the prosperity and glory of your country, may you receive
the approbation of Him, who rules among the nations!

JOSEPH WILLARD, President of the University.
Oct. 27, 1789.
The Answer. To the PRESIDENT and FELLOWS of HARVARD UNIVERSITY in CAMBRIDGE.
GENTLEMEN,
REQUESTING you to accept my sincere thanks for the Address with which you have
thought proper to honor me, I entreat you to be persuaded of the respectful
and affectionate consideration with which I receive it.

Elected by the suffrages of a too partial country to the eminent and arduous
situation, which I now hold, it is peculiarly flattering to find an approbation
of my conduct in the judgment of men, whose reverend characters must sanction
the opinions they are pleased to express.

Unacquainted with the expression of sentiments which I do not feel, you will
^o me justice by believing confidently in my disposition to promote the
interests of science and true religion.

It gives me sincere satisfaction to learn the flourishing state of your
literary Republic -- assured of its efficiency in the past events of our
political system, and of its further influence on those means which make the
best support of good government, I rejoice that the direction of its measures
is lodged with men, whose approved knowledge, integrity and patriotism, give an
unquestionable assurance of their success.

That the Muses may long enjoy a tranquil residence within the walls of your
University, and that you, Gentlemen, may be happy in contemplating the progress
of improvement through the various branches of your important departments, are
among the most pleasing of my wishes and expectations.

G. WASHINGTON.
Boston, October 27, 1789.
Address Of the INHABITANTS of the Town of BOSTON, to the PRESIDENT of the
UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
WE beg leave to express our happiness in the honor you confer upon us by your
visit to this capital.

We are happy in the opportunity of again making our personal acknowledgments
to a character, to which, on every principle, we are so deeply indebted.

Every motive of esteem, duty and affection have conspired to form in our minds
the strongest attachment that the freest people can feel to the most deserving
citizen.

As men, we have long since considered you, under God, as the great and
glorious Avenger of the violated rights of humanity -- as citizens, we have
observed with peculiar satisfaction, that you have unvariably respected those
liberties, which you have so successfully defended -- and as inhabitants of a
great commercial town, we attribute the security we enjoy to the singular merit
and success of those measures, in the progress of the war, which you had the
honor to conduct.

It cannot but afford you the highest pleasure, when you compare our present
situation with the signal distresses to which we were exposed during the period
in which this town was in the possession of an exasperated enemy. Indignant at
the multiplied restraints of hostile domination, we sought an asylum among our
friends and connections in the country, and cheerfully abandoned our property
and possessions in the common cause of America -- that we were so soon happily
reinstated, may be justly imputed to the wisdom of those arrangements which
compelled our invaders, in their retreat, to adopt a less destructive policy
than that, which on other occasions, they so wantonly practiced.

In every trying vicissitude, we have remarked the conspicuous and unaffected
piety of your heart, and the wisdom and moderation of your counsels.

We have seen you relinquish the ease and independence of private fortune to
lead in the untried dangers of a war, at the risque of your life and
reputation. With pleasure we have viewed you retiring in victory, and
exhibiting a new example of patriotic virtue to an admiring world; and we now
feel a still higher satisfaction at your having once more sacrificed the sweets
of domestic retirement in obedience to the united voice of your countrymen.

These, Sir, are the sentiments and reflections which naturally occur on an
attentive consideration of your past conduct. To the future we look for those
virtues which adorn the Man, and mark the wise and accomplished Legislator. We
anticipate from your discernment the happy union of liberty and law, lenity and
vigor, mercy and justice: the enlightened policy of a mind calm amidst the
influence, of power, and uncorrupted by the fascinating allurements of avarice
or ambition.

With these impressions, the preservation of your life through the varied
scenes in which you have been engaged, demands our grateful acknowledgments to
the beneficent Disposer of human events.

It is one of the first wishes of our hearts, that you may be as happy in your
present elevated station, as you have been distinguished in your military
character; and it is our fervent prayer to the Almighty Ruler of the Universe,
that the invisible hand which led the citizens of America through the dangers
and calamities of war, may still guard and protect you as an ornament to human
nature, and a blessing to your country.

The Answer. To the INHABITANTS of the Town of BOSTON.
GENTLEMEN,
THE obligations which your goodness has imposed upon me, demand my grateful,
and receive my sincere acknowledgments. Your esteem does me honor, and your
affection communicates the truest pleasure: by endeavoring to deserve, I will
indulge the hope of retaining them.

Overrating my services, you have ascribed consequences to them, in which it
would be injustice to deny a participation to the virtue and firmness of my
worthy fellow-citizens of this respectable Town and Commonwealth.

If the exercise of my military commission has contributed to vindicate the
rights of humanity, and to secure the freedom and happiness of my country, the
purpose for which it was assumed has been completed, and I am amply rewarded.
If in the prosecution of my civil duties, I shall be so fortunate as to meet
the wishes of my fellow-citizens, and to promote the advantage of our common
interests, I shall not regret the sacrifice, which you are pleased to mention
in terms so obliging.

The numerous sensations of heartfelt satisfaction, which a review of past
scenes affords to my mind, in a comparison with the present happy hour, are far
beyond my powers of utterance to express.

I rejoice with you, my fellow-citizens, in every circumstance that declares
your prosperity; and I do so, most cordially, because you have well deserved to
be happy.

Your love of liberty -- your respect for the laws -- your habits of industry,
and your practice of the moral and religious obligations, are the strongest
claims to national and individual happiness; and they will, I trust, be firmly
and lastingly established.

Your wishes for my personal felicity, impress a deep and affectionate
gratitude; and your prayer to the Almighty Ruler of the Universe, in my behalf,
calls forth my fervent supplication to that gracious and beneficent Being, for
every blessing on your temporal pursuits, and for the perfection of your
happiness hereafter.

G. WASHINGTON.
Boston, Oct. 27, 1789.
Address Of the INHABITANTS of the Town of MARBLEHEAD to GEORGE WASHINGTON,
PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
YOUR presence has inspired the Inhabitants of Marblehead with the most
unbounded joy: but they cannot express, as they would wish, their grateful
sense of the honor done them on this occasion. The too visible decay and
poverty of this town must be their excuse, that they have not offered to the
illustrious Character who now visits them, a reception more answerable to his
dignity, and more expressive of their own veneration.

The blessings of Independence and a Republican Government must ever excite our
gratitude and affection to so eminent a Supporter of the Public Liberty, whose
wisdom and valor have so successfully defended the rights of his country. The
establishment, by the United States, of a secure and efficient government,
gives us the pleasing expectation of the gradual revival of our fishery and
commerce -- objects of the industry, and principal means of the subsistence, of
the inhabitants of this place, for above a century previous to the late
revolution. In the commencement of the contest with Great Britain, this town
were early in their exertions in the common cause; and were not discouraged,
when they foresaw that reverse of their situation, which the war has
necessarily produced. The return of peace did not restore to us the former
advantages of the fishery, which has remained under peculiar discouragements:
and we have yet patiently to expect that attention of the General Government,
which may remedy these evils, and which the subject may deserve, from its
extensive importance to the commerce of the United States.

The present Government of the United States commands our ready submission and
inviolable attachment; and we deem it a peculiar felicity, that the highest
dignity of that government is so properly vested in you; in whom all America
repose the most entire confidence; in whose administration, the world will
admire the example of a Patriot Ruler.

Sir, our anxiety for your health and long life is proportionate to our most
ardent wishes for the prosperity of our country; and we are well assured, that
you will ever partake in the happiness of that numerous people, over whom you
preside. May the Divine Providence continue to favor your care and guidance of
their most important public affairs, and reward your virtues, which have been
so long employed in promoting the happiness of mankind.

In behalf of the town of Marblehead, Selectmen.
ISAAC MANSFIELD, JONATHAN GLOVER, JOHN GLOVER, SAMUEL SEWALL, SAMUEL HOOPER,
NATHANIEL LINDSEY, BURREL DEVEREUX, RICHARD HARRIS,

October 29, 1789
The Answer. To the INHABITANTS of the Town of MARBLEHEAD.
GENTLEMEN,
THE reception, with which you have been pleased to honor my arrival in
Marblehead, and the sentiments of approbation and attachment, which you have
expressed of my conduct, and to my person, are too flattering and grateful not
to be acknowledged with sincere thanks, and answered with unfeigned wishes for
your prosperity.

Avoiding to dwell on the diminution of pleasure, which the mention of your
impaired circumstances occasions me, I desire to engage your thoughts on the
pleasing prospect presented to all our interests, and particularly to our
fishery, in the efficiency of our government, and the invigorated industry of
our citizens.

Protected in the exercise of those means, which the Beneficent Parent of
mankind has furnished for their sustenance and comfort, the citizens of
America, animated by virtuous enterprise, and actuated by due obedience to the
laws and regulations of their government, may expect, with confidence, to enjoy
every blessing which industry can promise, and national union may ensure.

Your attachment to the Constitution of the United States is worthy of men, who
fought and bled for freedom, and who know its value.

Your anxiety for my health, and your prayers for my happiness, are replied to
with solicitude for your welfare, and earnest entreaty to the Author of Good
for your felicity.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the INHABITANTS of the Town of SALEM to the PRESIDENT.
SIR,
THE Inhabitants of the town of Salem, upon receiving a visit from a personage
the first object of their esteem, cannot forbear expressing those sensations,
which an occasion so pleasing must naturally excite. While we view it as an
high honor done us, a most obliging mark of condescension and regard shown us,
in making us this visit; most readily would we manifest the satisfaction we
feel in being gratified with an opportunity of seeing the man, whose deeds have
been so illustrious; and of paying our particular respects to the character,
which not only the people of America, but all the world are agreed to admire
and celebrate. How great soever, Sir, we had conceived our obligations to be,
and how strong soever the motives of attachments we were under to you, for
those military services and achievements, from which such essential benefits
have been derived, -- an addition to those obligations we are sensible is now
made; and still further reasons of attachment are presented, from your
acceptance of that important trust in our newly instituted government, which
was so earnestly and universally desired. That remarkable spirit of patriotism,
of benevolence toward this people, which has been so conspicuous in your past
conduct, we doubt not has determined you to this arduous undertaking. Whatever
therefore may contribute to the ease and happiness of your administration,
whatever returns of respect and dutiful submission it becomes a grateful people
to make, we wish you to receive and enjoy.

Long may you be continued, diffusing those blessings of freedom and good
government, by which our prosperity shall be further promoted. Long may you be
indulged a series of the best satisfactions, which the honors and enjoyments
of this world can afford. And by that Almighty Being, whose agency and aid you
have ever acknowledged, in those great events you have been improved to
accomplish with distinguished honors and felicities, may you finally be
rewarded.

The Answer.
GENTLEMEN,
WOULD words express the feelings of my heart* I should have the happiness to
demonstrate to my fellow-citizens of Salem, that their affectionate Address is
received with gratitude, and returned with sincerity. To your goodness I refer
myself for a just construction of thoughts which language will not explain.

Honored by the high, yet hazardous appointment which my country has conferred
upon me, it will be my best ambition to discharge its important trusts with
fidelity; for the rest I must cast myself upon her candor and kind indulgence.

Toward you, Gentlemen, permit me to assure you. I entertain every disposition
that is due to your virtue; and the promotion of your interests will be among
the most grateful of my employments.

From your own industry and enterprise, you have every thing to hope that
deserving men and good citizens can expect.

May your navigation and commerce flourish; your industry, in all its
applications, be rewarded; your happiness, here, be as perfect as belongs to
the lot of humanity; and your eternal felicity be complete.

G. WASHINGTON.
Salem, October 29, 1789.
Address Of the INHABITANTS of the Town of NEWBURY-PORT to the PRESIDENT of the
UNITED STATES.
SIR,
WHEN, by the unanimous suffrages of your countrymen, you were called to
preside over their public councils, the citizens of the town of Newbury-Port
participated in the general joy, that arose from anticipating an
administration, conducted by the man, to whose wisdom and valor they owed their
liberties.

Pleasing were their reflections, that he, who, by the blessing of Heaven, had
given them their independence, would again relinquish the felicities of
domestic retirement, to teach them its just value.

They have seen you, victorious, leave the field, followed with the applauses
of a grateful country; and they now see you entwining the olive with the
laurel, and, in peace, giving security and happiness to a people, whom, in war,
you covered with glory.

At the present moment, they indulge themselves in sentiments of joy, resulting
from a principle, perhaps less elevated, but exceedingly dear to their hearts,
from a gratification of their affection, in beholding personally among them the
Friend, the Benefactor, and the Father of their country.

They cannot hope, Sir, to exhibit any peculiar marks of attachment to your
person; for, could they express their feelings of the most ardent and sincere
gratitude, they would only repeat the sentiments, which are deeply impressed
upon the hearts of all their fellow-citizens: but in justice to themselves,
they beg leave to assure you, that, in no part of the United States are those
sentiments of gratitude and affection more cordial and animated, than in the
town, which at this time is honored with your presence.

Long, Sir, may you continue the ornament and support of these States, and may
the period be late, when you shall be called to receive a reward adequate to
your virtues, which it is not in the power of your country to bestow.

The Answer. To the CITIZENS of the Town of NEWBURY-PORT.
GENTLEMEN,
THE demonstrations of respect and affection which you are pleased to pay to an
individual, whose highest pretension is to rank as your fellow-citizen, are of
a nature too distinguished not to claim the warmest return that gratitude can
make.

My endeavors to be useful to my country have been no more than the result of
conscious duty. Regards like yours, would reward services of the highest
estimation and sacrifice: yet, it is due to my feelings, that I should tell you
those regards are received with esteem, and replied to with sincerity.

In visiting the town of Newbury-Port, I have obeyed a favorite inclination,
and I am much gratified by the indulgence. In expressing a sincere wish for its
prosperity, and the happiness of its inhabitants, I do justice to my own
sentiments and their merit.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address To GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
SENSIBLE of the honor done them by this visit from your Excellency, the
inhabitants of Portsmouth improve this first opportunity of bidding you welcome
to New Hampshire; and beg leave to mingle their warmest congratulations with
those of their brethren throughout the Union, upon your election to the high
and important office of President of the United States.

We attempt not to recount the number, variety and merit, of your services to
our common country; these are already written in indelible characters on the
heart of every true American, which the faithful page of history will transmit
to generations unborn: but to express our gratitude to him, who with a
magnanimity peculiar to himself, under the smiles of Heaven, defended the
rights, and gave birth to the empire of America. Permit us to add the grateful
sense we entertain of our high obligations to you, Sir, as a town, for our
security from that devastation which was the fate of many other seaport towns
in the Union, and would probably have been our's, had not the enemy, by your
wise and spirited exertions, been driven from the capital of a neighboring
State, and compelled to seek an asylum, for a while, within their own dominions.

Our happy escape from this calamity, while it demands our devout ascriptions
of praise to the great Ruler of all events, consoles us under the many heavy
losses we have sustained in our navigation and commerce during the war, the
distressing effects of which we still but too sensibly feel.

It is with pleasing emotions, we recognize the dispensations of Divine
Providence toward the United States, in placing the Deliverer of his country
at the head of the General Government by the unanimous suffrages of a free and
grateful people, at a crisis when none but the man who has long enjoyed, and
richly merited, the confidence of America, and the plaudits of an enlightened
world, could be found equal to the arduous task.

We felicitate you, and these States, on your speedy recovery from your late
sickness, and ardently wish your life may be continued a blessing to yourself,
and your country, and that at some far distant period, full of years, and the
most benevolent and glorious achievements, embalmed with the tears of grateful
millions, you may be called to inherit an incorruptible crown in the realms of
glory.

In behalf of the Inhabitants, JOHN PICKERING.
Portsmouth, Nov. 2, 1789.
The Answer. To the INHABITANTS of the Town of PORTSMOUTH.
GENTLEMEN,
I AM sensibly impressed with your friendly welcome to the metropolis of New
Hampshire, and have a grateful heart for your kind (...) congratulations on my
election to the Presidency of these United States.

I fear the fond partiality of my countrymen has too highly appreciated my past
e^^rtions, and formed too sanguine anticipations of my future services. If the
former have been successful, much of the success should be ascribed to those
who labored with me in the common cause; and the glory of the event should be
given to the great Disposer of events. If an unremitting attention to the
duties of my office, and the zeal of an honest heart, can promote the public
good, my fellow-citizens may be assured that these will not be wanting in my
present station.

I can claim no particular merit, Gentlemen, for the preservation of your town
from the devastation of the enemy. I am happy, if by any event of the war, your
property has been preserved from that destruction which fell but too heavily on
your neighbors; and I sincerely condole with you for the loss which you have
sustained in navigation and commerce; but I trust that industry and economy,
those fruitful and never-failing sources of private and public opulence, will,
under our present system of government, restore you to your former flourishing
state.

The interest which you take in my personal happiness, and the kind
felicitations which you express on the recovery of my health, are peculiarly
grateful to me; and I earnestly pray that the great Ruler of the Universe may
smile upon your honest exertions here, and reward your well-doings with future
happiness.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the EXECUTIVE of NEW HAMPSHIRE to the PRESIDENT of the UNITED
STATES of AMERICA.
AMIDST the applause and gratulations of millions, suffer the Executive of New
Hampshire, with grateful hearts to approach you, Sir, and hail you welcome to
this northern State -- to a government whose metropolis was at an early stage
of the late war, by your vigilance and attention, saved from destruction; and
the whole of which was at an after period rescued from impending ruin, by that
valor and prudence which eventually wrought out the salvation of our common
country, and gave birth to the American empire. Deeply impressed with the
remembrance of those important events, you will permit us to say, that amongst
the vast multitude of your admirers, there is not a people who hold your
talents and your virtues in higher veneration than the inhabitants of New
Hampshire. We beg you, Sir, to accept our most cordial thanks for the honor
done to this State, by your more than welcome visit at this time. And that you
will believe we shall not cease to unite our most fervent prayers, with those
of our American brethren, that you may be continued a lasting blessing to our
nation, and long, very long be suffered to rule in peace over those whom you
have protected and defended in war.

In behalf of the Council, JOHN SULLIVAN
Portsmouth, Nov. 3, 1789.
The Answer. To the Honorable the EXECUTIVE of the State of NEW HAMPSHIRE.
ALLOW me, Gentlemen, to assure you, that grateful as my heart is for the
affectionate regards, which my fellow-citizens have manifested toward me, it
has at no time been more sensibly impressed with a consciousness of their
goodness, than on the present occasion.

I am truly thankful for your expressions of attachment to my person, and
approbation of my conduct; and I reciprocate your good wishes with unfeigned
affection.

In exercising the vigilance and attention, with which you are pleased to
compliment my military command, I did no more than what inclination prompted,
and duty enjoined. In discharging the duties of my civil appointment, I can
sincerely promise, that the love of my country will be the ruling influence of
my conduct.

The success which has hitherto attended our united efforts, we owe to the
gracious interposition of Heaven; and to that interposition let us gratefully
ascribe the praise of victory, and the blessings of peace.

May the State, in whose councils you worthily preside, be happy under your
administration; and may you, Gentlemen, partake of the blessings which your
endeavors are intended to bestow.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address To the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
THE Legislature of New Jersey, although fully sensible of the trouble and
interruption occasioned by the numerous Addresses of congratulation, on your
acceptance of the highest office in the Commonwealth, would neither forgive
themselves, nor expect the pardon of their constituents, should they neglect,
in this their first meeting, after the organization of the Federal Government,
to express their joy, on seeing you at the head of the United States.

New Jersey having been the central theater of the late war, and the scene of
some of the most important military operations, which distinguished the
American armies, and added new honors to their illustrious Commander, we are
particularly induced to commemorate those brilliant exploits, which, while they
immortalized your name, afforded peace and security to the inhabitants of the
State.

Adulation, Sir, we are as much indisposed to offer, as you can be disinclined
to receive; but while we add our voice to that of the world, in celebrating
your military achievements, we cannot refrain from acknowledging the attention,
which you have always paid to the laws of the State, and your inflexible
perseverance, amidst all the dire necessities of war, in preferring the rights
of the citizen to the convenience of the soldier; thus, while equal to the most
renowned warriors as a hero, you have proved yourself superior to them as a
citizen.

As New Jersey was early and unanimous in adopting the Constitution, under
which you rule -- as every voice called you forth to the office of Chief
Magistrate, and every person looks up to it and you for protection, prosperity,
and good government, -- we may, we trust, assure you, that the citizens of this
State will, to the utmost of their abilities, ever strengthen and support you
in the discharge of your high and momentous trust.

We have reason to adore the Divine Providence, in raising up for us a Leader
and Ruler, so perfectly suited to our situation and circumstances; and
sincerely believe, that great and important as your services have been, you
will not derive more honor therefrom, than from your humility and self-denial,
in modestly ascribing all, as you constantly have done, to the power and wisdom
of the Most High.

We earnestly pray, that the same kind Providence which has conducted you with
so much honor to yourself, and such unspeakable felicity to the public, may
long continue you a blessing to the United States, in your present important
office, and at last crown you with that palm of victory, which is promised to
those, who by Divine assistance shall finally prove to be more than conquerors.

House of Assembly, November 30, 1789. Signed in and by order of the House,
JOHN BEATTY, Speaker.
Council Chamber, Dec. 1, 1789. Signed in and by order of Council, WILLIAM
LIVINGSTON, President.

The Answer. To the Honorable the LEGISLATURE of the State of NEW JERSEY.
GENTLEMEN,
IN replying to the flattering and affectionate Address, with which you are
pleased to honor me, I confess a want of expression to convey the grateful
sentiment which it inspires. You will do justice to those sentiments, by
believing that they are founded in sincere regard, and respectful esteem.

The opportunities which were afforded me, in the trying vicissitudes of our
arduous struggle, to remark the generous spirit, which animated the exertions
of your citizens, have impressed a remembrance of their worth, which no length
of time, or change of circumstances, can efface.

To the gallantry and firmness of their efforts in the Field, they have added
the wisdom and liberality of distinguished patriotism in Council. Appreciating,
with judicious discernment, the blessings of that independence, which their
efforts contributed to establish, they were unanimously agreed to secure and
perpetuate them, by adopting a Constitution, which promised equal and efficient
protection to the privileges of Confederated America.

The assurance now given by your honorable body, to support the federal system,
is a renewed proof of the estimation in which it is held, and a happy
indication of the beneficial effects already experienced, and hereafter
expected to flow from its operations. As such it is to me peculiarly grateful,
and must be so to every citizen of the Union, whose wish is private prosperity
and public honor.

Allow me, Gentlemen, to assure you of every endeavor on my part, to promote
these desirable objects.

In making my acknowledgments for the favorable opinions you express of my
military conduct, as it respected the observance of civil rights, it is justice
to assign great merit to the temper of those citizens, whose estates were more
immediately the scene of warfare. Their personal services were rendered without
constraint, and the derangement of their affairs submitted to without
dissatisisfaction. It was the triumph of patriotism over personal
consideration, and our present enjoyment of peace and freedom reward the
sacrifice.

Imploring a continuance of these enjoyments to our country, and individual
happiness to the citizens who procured them, I offer up a sincere prayer for
you, Gentlemen, and your constituents.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the Society of the CINCINNATI in the STATE of SOUTH CAROLINA, to
GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
POSSESSED of every feeling that can act on grateful hearts, the Society of the
Cincinnati established in the State of South Carolina, beg leave to
congratulate you on the happy occasion which has once again placed you in a
situation of rendering general good to their country.

Retired from the busy scenes of life, to reap the rewards of your virtuous
acts, and to enjoy the glory you had already obtained, your fellow-citizens
received you with exulting happiness; they saw in you the patriot-hero, the
friend and savior of their country; and with hearts-filled with gratitude and
affection, they invoked the Allwise Disposer of human events to render that
retirement happy.

The period, however, arrived when the abilities of the virtuous patriot were
again to be called forth to assume a public character. A general political
government was formed, by which the happiness of the country for whose liberty
you had fought, was now to be established. To preside at the head of this new
government, to establish it with permanency, the people sought, in the Great
WASHINGTON, the virtues on which they could rely with safety, and from which
they might expect to receive every benefit without alloy. They had experienced
his abilities, they had experienced his integrity, and his inviolable love for
his country. Nor did they seek in vain. The same noble spirit which actuated
you at the beginning of our late contest with Great Britain, now operated. You
received and obeyed the summons; and although you should make a sacrifice, yet
you nobly determined, it was the voice of your country, in whose service every
inferior consideration of case and retirement must give place.

As citizens, we congratulate you, Sir, on this additional proof of your
country's confidence. As soldiers who partook with you in many of the dangers
and hardships which attended the general army under your command, we beg leave
to express our warmest attachment to your person, and sincerest wish for your
happiness and honor; and that we may, under your rule, supported by your
amiable virtues, happily experience and long enjoy the fruits of a government
which has for its basis the good of the people of America.

By order of the Society, WILLIAM MOULTRIE, President.

The Answer. To the State Society of the CINCINNATI in SOUTH CAROLINA.
GENTLEMEN,
FROM a conviction that the dispositions of the Society of the Cincinnati
established in the State of South Carolina are peculiarly friendly to me, I
cannot receive their congratulations on the occasion which gave birth to their
Address, without emotions of peculiar satisfaction.

The interest that my fellow-citizens so kindly took in the happiness which
they saw me enjoy in my retirement after the war, is rather to be attributed to
their great partiality in my favor, than to any singular title I had to their
gratitude and affection.

Notwithstanding I was conscious that my abilities had been too highly
appreciated; yet I felt, that, whatever they were, my country had a just claim
upon me, whenever the exercise of them should be deemed conducive to its
welfare. With such feelings, I could not refuse to obey that voice which I had
always been accustomed to respect, nor hesitate to forego a resolution which I
had formed of passing the remainder of my days in retirement. And so far am I
from having reason to repent of the decided measure I took, in the crisis of
organizing a new general government, that I ought rather, perhaps, to
felicitate myself upon having met the wishes, and experienced the assistance of
a patriotic and enlightened people, in my arduous undertaking.

Always satisfied that I should be supported in the administration of my
office, by the friends of good government in general, I counted upon the
favorable sentiment and conduct of the officers of the late army in
particular. Nor has my expectation been deceived. As they were formerly
distinguished by their eminent fortitude and patriotism in their military
service, during the most trying occasions, so are the same men now, mingled in
the mass of citizens, conspicuous for a disinterested love of order, and a
jealous attention to the preservation of the rights of mankind. Nor is it
conceivable that any members of the community should be more worthy of the
enjoyment of liberty, or more zealous to perpetuate its duration, than those
who have so nobly and so successfully defended its standard in the new world.

I sincerely thank you, Gentlemen, for your expression of attachment to my
person, and wish for my happiness and honor. On my part, I only dare to
engage, it shall be my incessant study, that you may happily experience and
long enjoy the fruits of a government, which has for its basis the good of the
American people.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the ROMAN CATHOLICS to GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED
STATES.
SIR,
WE have been long impatient to testify our joy and unbounded confidence on
your being called, by an unanimous vote, to the first station of a country, in
which that unanimity could not have been obtained without the previous merit of
unexampled services, of eminent wisdom, and unblemished virtue. Our
congratulations have not reached you sooner, because our scattered situation
prevented the communication and the collecting of those sentiments, which
warmed every breast. But the delay has furnished us with the opportunity, not
merely of presaging the happiness to be expected under your administration, but
of bearing testimony to that which we experience already. It is your peculiar
talent, in war and in peace, to afford security to those, who commit their
protection into your hands. In war, you shield them from the ravages of armed
hostility: in peace, you establish public tranquillity, by the justice and
moderation, not less than by the vigor of your government. By example as well
as by vigilance, you extend the influence of laws on the manners of our
fellow-citizens. You encourage respect for religion, and inculcate by words and
actions, that principle on which the welfare of nations so much depends, that a
superintending Providence governs the events of the world, and watches over the
conduct of men. Your exalted maxims, and unwearied attention to the moral and
physical improvement of our country have produced already the happiest effects.
Under your administration, America is animated with zeal for the attainment and
encouragement of useful literature; she improves her agriculture, extends her
commerce, and acquires with foreign nations a dignity unknown to her before.
From these happy events, in which none can feel a warmer interest than
ourselves, we derive additional pleasure by recollecting that you, Sir, have
been the principal instrument to effect so rapid a change in our political
situation. This prospect of national prosperity is peculiarly pleasing to us on
another account; because whilst our country preserves her freedom and
independence, we shall have a well-founded title to claim from her justice the
equal rights of citizenship, as the price of our blood spilt under your eyes,
and of our common exertions for her defense, under your auspicious conduct;
rights rendered more dear to us by the remembrance of former hardships. When we
pray for the preservation of them, where they have been granted; and expect the
full extension of them from the justice of those States which still restrict
them; when we solicit the protection of Heaven over our common country, we
neither omit, or can omit recommending your preservation to the singular care
of Divine Providence; because we conceive that no human means are so available
to promote the welfare of the United States, as the prolongation of your health
and life, in which are included the energy of your example, the wisdom of your
counsels, and the persuasive eloquence of your virtues.

In behalf of the Roman Catholic Clergy, J. CARROLL.
In behalf of the Roman Catholic Laity, CHARLES CARROLL, of Carrollton, DANIEL
CARROLL, THOMAS FITZSIMONS, DOMINICK LYNCH.


The Answer. To the ROMAN CATHOLICS in the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
GENTLEMEN,
WHILE I now receive with much satisfaction your congratulations on my being
called, by an unanimous vote, to the first station in my country, -- I cannot
but duly, notice your politeness in offering an apology for the unavoidable
delay. As that delay has given you an opportunity of realizing, instead of
anticipating the benefits of the general government, you will do me the justice
to believe, that your testimony of the increase of the public prosperity,
enhances the pleasure which I should otherwise have experienced from your
affectionate Address.

I feel that my conduct in war and in peace, has met with more general
approbation than could reasonably have been expected; and I find myself
disposed to consider that fortunate circumstance in a great degree resulting
from the able support and extraordinary candor of my fellow-citizens of all
denominations.

The prospect of national prosperity now before us is truly animating, and
ought to excite the exertions of all good men to establish and secure the
happiness of their country, in the permanent duration of its freedom and
independence. America, under the smiles of a Divine Providence, the protection
of a good government, and the cultivation of manners, morals, and piety, cannot
fail of attaining an uncommon degree of eminence, in literature, commerce,
agriculture, improvements at home and respectability abroad.

As mankind become more liberal they will be more apt to allow, that all those
who conduct themselves as worthy members of the community are equally entitled
to the protection of civil government. I hope ever to see America among the
foremost nations in examples of justice and liberality. And I presume that your
fellow-citizens will not forget the patriotic part which you took in the
accomplishment of their revolution, and the establishment of their government:
or, the important assistance which they received from a nation in which the
Roman Catholic faith is professed.

I thank you, Gentlemen, for your kind concern for me. While my life and my
health shall continue, in whatever situation I may be, it shall be my constant
endeavor to justify the favorable sentiments which you are pleased to express
of my conduct. And may the members of your society in America, animated alone
by the pure spirit of Christianity, and still conducting themselves as the
faithful subjects of our free government, enjoy every temporal and spiritual
felicity.

G. WASHINGTON*

Address Of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the State of GEORGIA, to the PRESIDENT of
the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
THE Federal Constitution being adopted, it became the wish of the people of
this State that you should be elevated to the Presidency of the Union; and the
two branches of the Legislature take the first occasion of offering to your
acceptance their congratulations on the unanimity of your election.

In the great concerns of mankind, success has not always been attendant on the
performance of duty; and where it has, the sanction of public approbation has
frequently been withheld; but it was reserved for you, in the midst of the most
arduous difficulties, not only to be successful, but to have been so with
universal applause.

Raised by your virtues and services to the head of a government, pervading so
many independent States, the general confidence is in favor of your justice;
and, while the history of nations informs that the errors of rulers have often
proceeded from the want of information, we shall not hesitate to lay before you
such facts and opinions respecting this State, as may appear to us to be
incumbent or necessary. In doing this, it shall be our aim to unite plainness
with respect, and integrity with truth.

Sir, in the course of the war which established our independence, our citizens
made proportionate exertions with those of any part of the whole, and, in point
of property, they suffered the most. The peace found the country a waste. With
many natural advantages, we flattered ourselves with a speedy recovery, when we
were attacked by the Indians.

On this subject we wish to be delicate. Much has been already said -- we have
asserted, and it has been contradicted. Removed at a distance from the center,
our actions have been liable to misrepresentation; but we trust that by this
time, they are better explained; in the mean while, our population has been
checked, and our agriculture diminished -- the blood of our citizens has been
spilled, our public resources greatly exhausted; and our frontiers still open
to fresh ravages. The failure of the late negotiation for a peace with the
Creek Indians, and the circumstances which attended the same, are the best
evidence of the necessity of our measures, and a proof of the late hostile
disposition of these people; but under the influence of the government and
power of the Union, it is to be hoped and expected that a different conduct
will on their part prevail: on our part, nothing shall be wanting to promote so
desirable an establishment.

Another circumstance of additional calamity attendant on our being the south
frontier of the Union, is, the facility of our black people crossing the
Spanish line, from whence we have never been able to reclaim them. This has
already been productive of much injury to private persons, and if not speedily
restrained, may grow into an evil of national magnitude.

We take this occasion of bringing this business into view, with a perfect
reliance, that you will cause such discussions to be made, as shall be
necessary to bring about a remedy.

We request you will accept our cordial wishes for your health and happiness,
and that you may long continue to enjoy that confidence which has been so
eminently placed in you by the people of the United States.

By order of the Senate, N. BROWNSON, President.
By order of the House of Representatives, SEABORN JONES, Speaker.

The Answer. To the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the State of GEORGIA.
GENTLEMEN,
THE congratulations presented to me by the different branches of the
Legislature of the State of Georgia, upon my having been elected with unanimity
to the Presidency of the United States, affect my mind with the most pleasing
sensations, and demand my best acknowledgments.

From the observation, that, in the great concerns of mankind, success has not
always been attendant on the performance of duty, and that, where it has, the
sanction of public approbation has frequently been withheld; I am naturally led
to reflect on the unlimited gratitude which we owe, as a nation, to the Supreme
Arbiter of human events for his interposition in our favor, as well as on the
singular obligations which are due from me, as an individual, for the indulgent
sentiments which my fellow-citizens have always had the goodness to entertain
of my conduct.

Raised, as I am, to the head of a government pervading so vast a territory --
and possessing, (as I flatter myself I do) the confidence of the people in
regard to my dispositions, -- I assure you, Gentlemen, that nothing could be
more consonant to my wishes, than to be favored with such facts and opinions
respecting the condition of the States as may appear proper and necessary. For
I am duly sensible that many errors which would result from want of
information, may be obviated by timely and just representations.

I am not ignorant how much the local situation of your State exposed its
inhabitants to suffer the distresses of the late war in a severe manner; nor
how manfully they exerted themselves in defense of the common cause, during the
struggle which established our independence. Wasted as your country was at the
return of peace, and exposed as your frontiers have since been to the ravages
of the Indians, I cannot but flatter myself that you will ere long realize the
blessings which were to be expected from your natural resources, and find a
compensation for your sufferings in the benefits of an efficient General
Government.

It will not be expected, I presume, on this occasion, that I should enter into
the merits of the delicate subject to which you allude. It may be sufficient to
say, that while I regret extremely the failure of the late negotiation for
peace with the Creek Indians, I am satisfied that the explanations which have
been obtained through authentic channels will be of eminent service. I am also
convinced that nothing will be wanting on your part to concur in the
accomplishment of a pacification; and I still hope, that under the influence of
the General Government that desirable object may be effected. With respect to
this subject in general, as well as to the other calamity which you mentioned
as resulting from your being the south frontier of the Union, I request you
will he persuaded that I shall make such use of the powers invested in me by
the Constitution, as may appear to be best calculated to promote the public
good.

I am much pleased, Gentlemen, with the frankness which you have manifested in
regard to myself, and return you my hearty thanks for the good wishes you have
expressed for my health and happiness, with a sincere prayer that the same
blessings may be extended to you and your constituents.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address To the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
WE, the Delegates of the State Societies of the Cincinnati, assembled at our
triennial General Meeting, congratulate you on being unanimously elected the
Head of our rising Republic.

As a part of the Community, we felicitate our countrymen on this happy event;
and we embrace the first opportunity of expressing our sentiments, with no less
zeal than sincerity.

When we say we love and revere you as a Father, we not only speak the language
of our own hearts, but we speak the language of all who have fought, suffered,
and conquered under your command. Were poverty and consciousness of duty our
only recompense, still should we glory in the part we have acted. For our
motives, as they regarded our country, will afford us satisfaction, as well
through the vicissitudes of life, as in the moment of dissolution. As Members
of our Institution, on a former occasion, we appealed to Heaven and our own
hearts for the pur^^y of our intentions. Our fellow-citizens will witness, that
the conduct of the Officers and Soldiers of the late American armies has not
been less patriotic in peace than it was glorious in war.

A good Constitution was the object for which we risked our lives, and
experienced unparalleled difficulties. We are happy in the conviction that our
views are answered in the present government of the United States. While we
applaud the wisdom of our countrymen in placing you at the head of it, we
pledge ourselves to support its administration with the remnants of lives long
since devoted to the public service.

We need not enumerate your titles to the gratitude of your country; or echo,
in the suffrages of our particular Constituents, the public sentiment. But we
may say, that we see with exultation our countrymen beginning to reap the
fruits of Independence under the auspices of the person, who was more
instrumental than any other in its establishment. May you, as a reward for your
services, enjoy length of days, and every temporal blessing, and may such
blessings be a prelude to everlasting felicity.

Signed in behalf of the General Meeting, T. MIFFLIN, Vice President General.
H. KNOX, Secretary General.

Attest, Philadelphia, May 4, 1790.
The Answer. To the DELEGATES of the STATE SOCIETIES of the CINCINNATI, lately
assembled at their Triennial Meeting.
GENTLEMEN,
ALTHOUGH it is easier for you to conceive, than for me to explain the pleasing
sensations which have been excited in my breast, by your congratulations on my
appointment to the head of this rising republic: yet I must take the liberty to
thank you sincerely for the polite manner in which you felicitate our
countrymen, and testify your regard to me, on this occasion.

In addition to that reward for your sufferings and services which arises from
the consciousness of having done your duty, you have erected monuments more
expressive of your merits than even the universal applause of your country, in
the establishment of its independence and sovereignty. Nor should any possible
circumstances of poverty or adversity compel you to give up that sweet
satisfaction for the part you have acted, which ought to attend you as well
through the vicissitudes of life as in the moment of dissolution.

The candor of your fellow-citizens acknowledges the patriotism of your
conduct in peace, as their gratitude has declared their obligations for your
fortitude and perseverance in war: a knowledge that they now do justice to the
purity of your intentions ought to be your highest consolation, as the fact is
demonstrative of your greatest glory.

The object for which your gallantry encountered every danger, and your virtue
sustained unp^^alleled difficulties, has happily been attained. A government,
promising protection and prosperity to the people of the United States, is
established; and its operations hitherto have been such as to justify the most
sanguine expectations of further success. It was naturally to be expected, that
lives which had long since been devoted on the altar of Freedom, could never be
offered at the shrines of Anarchy or Despotism; and the offer which you make of
the residue of those lives to support the administration of this Government, is
not less a proof of its excellence, than an encouragement for those concerned
in its execution to use their best endeavors to make it a source of extensive
and permanent blessings to their country.

Whatever titles my military services may have given me to the regard of my
country, they are principally corroborated by the firm support of my brave and
faithful associates in the field. And, if any consideration is to be attributed
to the successful exercise of my civil duties, it (...)* in a great measure,
from the wisdom of the laws, and the facility which the disposition of my
fellow-citizens has given to their administration.

To the most affectionate wishes for your temporal happiness, I add a fervent
prayer for your eternal felicity.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the CONVENTION of SOUTH CAROLINA, to the PRESIDENT of the UNITED
STATES.
SIR,
WE, the people of the State of South Carolina, now met and sitting in
Convention, beg leave to address you, and to embrace this first opportunity
which has been afforded us of congratulating you on the high and important
station of President of the United States. Such, Sir, has been the impression
made upon the public mind by a due sense of your eminent services, and such the
affection of a nation, whose dearest rights you have defended, that one wish
pervaded the whole continent, of placing you at the head of the Federal
Republic, and of enjoying under your protection, as our First Magistrate, the
blessings of that free government, for the attainment of which we are so much
indebted to your exertions as our General. The promises of your earlier life,
Sir, had prepared your fellow-citizens for your acceptance of the military
command in 1775, when dangers and difficulties surrounded us on all sides, and
the prospect was dark and gloomy; but they must ever remember with gratitude
and admiration the wisdom and energy of that system, which could induce men
accustomed to the most perfect equality to submit to the rigorous duties of a
camp, and thus convert the tumultuary array of an undisciplined yeomanry into a
permanent force, capable of making head against the veteran army of our
enemies. With similar sentiments do they call to mind the efforts of that
heroic fortitude, which despaired not in the worst of times, but rose superior
to every misfortune, infusing new spirit into the bosoms of an unfortunate
army, and animating them by the force of example to undergo the severest toil
with alacrity, and to endure with perseverance the most accumulated distress.

It was the will of an Allwise Providence, that the great objects we were
contending for should not be attained without some difficulty, and that we
should be taught to observe and to value the virtues which spring up in
adversity; but the time of our severe trial was at length terminated -- the
cloud which had hovered over us so long was at length dispelled, and the sun of
American glory appeared in its full splendor. To have borne this change of
fortune with equanimity, to have employed the last hours of command in
reconciling our gallant soldiers to a disappointment which their long suffering
during the war had but ill prepared them for; and having checked the rage of
civil discord in its infancy, to have resigned all power, and cheerfully
descended into the walks of private life, -- are circumstances that must
forever illumine the page of history, and which, as they can never be effaced
from our remembrance, so we trust they will be deeply engraven upon the minds
of our posterity.

To transmit to that posterity the spirit of a free Constitution in its native
purity is the hope which animates us all; we hope also, that they will learn
from us to cherish every grateful sentiment toward you, Sir, and that they
will be proud, as we are, to participate individually in the honor which
America may so justly claim to herself, of having produced a citizen, whose
love of glory was devoid of ambition, whose view embraced no objects but the
freedom and the happiness of his countrymen; whose integrity was equal to their
most unbounded confidence, and who, combining the prudence of retreat with all
the active valor of attack, was at once the shield and the sword of his native
country. The tranquillity of retirement, after the dangers of war and the
fatigues of public life, is one of those rewards which exalted merit seems ever
entitled to, but which your fellow-citizens were constrained to deny you.
Independence had been established, but the arduous task of internal legislation
still remained, and the United States were yet to establish upon the firmest
basis that station amongst the nations of the earth, which they had of right
assumed. Called upon for this sacred purpose, you have listened, Sir, to the
voice of your country -- you have given a further proof of your never-failing
attachment to her interests; and we can only hope, in the warmest wishes which
we form for the good of the public weal, that your administration in the office
of President of the United States may be as prosperous as your acceptance of it
has been honorable and patriotic.

We will not, Sir, by thus giving way to the effusions of our hearts, any
longer intrude upon that time which is devoted to the general good, but
conclude with offering up our prayers to the great Father of the Universe, that
he may be pleased to shed his influence over all your councils, and that having
saved your country and given an awful lesson to all mankind, you may finally,
in the fullness of your years, close the long glories of an illustrious life,
not only with the consciousness of having deserved, but with the comfort and
satisfaction of having received every proof of respect and esteem from the
heartfelt gratitude of your fellow-citizens.

By the unanimous voice of the Convention, CHARLES PINCKNEY, President.
Columbia, May 31, 1790.
The Answer. To the PEOPLE of the State of SOUTH CAROLINA.
FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THE congratulatory Address of the People of the State of South Carolina on my
election to the office of President of the United States, expressed in such
forcible and endearing terms, affects me with the liveliest emotions of
satisfaction, and induces me to request their acceptance of my sincerest
acknowledgments.

Flattering as it must have been to me to find the extraordinary unanimity of
the people of the United States, in placing me at the head of their federal
republic, I am still more pleased with the recollection of the manly conduct on
their part, which, in the issue of an arduous struggle, put them in a condition
to enjoy the blessings of a free government. It was owing to their steady and
strenuous support, with the smiles of a gracious Providence, that I did not
sink under the oppression I felt from a diffidence in my abilities to conduct
their military operations. It was a distressing consideration, that so good a
cause might be endangered by a single false step on the part of their General.
But in such a cause, although surrounded with difficulties and dangers on every
side and in the midst of dark and gloomy prospects, it would have argued the
most infamous pusillanimity to have despaired of the commonwealth. Seconded by
such a body of yeomanry as repaired to the standard of liberty, fighting in
their own native land -- fighting for all that freemen hold dear, and whose
docility soon supplied the place of discipline -- it was scarcely in human
nature, under its worst character, to have abandoned them in their misfortunes;
nor is it for me to claim any singular title to merit, for having shared in a
common danger, and triumphed with them, after a series of the severest toil and
most accumulated distress, over a formidable foe.

The value of liberty was thus enhanced in our estimation by the difficulty of
its attainment; and the worth of characters appreciated by the trial of
adversity. The tempest of war having at length been succeeded by the sunshine
of peace, our citizen-soldiers impressed an useful lesson of patriotism on
mankind, by nobly returning, with impaired constitutions and unsatisfied
claims, after such long sufferings and severe disappointments, to their former
occupations. Posterity, as well as the present age, will doubtless regard with
admiration and gratitude the patience, perseverance and valor which achieved
our revolution; they will cherish the remembrance of virtues which had but few
parallels in former times, and which will add new luster to the most splendid
page of history.

If there be for me any peculiarly just subject of exultation, and with honest
pride I avow the fact, it is in being the citizen of a country, whose
inhabitants were so enlightened and disinterested, as to sacrifice local
prejudices and temporary systems, for the sake of rendering secure and
permanent that Independency, which had been the price of so much treasure and
blood. Animated with a hope of transmitting to posterity the spirit of a free
Constitution in its native purity, they have, since the conclusion of the war,
evinced the rectitude of their principles, as well as proved themselves, by
their practice, worthy of their successes.

For myself, notwithstanding my former intentions and declarations, I could not
hesitate to return to public life, when, from all the circumstances within my
knowledge, I had collected it to be my duty, because it was apparently the wish
of a whole nation; nor shall I regret the loss of that tranquillity in
retirement, which my time of life and state of health seemed in some measure to
authorize and require, if I may still be an instrument of any good to that
country, which has continued to assist my administration with such generous and
unlimited confidence.

I pray you to be persuaded, that while I receive with great sensibility, such
repeated proofs of the partiality of my fellow-citizens in my favor, I feel
increasing obligations to devote my labors unremittingly to the public
service; and with the benediction of the great Father of the Universe on our
councils, to use my best endeavors that the American people, who have of right
assumed an independent station amongst the nations of the earth, should forever
remain a great, respectable and happy nation.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, July 3, 1790.
Address Of the PROVIDENCE ASSOCIATION of MECHANICS and MANUFACTURERS, to the
PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
THE happy period has at length arrived, when we can with propriety join our
fellow-citizens of the other States in congratulating you, as Chief Magistrate
of United America. Although the progress of this State to our present situation
has been slow and timid, it is some consolation, that our accession has
completed the Federal Union.

Pleased with the establishment of a firm government, we are happy in thus
having it in our power to express our sentiments of regard and attachment to
the President of the Union, and our determination, as far as in us lies, to
support the Constitution and laws of the United States.

The Mechanics and Manufacturers of this town feel a confidence in the wisdom
and patriotism of the Legislature of the United States, -- that they will do
all in their power to promote the manufactures as well as the agriculture and
commerce of our country; this confidence is greatly strengthened by the
consideration that you, Sir, are at the head of it.

In full expectation that, under a mild and beneficent administration of the
government, we shall be enabled to lead quiet and peaceable lives, and enjoy
the fruits of our honest industry; with grateful hearts for past favors, we
join the millions of America, in fervent prayers to the Disposer of all events,
for your health and happiness; and that your important life may long be spared,
to rule a free, virtuous, and happy nation.

Signed by order and in behalf of the Association, CHARLES KEEN, President.
Attest, BENNETT WHEELER, Secretary.
Providence, June 4, 1790.
The Answer. To the ASSOCIATION of MECHANICS and MANUFACTURERS of PROVIDENCE.
GENTLEMEN,
THE accession of the State of Rhode Island to the General Government, which
has again completed our Union, is, indeed, an event that affords me singular
satisfaction. For your favorable sentiments respecting myself, as well as for
your determination to support the Constitution and laws of the United States, I
return you my thanks.

In full expectation that your confidence in the wisdom and patriotism of the
National Legislature will not be disappointed, and that they will do all in
their power to promote the manufactures, agriculture and commerce of this
country* I assure you, Gentlemen, I shall always heartily concur in all such
judicious measures as may seem calculated to enable the good people of United
America to lead quiet and peaceable lives, in the enjoyment of the fruits of
their honest industry.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the CONVENTION of the UNIVERSAL CHURCH, assembled in PHILADELPHIA,
to the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
PERMIT us, in the name of the Society whom we represent, to concur in the
numerous congratulations which have been offered to you since your accession to
the government of the United States.

For an account of our principles we beg leave to refer you to the pamphlet,
which we have now the honor to put into your hands. In this publication it
will appear, that the peculiar doctrine which we hold, is not less friendly to
the order and happiness of society, than it is essential to the perfections of
the Deity.

It is a singular circumstance in the history of this doctrine, that it has
been preached and defended in every age, since the first promulgation of the
gospel, but we represent the first society professing this doctrine, that have
formed themselves into an independent church. Posterity will hardly fail of
connecting this memorable event, with the auspicious years of peace, liberty
and free inquiry in the United States, which distinguished the administration
of GEORGE WASHINGTON.

We join thus publicly with our affectionate fellow-citizens in thanks to
Almighty God for the last of his numerous signal acts of goodness to our
country, in preserving your valuable life in a late dangerous indisposition;
and we assure you, Sir, that duty will not prompt us more than affection, to
pray, that you may long continue the support and ornament of our country, and
that you may hereafter fill a higher station, and enjoy the greater reward of
being a king and priest to our God.

Signed in behalf and by order of the Convention, JOHN MURRAY, W. UEGENE IMLAY.


The Answer. To the CONVENTION of the UNIVERSAL CHURCH lately assembled at
PHILADELPHIA.
GENTLEMEN,
I THANK you cordially for the congratulations which you offer on my
appointment to the office I have the honor to hold in the government of the
United States.

It gives me the most sensible pleasure to find, that, in our nation, however
different are the sentiments of the citizens on religious doctrines, they
generally concur in one thing: for their political professions and practices
are almost universally friendly to the order and happiness of our civil
institutions. I am also happy in finding this disposition particularly evinced
by your Society. It is moreover my earnest desire, that all the members of
every association or community, throughout the United States, may make such use
of the auspicious years of peace, liberty, and free inquiry, with which they
are now favored, as they shall hereafter find occasion to rejoice for having
done. -- With great satisfaction, I embrace this opportunity to express my
acknowledgments for the interest my affectionate fellow-citizens have taken in
my recovery from a late dangerous indisposition; and I assure you, Gentlemen,
that in mentioning my obligations for the effusions of your benevolent wishes
on my behalf, I feel animated with new zeal, that my conduct may ever be worthy
of your favorable opinion, as well as such as shall, in every respect, best
comport with the character of an intelligent and accountable being.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address From the INHABITANTS of CAMDEN and its Vicinity, to the PRESIDENT of
the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
IMPRESSED with every sentiment of friendship, esteem and gratitude, which can
actuate the human heart, and amid the congratulations and voluntary homage of
freemen and fellow-citizens that accompany your progress in the Southern
States, the citizens of Camden, and its vicinity, in whose country the ravages
and distresses of war were once as severely and painfully felt, as the
blessings of peace and good government are now gratefully cherished, yielding
to the universal sentiment, but more to the impulse of our own hearts, beg
leave to express the satisfaction and happiness we feel, at seeing among us our
Great Deliverer, the venerated Chief, who heretofore, under the standard of
liberty, defended the invaded rights of America, and led her troops with
success through all the doubtful changes of a perilous war; now our first civil
Magistrate, under whose administration we forget our dangers and sufferings
past, and rest in the perfect enjoyment of those invaluable rights, secured to
us by his labors.

We congratulate you, Sir, on your return thus far; and we hail your arrival in
this town with a welcome, though less splendid, yet not less sincere, than what
you have any where received.

And now, Sir, permit us to bring to your recollection that noble foreigner,
the baron De Kalb, whose dust with that of many other brave officers, is
entombed on the plains of Camden; to him we owe this grateful mention, who,
despising ease and inaction, when the liberties of his fellow creatures
(however distant) were threatened, entered the lists in our late contest, and
fell bravely fighting for the rights of mankind.

May Almighty God long preserve a life so beloved, and make the future as happy
as the past has been illustrious; and at the close of a life rendered thus
illustrious, may you greet on the happy shores of blissful immortality, the
kindred spirits of those heroes and patriots, who have in all past ages been
distinguished as the guardians of liberty and the fathers of their country.

The Answer. To the INHABITANTS of CAMDEN, and of its Vicinity.
GENTLEMEN,
THE acknowledgments which your respectful and affectionate Address demands, I
offer to you with unfeigned sincerity. I receive your congratulations with
pleasure; and estimating your welcome of me to Camden by a conviction of its
cordiality, I render those thanks to your polite and hospitable attentions, to
which they are so justly entitled.

Your grateful remembrance of that excellent friend and gallant officer, the
baron De Kalb, does honor to the goodness of your hearts; with your regrets, I
mingle mine for his loss, and to your praise, I join the tribute of my esteem
for his memory.

May you largely participate the national advantages, and may your past
sufferings and dangers, endured and braved in the cause of freedom, be long
contrasted with future safety and happiness.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the INHABITANTS of PROVIDENCE to the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
WE, the inhabitants of Providence, beg leave to offer you our congratulations,
on your safe arrival in this place.

We are sensibly affected by the honor conferred on the State, and on us in
particular, in the present visit; and be assured, Sir, we shall think ourselves
peculiarly happy, if, (...) our utmost attentions, it can be made agreeable to
you.

We gladly seize the first opportunity to express the most sincere satisfaction
in your election to the Presidency of the United States. The unbiassed voice of
a great nation, which unanimously called you to that important trust, is an
event, of which the annals of history afford no example; nor will future time
see it followed, unless the most transcendant merit and the clearest same
should be united in the same person.

As General of the armies of the United States, and as their President, we are
attached to you by every motive of gratitude and affection. To the conduct and
magnanimity of her Commander in Chief, uniformly displayed in the course of a
long and arduous war, America is indebted, under the smiles of Heaven, for her
freedom and independence; and the consummate prudence and ability, manifested
in the exercise of the powers delegated to the President of the United States,
exhibit to the world a character of no less celebrity in the cabinet than in
the field.

From our most excellent Constitution, and the benign influence of those
virtues which characterize your administration, we entertain the most pleasing
hopes of the extension of commerce, the encouragement of agriculture and
manufactures, and of the establishment of public faith, and private credit; and
that the liberties of America will be transmitted to very late posterity.

We ardently pray that a life so conducive to the welfare of millions may be
long protracted; and that, when the fatal shaft shall be sped which will
deprive America of her great Benefactor, you may ascend those regions where
only exalted virtue will be fully rewarded.

Done in town-meeting, legally assembled, this seventeenth day of August, A. D.
1790, and in the fifteenth year of independence. Signed, at the request of the
Town, by JABEZ BOWEN, Moderator. DANIEL COOK, Town Clerk.


The Answer. To the INHABITANTS of PROVIDENCE.
GENTLEMEN,
THE congratulations which you offer me upon my arrival in this place, are
received with no small degree of pleasure. For your attentions, and endeavors
to render the town agreeable to me, and for your expressions of satisfaction at
my election to the Presidency of the United States, I return you my warmest
thanks.

My sensibility is highly excited, by your ardent declarations of attachment to
my person, and the Constitution.

As, under the smiles of Heaven, America is indebted for freedom and
independence rather to the joint exertions of the citizens of the several
States, in which it may be your boast to have borne no inconsiderable share,
than to the conduct of the Commander in Chief, -- so is she indebted for their
support rather to a continuation of those exertions, than to the prudence and
ability manifested in the exercise of the powers delegated to the President of
the United States.

Your hopes for the extension of commerce, the encouragement of agriculture and
manufactures, and the establishment of public faith, as reared upon our
Constitution, are well founded; and it is my earnest wish that you may
extensively enjoy the benefits arising from them.

I thank you, Gentlemen, for your prayer for my future welfare; and offer up my
best wishes for your individual and collective happiness.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the CORPORATION of RHODE ISLAND COLLEGE, to the PRESIDENT of the
UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
THOUGH among the last to congratulate you on your advancement to that
dignified and important station to which the unanimous voice of a grateful
country has called you, the Corporation of Rhode Island College claim to be
among the first in warmth of affection for your person, and in esteem for your
public character. In placing you at the head of the United States, regard was
had no less to the influence of your example over the morals of the people,
than to your talents in the administration of government. Happy are we to
observe, that similar motives have influenced your conduct in filling the lower
offices in the executive department. We most devoutly venerate that
superintending Providence, which, in the course of events propitious to this
country, has called you forth to establish, after having defended, our rights
and liberties.

Agitated in the hour of doubtful conflict, exulting in your victories, we
watched your footsteps with the most anxious solicitude. Our fervent
supplications to Heaven, that you might be furnished with that wisdom and
prudence necessary to guide us to freedom and independence, have been heard,
and most graciously answered.

For the preservation of this freedom, one great object still demands our
peculiar attention, the education of our youth. Your sentiments, Sir, on this
subject, "that knowledge is in every country the surest basis of public
happiness," and the strongest barrier against the intruding hand of despotism,
as they perfectly accord with those of the most celebrated characters that ever
adorned human nature, so they leave no room to apprehend you will refuse the
wreath with which the guardians of literature, here, would entwine your brow.

By restoring your health, and protracting your life, so dear to this country,
Divine Providence has, in a late instance, furnished to millions matter of
thanksgiving and praise.

That you may long remain on earth a blessing to mankind, and the support of
your country; that you may afterward receive the rewards of virtue, by having
the approbation of God, is our most sincere desire, and fervent supplication.

Signed, by order of the Corporation, JABEZ BOWEN, Chancellor. JAMES MANNING,
President. DAVID HOWELL, Secretary.

Providence, August 19, 1790.
The Answer. To the CORPORATION of RHODE ISLAND COLLEGE.
GENTLEMEN,
THE circumstances which have, until this time, prevented you from offering
your congratulations on my advancement to the station I hold in the government
of the United States, do not diminish the pleasure I feel in receiving this
flattering proof of your affection and esteem; for which I request you will
accept my thanks.

In repeating thus publicly my sense of the zeal you displayed for the success
of the cause of your country, I only add a single suffrage to the general
testimony, which all who were acquainted with you in the most critical and
doubtful moments of our struggle for liberty and independence, have constantly
borne in your favor.

While I cannot remain insensible to the indulgence with which you regard the
influence of my example, and the tenor of my conduct, I rejoice in having so
favorable an opportunity of felicitating the State of Rhode Island on the
cooperation I am sure to find in the measures adopted by the guardians of
literature in this place, for improving the morals of the rising generation,
and inculcating upon their minds, principles peculiarly calculated for the
preservation of our rights and liberties. You may rely on whatever protection I
may be able to afford, in so important an object as the education of our youth.

I will now conclude, Gentlemen, by expressing my acknowledgments for the
tender manner in which you mention the restoration of my health on a late
occasion; and with ardent wishes that Heaven may prosper the literary
institution under your care, in giving you the best of its blessings in this
world, as well as in the world to come.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the MASTER, WARDENS and BRETHREN of KING DAVID's LODGE, to GEORGE
WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
WE, the Master, Wardens and Brethren of King David's Lodge, in Newport, Rhode
Island, joyfully embrace this opportunity, to greet you as a Brother, and to
hail you welcome to Rhode Island.

We exult in the thought, that as Masonry has always been patronized by the
wise, the good, and the great, so has it stood, and ever will stand, as its
fixtures are on the immutable pillars of faith, hope and charity.

With unspeakable pleasure, we gratulate you as filling the Presidential Chair,
with the applause of a numerous and enlightened people; whilst at the same
time, we felicitate ourselves in the honor done the brotherhood, by your many
exemplary virtues, and emanations of goodness proceeding from a heart worthy of
possessing the ancient mysteries of our craft, being persuaded that the wisdom
and grace, with which Heaven has endowed you, will ever square all your
thoughts, words and actions by the eternal laws of honor, equity and truth; so
as to promote the advancement of all good works, your own happiness, and that
of mankind. Permit us then, illustrious Brother, cordially to salute you, with
three times three, and to add our fervent supplications, that the Sovereign
Architect of the Universe may always encompass you with his holy protection.

Committee.
MOSES SEIXAS, Master, HENRY SHERBURNE,

By order, WILLIAM LITTLEFIELD, Secretary.
Newport, August 17, 1790.
The Answer. To the MASTER, WARDENS and BRETHREN of KING DAVID's LODGE in
NEWPORT, RHODE ISLAND.
GENTLEMEN,
I RECEIVE the welcome which you give me to Rhode Island with pleasure; and I
acknowledge my obligations for the flattering expressions of regard contained
in your Address with grateful sincerity. Being persuaded that a just
application of the principles on which the Masonic Fraternity is founded, must
be promotive of private virtue and public prosperity, I shall always be happy
to advance the interest of the Society, and to be considered by them as a
deserving Brother. My best wishes, Gentlemen, are offered for your individual
happiness.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the HEBREW CONGREGATION in NEWPORT, RHODE ISLAND, to the PRESIDENT
of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
PERMIT the children of the stock of Abraham to approach you with the most
cordial affection and esteem for your person and merit, and to join with our
fellow-citizens in welcoming you to Newport.

With pleasure we reflect on those days -- those days of difficulty and danger,
when the God of Israel, who delivered David from the peril of the sword,
shielded your head in the day of battle; and we rejoice to think, that the same
Spirit who rested in the bosom of the greatly beloved Daniel, enabling him to
preside over the provinces of the Babylonish empire, rests, and ever will rest,
upon you, enabling you to discharge the arduous duties of Chief Magistrate in
these States.

Deprived as we heretofore have been of the invaluable rights of free citizens,
we now (with a deep sense of gratitude to the Almighty Disposer of all events)
behold a government erected by the Majesty of the People -- a government, which
to bigotry gives no sanction -- to persecution no assistance: but generously
affording to all, liberty of conscience, and immunities of citizenship: deeming
every one, of whatever nation, tongue or language, equal parts of the great
governmental machine. This so ample and extensive Federal Union, whose base is
philanthropy, mutual confidence, and public virtue, we cannot but acknowledge
to be the work of the Great God, who rules in the armies of heaven, and among
the inhabitants of the earth, doing whatsoever seems to him good.

For all the blessings of civil and religious liberty, which we enjoy under an
equal and benign administration, we desire to send up our thanks to the Ancient
of Days, the Great Preserver of men, beseeching him that the Angel who
conducted our forefathers through the wilderness into the promised land, may
graciously conduct you through all the difficulties and dangers of this mortal
life. And when like Joshua, full of days and full of honors, you are gathered
to your fathers, may you be admitted into the heavenly paradise, to partake of
the water of life, and the tree of immortality.

Done and Signed by order of the Hebrew Congregation, in Newport, (Rhode
Island.) MOSES SEIXAS, Warden.
Newport, August 17, 1790.
The Answer. To the HEBREW CONGREGATION in NEWPORT, RHODE ISLAND.
GENTLEMEN,
WHILE I receive with much satisfaction your Address, replete with expressions
of affection and esteem, I rejoice in the opportunity of assuring you, that I
shall always retain a grateful remembrance of the cordial welcome I experienced
in my visit to Newport, from all classes of citizens. The reflection on the
days of difficulty and danger which are past, is rendered the more sweet from a
consciousness that they are succeeded by days of uncommon prosperity and
security.

If we have wisdom to make the best use of the advantages with which we are now
favored, we cannot fail, under the just administration of a good government,
to become a great and a happy people.

The citizens of the United States of America, have a right to applaud
themselves for having given to mankind examples of an enlarged and liberal
policy: a policy worthy of imitation. All possess a like liberty of conscience,
and immunities of citizenship. It is now no more that toleration is spoken of,
as if it was by the indulgence of one class of people that another enjoyed the
exercise of their inherent natural rights. For happily the government of the
United States, which gives to bigotry no sanction, to persecution no
assistance, requires only that they who live under its protection should demean
themselves as good citizens, in giving it on all occasions their effectual
support.

It would be inconsistent with the frankness of my character, not to avow that
I am pleased with your favorable opinion of my administration and fervent
wishes for my felicity. May the children of the stock of Abraham, who dwell in
this land, continue to merit and enjoy the good will of the other inhabitants
-- while every one shall sit in safety under his own vine and fig tree, and
there shall be none to make him afraid.

May the Father of all Mercies scatter light and not darkness in our paths, and
make us all in our several vocations useful here, and in his own due time and
way everlastingly happy.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the INHABITANTS of ELIZABETH TOWN to the PRESIDENT of the UNITED
STATES.
SIR,
WE, the inhabitants of Elizabeth Town and its vicinity, being deeply impressed
with your illustrious character, and sensibly awake to your resplendent and
innumerable virtues, hail you a hearty welcome!

We are happy to find, that notwithstanding your perils, toils, and
guardianship, you are still able to grant us this first, this greatest of all
favors -- your presence.

We felicitate ourselves on your exploring our country; and as you already
reign in our hearts, so we should think ourselves doubly blessed, could we have
the honor to be included within your more especial command and jurisdiction --
within the grand center of virtues.

Our beloved Chief! be pleased to accept our most grateful thanks for this
honor conferred on us. And may the Disposer of all things lengthen out your
days, so that you may behold with satisfaction, the virtue and prosperity of
the people whom you have made free. And when you come to close the last volume
of your illustrious actions, may you be crowned with a crown, not made with
hands.

In behalf of the Inhabitants, THOMAS SPRIGG, HENRY SHRYOCK, WILLIAM LEE.

Elizabeth Town, Oct. 20, 1790.
The Answer. To the INHABITANTS of ELIZABETH TOWN and its Vicinity.
GENTLEMEN,
THE cordial welcome which you give me to Elizabeth Town, and the very
flattering expressions of regard, contained in your Address, claim and receive
my grateful and sincere acknowledgments.

Estimating, as I do, the affection and esteem of my fellow-citizens, and
conscious that my best pretension to their approbation is founded in an earnest
endeavor faithfully to discharge the duties which have been assigned me, I
cannot better reply to their confidence than by assuring them that the same
impartiality, which has heretofore directed, will continue to govern my conduct
in the execution of public trusts.

I offer sincere wishes for your temporal happiness and future felicity.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the HEBREW CONGREGATIONS in the Cities of PHILADELPHIA, NEW YORK,
CHARLESTON and RICHMOND, to GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
IT is reserved for you to unite in affection for your character and person,
every political and religious denomination of men: and in this will the Hebrew
Congregations aforesaid yield to no class of their fellow-citizens.

We have been hitherto prevented by various circumstances peculiar to our
situation, from adding our congratulation to those which the rest of America
have offered on your elevation to the Chair of the Federal Government. Deign,
then, illustrious Sir, to accept this our homage.

The wonders which the Lord of Hosts has worked in the days of our
forefathers, have taught us to observe the greatness of his wisdom and his
might, throughout the events of the late glorious revolution; and while we
humble ourselves at his footstool in thanksgiving and praise for the blessing
of his deliverance, we acknowledge you the Leader of the American Armies, as
his chosen and beloved servant. But not to your sword alone is our present
happiness to be ascribed: that, indeed, opened the way to the reign of freedom;
but never was it perfectly secure, till your hand gave birth to the Federal
Constitution; and you renounced the joys of retirement, to seal by your
administration in peace what you had achieved in war.

To the eternal God who is thy refuge, we commit in our prayer the care of thy
precious life; and when full of years thou shall be gathered unto the people,
thy righteousness shall go before thee, and we shall remember, amidst our
regret, "that the Lord has set apart the godly for himself," whilst thy name
and thy virtues will remain an indelible memorial on our minds.

MANUEL JOSEPHSON, For and in behalf and under the authority of the several
Congregations aforesaid.
Philadelphia, Dec. 13, 1790.
The Answer. To the HEBREW CONGREGATIONS, in the City of PHILADELPHIA, NEW
YORK, CHARLESTON and RICHMOND.
GENTLEMEN,
THE liberality of sentiment toward each other which marks every political and
religious denomination of men in this country, stands unparalleled in the
history of nations.

The affection of such a people, is a treasure beyond the reach of calculation;
and the repeated proofs which my fellow-citizens have given of their attachment
to me and approbation of my doings, form the purest source of my temporal
felicity. The affectionate expressions of your Address again excite my
gratitude, and receive my warmest acknowledgment.

The power and goodness of the Almighty were strongly manifested in the events
of our late glorious revolution; and his kind interposition in our behalf, has
been no less visible in the establishment of our present equal government. In
war he directed the sword; and in peace he has ruled in our councils. My agency
in both has been guided by the best intentions, and a sense of the duty which I
owe my country.

And as my exertions have hitherto been amply rewarded by the approbation of my
fellow-citizens, I shall endeavor to deserve a continuance of it by my future
conduct.

May the same temporal and eternal blessings which you implore for me, rest
upon your Congregations.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the GRAND LODGE of ANCIENT YORK MASONS, in PENNSYLVANIA, to GEORGE
WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR and BROTHER,
THE Ancient York Masons of the jurisdiction of Pennsylvania, for the first
time assembled, in general communication to celebrate the feast of St. John the
Evangelist, since your election to the chair of government in the United
States, beg leave to approach you, with congratulations from the East, and in
the pride of fraternal affection, to hail you as the great master builder
(under the Supreme Architect) by whose labors the temple of liberty has been
reared in the west; exhibiting to the nations of the earth a model of beauty,
order and harmony, worthy of their imitation and praise.

Your knowledge of the origin and objects of our institution -- its tendency to
promote the social affections and harmonize the hearts, give us a sure pledge
that this tribute of our veneration, this effusion of our love will not be
ungrateful to you; nor will Heaven reject our prayer that you may be long
continued to adorn the bright list of master workmen which our fraternity
produces in the terrestrial Lodge; and that you may be late removed to that
celestial Lodge, where love and harmony reigns transcendant and divine; where
the Great Architect more immediately presides; and where Cherubim and Seraphim,
wafting our congratulations from earth to heaven, shall hail you Brother!

By order and in behalf of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, in general
communication assembled in ample form. J. B. SMITH, G. M.
Attest, P. LE BARBIER DU PLESSIS, G. Sec.

The Answer. To the ANCIENT YORK MASONS of the jurisdiction of PENNSYLVANIA.
GENTLEMEN and BROTHERS,
I RECEIVE your kind congratulations with the purest sensations of fraternal
affection; and from a heart deeply impressed with your generous wishes for my
present and future happiness, I beg you to accept my thanks.

At the same time I request you will be assured of my best wishes and earnest
prayers for your happiness while you remain in this terrestrial mansion; and
that we may hereafter meet as brethren in the eternal temple of the Supreme
Architect.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the GRAND LODGE of FREE and ACCEPTED MASONS, for the Commonwealth
of MASSACHUSETTS, to their honored and illustrious BROTHER GEORGE WASHINGTON.
SIR,
WHILST the historian is describing the career of your glory, and the
inhabitants of an extensive empire are made happy in your unexampled exertions
-- whilst some celebrate the Hero, so distinguished in liberating United
America, and others the Patriot who presides over her Councils, -- a band of
brothers, having always joined the acclamations of their countrymen, now
testify their respect for those milder virtues which have ever graced the Man.

Taught by the precepts of our Society that all its Members stand upon a level,
we venture to assume this station, and to approach you with that freedom, which
diminishes our diffidence, without lessening our respect. Desirous to enlarge
the boundaries of social happiness, and to vindicate the ceremonies of their
institution, this Grand Lodge have published a "Book of Constitutions," (and a
copy for your acceptance accompanies this) which by discovering the principles
that actuate, will speak the eulogy of the Society; though they fervently wish
the conduct of its Members may prove its higher commendation.

Convinced of his attachment to its cause, and readiness to encourage its
benevolent designs, they have taken the liberty to dedicate this work to one,
the qualities of whose heart, and the actions of whose life, have contributed
to improve personal virtue, and extend throughout the world the most endearing
cordialities; and they humbly hope he will pardon this freedom, and accept the
tribute of their esteem and homage.

May the Supreme Architect of the Universe protect and bless you, give you
length of days, and increase of felicity in this world, and then receive you to
the harmonious and exalted Society in heaven.

JOHN CUTLER, Grand Master.
Grand Wardens.
JOSIAH BARTLETT, MUNGO MACKAY,

Boston, December 27, A. L. 5792.
The Answer. To the GRAND LODGE of FREE and ACCEPTED MASONS for the
Commonwealth of MASSACHUSETTS.
GENTLEMEN,
FLATTERING as it may be to the human mind, and truly honorable as it is, to
receive from our fellow-citizens testimonies of approbation for exertions to
promote the public welfare, it is not less pleasing to know, that the milder
virtues of the heart are highly respected by a society whose liberal principles
are founded in the immutable laws of truth and justice.

To enlarge the sphere of social happiness is worthy the benevolent design of a
Masonic Institution. And it is most fervently to be wished, that the conduct of
every member of the fraternity, as well as those publications that discover the
principles which actuate them, may tend to convince mankind that the grand
object of Masonry is to promote the happiness of the human race.

While I beg your acceptance of my thanks for the "Book of Constitutions" which
you have sent me, and for the honor you have done me in the dedication, permit
me to assure you, that I feel all those emotions of gratitude which your
affectionate Address, and cordial wishes, are calculated to inspire. And I
sincerely pray that the Great Architect of the Universe may bless you here, and
receive you hereafter in his Immortal Temple.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the MERCHANTS and TRADERS of the City of PHILADELPHIA to GEORGE
WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
SENSIBLE that nothing is wanting to the happiness of the people of the United
States, but to continue in peace under their excellent laws and government, the
Merchants and Traders of the city of Philadelphia beg leave to express to you
the high sense they entertain of the wisdom and goodness which dictated your
late Proclamation, declaring the neutrality to be observed by the United States
in the war wherein several European powers are now engaged -- a war which,
however it might serve the interests of their commerce for the time, they, as
the friends of all men, and of all nations, are bound to deplore.

Impressed too with an opinion, that in an unoffending conduct toward all the
world, consists the true policy of America, it is their determination not only
to pay the strictest regard to the Proclamation themselves, but to
discountenance in the most pointed manner, any contrary disposition in others;
^xamples of which they are persuaded will seldom occur, the sentiments just
expressed being, as they have the satisfaction to find, the common language of
the citizens of Pennsylvania.

Philadelphia, May 17, 1793. [ The above Address was signed by about 300
persons.]



The Answer. To the MERCHANTS and TRADERS of the City of PHILADELPHIA.
GENTLEMEN,
FULLY persuaded that the happiness and best interests of the people of the
United States will be promoted by observing a strict neutrality in the present
contest among the powers of Europe -- it gives me pleasure to learn that the
measure which I have taken to declare to the world their disposition on this
head, has given general satisfaction to the citizens of Pennsylvania.

The friends of humanity will deprecate war wherever it may appear; and we have
experienced enough of its evils in this country to know that it should not be
wantonly or unnecessarily entered upon. I trust therefore that the good
citizens of the United States will show to the world that they have as much
wisdom in preserving peace at this interesting juncture, as they have
heretofore displayed valor in defending their just rights.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the MERCHANTS and TRADERS of BALTIMORE to GEORGE WASHINGTON,
PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
THE Merchants and Traders of the town of Baltimore, as participators in the
general prosperity resulting from peace, and the excellent laws and
constitution of the United States, cannot be insensible, in the present crisis
of things, to whatever might endanger an uninterrupted enjoyment of these great
and visible blessings. Impressed with these sentiments, they beg leave to
express the high sense, they entertain of the provident wisdom and watchfulness
over the concerns and peace of a happy people, which you have so evidently and
seasonably displayed in your late proclamation, declaring the neutrality to be
observed by the United States in the war wherein several European nations are
now engaged. Well convinced that the true interest of America consists in a
conduct impartial, friendly, and unoffending to the belligerent powers, they
would further assure you of their steady determination not only to pay the
strictest regard to that proclamation themselves, but to discountenance the
least departure from it in others, should any such instances occur within their
knowledge; a resolution which they unfold the more confidently as believing it
to accord with the general sentiment of their fellow-citizens throughout
Maryland.

Baltimore, May 22, 1793.
The Answer. To the MERCHANTS and TRADERS of the Town of BALTIMORE.
GENTLEMEN,
AT this eventful period, when caution must be united with firmness to preserve
to the United States the blessings of peace, and at the same time, to maintain
our rights as an independent nation, it affords me no small degree of
satisfaction to find that my endeavors to promote these objects, by declaring
the neutrality of the United States, has met your approbation. While the
measures of this government are taken upon constitutional ground, and have for
their object the public good, it would be injurious to our enlightened citizens
not to rely upon their countenance and support in carrying them into effect.

G. WASHINGTON.
Philadelphia, May 27, 1793.
Address Of the BALTIMORE MECHANICAL SOCIETY to GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of
the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
HAVING our hopes and expectations principally fixed on the National
Government, for protection and encouragement in our various pursuits, and being
sensible that our happiness and prosperity, in a great measure depends on the
continuance of peace and our being in a state of amity with the European
nations now engaged in war, we beg leave, in addition to what others of our
fellow-citizens in this town have presented, to express the high sense we
entertain of the wisdom and goodness which dictated your late declaration of
the disposition of government to observe a strict neutrality toward the
belligerent powers, who are now desolating the finest countries of Europe. Our
country lately experienced all the miseries of a cruel and desolating war; but
by the interposition of a kind Providence, the Americans were enabled under
your wise direction and patriotic exertions during their arduous struggle, to
secure the invaluable blessings they now enjoy. Being thus exalted to the
possession of civil and religious liberty, and enjoying the benefits of a free
and equal government, we cannot divest ourselves of sympathy for all who
struggle for the same blessing; but the miseries of war we deprecate; and,
circumstanced as our country and governernment are, the generous French will
acquiesce with the American citizens in the acknowledgment of that political
truth, which you have wisely enjoined, that the duty and interest of the United
States require that we should, with sincerity and good faith, adopt and pursue
a conduct friendly and impartial toward the belligerent powers. This conduct
we do, for ourselves adopt, and mean to pursue, and we are persuaded it will be
the conduct of all our good and virtuous citizens. Peace will thus be
preserved, the true interest of our country promoted, happiness extended, and
an asylum secured to the oppressed of every nation and country.

Baltimore, June 18, 1793.
The Answer. To the BALTIMORE MECHANICAL SOCIETY.
GENTLEMEN,
THE language of your Address shows that you have rightly estimated the
purposes for which our General Government was established; and so evident are
the benefits resulting to the industrious citizens, of every description,
throughout the United States, from the operation of equal laws, and from the
security and tranquillity with which they have pursued their various avocations
under a government of their own choice, that it becomes the duty of those who
are entrusted with the management of their public affairs, to endeavor by all
proper means to continue and promote those invaluable blessings. And that the
happiness and true interest of a people are best secured by observing such a
line of conduct as will, while they discharge their political obligations,
preserve to their country, peace with other nations, and cultivate the good
will of mankind toward them, I trust no one will deny. If the citizens of the
United States have obtained the character of an enlightened and liberal people,
they will prove that they deserve it, by showing themselves to be the true
friends of mankind, and making their country not only an asylum for the
oppressed of every nation, but a desirable residence for the virtuous and
industrious of every country.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the INHABITANTS of ALEXANDRIA and its Vicinity to the PRESIDENT of
the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
THAT America should remain in peace, and enjoy the blessings of her free
government, undisturbed by European concerns, we believe it to be the earnest
desire of every well-wisher to our country; and we feel the most cordial
satisfaction in expressing to you our conviction of the part you have taken to
preserve the public repose and happiness. In declaring by your Proclamation the
conduct which ought to be pursued by the people of the United States toward
the belligerent powers of Europe, a new instance was presented to your
fellow-citizens of your vigilance in discharging the important duties of your
station, and you have exhibited to the nations of the world a striking proof of
the candor and justice which govern the politics of the republic over which
you preside. Sincerity, good faith, and truth, are virtues belonging to the
republican character. We rejoice that they have been cherished and practiced in
the administration of our government, and we conside that a steady and manly
adherence to them will furnish an example of a people living under a republican
form of government that will meet with the approbation of all mankind, and be
productive of universal happiness.

Accept, Sir, our assurances, that individually our conduct shall be regulated
on every occasion by that spirit of amity and impartiality which you have
enjoined.

By order of the Meeting, DENNIS RAMSAY, Chairman.
Alexandria, July 4, 1793.
The Answer. To the INHABITANTS of ALEXANDRIA and its Vicinity.
GENTLEMEN,
DEEPLY impressed with the important advantages which the United States will
experience by remaining in peace during the present contest among the powers of
Europe, it is with the highest satisfaction that I receive this manifestation
of your wishes for the preservation of that invaluable blessing and the
approbation which you express of the measures which have been taken to secure a
continuance of our present happy situation. To complete the American character,
it remains for the citizens of the United States to show to the world, that the
reproach heretofore cast upon republican governments, for their want of
stability, is without foundation, when the government is the deliberate choice
of an enlightened people; and I am fully persuaded, that every well-wisher to
the happiness and prosperity of this country will evince by his conduct, that
we live under a government of laws, and that, while we preserve inviolate our
national faith, we are desirous of living in amity with all mankind.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the PEOPLE of FAIRFAX COUNTY, to the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
WHILST the people of America are so generally expressing to you, Sir, their
perfect approbation of your proclamation, enjoining, on the part of the
citizens of these United States, a strict neutrality toward the belligerent
powers of Europe; we should have remained silent, under this general
approbation, and not have troubled you with our sentiments, did we not conceive
that the present crisis calls loudly on all those, who feel for the dignity of
their government, to speak out the language of their hearts. When foreigners
shall be so far forgetful of the respect they owe to the sovereignty of the
community wherein they reside, as to threaten an appeal (...) the body of the
people, from the decision and conduct of those with whom the people have
entrusted that part of it which relates to their foreign connexions; and in
despite of the public authority, prohibiting the contrary, shall arm and equip
vessels of war, in our ports, for the purpose of capturing the property of
nations with whom we are at peace, which things can only have for their object
internal confusion, and all the calamities of external warfare; that a stop may
be put to proceedings so hurtful and so dangerous, we think it the duty of the
citizens to let their sentiments be publicly known.

Impressed with this truth, we, the subscribers, landholders and inhabitants of
Fairfax County, have presented ourselves before you; and beg leave to assure
you, that as in all your conduct as presiding Magistrate of these United
States, we have seen you pursuing, with prosperity and firmness, the good of
mankind and the solid glory and interests of your country; and in no instance,
we conceive, more truly honorable to yourself, or more serviceable to us, than
in the conduct you have caused to be pursued toward the nations of Europe now
at war with each other; we shall hold ourselves bound to oppose all attempts
that shall be made to disturb the peace, or injure the independence and dignity
of the government over which you preside, by the machinations of foreigners or
the intemperate actions of discontented individuals of our own country. We
trust, that in speaking thus, we do but proclaim the ideas of every
well-intentioned citizen of America; for all have felt, and we hope, will long
continue to feel, the blessings of an administration where wisdom, temper and
firmness have so conspicuously presided.

In behalf of the people of Fairfax County, LUDWELL LEE* R. WEST.


The Answer.
GENTLEMEN,
THE Address of the Landholders and Inhabitants of Fairfax County, forwarded to
me, by you, has been received.

It is a source of much pleasure to me to find my fellow-citizens of Fairfax
among those spirited republicans of the United States, who declare to the world
their firm determination to support the government they have chosen for
themselves, and to oppose, with manly resolution, any attempts to weaken the
public confidence therein, or to interrupt the repose they now enjoy in a state
of peace, to which their interest and happiness are so closely allied.

In fulfilling the duties which are attendant on the trust with which my
countrymen have honored me, my highest gratification is in meriting and
receiving their approving voice. I therefore request you to communicate to the
citizens of Fairfax, the pleasure I derive from their approbation of my public
conduct, and to assure them of my constant and unremitted attention to the
promotion of the prosperity and happiness of my fellow-citizens of these States.

G. WASHINGTON.
Mount Vernon, October 24.
Address Of the TRUSTEES of a School at GERMANTOWN, (...) the PRESIDENT of the
UNITED STATES.
SIR,
THE Trustees of the public school of Germantown, have the honor to wait upon
the President, with a respectful tender of the school buildings for the
accommodation of Congress, should they convene at this place.

To judge of the other inhabitants of Germantown from our own motives, it
cannot be questioned, they would, on this occasion, strive to make it as
convenient a residence as possible.

On the permanence of our General Government, and the safety of its supporters
and defenders, rests, under God, in our view, whatever we hold most valuable.

It has been our fortune, Sir, to see you in many seasons of difficulty and
danger always surmounting them; and even now, fortifying by your presence the
good spirit of the Union, lately humbled by the calamity in Philadelphia; an
alleviation of which we participate, in common with the survivors there, in
consequence of your propitious return to this State.

Trustees.
HENRY HILL, SAMUEL ASHMEAN, JOS. FAR, CHRISTIAN SCHNYDER, SAMUEL MECKLIN,

Nov. 6, 1793.
The Answer. To the TRUSTEES of the Public School of GERMANTOWN.
GENTLEMEN,
THE readiness with which the Trustees of the public school of Germantown
tender the buildings under their charge for the use of Congress, is a proof of
their zeal for furthering the public good: and doubtless the inhabitants of
Germantown generally, actuated by the same motives, will feel the same
dispositions to accommodate, if necessary, those who assemble but for their
service and that of their fellow-citizens.

Where it may be best for Congress to remain, will depend on circumstances,
which are daily unfolding themselves, and for the issue of which we can but
offer up our prayers to the Sovereign Dispenser of life and health. His favor
too on our endeavors -- the good sense and firmness of our fellow-citizens,
and fidelity in those they employ, will secure us a permanence of good
government.

If I have been fortunate enough during the vicissitudes of my life, so to have
conducted myself, as to have merited your approbation, it is a source of much
pleasure; and should my future conduct merit a continuance of your good
opinions, especially at a time when our country, and the city of Philadelphia
in particular, is visited by so severe a calamity, it will add more than a
little to my happiness.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address Of the ARTILLERY COMPANY of the Town of NEWPORT to the PRESIDENT of
the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
THE Artillery Company of the town of Newport, i^ the State of Rhode Island and
Providence Plantations, assembled on this day, to celebrate the birth of the
Chief Magistrate of the United States, beg leave to present their
congratulations and respect. Associated by principles which effected a glorious
revolution, and laid the basis of a free and permanent government; they
contemplate with grateful emotions, the blessings which have resulted from a
prudent and efficient administration. Enjoying the inestimable privileges of
freemen, they commiserate the unhappy state of those who are in bondage;
sympathize in the sufferings of those who are bravely struggling in the cause
of freedom; and cordially rejoice with those who are successful in regaining
their rights. Equalized with their fellow-citizens, they consider abilities and
virtue the only qualities which deserve public estimation, and give preemine^ce
to a character. Influenced by these sentiments, they have presumed to present
this offering of congratulation and respect, as the purest testimony of their
attachment for distinguished virtue; humbly beseeching the Supreme Giver of all
good gifts to continue your life and public usefulness, and that they, with
their fellow-citizens, may still greatly reciprocate the satisfaction resulting
from a faithful discharge of important duties.

Newport, April 1.
The Answer.
GENTLEMEN,
FOR your kind congratulations on the anniversary of my birthday, and the
other obliging expressions of your Address, I pray you to accept my grateful
thanks.

To cherish those principles which effected the revolution, and laid the
foundation of our free and happy government, does honor to your patriotism, as
do the sentiments of commiseration for the sufferings of the unfortunate, and
the good wishes for the happiness of the great family of mankind, to your
philanthropy.

Your prayer for me is reciprocated by the best vows I can offer for your
welfare.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address To GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
SIR,
WHILE we, the Burgesses and Citizens of Harrisburg, rejoice at the opportunity
of presenting our respects to a character so justly revered, and dear to
Americans, we cannot but lament that we should owe it to an interruption of the
peace and prosperity of our country, those constant objects of our public
cares. We trust, however, that the just indignation which fires the breasts of
all virtuous citizens, at the unprovoked outrages committed by those lawless
men, who are in opposition to one of the mildest and most equal governments of
which the condition of man is susceptible, will excite such exertions as to
crush the spirit of disaffection wherever it has appeared, and that our
political horizon will shine brighter than ever, on the dispersion of the
clouds which now menace and obscure it.

Though our sphere of action is too limited to produce any important effects,
yet we beg leave to assure your Excellency that so far as it extends, our best
endeavors shall not be wanting to support the happy Constitution and wise
administration of our government.

Signed in behalf of the Borough, Burgesses.
BONARD BOMBACH, ALEX. BRERYHILL,

Harrisburg, October 3.
The Answer. To the BURGESSES and other CITIZENS of HARRISBURG.
GENTLEMEN,
IN declaring to you the genuine satisfaction I derive from your very cordial
Address, I will not mingle any expressions of the painful sensations which I
experience from the occasion that has drawn me hither. You will be at no loss
to do justice to my feelings. But relying on that kindness of Providence
toward our country which every adverse appearance hitherto has served to
manifest, and counting upon the tried good sense and patriotism of the great
body of our fellow-citizens, I do not hesitate to indulge, with you, the
expectation of such an issue as will serve to confirm the blessings we enjoy,
under a Constitution that well deserves the confidence, attachment, and support
of virtuous and enlightened men. To class the inhabitants of Harrisburg among
this number, is only to bear testimony to the zealous and efficient exertions,
which they have made toward the defense of the laws.

G. WASHINGTON.
[Though foreign to the general Plan of this Work, the following Proceedings on
the Treaty are of sufficient Importance to warrant the Insertion.]



The Answer Of the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES to the RESOLUTIONS of the
Town of BOSTON.
To EZEKIEL PRICE, THOMAS WALLEY, WILLIAM BOARDMAN, EBENEZER SEAVER, THOMAS
CRAFTS, THOMAS EDWARDS, WILLIAM LITTLE, WILLIAM SCOLLAY, and JESSE PUTNAM,
Esq'rs. Selectmen of the Town of BOSTON. GENTLEMEN,
IN every act of my administration, I have sought the happiness of my
fellow-citizens. My system for the attainment of this object has uniformly
been, to overlook all personal, local, and partial considerations; to
contemplate the United States as one great whole; to consider that sudden
impressions, when erroneous, would yield to candid reflection; and to consult
only the substantial and permanent interests of our country.

Nor have I departed from this line of conduct, on the occasion which has
produced the Resolutions contained in your letter of the 13th instant.

Without a predilection to my own judgment, I have weighed with attention every
argument which has at any time been brought into view. But the Constitution is
the guide which I never can abandon. It has assigned to the President the power
of making treaties, with the advice and consent of the Senate. It was doubtless
supposed, that these two branches of government would combine, without passion,
and with the best means of information, those facts and principles, upon which
the success of our foreign relations will always depend: that they ought not to
substitute for their own conviction, the opinions of others; or to seek truth
through any channel but that of a temperate and well-informed investigation.

Under this persuasion, I have resolved on the manner of executing the duty now
before me. To the high responsibility, attached to it, I freely submit; and
you, Gentlemen, are at liberty to make these sentiments known, as the grounds
of my procedure. While I feel the most lively gratitude for the many instances
of approbation from my country, I can no otherwise deserve it, than by obeying
the dictates of my conscience.

With due respect, I am, Gentlemen, your obedient

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, July 20, 1795.
Dissent. Signed by upwards of 200 of the principal merchants, traders, and
mechanics of the town of Boston.

WHEREAS the votes adopted at a late meeting of this town, relative to the
Treaty of Amity, Navigation, and Commerce, between the United States and his
Britannic Majesty, have been represented as expressing the unanimous sentiments
of the merchants and other inhabitants upon that subject -- we, the
subscribers, unwilling to be implicated in the number of those, who approve of
the doings of that meeting, and reserving to ourselves the right of expressing
our opinion individually upon the merits or demerits of public measures, do
hereby declare our disapprobation of and dissent from the votes of said meeting.

Boston, July 15, 1795.
The Answer. To THOMAS RUSSELL, Esquire.
SIR,
I HAVE received your letter of the 13th instant, covering a copy of the
dissent of a number of citizens of Boston, expressing their disapprobation of
the votes adopted at a late meeting in that town, relative to the Treaty of
Amity, Commerce and Navigation, between the United States and Great Britain;
and also a copy of the proceedings of the Boston Chamber of Commerce, on the
same subject.

While I regret the diversity of opinion which has been manifested on this
occasion, it is a satisfaction to learn, that the commercial part of my
fellow-citizens, whose interests are thought to be most directly affected, so
generally consider the Treaty as calculated, on the whole, to procure important
advantages to our country.

This sentiment, I trust, will be extended, in proportion as the provisions of
the Treaty become well understood.

With due respect, I am, Sir, your obedient

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, August 22, 1795.
The Address Of the SUBSCRIBERS, MERCHANTS and TRADERS of the City of
PHILADELPHIA, to the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES,
RESPECTFULLY SHOWS,
THAT, confiding in the wisdom, integrity and patriotism of the constituted
authorities, we have forborne to offer our opinions on the merits of the
Treaty, pending between Great Britain and the United States; though, as
merchants and traders, our interests are more immediately concerned, than those
of any other class of men amongst us; as well on account of the indemnity
therein stipulated for past losses, as for the security we apprehend it will
give to the immense property employed by the merchants of the United States, in
their foreign commerce.

But seeing that other citizens have expressed their opinions upon this
important subject, and fearing lest our silence should be construed into an
acquiescence in those opinions, we deem it our duty explicitly and publicly to
avow our approbation of the conduct of the Senate of the United States,
believing that a different conduct respecting the Treaty would have subjected
us to the imminent hazard of war, with all its concomitant evils, and, more
especially, as provision is made for the establishment of public and private
credit, a continuance of peace, with all the advantages under which our
commerce flourishes, and the further improvement of our country now progressing
in a degree, elsewhere, without example.

These are advantages and blessings, which, in our opinions, greatly outweigh
all the objections to the Treaty generally; and, as further negociations are
recommended for obtaining a less limited intercourse with the British West
India islands, we hope that it will be rendered still more beneficial to this
country.

Such being our sentiments, we submit them freely; and in confidence, that as
they have not been hastily formed, so they will not be less deserving of
consideration.

[Signed by above four hundred respectable names.]

The Answer.
GENTLEMEN,
I RECEIVE, with great sensibility, your Address, on the subject of the Treaty
lately negociated between the United States and Great Britain; expressing your
confidence in the constituted authorities, and the concurrence of your opinions
with their determinations on this highly important subject. Such sentiments
deliberately formed, and proceeding from men whose interests are more
immediately concerned than those of any other classes of my fellow-citizens,
cannot fail to strengthen that just confidence in the rectitude of public
measures which is essential to the general welfare.

G. WASHINGTON.

Address To the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
IT is with real pleasure, we comply with the request of our fellow-citizens of
Frederick County, by forwarding to you the enclosed resolutions, which express
the sentiments they entertain of your conduct, in a situation the most
delicate, and upon an occasion the most interesting and important that has,
perhaps, occurred during your administration.

Permit us, Sir, to seize this opportunity of expressing our sincere and
anxious wish, that you may long continue to preside over the interests of these
States with that wisdom and firmness which have hitherto adorned and supported
your official conduct; and that you may, in an eminent degree, partake of that
happiness which you have been so instrumental in procuring and preserving to
your fellow-citizens.

We have the honor to be, with sentiments of real esteem and respect, Sir,
your humble servants,

DANIEL MORGAN, CHARLES M. THURSTON, ROBERT WHITE, CHARLES MAGILL, JOSEPH
CALDWELL.

Winchester, Dec. 2, 1795.
The Answer.
GENTLEMEN,
I RECEIVED with great satisfaction your obliging and affectionate letter,
dated the 2d instant at Winchester, enclosing a Resolution of the citizens of
Frederick County, who met the preceding day at the county courthouse,
expressing their entire approbation of my conduct, in ratifying the Treaty
lately negociated between the United States and Great Britain.

Next to the approbation of my own mind, arising from a consciousness of having
uniformly, diligently, and sincerely aimed, by doing my duty, to promote the
true interests of my country -- the approbation of my fellow-citizens is dear
to my heart.

In a free country, such approbation should be a citizen's best reward; and so
it would be, if truth and candor were always to estimate the conduct of public
men. But the reverse is so often the case, that he who, wishing to serve his
country, is not influenced by higher motives, runs the risk of being miserably
disappointed. Under such discouragement, the good citizen will look beyond the
applauses and reproaches of men, and, persevering in his duty, stand firm in
conscious rectitude, and in the hope of approving Heaven.

I am, Gentlemen, with much respect, your fellow-citizen and friend,

G. WASHINGTON.
Philadelphia, Dec. 10, 1795.
Address Of the MINISTER PLENIPOTENTIARY of the FRENCH REPUBLIC on his
presenting the COLORS of FRANCE to the UNITED STATES.
MR. PRESIDENT,
I COME to acquit myself of a duty very dear to my heart. I come to deposite,
in your hands and in the midst of a people justly renowned for their courage,
and their love of liberty, the symbol of the triumph and of the enfranchisement
of my nation.

When she broke her chains; when she proclaimed the imprescriptable rights of
man; when, in a terrible war, she sealed with her blood the covenant made with
liberty, -- her own happiness was not alone the object of her glorious efforts;
her views extended also to all free people; she saw their interests blended
with her own, and doubly rejoiced in her victories, which in assuring to her
the enjoyments of her rights, became to them new guarantees of their
independence.

These sentiments, which animated the French nation, from the dawn of their
revolution, have acquired new strength since the foundation of the Republic.
France, at that time, by the form of its government assimilated to, or rather
indentified with free people, saw in them only friends and brothers. Long
accustomed to regard the American people as their most faithful allies, she has
sought to draw closer the ties already formed in the fields of America, under
the auspices of victory over the ruins of tyranny.

The National Convention, the organs of the will of the French nation, have
more than once expressed their sentiments to the American people; but above
all, these burst forth on that august day, when the ministers of the United
States presented to the National Representation, the Colors of his country,
desiring never to lose recollections as dear to Frenchmen as they must be to
Americans. The Convention ordered that these colors should be placed in the
hall of their sittings. They had experienced sensations too agreeable not to
cause them to be partaken of by their allies, and decreed that to them the
National Colors should be presented.

Mr. President, I do not doubt their expectations will be fulfilled; and I am
convinced, that every citizen will receive, with a pleasing emotion, this Flag,
elsewhere the terror of the enemies of liberty, here the certain pledge of
faithful friendship; especially when they recollect that it guides to combat,
men who have shared their toils, and who were prepared for liberty, by aiding
them to acquire their own.

P. A. ADET.

The Answer Of the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
BORN, Sir, in a land of liberty; having early learned its value; having
engaged in a perilous conflict to defend it; having, in a word, devoted the
best years of my life to secure it a permanent establishment in my own country;
my anxious recollections, my sympathetic feelings, and my best wishes are
irresistibly excited, whenever, in any country, I see an oppressed nation
unfurl the banners of freedom. But above all, the events of the French
Revolution have produced the deepest solicitude, as well as the highest
admiration. To call your nation brave, were to pronounce but common praise.
Wonderful people! ages to come will read with astonishment the history of your
brilliant exploits! I rejoice that the period of your toils and of your immense
sacrifices is approaching. I rejoice that the interesting revolutionary
movements of so many years have issued in the formation of a Constitution
designed to give permanency to the great object for which you have contended. I
rejoice that liberty, which you have so long embraced with enthusiasm --
liberty, of which you have been the invincible defenders, now finds an asylum
in the bosom of a regularly organized government; -- a government, which, being
formed to secure the happiness of the French people, corresponds with the
ardent wishes of my heart, while it gratifies the pride of every citizen of the
United States, by its resemblance of their own. On these glorious events,
accept, Sir, my sincere congratulations.

In delivering to you these sentiments. I express not my own feelings only, but
those of my fellow-citizens, in relation to the commencement, the progress, and
the issue of the French Revolution; and they will cordially join with me in
purest wishes to the Supreme Being, that the citizens of our sister Republic,
our magnanimous allies, may soon enjoy in peace, that liberty, which they have
purchased at so great a price, and all the happiness which liberty can bestow.

I receive, Sir, with lively sensibility, the symbol of the triumphs and of the
enfranchisements of your nation, the Colors of France, which you have now
presented to the United States. The transaction will be announced to Congress;
and the colors will be deposited with those archives of the United States,
which are at once the evidences and the memorials of their freedom and
independence. May these be perpetual! and may the friendship of the two
Republics be commensurate with their existence.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, Jan. 1, 1796.
Address Of the EMIGRANT SOCIETY to the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES.
SIR,
YOU are now approached by a Society, through their Committee, whose province
it is to take the emigrant stranger by the hand, on his arrival to our happy
shores, and point him to such objects as may render him serviceable to society
and himself; and to assist those in more indigent circumstances until they can
engage in useful employments. Such a society uniting with others of their
fellow-citizens, in congratulations to you on the present anniversary, cannot
be disagreeable, we hope, to a Chief Magistrate to whose wise and prudent
administration not less, perhaps, than to our excellent form of government, we
are indebted for that accession of population invited thereby to our common
country.

And when we reflect, that before this government was established from the
first cornerstone of the revolution, until the fabric was completed, your
services in arms were not less conspicuous than since the peace, we cannot
forbear to offer up our ardent desires, that the great Disposer of human events
may long continue a life so eminently useful to this country; and that you may
not cease to enjoy health, happiness, and that satisfaction which results from
doing good.

By order, and in behalf of the Philadelphia Society, for the information and
assistance of persons emigrating from foreign countries. JOHN NICHOLSON,
Chairman.
Philadelphia, Feb. 22, 1796.
The Answer.
GENTLEMEN,
THE principles of benevolence, on which the Society you represent is founded,
and which regulate its proceedings, entitle it to the approbation of all your
fellow-citizens. The congratulations of such a society I receive with
particular pleasure; and the satisfaction resulting from my constant exertions
to promote the welfare of my country, will be increased, if my public services
shall at the same time have contributed to render it a grateful residence to
persons emigrating from foreign countries.

Your kind wishes, Gentlemen, for my health and happiness, claim and receive my
cordial thanks.

G. WASHINGTON.

APPENDIX.
A Circular Letter From his Excellency GEORGE WASHINGTON, COMMANDER IN CHIEF of
the ARMIES of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA, to the GOVERNORS of the several
STATES.
Headquarters, Newburg, June 18, 1783. SIR,
THE great object for which I had the honor to hold an appointment in the
service of my country, being accomplished, I am now preparing to resign it into
the hands of Congress, and return to that domestic retirement, which, it is
well known, I left with the greatest reluctance; a retirement for which I have
never ceased to sigh through a long and painful absence, in which (remote from
the noise and trouble of the world) I meditate to pass the remainder of life in
a state of undisturbed repose: but, before I carry this resolution into effect,
I think it a duty incumbent on me to make this my last official communication,
to congratulate you on the glorious events which Heaven has been pleased to
produce in our favor, to offer my sentiments respecting some important
subjects, which appear to me to be intimately connected with the tranquillity
of the United States, to take my leave of your Excellency as a public
character, and to give my final blessing to that country in whose service I
have spent the prime of my life; for whose sake I have consumed so many anxious
days and watchful nights; and whose happiness, being extremely dear to me, will
always constitute no inconsiderable part of my own.

Impressed with the liveliest sensibility on this pleasing occasion, I will
claim the indulgence of dilating the more copiously on the subject of our
mutual selicitation. When we consider the magnitude of the prize we contended
for, the doubtful nature of the contest, and the favorable manner in which it
has terminated; we shall find the greatest possible reason for gratitude and
rejoicing: this is a theme that will afford infinite delight to every
benevolent and liberal mind, whether the event in contemplation be considered
as a source of present enjoyment, or the parent of future happiness; and we
shall have equal occasion to felicitate ourselves on the lot which Providence
has assigned us, whether we view it in a natural, a political, or moral point
of view.

The citizens of America, placed in the most enviable condition, as the sole
lords and proprietors of a vast tract of continent, comprehending all the
various soils and climates of the world, and abounding with all the necessaries
and conveniences of life, are now, by the late satisfactory pacification,
acknowledged to be possessed of absolute freedom and independency; they are
from this period to be considered as the actors on a most conspicuous theater,
which seems to be peculiarly designed by Providence for the display of human
greatness and felicity: here they are not only surrounded with every thing that
can contribute to the completion of private and domestic enjoyment, but Heaven
has crowned all its other blessings, by giving a surer opportunity for
political happiness than any other nation has ever been favored with. Nothing
can illustrate these observations more forcibly than the recollection of the
happy conjuncture of times and circumstances, under which our Republic assumed
its rank among the nations. The foundation of our empire was not laid in a
gloomy age of ignorance and superstition, but at an epoch when the rights of
mankind were better understood and more clearly defined, than at any former
period: researches of the human mind after social happiness have been carried
to a great extent: the treasures of knowledge acquired by the labors of
philosophers, sages, and legislators, through a long succession of years, are
laid open for use, and their collected wisdom may be happily applied in the
establishment of our forms of government: the free cultivation of letters, the
unbounded extension of commerce, the progressive refinement of manners, the
growing liberality of sentiment, and, above all, the pure and benign light of
revelation, have had a meliorating influence on mankind, and increased the
blessings of society. At this auspicious period the United States came into
existence as a nation, and if their citizens should not be completely free and
happy, the fault will be entirely their own.

Such is our situation, and such are our prospects; but notwithstanding the cup
of blessing is thus reached out to us -- notwithstanding happiness is ours, if
we have a disposition to seize the occasion, and make it our own; yet it
appears to me, there is an option still left to the United States of America,
whether they will be respectable and prosperous, or contemptible and miserable
as a nation. This is the time of their political probation; this is the moment,
when the eyes of the whole world are turned upon them; this is the time to
establish or ruin their national character forever; this is the favorable
moment to give such a tone to the Federal Government, as will enable it to
answer the ends of its institution; or this may be the ill-fated moment for
relaxing the powers of the Union, annihilating the cement of the Confederation,
and exposing us to become the sport of European politics, which may play one
State against another, to prevent their growing importance, and to serve their
own interested purposes. For, according to the system of policy the States
shall adopt at this moment, they will stand or fall; and, by their confirmation
or lapse, it is yet to be decided, whether the revolution must ultimately be
considered as a blessing or a curse; a blessing or a curse, not to the present
age alone, for with our fate will the destiny of unborn millions be involved.

With this conviction of the importance of the present crisis* silence in me
would be a crime. I will therefore speak to your Excellency the language of
freedom and sincerity, without disguise. I am aware, however, those who differ
from me in political sentiments, may perhaps remark, I am stepping out of the
proper line of my duty; and they may possibly ascribe to arrogance or
ostentation, what I know is alone the result of the purest intention; but the
rectitude of my own heart, which disdains such unworthy motives -- the part I
have hitherto acted in life -- the determination I have formed of not taking
any share in public business hereafter -- the ardent desire I feel and shall
continue to manifest, of quietly enjoying in private life, after all the toils
of war, the benefits of a wise and liberal government, -- will, I flatter
myself, sooner or later, convince my countrymen, that I could have no sinister
views in delivering, with so little reserve, the opinions contained in this
Address.

There are four things which I humbly conceive are essential to the well-being,
I may even venture to say, to the existence of the United States, as an
independent power.

1st. An indissoluble union of the States under one federal head.

2dly. A sacred regard to public justice.

3dly. The adoption of a proper peace establishment, And,

4thly. The prevalence of that pacific and friendly disposition among the
people of the United States, which will induce them to forget their local
prejudices and policies, to make those mutual concessions which are requisite
to the general prosperity, and, in some instances, to sacrifice their
individual advantages to the interest of the community.

These are the pillars on which the glorious fabric of our independency and
national character must be supported. Liberty is the basis, and whoever would
dare to sap the foundation, or overturn the structure, under whatever specious
pretext he may attempt it, will merit the bitterest execration and the severest
punishment which can be inflicted by his injured country.

On the three first articles I will make a few observations, leaving the last
to the good sense and serious consideration of those immediately concerned.

Under the first head, although it may not be necessary or proper for me in
this place to enter into a particular disquisition of the principles of the
Union, and to take up the great question which has been frequently agitated,
whether it be expedient and requisite for the States to delegate a large
proportion of power to Congress, or not; yet it will be a part of my duty, and
that of every true patriot, to assert, without reserve, and to insist upon the
following positions. That unless the States will suffer Congress to exercise
those prerogatives they are undoubtedly invested with by the constitution,
every thing must very rapidly tend to anarchy and confusion. -- That it is
indispensable to the happiness of the individual States, that there should be
lodged, somewhere, a supreme power, to regulate and govern the general concerns
of the confederated republic, without which the Union cannot be of long
duration. -- That there must be a faithful and pointed compliance on the part
of every State with the late proposals and demands of Congress, or the most
fatal consequences will ensue. -- That whatever measures have a tendency to
dissolve the union, or contribute to violate or lessen the sovereign authority,
ought to be considered as hostile to the liberty and independency of America,
and the authors of them treated accordingly. -- And lastly, that unless we can
be enabled by the concurrence of the States to participate of the fruits of the
revolution, and enjoy the essential benefits of civil society, under a form of
government so free and uncorrupted, so happily guarded against the danger of
oppression, as has been devised and adopted by the articles of confederation,
it will be a subject of regret, that so much blood and treasure have been
lavished for no purpose; that so many sufferings have been encountered without
a compensation, and that so many sacrifices have been made in vain. Many other
considerations might here be adduced to prove, that without an entire
conformity to the spirit of the Union, we cannot exist as an independent power.
It will be sufficient for my purpose to mention but one or two, which seem to
me of the greatest importance. It is only in our united character, as an
empire, that our independence is acknowledged, that our power can be regarded,
or our credit supported among foreign nations. The treaties of the European
powers with the United States of America, will have no validity on the
dissolution of the Union. We shall be left nearly in a state of nature; or we
may find, by our own unhappy experience, that there is a natural and necessary
progression from the extreme of anarchy to the extreme of tyranny; and that
arbitrary power is most easily established on the ruins of liberty abused to
licentiousness.

As to the second article, which respects the performance of public justice,
Congress have, in their late Address to the United States, almost exhausted the
subject; they have explained their ideas so fully, and have enforced the
obligations the States are under to render complete justice to all the public
creditors, with so much dignity and energy, that in my opinion, no real friend
to the honor and independency of America can hesitate a single moment
respecting the propriety of complying with the just and honorable measures
proposed. If their arguments do not produce conviction, I know of nothing that
will have greater influence, especially when we reflect that the system
referred to, being the result of the collected wisdom of the continent, must be
esteemed, if not perfect, certainly the least objectionable of any that could
be devised; and that, if it should not be carried into immediate execution, a
national bankruptcy, with all its deplorable consequences, will take place,
before any different plan can possibly be proposed or adopted; so pressing are
the present circumstances, and such is the alternative now offered to the
States.

The ability of the country to discharge the debts which have been incurred in
its defense, is not to be doubted. An inclination, I flatter myself, will not
be wanting; the path of our duty is plain before us; honesty will be found, on
every experiment, to be the best and only true policy. Let us then, as a
nation, be just; let us fulfill the public contracts which Congress had
undoubtedly a right to make for the purpose of carrying on the war, with the
same good faith we suppose ourselves bound to perform our private engagements.
In the mean time let an attention to the cheerful performance of their proper
business, as individuals, and as members of society, be earnestly inculcated on
the citizens of America; then will they strengthen the bands of government, and
be happy under its protection. Every one will reap the fruit of his labors;
every one will enjoy his own acquisitions, without molestation and without
danger.

In this state of absolute freedom and perfect security, who will grudge to
yield a very little of his property to support the common interests of society,
and ensure the protection of government? Who does not remember the frequent
declarations at the commencement of the war, that we should be completely
satisfied, if at the expense of one half, we could defend the remainder of our
possessions? Where is the man to be found, who wishes to remain indebted for
the defense of his own person and property to the exertions, the bravery, and
the blood of others, without making one generous effort to pay the debt of
honor and of gratitude? In what part of the continent shall we find any man,
or body of men, who would not blush to stand up, and propose measures purposely
calculated to rob the soldier of his stipend, and the public creditor of his
due? And were it possible that such a flagrant instance of injustice could ever
happen, would it not excite the general indignation, and tend to bring down,
upon the authors of such measures, the aggravated vengeance of Heaven? If,
after all, a spirit of disunion, or a temper of obstinacy and perverseness
should manifest itself in any of the States; if such an ungracious disposition
should attempt to frustrate all the happy effects that might be expected to
flow from the Union; if there should be a refusal to comply with the
requisitions for funds to discharge the annual interest of the public debts,
and if that refusal should revive all those jealousies, and produce all those
evils which are now happily removed -- Congress, who have in all their
transactions shown a great degree of magnanimity and justice, will stand
justified in the sight of God and man! And that State alone, which puts itself
in opposition to the aggregate wisdom of the continent, and follows such
mistaken and pernicious councils, will be responsible for all the consequences.

For my own part, conscious of having acted while a servant of the public, in
the manner I conceived best suited to promote the real interests of my country;
having, in consequence of my fixed belief, in some measure, pledged myself to
the army, that their country would finally do them complete and ample justice,
and not willing to conceal any instance of my official conduct from the eyes of
the world, I have thought proper to transmit to your Excellency the enclosed
collection of papers, relative to the half-pay and commutation granted by
Congress to the officers of the army: from these communications, my decided
sentiment will be clearly comprehended, together with the conclusive reasons,
which induced me at an early period, to recommend the adoption of this measure
in the most earnest and serious manner. As the proceedings of Congress, the
army, and myself, are open to all, and contain, in my opinion, sufficient
information to remove the prejudice and errors which may have been entertained
by any, I think it unnecessary to say any thing more, than just to observe,
that the resolutions of Congress, now alluded to, are as undoubtedly and
absolutely binding upon the United States, as the most solemn acts of
confederation or legislation.

As to the idea, which I am informed, has in some instances prevailed, that the
half-pay and commutation are to be regarded merely in the odious light of a
pension, it ought to be exploded forever: that provision should be viewed, as
it really was, a reasonable compensation offered by Congress, at a time when
they had nothing else to give to officers of the army, for services then to be
performed: it was the only means to prevent a total derilection of the service;
it was a part of their hire. I may be allowed to say, it was the price of their
blood, and of your independency; it is therefore more than a common debt, it is
a debt of honor; it can never be considered as a pension or gratuity, nor
cancelled until it is fairly discharged.

With regard to the distinction between officers and soldiers, it is sufficient
that the uniform experience of every nation of the world, combined with our
own, proves the utility and propriety of the discrimination. Rewards, in
proportion to the aid the public draws from them, are unquestionably due to all
its servants. In some lines, the soldiers have perhaps generally had as ample
compensation for their services, by the large bounties which have been paid
them, as their officers will receive in the proposed commutation; in others, if
besides the donation of land, the payment of arrearages of clothing and wages
(in which articles all the component parts of the army must be put upon the
same footing) we take into the estimate, the bounties many of the soldiers have
received, and the gratuity of one year's full pay, which is promised to all,
possibly their situation (every circumstance being duly considered) will not be
deemed less eligible than that of the officers. Should a farther reward,
however, be judged equitable, I will venture to assert, no man will enjoy
greater satisfaction than myself, in an exemption from taxes for a limited time
(which has been petitioned for in some instances) or any other adequate
immunity or compensation granted to the brave defenders of their country's
cause: but neither the adoption or rejection of this proposition will, in any
manner affect, much less militate against the act of Congress, by which they
have offered five years full pay, in lieu of the half-pay for life, which had
been before promised to the officers of the army.

Before I conclude the subject on public justice, I cannot omit to mention the
obligations this country is under to that meritorious class of veterans, the
noncommissioned officers and privates, who have been discharged for inability,
in consequence of the resolution of Congress, of the 23d of April, 1782, on an
annual pension for life. Their peculiar sufferings, their singular merits and
claims to that provision need only to be known, to interest the feelings of
humanity in their behalf. Nothing but a punctual payment of their annual
allowance can rescue them from the most complicated misery; and nothing could
be a more melancholy and distressing sight, than to behold those who have shed
their blood, or lost their limbs in the service of their country, without a
shelter, without a friend, and without the means of obtaining any of the
comforts or necessaries of life, compelled to beg their daily bread from door
to door. Suffer me to recommend those of this description, belonging to your
State, to the warmest patronage of your Excellency and your Legislature.

It is necessary to say but a few words on the third topic which was proposed,
and which regards particularly the defense of the republic. As there can be
little doubt but Congress will recommend a proper peace establishment for the
United States, in which a due attention will be paid to the importance of
placing the militia of the Union upon a regular and respectable footing; if
this should be the case, I should beg leave to urge the great advantage of it
in the strongest terms.

The militia of this country must be considered as the palladium of our
security, and the first effectual resort in case of hostility: it is essential,
therefore, that the same system should pervade the whole that the formation and
discipline of the militia of the continent should be absolutely uniform; and
that the same species of arms, accoutrements, and military apparatus, should be
introduced in every part of the United States. No one, who has not learned it
from experience, can conceive the difficulty, expense, and confusion which
result from a contrary system, or the vague arrangements which have hitherto
prevailed.

If, in treating of political points, a greater latitude than usual has been
taken in the course of the Address, the importance of the crisis, and the
magnitude of the objects in discussion, must be my apology: it is, however,
neither my wish nor expectation, that the preceding observations should claim
any regard, except so far as they shall appear to be dictated by a good
intention; consonant to the immutable rules of justice; calculated to produce a
liberal system of policy, and founded on whatever experience may have been
acquired by a long and close attention to public business. Here I might speak
with more confidence, from my actual observations; and if it would not swell
this letter (already too prolix) beyond the bounds I had prescribed myself, I
could demonstrate to every mind, open to conviction, that in less time, and
with much less expense than has been incurred, the war might have been brought
to the same happy conclusion, if the resources of the continent could have been
properly called forth; that the distresses and disappointments which have very
often occurred, have, in too many instances, resulted more from a want of
energy in the continental government, than a deficiency of means in the
particular States: that the inefficacy of the measures, arising from the want
of an adequate authority in the supreme power, from a partial compliance with
the requisitions of Congress in some of the States, and from a failure of
punctuality in others, while they tended to damp the zeal of those who were
more willing to exert themselves, served also to accumulate the expenses of the
war, and to frustrate the best concerted plans; and that the discouragement
occasioned by the complicated difficulties and embarrassments, in which our
affairs were by this means involved, would have long age produced the
dissolution of any army, less patient, less virtuous, and less persevering than
that which I have had the honor to command. But while I mention those things,
which are notorious facts, as the defects of our Federal Constitution,
particularly in the prosecution of a war, I beg it may be understood, that as I
have ever taken a pleasure in gratefully acknowledging the assistance and
support I have derived from every class of citizens; so shall I always be happy
to do justice to the unparalleled exertions of the individual States, on many
interesting occasions.

I have thus freely disclosed what I wished to make known before I surrendered
up my public trust to those who committed it to me: the task is now
accomplished. I now bid adieu to your Excellency, as the Chief Magistrate of
your State; at the same time I bid a last farewell to the cares of office, and
all the employments of public life.

It remains, then, to be my final and only request, that your Excellency will
communicate these sentiments to your legislature, at their next meeting; and
that they may be considered as the legacy of one who has ardently wished, on
all occasions, to be useful to his country, and who, even in the shade of
retirement, will not fail to implore the divine benediction upon it.

I now make it my earnest prayer, that God would have you, and the State over
which you preside, in his holy protection; that he would incline the hearts of
the citizens to cultivate a spirit of subordination and obedience to
government; to entertain a brotherly affection and love for one another, for
their fellow-citizens of the United States at large; and particularly for their
brethren who have served in the field; and finally, that he would most
graciously be pleased to dispose us all to do justice, to love mercy, and to
demean ourselves with that charity, humility, and pacific temper of the mind,
which were the characteristics of the divine Author of our blessed religion;
without an humble imitation of whose example, in these things, we can never
hope to be a happy nation.

I have the honor to be, with much esteem and respect, Sir, your Excellency's
most obedient, and most humble servant,

G. WASHINGTON.

Farewell Orders Of GENERAL WASHINGTON to the ARMIES of the UNITED STATES.
Rocky Hill, near Princeton, November 2, 1783.
THE United States in Congress assembled, after giving the most honorable
testimony to the merits of the federal armies, and presenting them with the
thanks of their country, for their long, eminent and faithful service, having
thought proper, by their proclamation bearing date the 18th of October last, to
discharge such part of the troops as were engaged for the war, and to permit
the officers on furlough to retire from service, from and after tomorrow,
which proclamation having been communicated in the public papers for the
information and government of all concerned; it only remains for the Commander
in Chief to address himself once more, and that for the last time, to the
armies of the United States, (however widely dispersed individuals who compose
them may be) and to bid them an affectionate, a long farewell.

But before the Commander in Chief takes his final leave of those he holds most
dear, he wishes to indulge himself a few moments in calling to mind a slight
review of the past: -- he will then take the liberty of exploring, with his
military friends, their future prospects; of advising the general line of
conduct which in his opinion ought to be pursued; and he will conclude the
Address, by expressing the obligations he feels himself under for the spirited
and able assistance he has experienced from them, in the performance of an
arduous office.

A contemplation of the complete attainment (at a period earlier than could
have been expected) of the object for which we contended against so formidable
a power, cannot but inspire us with astonishment and gratitude. The
disadvantageous circumstances on our part, under which the war was undertaken,
can never be forgotten. The singular interpositions of Providence in our feeble
condition, were such as could scarcely escape the attention of the most
unobserving -- while the unparalleled perseverance of the armies of the United
States, through almost every possible suffering and discouragement, for the
space of eight long years, was little short of a standing miracle.

It is not the meaning, nor within the compass of this Address, to detail the
hardships peculiarly incident to our service, or to describe the distresses
which in several instances have resulted from the extremes of hunger and
nakedness, combined with the rigours of an inclement season; nor is it
necessary to dwell on the dark side of our past affairs. Every American officer
and soldier must now console himself for any unpleasant circumstances which may
have occurred, by a recollection of the uncommon scenes in which he has been
called to act no inglorious part, and the astonishing events of which he has
been a witness; events which have seldom, if ever before, taken place on the
stage of human action, nor can they probably ever happen again. For who has
before seen a disciplined army formed at once from such raw materials? Who that
was not a witness could imagine that the most violent local prejudices would
cease so soon, and that men who came from the different parts of the continent,
strongly disposed by the habits of education to despise and quarrel with each
other, would instantly become but one patriotic band of brothers? Or who that
was not on the spot, can trace the steps by which such a wonderful revolution
has been effected, and such a glorious period put to all our warlike toils?

It is universally acknowledged, that the enlarged prospects of happiness,
opened by the confirmation of our independence and sovereignty, almost exceed
the power of description: and shall not the brave men who have contributed so
essentially to these inestimable acquisitions, retiring victorious from the
field of war to the field of agriculture, participate in all the blessings
which have been obtained? In such a republic, who will exclude them from the
rights of citizens, and the fruits of their labors? In such a country, so
happily circumstanced, the pursuits of commerce, and the cultivation of the
soil, will unfold to industry the certain road to competence. To those hardy
soldiers who are actuated by the spirit of adventure, the fisheries will afford
ample and profitable employment: and the extensive and fertile regions of the
West will yield a most happy asylum to those who, fond of domestic enjoyment,
are seeking personal independence. Nor is it possible to conceive that any one
of the United States will prefer a national bankruptcy, and the dissolution of
the Union, to a compliance with the requisitions of Congress, and the payment
of its just debts; so that the officers and soldiers may expect considerable
assistance, in re-commencing their civil occupations, from the sums due to them
from the public, which must and will most inevitably be paid.

In order to effect this desirable purpose, and to remove the prejudices which
may have taken possession of the minds of any of the good people of the States,
it is earnestly recommended to all the troops, that, with strong attachments to
the Union, they should carry with them into civil society the most conciliating
dispositions; and that they should prove themselves not less virtuous and
useful as citizens, than they have been persevering and victorious as soldiers.
What though there should be some envious individuals, who are unwilling to pay
the debt the public has contracted, or to yield the tribute due to merit; yet
let such unworthy treatment produce no invective, or any instance of
intemperate conduct; let it be remembered, that the unbiassed voice of the free
citizens of the United States has promised the just reward, and given the
merited applause; let it be known and remembered, that the reputation of the
federal armies is established beyond the reach of malevolence; and let a
consciousness of their achievements, and fame, still excite the men who
composed them to honorable actions, under the persuasion, that the private
virtues of economy, prudence, and industry, will not be less amiable in civil
life, than the more splendid qualities of valor, perseverance, and enterprise
were in the field. Every one may rest assured that much, very much of the
future happiness of the officers and men will depend upon the wise and manly
conduct which shall be adopted by them, when they are mingled with the great
body of the community. And although the General has so frequently given it as
his opinion, in the most public and explicit manner, that unless the principles
of the Federal Government were properly supported, and the powers of the Union
increased, the honor, dignity, and justice of the nation, would be lost
forever; yet he cannot help repeating on this occasion so interesting a
sentiment, and leaving it as his last injunction to every officer and every
soldier who may view the subject in the same serious point of light, to add his
best endeavors to those of his worthy fellow-citizens, toward effecting th^se
great and valuable purposes, on which our very existence as a nation so
materially depends.

The Commander in Chief conceives little is now wanting to enable the soldier
to change the military character into that of a citizen, but that steady and
decent tenor of behavior, which has generally distinguished not only the army
under his immediate command, but the different detachments and separate armies,
through the course of the war. From their good sense and prudence he
anticipated the happiest consequences: and while he congratulates them on the
glorious occasion which renders their services in the field no longer
necessary, he wishes to express the strong obligations he feels himself under
for the assistance he has received from every class, and in every instance. He
presents his thanks, in the most serious and affectionate manner, to the
general officers, as well for their counsel on many interesting occasions, as
for their ardour in promoting the success of the plans he had adopted; to the
commandants of regiments and corpse, and to the officers for their zeal and
attention in carrying his orders promptly into execution; to the staff, for
their alacrity and exactness in performing the duties of their several
departments; and to the non-commissioned officers and private soldiers, for
their extraordinary patience in suffering, as well as their invincible
fortitude in action. To various branches of the army the General takes this
last and solemn opportunity of professing his inviolable attachment and
friendship: He wishes more than bare professions were in his power, that he was
really able to be useful to them all in future life. He flatters himself,
however, they will do him the justice to believe, that whatever could with
propriety be attempted by him, has been done. And being now to conclude these
his last public orders, to take his ultimate leave, in a short time, of the
military character, and to bid a final adieu to the armies he has so long had
the honor to command, he can only again offer, in their behalf, his
recommendations to their grateful country, and his prayers to the God of
armies. May ample justice be done them here, and may the choicest of Heaven's
favors, both here and hereafter, attend those who, under the divine, auspices,
have secured innumerable blessings for others! With these wishes, and this
benediction, the Commander in Chief is about to retire from service. The
curtain of separation will soon be drawn -- and the military s^ene to him will
be closed forever.

The Answer. To his Excellency GENERAL WASHINGTON, Commander in Chief of the
ARMIES of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
WE, the officers of the part of the army remaining on the banks of the Hudson,
have received your Excellency's serious and farewell Address to the armies of
the United States. We beg you to accept our unfeigned thanks for the
communication, and your affectionate assurances of inviolable attachment and
friendship. If your attempts to ensure to the armies the just, the promised
rewards, of their long, severe, and dangerous services, have failed of success,
we believe it has arisen from causes not in your Excellency's power to control.
With extreme regret do we reflect on the occasion which called for such
endeavors. But while we thank your Excellency for these exertions in favor of
the troops you have so successfully commanded, we pray it may be believed, that
in this sentiment our own particular interests have but a secondary place; and
that even the ultimate ingratitude of the people (were that possible) could not
shake the patriotism of those who suffer by it. Still with pleasing wonder and
with grateful joy shall we contemplate the glorious conclusion of our labors.
To that merit in the revolution which, under the auspices of Heaven, the armies
have displayed, posterity will do justice; and the sons will blush whose
fathers were their foes.

Most gladly would we cast a veil on every act which fullies the reputation of
our country -- never should the page of history be stained with its dishonor
-- even from our memories should the idea be erased. We lament the opposition
to those salutary measures which the wisdom of the Union has planted; measures
which alone can recover and fix on a permanent basis the credit of the States;
measures which are essential to the justice, the honor, and interest of the
nation. While she was giving the noblest proofs of magnanimity, with conscious
pride we saw her growing fame; and, regardless of present sufferings, we looked
forward to the end of our toils and dangers, to brighter scenes in prospect.
There we beheld the genius of our country dignified by sovereignty and
independence, supported by justice, and adorned with every liberal virtue.
There we saw patient Husbandry fearless extend her cultured fields, and
animated Commerce spread her sails to every wind. There we beheld fair Science
lift her head, with all the Arts attending in her train. There, blessed with
freedom, we saw the human mind expand; and, throwing aside the restraints which
confined it to the narrow bounds of country, it embraced the world. Such were
our fond hopes, and with such delightful prospects did they present us. Nor are
we disappointed. Those animating prospects are now changed and changing to
realities; and actively to have contributed to their production is our pride,
our glory. But justice alone can give them stability. In that justice we still
believe. Still we hope that the prejudices of the misinformed will be removed,
and the arts of false and selfish popularity, addressed to the feelings of
avarice, defeated: or, in the worst event, the world, we hope, will make the
just distinction: we trust the disingenuousness of a few will not sully the
reputation, the honor, and dignity, of the great and respectable majority of
the States.

We are happy in the opportunity just presented of congratulating your
Excellency on the certain conclusion of the definitive treaty of peace.
Relieved at length from long suspense, our warmest wish is to return to the
bosom of our country, to resume the character of citizens; and it will be our
highest ambition to become useful ones. To your Excellency this great event
must be peculiarly pleasing: for while at the head of her armies, urged by
patriot virtues and magnanimity, you persevered, under the pressure of every
possible difficulty and discouragement, in the pursuit of the great objects of
the war -- the freedom and safety of your country; -- your heart panted for the
tranquil enjoyments of peace. We cordially rejoice with you that the period of
indulging them has arrived so soon. In contemplating the blessings of liberty
and independence, the rich prize of eight years hardy adventure, past
sufferings will be forgotten; or if remembered, the reccollection will serve to
heighten the relish of present happiness. We sincerely pray God this happiness
may long be yours; and that when you quit the stage of human life, you may
receive from the unerring Judge, the rewards of valor exerted to save the
oppressed, of patriotism, and disinterested virtue.

West Point, November 15, 1783.
THE END.
CORRECTION. -- Page 252, 18th line from bottom -- for consider read confide.

SOLOMON COTTON, jun* BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER, No. 51, MARLBOROUGH-STREET, HAS
for Sale, a general Assortment of BOOKS AND STATIONARY, Wholesale and Retail.
Merchants and others supplied with the following Articles, at a price which
cannot fail giving satisfaction: -- Large and small Bibles -- Dictionaries --
First, Second, and Third Parts of Webster's Institute -- Account Books, of all
sizes -- STATIONARY -- Foolscap and Pot Writing-Paper -- Slates -- Penknives --
Quills -- Ink -- Ink-Powder -- Sealing-Wax -- Wafers, etc. etc. etc.

Boston, July, 1796.

