A TREATY BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND HIS CATHOLIC MAJESTY, 27th OCTOBER,
1795.

PRINTED BY JOHN FENNO, PRINTER TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES.

1796.

A TREATY BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND HIS CATHOLIC MAJESTY.
HIS Catholic Majesty and the United States of America, desiring to consolidate
on a permanent basis, the friendship and good correspondence, which happily
prevails between the two parties, have determined to establish by a Convention,
several points, the settlement whereof will be productive of general advantage
and reciprocal utility to both nations.

With this intention his Catholic Majesty has appointed the most excellent
lord, don Manuel de Godoy, and Alvarez de Faria, Rioa, Sanchez, Zarzoza, Prince
de la Paz, duke de la Alcudia, lord of the Soto de Roma, and of the state of
Albala, Grandee of Spain of the first class, perpetual regidor of the city of
Santiago, Knight of the Illustrious Order of the Golden Fleece, and Great Cross
of the Royal and distinguished Spanish Order of Charles III. Commander of
Valencia, del Ventoso, Rivera, and Acenchal in that of Santiago: Knight and
Great Cross of the Religious Order of St. John^ Counselor of State: First
Secretary of State, and Despacho: Secretary to the Queen: Superintendent
General of the Posts and Highways: Protector of the Royal Academy of the Noble
Arts, and of the Royal Societies of Natural History, Botany, (...) Gentleman of
the (...) chamber in employment: Captain General of his armies: Inspector, and
Major of the Royal Corpse of Body Guards, etc. etc. etc. And the President of
the United States, with the advice and consent of their Senate, has appointed
Thomas Pinckney, a Citizen of the United States, and their Envoy Extraordinary
to his Catholic Majesty. And the said Plenipotentiaries have agreed upon and
concluded the following Articles.

ARTICLE I.
There shall be a firm and inviolable peace and sincere friendship between his
Catholic Majesty, his successors and subjects, and the United States, and their
Citizens, without exception of persons or places.

ARTICLE II.
To prevent all disputes on the subject of the boundaries which separate the
territories of the two high contracting parties, it is hereby declared and
agreed as follows, to wit. The southern boundary of the United States which
divides their territory from the Spanish colonies of East and West Florida,
shall be designated by a line beginning on the river Missisipi at the
northernmost part of the thirty first degree of latitude north of the equator
which from thence shall be drawn due east to the middle of the river
Apalachicola or Catahsuche thence along the middle thereof to its junction with
the Flint: thence straight to the head of St. Marys river, and thence down the
middle thereof to the Atlantic ocean. And it is agreed that if there should be
any troops garrisons or settlements of either party in the territory of the
other according to the abovementioned boundaries, they shall be withdrawn from
the said territory within the term of six months after the ratification of this
treaty, or sooner if it be possible; and that they shall be permitted to take
with them all the goods and effects which they possess.

ARTICLE III.
In order to carry the preceding article into effect, one commissioner and one
surveyor shall be appointed by each of the contracting parties, who shall meet
at the Natchez on the left side of the river Missisipi before the expiration of
six months from the ratification of this convention, and they shall proceed to
run and mark this boundary according to the stipulations of the said article.
They shall make plats and keep journals of their proceedings, which shall be
considered as part of this convention, and shall have the same force as if they
were inserted therein. And if on any account it should be found necessary that
the said commissioners and surveyors should be accompanied by guards, they
shall be furnished in equal proportions by the commanding officer of his
majesty's troops in the two Floridas, and the commanding officer of the troops
of the United States in their south western territory, who shall act by common
consent and amicably as well with respect to this point, as to the furnishing
of provisions and instruments, and making every other arrangement which may be
necessary or useful for the execution of this article.

ARTICLE IV.
It is likewise agreed that the western boundary of the United States which
separate them from the Spanish colony of Louissiana, is in the middle of the
channel or bed of the river Missisipi from the northern boundary of the said
States to the completion of the thirty first degree of latitude north of the
equator. And his Catholic Majesty has likewise agreed that the navigation of
the said river in its whole breadth from its source to the ocean shall be free
only to his subjects and the Citizens of the United States, unless he should
extend this privilege to the subjects of other powers by special convention.

ARTICLE V.
The two high contracting parties shall by all the means in their power
maintain peace and harmony among the several Indian nations who inhabit the
country adjacent to the lines and rivers which by the preceding articles form
the boundaries of the two Floridas. And the better to attain this effect, both
parties oblige themselves expressly to restrain by force all hostilities on the
part of the Indian nations living within their boundary: so that Spain will not
suffer her Indians to attack the citizens of the United States nor the Indians
inhabiting their territory; nor will the United States permit their last
mentioned Indians to commence hostilities against the subjects of his Catholic
majesty or his Indians in any manner whatever.

And whereas several treaties of friendship exist between the two contracting
parties and the said nations of Indians, it is hereby agreed that in future no
treaty of alliance or other whatever (except treaties of peace) shall be made
by either party with the Indians living within the boundary of the other, but
both parties will endeavor to make the advantages of the Indian trade common
and mutually beneficial to their respective subjects and citizens, observing in
all things the most complete reciprocity, so that both parties may obtain the
advantages arising from a good understanding with the said nations without
being subject to the expense which they have hitherto occasioned.

ARTICLE VI.
Each party shall endeavor by all means in their power to protect and defend
all vessels and other effects belonging to the citizens or subjects of the
other, which shall be within the extent of their jurisdiction, by sea or by
land, and shall use all their efforts to recover and cause to be restored to
the right owners, their vessels and effects which may have been taken from them
within the extent of their said jurisdiction, whether they are at war or not
with the power whose subjects have taken possession of the said effects.

ARTICLE VII.
And it is agreed that the subjects or citizens of each of the contracting
parties, their vessels, of effects shall not be liable to any embargo or
detention on the part of the other for any military expedition or other public
or private purpose (...) And in all cases of seizure, detention or arrest for
debts contracted, or offenses committed by any citizen or subject of the one
party within the jurisdiction of the other, the same shall be made and
prosecuted by order and authority of law only and according to the regular
course of proceedings usual in such cases. The citizens and subjects of both
parties shall be allowed to employ such advocates, solicitors, notaries,
agents, and factors, as they may judge proper in all their affairs and in all
their trials at law, in which they may be concerned before the tribunals of the
other party, and such agents shall have free access to be present at the
proceedings in such causes and at the taking of all examinations and evidence
which may be exhibited in the said trials.

ARTICLE VIII.
In case the subjects and inhabitants of either party with their shipping,
whether public and of war, or private and of merchants be forced through stress
of weather, pursuit of pirates or enemies, or any other urgent necessity for
seeking of shelter and harbor, to retreat and enter into any of the rivers,
bays, roads or ports belonging to the other party, they shall be received and
treated with all humanity, and enjoy all favor, protection and help, and they
shall be permitted to refresh and provide themselves at reasonable rates with
victuals and all things needful for the sustenance of their persons or
reparation of their ships and prosecution of their voyage; and they shall no
ways be hindered from returning out of the said ports or roads, but may remove
and depart when and wither they please without any let or hindrance.

ARTICLE IX.
All ships and merchandise of what nature soever which shall be rescued out of
the hands of any pirates or robbers on the high seas, shall be brought into
some port of either state, and shall be delivered to the custody of the
officers of that port in order to be taken care of and restored entire to the
true proprietor, as soon as due and sufficient proof shall be made concerning
the property thereof.

ARTICLE X.
When any vessel of either party shall be wrecked, foundered or otherwise
damaged on the coasts, or within the dominion of the other, their respective
subjects or citizens shall receive as well for themselves as for their vessels
and effects, the same assistance which would be due to the inhabitants of the
country where the damage happens and shall pay the same charges and dues only
as the said inhabitants would be subject to pay in a like case: And if the
operations of repair would require that the whole or any part of the cargo be
unladen they shall no duties, charges or fees on the part which they shall
relade and carry away.

ARTICLE XI.
The citizens and subjects of each party shall have power to dispose of their
personal goods within the jurisdiction of the other by testament donation or
otherwise, and their representatives being subjects or citizens of the other
party shall succeed to their said personal goods whether by testament or
abintertato, and they may take possession thereof either by themselves or
others acting for them and dispose of the same at their will paying such dues
only as the inhabitants of the country wherein the said goods are, shall be
subject to pay in like cases.

And in case of the absence of the representative such care shall be taken of
the said goods as would be taken of the goods of a native in like case until
the lawful owner may take measures for receiving them. And if questions shall
arise among several claimants to which of them the said goods belong, the same
shall be decided finally by the laws and judges of the land wherein the said
goods are. And where on the death of any person holding real estate within the
territories of the one party such real estate would by the laws of the land
descend on a citizen or subject of the other were he not disqualified by being
an alien such subject shall be allowed a reasonable time to sell the same and
to withdraw the proceeds without molestation and exempt from all right of
detraction on the part of the government of the respective States.

ARTICLE XII.
The merchant ships of either of the parties which shall be making into a port
belonging to the enemy of the other party and concerning whose voyage and the
species of goods on board her, there shall be just grounds of suspicion, shall
be obliged to exhibit as well upon the high seas as in the ports and havens not
only her pass-ports but likewise certificates expressly showing that her goods
are not of the number of those which have been prohibited as contraband.

ARTICLE XIII.
For the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is agreed that if a war
shall break out between the said two nations, one year after the proclamation
of war shall be allowed to the merchants in the cities and towns where they
shall live for collecting and transporting their goods and merchandises: and if
any thing be taken from them or any injury be done them within that term, by
either party, or the people or subjects of either, full satisfaction shall be
made for the same by the government.

ARTICLE XIV.
No subject of his Catholic majesty shall apply for or take any commission or
letters of marque for arming any ship or ships to act as privateers against the
said United States, or against the citizens, people or inhabitants of the said
United States, or against the property of any of the inhabitants of any of
them, from any prince or state with which the said United States shall be at
war.

Nor shall any citizen, subject or inhabitant of the said United States apply
for or take any commission or letters of marque for arming any ship or ships to
act as privateers against the subjects of his Catholic majesty or the property
of any of them, from any prince or state with which the said King shall be at
war. And if any person of either nation shall take such commissions or letters
of marque he shall be punished as a pirate.

ARTICLE XV.
It shall be lawful for all and singular the subjects of his Catholic Majesty,
and the citizens, people and inhabitants of the said United States to sail with
their ships with all manner of liberty and security, no distinction being made
who are the proprietors of the merchandises laden thereon, from any port to the
places of th^se who now are, or hereafter shall be at enmity with his Catholic
majesty or the United States. It shall be likewise lawful for the subjects and
inhabitants aforesaid to sail with the ships and merchandises aforementioned,
and to trade with the same liberty and security from the places, ports and
havens of those who are enemies of both or either party, without any opposition
or disturbance whatsoever, not only directly from the places of the enemy
aforementioned to neutral places, but also from one place belonging to an enemy
to another place belonging to an enemy, whether they be under the jurisdiction
of the same prince or under several; and it is hereby stipulated that free
ships shall also give freedom to go^ds, and that every thing shall be deemed
free and exempt which shall be found on board the ships belonging to the
subjects of either of the contracting parties, although the whole (...) or any
part thereof should appertain to the enemies of either: contraband goods being
always excepted. It is also agreed* that the same liberty be extended to
persons (...), so that although they be enemies to either party, they shall not
be made prisoners or taken out of that free ship, unless they are soldiers and
in actual service of the enemies.

ARTICLE XVI.
This liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all kinds of
merchandises excepting those only which are distinguished by the name of
contraband: and under this name of contraband or prohibited goods shall be
comprehended arms, great guns, bombs, with the fusees, and the other things
belonging to them, cannon ball, gunpowder, match, pikes, swords, lances,
spears, halberts mortars, petards, grenades, salt petre, muskets, musket ball,
bucklers, helmets, breast plates, coats of mail and the like kinds of arms,
proper for arming soldiers, musket rests, belts, horses with their furniture,
and all other warlike instruments whatever. These merchandises which follow
shall not be reckoned among contraband or prohibited goods: that is to say, all
sorts of cloths and all other manufactures woven of any wool, flax, silk,
cotton, or any other materials whatever, all kinds of wearing apparel, together
with all species whereof they are used to be made: gold and silver, as well
coined as uncoined, tin, iron, latten, copper, brass, coals: as also wheat,
barley, and oats, and any other kind of corn and pulse; tobacco, and likewise
all manner of spices, salted and smoked flesh, salted fish, cheese and butter,
beer, oils, wines, sugars, and all sorts of salts: and in general all
provisions which serve for the sustenance of life: furthermore all kinds of
cotton, hemp, flax, ta^, pitch, ropes, cables, sails, sail cloths, anchors, and
any parts of anchors, also ships masts, planks and wood of all kind, and all
things proper either for building or repairing ships, and all other goods
whatever which have not been worked into the form of any instrument prepared
for war by land or by sea, shall not be reputed contraband, much less such as
have been already wrought and made up for any other use: al which shall be
wholly reckoned among ^re^ goods: as likewise all other merchandises and things
which are not comprehended and particularly mentioned in the foregoing
enumeration o^ contraband goods: so that they may be transported and carried in
the freest manner by the subjects of both parties, even to places belonging to
an enemy, such towns or places being only excepted as are at that time
besieged, blocked up or invested. And except the cases in which any ship of
war, or squadron shall, in consequenc^ of storms or other accidents at sea, be
under the necessity of taking the cargo of any trading vessel or vessels, in
which case they may stop the said vessel or vessels, and furnish themselves
with necessaries giving a receipt in order that the power to whom the said ship
of war belongs, may pay for the articles so taken, according to the price
thereof at the port to which they may appear to have been destined by the
ship's papers: and the two contracting parties engage that the vessels shall
not be detained longer than may be absolutely necessary for their said ships to
supply themselves with necessaries: That they will immediately pay the value of
the receipts, and indemnify the proprietor for all losses which he may have
sustained in consequence of such transaction.

ARTICLE XVII.
To the end that all manner of dissentions and quarrels may be avoided and
prevented on one side and the other, it is agreed that in case either of the
parties hereto should be engaged in a war, the ships and vessels belonging to
the subjects or people of the other party must be furnished with sea letters of
passports, expressing the name, property, and bulk of the ship, as also the
name and place of habitation of the master or commander of the said ship, that
it may appear thereby that the ship really and truly belongs to the subjects of
one of the parties, which passport shall be made out and granted according to
the form annexed to this treaty. They shall likewise be recalled every year,
that is, if the ship happens to return home within the space of a year.

It is likewise agreed that such ships being laden, are to be provided not only
with passports as abovementioned, but also with certificates, containing the
several particulars of the cargo, the place whence the ship sailed, that so it
may be known whether any forbidden or contraband goods be on board the same:
which certificates shall be made out by the officers of the place whence the
ship sailed in the accustomed form: And if any one shall think it fit or
advisable to express in the said certificates the person to whom the goods on
board belong, he may freely do so without which requisites they may be sent to
one of the ports of the other contracting party, and adjudged by the competent
tribunal, according to what is above set forth, that all the circumstances of
this omission having been well examined, they shall be adjudged to be legal
prizes, unless they shall give legal satisfaction of their property by
testimony entirely equivalent.

ARTICLE XVIII.
If the ships of the said subjects, people, or inhabitants of either of the
parties shall be met with either sailing along the coasts or on the high seas
by any ship of war of the other, or by any privateer, the said ship of war or
privateer for the avoiding of any disorder shall remain out of cannon shot, and
may send their boats aboard the merchant ship which they shall so meet with,
and may enter her to number of two or three men only, to whom the master or
commander of such ship or vessel shall exhibit his pass-ports concerning the
property of the ship made out according to the form inserted in this present
treaty, and the ship when she shall have showed such passport shall be free
and at liberty to pursue her voyage, so as it shall not be lawful to molest or
give her chase in any manner, or force her to quit her intended course.

ARTICLE XIX.
Consuls shall be reciprocally established with the privileges and powers which
those of the most favored nations enjoy in the ports where their consuls reside
or are permitted to be.

ARTICLE XX.
It is also agreed that the inhabitants of the territories of each party shall
respectively have free access to the courts of justice of the other, and they
shall be permitted to prosecute suits for the recovery of their properties, the
payment of their debts, and for obtaining satisfaction for the damages which
they may have sustained, whether the persons whom they may sue be subjects or
citizens of the country in which they may be found, or any other persons what
ever who may have taken refuge therein; and the proceedings and sentences of
the said courts shall be the same as if the co^tending parties had been
subjects or citizens of the said country.

ARTICLE XXI.
In order to terminate all differences on account of the losses sustained by
the citizens of the United States in consequence of their vessels and cargoes
having been taken by the subjects of his Catholic majesty, during the late war
between Spain and France, it is agreed that all such cases shall be referred to
the final decision of commissioners to be appointed in the following manner.
His Catholic majesty shall name one commissioner, and the President of the
United States, by and with the advice and consent of their Senate, shall
appoint another, and the said two commissioners shall agree on the choice of a
third or if they cannot agree so, they shall each propose one person, and of
the two names so proposed one shall be drawn by lot in the presence of the two
original commissioners, and the person whose name shall be drawn shall be the
third commissioner: and the three commissioners so appointed shall be sworn
impartially to examine and decide the claims in question according to the
merits of the several cases, and to justice, equity and the laws of nations.
The said commissioners shall meet and sit at Philadelphia; and in the case of
the death, sickness, or necessary absence of any such commissioner, his place
shall be supplied in the same manner as he was first appointed, and the new
commissioner shall take the same oaths and do the same duties. They shall
receive all complaints and applications authorized by this article during
eighteen months from the day on which they shall assemble. They shall have
power to examine all such persons as come before them on oath or affirmation
touching the complaints in question, and also to receive in evidence all
written testimony authenticated in such manner as they shall think proper to
require or admit. The award of the said Commissioners or any two of them shall
be final and conclusive, b^^^ as to the justice of the claim and the amount of
the sum to be paid to the claimants; and his C^^^olic majesty undertakes to
cause the same to be paid in specie, without deduction, at such times and
places, and under such conditions as shall be awarded by the said commissioners.

ARTICLE XXII.
The two high contracting parties, hoping that the good correspondence and
friendship which happily reigns between them, will be further increased by this
treaty, and that it will contribute to augment their prosperity and opulence,
will in future give to their mutual commerce all the extension and favor which
the advantages of both countries may require.

In consequence of the stipulations contained in the fourth article, his
Catholic majesty will permit the citizens of the United States for the space of
three years from this time to deposit their merchandises and effects in the
port of New Orleans and to export them from thence without paying any other
duty than a fair price for the hire of the stores, and his majesty promises
either to continue this permission, if he finds during that time that it is not
prejudicial to the interests of Spain, or if he should not agree to continue it
there, he will assign to them on another part of the banks of the Missisipi an
equivalent establishment.

ARTICLE XXIII.
The present treaty shall not be in force until ratified by the contracting
parties, and the ratifications shall be exchanged in six months from this time,
or sooner if possible.

In witness whereof we the underwritten plenipotentiaries of his Catholic
majesty and of the United States of America have signed this present treaty of
friendship, limits, and navigation, and have thereunto affixed our seals
respectively.

Done at San Lorenzo et Real this seven and twentieth day of October one
thousand seven hundred and ninety five.

THOMAS PINCKNEY L. S. PRINCIPE DE LA PAZ L. S.



