To the PEOPLE of the UNITED STATES.
Friends and Fellow Citizens,
THE period for a new election of a Citizen to administer the Executive
Government of the United States being not far distant, and the time actually
arrived, when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person, who is
to be clothed with that impor^^nt (...), it appears to me proper, especially as
it may conduce to a more distinct expression of the public voice, that I should
now apprise you of the resolution I have formed, to decline being considered
among the number of those (...) of whom a choice is to be made.

I beg you, at the same (...), to do me the justice to be assured, that this
resolution has not been taken, without (...) regard to all the considerations
appertaining to the relation, which (...) a du^^ful citizen to his country; and
that, in withdrawing the tender of service which silence in my situation might
imply, I am influenced by no diminution of ^eal for your future interest; no
deficiency of grateful respect for your past kindness; but am supported by a
full conviction that the step is compatible with both.

The acceptance of, and continuance hitherto in the office to which your
suffrages have twice called me, have been a uniform sacrifice of inclination to
the opinion of duty and to a de^erence for what appeared to be your desire. I
constantly hoped, that it would have been much earlier in my power,
consistently with motives, which I was not at liberty to disregard, to return
to that retirement, from which I had been reluctantly drawn. The strength of my
inclination to do this, previous to the last election, had even led to the
preparation of an address to declare it to you; but mature reflection on the
then perplexed and critical posture of our affairs with foreign nations, and
the unanimous advice of persons entitled to my confidence, impelled me to
abandon the idea.

I rejoice, that the state of your concerns, ex^ernal as well as internal, no
longer renders the pursuit of inclination incompatible with the sentiment of
duty or propiety; and am persuaded whatever partiality may be retained (...) my
services, that in the present circumstances of our country, you will not
disapprove my determination to retire.

The impressions with which I first undertook the ardu^^^ trust, were explained
on the proper occasion. In the discharge of this trust, I will only say, that I
have with good intentions, contributed toward the organization and
administration of the government, the best exertions of which a very fallible
judgment was capable. No^ unconscious, in the outset, of the inferiority of my
qualifications, experience in my own eyes, perhaps still more in the eyes of
others, has strengthened the motives to (...) of myself; and every day the
increasing weight of (...) admonishes me more and more that the shade of
retirement (...) as necessary to me as it will be welcome. Satisfied that if
any circumstances have given peculi^r value to my services, they were
temporary, I have the consolation to believe, that while choice and prudence
invite me to quit the political scene, patriotism does not forbid it.

In looking forward to the moment, which is intended to (...) the career of my
public life* my feelings do not (...) me to suspend the deep acknowledgment o^
that debt of gratitude which I owe to my beloved country, for the (...) honors
it has conferred upon me: (...) more for the (...) confidence with which it has
supported me; and for the opportunities I have thence enj^yed of (...) my
inviolable attachment, by services faithful and persevering, though in
usefulness unequal to my zeal. It benefit^ have resulted to our country from
these services, let it always be remembered to your praise, and as (...)
instructive example in our (...), that under circumstances in which the
passions, agitated in every direction, were liable to mis^ead, (...)
appearances sometimes dubious, -- vicissitudes of fortune often discouraging,
-- in situations in which not unfrequently want of success has countenanced the
spirit of criticism -- the constancy of your support was the essential prop of
the efforts, and a (...) of the plans by which they were effected -- (...)
penetrated with this idea* I shall carry it with (...) to my grave, as a strong
incitement to unceasing vow^ (...) Heaven may continue to you the (...) tokens
of (...) beneficence -- that your union and brotherly affection may be
perpetual -- that the free constitution, which is the work of your hands, may
be sacredly maintained -- that its administration in every department may be
stamped with wisdom and virtue -- that, in fine, the happiness of the people of
these states, under the auspices of liberty, may be made complete, by so
careful a preservation and (...) of this blessing, as will (...) to them the
glory of recommending to the applause, the affection and adoption of every
nation which is yet a stranger to it.

Here, perhaps, I ought to stop. But solicitude for your welfare, which cannot
end but with my life, and the apprehension of danger, natural to that
solicitude, (...) me on an occasion like the present, to ^ff^^ to your (...)
contemplation, and to recommend to your frequent (...), which are the result of
(...) observation, and which appear to me all important to the permanency of
your felicity as a people. These will be offered to you with the more freedom,
as you can only see in them the d^sinterested warnings of a p^rting friend, who
can possibly have no personal motive to bias his counsel. Nor can I forget, as
an encouragement to it, your indulgent reception of my sentiments on a former
and not dissimilar occasion.

(...) as is the love of liberty with every (...) of your hearts, no
recommendation of mine is necessary to fortify or confirm the attachment.

The unity of government which constitutes you one people, is also now dear to
you. It is justly so; for it is a main pillar of the edifice of your real
independence, the support of your tranquilty at home, your peace abroad; of
your safety; of your prosperity; of that very liberty which you so highly
prize. But as it is easy to foresee, that from different causes and from
different quarters, much pain^ will be taken, many artifices employed, to
weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth; as this is the point in your
political fortress, against which the batteries of internal and external
enemies will be m^st constantly and actively (though often cove^tly and
insidiously) directed, it is of infinite moment, that you should properly
estimate the immense value of your national Union, to your collective and
individual happiness; that you should cherish a cordial, habitual and
immovable attachment to it; accustoming yourselves to think and speak of it as
of the Palladium of your political safety and prosperity; watching for its
preservation with jealous anxiety, discountenancing whatever may suggest even a
suspicion that it can in any event be abandoned; and indignantly frowning upon
the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from
the rest, or to enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the various
parts.

For this, you have every inducement of sympathy and interest. Citizens by
birth or choice, of a common country, that country has a right to concentrate
your affections. The name of an AMERICAN, which belongs to you, in your
national capacity, must always exalt the j^st pride of Patrio^ism, more than
any appellation derived from local discriminations. With slight shades of
difference, you have the same religion, manners, habits, and political
principles. You have in a common cause sought and triumphed together; the
Independence and Liberty you possess are the work of joint councils and joint
efforts* of common dangers, sufferings and successes.

But (...) powerfully they address themselves (...), are greatly outweighed by
those which (...) to your interest. -- Here every (...) find the most
commanding (...) guarding and preserving the Union of (...)

The North, in an unrestrained intercourse with the South, protected by the
equal laws (...) a common government, finds in the productions of the latter,
great additional resources of maritime and commercial enterprise, and precious
materials of manufacturing industry -- The South in the same intercourse,
benefitting by the Agency of the North, (...) agriculture grow and its commerce
expand. (...) partly into its own channels the seamen of the North, (...) finds
its particular navigation invigo^^ted; -- and while it contributes in different
ways, to nourish and increase the general (...) the national navigation, it
looks forward to the protection of a maritime strength, to which itself is
unequally adapted. -- The East, in a like intercourse with the West, already
finds, and in the progressive improvement of interior communication by land and
water, will more and more find a valuable ^ent for the commodities which it
brings from abroad, or manufactures at home. -- The West derives from the East
supplies requisite to its growth and comfort -- and what is perhaps of still
greater consequence, it must of necessity ow^ the secure enjoyment of
indispensable outlets for its own productions to the weight, influence, and the
future maritime strength of the Atlantic side of the (...) directed by an
indissoluble community of interest as one nation -- Any other tenure by which
the West can hold this essential advantage, whether derived from its own
separate strength, or from an apostate and unnatural connection with any
foreign power, must be (...) preca^io^s.

While then every part of our country thus feels an immediate and particular
interest in Union, all the parts combined cannot fail to find in the (...)
mass, of means and efforts, greater strength, greater (...), proportionably
greater security from external danger, a less frequent interruption of their
peace by foreign (...)* -- and what is of inestimable value* they must derive
from Union an exemption from those broils and wars between themselves, which so
frequently (...) neighboring countries, not tied together by the same
government; which their own rivalships alone would be sufficient to produce,
but which opposite foreign alliances, attachments and intrigues would stimulate
and imbitter. -- Hence like (...) they will avoid the necessity of those
overgrown military establishments, which under any form of government are
inauspicious to liberty, and which are to be regarded as particuliarly hostile
to Republican Liberty; in this sense it is, that your Union ought to be
considered as a main prop of your liberty, and that the love of the one ^^ght
to endear to you the preservation of the other.

These considerations speak a person (...) language to every reflecting and
virtuous mind, and exhibit the continuance of the Union as a primary object of
Patriotic desire. -- I^ there a doubt, whether a common government can embrace
so large a sphere? -- Let experience solve it. To listen to mere speculation,
in such a case, were criminal. We are authorized to hope, that a proper
organization of the whole, with the auxiliary agency of governments for the
respective subdivisions, will afford a happy issue to the experiment. It Is well
worth a (...) and full experiment. -- With such powerful and obvious motives to
Union, affecting all parts of our country, w^^^e experience shall not (...)
demonstrated its impractibility, there will always be reason to distrust the
patriotism of those, who in any quarter may endeavor to w^^ken its ^ands.

In contemplating the causes which may disturb our Union, it occurs (...)
matter of serious concern, that any ground should (...) furnished (...)
characterising parties by Geographical (...) -- Atlantic (...); when (...) men
may endeavor to excite, a belief that there is (...) difference of local
interests and views. One of the expedients of party to acquire influence,
within particular districts, is to misrepresent (...) opinions and (...) of
other districts. You cannot shield yourselves too much against the jealousies
and heart burnings which spring from (...) misrepresentations: they tend to
render (...) to (...) other those who ought to be bound together (...)
affection. The inhabitants of our (...) have la^^ly had a useful lesson on this
(...) have seen, in the negotiation by the Executive, (...) in the unanimous
ratification by the Senate, of (...) treaty with Spain, and in the universal
satisfaction at the event throughout the United States, a decisive proof (...)
unsounded were the suspicions propagated among them of a policy in the General
Government and in the Atlantic States unfriendly to their interests, in regard
to the Misissippi* They have been witnesses to the formation of two treaties,
that with Great Britain and that with Spain, which secures to them every thing
they could desire, in respect to our foreign relations* toward confirming
their prosperity. -- Will it not be their wisdom to rely for the preservation
of these advantages on the UNION, by which they were procured? Will they not
henceforth be deaf to those advisers, i^ such there are, who would sever them
from their Brethren and connect them with aliens*

To the efficacy and permanency of your Union, a Government for the whole is
indispensable -- No alliances, however strict between the parts can be an
adequate substitute; they must inevitably experience the infractions and
interruptions which all alliances in all times have experienced. Sensible of
this momentous truth, you have improved upon your first essay, by the adoption
of a Constitution of Government better calculated than your former for an
intimate Union, and for the efficacious management of your common concerns.
This Government, the off^pring of our own chance, uninfluenced and unawed,
adopted upon (...) deliberation, completely (...), to the distribution of its
powers, (...) with energy, and containing within itself a provision for its own
amendment, has a just claim to your confidence and your support. Respect for
its authority, compliance with its laws, acquiescence in its measures are
duties enjoined by the fundamental maxims of true Liberty. The basis of our
political systems is the right of the people to make and to alter their
Constitutions of Government -- But, the Constitution which at any time exists,
'till changed by an explicit and authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly
obligatory upon all. The very idea of the power and the right of the people to
establish Government presupposes the duty of every individual to obey the
established Government.

All obstructions to the execution of the Laws, all combinations and
associations, under whatever plausible character, with the real design, to
direct, control, counteract, or awe the regular deliberation and action of the
constituted authorities, are destructive of this fundamental principle, and of
fatal tendency. -- They serve to organize faction, to give it an artificial and
extraordinary force -- to put to the place of the delegated will of the nation,
the will of a party, often a small but artful and enterprising minority of the
community; and, according to the alternate triumph^ of d^fferent parties, to
make the public administration the mirror of the ill-concerted and incongruous
projects of faction, rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plan^
digested by common councils, and modified by mutual interests.

However combinations or ass^ciations of the above descriptions may now and
then answer popular ends, they are likely in the course of time and things, to
become popular engines, by which cunning, ambitious and unprincipled men will
be enabled to subvert the power of the people, and to usurp for themselves the
reins of government; destroying afterward the very engines which have lifted
them to unjust dominion.

Toward the preservation of your government, and the permanency of your
present happy state, it is requisite, not only that you steadily discountenance
irregular oppositions to its acknowledged authority, but also that you resist
with care the spirit of innovation upon its principles however specious the
pretexts. -- One method of assault may be to effect, in the forms of the
constitution, alterations which will impair the energy of the system, and thus
to undermine what cannot be directly overthrown. In all the changes to which
you may be invited, remember that time and habit are at least as necessary to
fix the true character of Governments, as of other human institutions -- that
experience i^ the surest standard, by which to test the real tendency of the
existing constitution of a country -- that facility in changes upon the credit
of mere hypothesis and opinion exposes to perpetual change, from the endless
variety of hypothesis and opinion; and remember, especially, that for the
sufficient management of your common interests, in a country so extensive as
ours, a government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security
of liberty, is indispensable. Liberty itself will find in such a government,
with powers properly distributed and adjusted, its surest guardian. It is,
indeed, little else than a name, where the government is too feeble to
withstand the enterprises of faction, to confine each member of the society
within the limits prescribed by the laws, and to maintain all in the secure and
tranquil enjoyment of the rights of person and property.

I have already intimated to you, the danger of parties in the state, with
particular reference to the founding of them on geographical discriminations.
Let me now take a more comprehensive view, and warn you in the most solemn
manner against the baneful effects of the spirit of party, generally.

This spirit, unfortunately, is insep^rable from our nature, having its root in
the strongest passions of the human mind. -- It exists under different shapes
in all governments, more or less stif^ed, controuled, or oppressed* but in
those of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness and is truly
their worst enemy.

The alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit
of revenge, natural to party dissension, which in different ages and countries
has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful despotism.
But this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism. -- The
disorders and miseries, which result; gradually incline the minds of men to
seek security and repose in the absolute power of an individual ^ and sooner or
later the chief of some prevailing faction more able or more fortunate than his
competitors, turn^ this disposition to the purposes of his own elevation, on
the ruins of Public Liberty.

Without looking forward to an extremity of this kind (which nevertheless ought
not to be entirely out of sight) the common and continued mischief^ of the
spirit of party are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a wise
People to discourage and restrain it.

It serves always (...) distract the Pub^ic Councils, and enfeeble the Public
Administration. It agitates the Community with ill-founded jealousies, and
false alarms* kindles the anim^si^y of one part against another; ^oment^
occasionally (...) and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influence and
corruption, which find a facilitate* access to the government itself, through
the channels of party passions. Thus the policy and the will of one country,
are subjected to the policy and will of another.

There is an opinion that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the
administration of the Government, and serve to keep alive the spirit of
Liberty. -- This (...) limits (...) probably true; and in Governments of a
Monarchial cast Patrio^^m may look with (...) not wi^h favor upon the spirit
of party. But in those of the popular character, in G^ve^nments purely (...),
it is a spirit not to be e^couraged. From (...) there will (...) be enough of
that spirit for (...) salutary purpose. And there being constant danger of
(...) effect ought to be, by force of public opinion, to (...) assuage it. A
fire not to be quenched; it demands (...) ^^gilance to prevent its bursting
into a flame, le^^, instead of wa^^^ing it should consume.

It is important likewise, that the habits of thinking in ^ free country,
should inspire caution, in those entrusted with (...) administration, to
confine themselves within their respective constitutional spheres, avoiding in
the exercise of the powers of one department to encroach upon another. The
spirit of encroachment tends to consolidate the power^ of all the departments
in one, and thus to create, whatever the form of government, a real despotism.
A just esti^ate of that (...) of power* and proneness to abuse it, which
predominates in the (...) heart, is suffi^ient to satisfy us of the truth of
this position. -- The necessity of reciprocal checks (...) the (...) of
political power: by dividing and distributing (...) dep^sito^^es, and
constituting each the (...) of the Public Weal against invasions by the others,
(...) been evinced by experiments ancient and modern: some of them in our
country and under our own eyes. To preserve them must be as necessary as to
(...) them. If, in the opinion of the People, the (...) mo^^^fication of the
constitutional powers be (...) any particular wrong, let it be corrected by
(...) amendment in the way which the constitution designates. -- But let there
be no change by usurpation; for though this, in one instance may be the
instrument of good, it is the customary weapon by which free governments are
destroyed. (...) precedent must always greatly overbalance in permanent evil
any partial or transient benefit which the use (...) at any tim^ yield.

Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity,
Religion and Morality are indispensible supports. In vain would that man claim
the tribute of patriotism* who should labor to subvert these great pillars of
human happiness, these fi^m^st prop^ of the duties of Men and Citizens. The
mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and to cherish
them. A volume could not trace all their connections with private and public
felicity. Let it simply be asked, where is the security for property, for
reputation, for life, if the sense of religious obligation desert the oaths,
which are the instruments of investigation in Courts of Justice? And let us
with caution ^ndulge the supposition, that morality can be maintained without
religion. Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education on
minds of peculiar structure; reason and experience both forbid or to expect
that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principles.

It Is substantially true, that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of
popular government. The (...) indeed extends with more or less force to every
(...) government. Who that is a sincere (...) with ind^fference upon attemp^s
to sh^^e the foundation of the fabric?

Promote, then, as an obj^ct of primary importance, institutions for the
general d^ffusion of knowledge. In proportion as the structure of government
gives force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion should be
enlightened.

As every important source of strength and security cherish public credit. One
method of preferring it is to (...) expense by cultivating peace, but
remembering also, that timely disbursements to prepare for danger frequently
prevent much greater d^sbursements to (...); avoiding likewise the accumulation
of debt, not of (...); shunning occasions of expense; but by vigorous exertions
in time of peace to discharge the debts which unavoidable (...) may have
occasioned, not ungenerously throwing upon posterity the burden which we
ourselves ought to bear. -- The execution of these max^m^ belongs to your
Representatives, but it is necessary that public opinion should cooperate. To
facilitate to them the performance of their duty, it is essential that you
should practically bear in mind, that toward the payment of debts there must
be a revenue* that to have revenue there must be taxes; that no taxes can be
devised which are not more or less inconvenient and unpleasant; that the
intrinsic embarrassment insepar^ble from the selection of the proper objects
(which is always a choice of difficulties) ought to be a decisive motive for a
candid construction of the conduct of the government in making it, and for a
spirit of acquiescence in the measures for obtaining Revenue which the public
exigencies may at any time dictate.

Observe good faith and justice toward all nations, cultivate peace and
harmony with all; Religion and Morality enjoin this conduct; and can it be that
good policy does not equally enjoin it? It will be worthy of a free,
enlightened, and, at no great distant period, a great Nation, to give to
mankind the magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an
exalted justice and benevolence. Who can doubt that in the course of time and
things the fruits of such a plan would richly repay any temporary advantages
which might be lost by a steady adherence to it? Can it be, that Providence has
not connected the permanent felicity of a Nation with (...) Virtue? The
experiment, at least, is recommended by every sentiment which enobles human
nature. Alas! is it rendered impossible by its vices?

In the execution of such a plan, nothing is more essential than that
permanent, inveterate antipathies against particular Nations, and passionate
attachments for others should be excluded; and that in place of the^ just an
amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated. The Nation which indulges
toward another an habitual hatred, or an habitual fondness, i^ in some degree
a ^^ave. (...) to its animosity or to its ^ffection, either of which (...)
sufficient to lend i^ astray from its duty and (...) interest. Antipathy in one
nation against another dispose^ each more readily to (...) insult and injury,
to lay (...) of slight causes of umbrage, and to be ^aughty and intractable,
when accidental or (...) occasions of disp^^te occur. Hence frequent
collisions, obstinate, (...) and bloody conte^ts. The nation prompted by (...)
and (...), sometimes impels to war the government, contrary to the be^^
calculations of policy. -- The government sometimes participates in the
na^i^nal prop^^si^y, and adopts through passion what (...) reject; at other
times (...) m^kes the animosity of the (...) su^serv^^nt to project^ of
hostil^^^ (...) by pride, ambition and other (...) and pernicious motives. --
The peace often, sometimes, perhaps, the liberty of nations has been the victim.

So likewise, a passionate attachment of one nation for another produces a
variety of evils. Sympathy for the favorite nation, (...) the illusion of an
imaginary common interest, in (...) where no (...) common interest exists,
(...) to one the enmities of the other* be (...) the (...) a participation in
the quarrels and wars of the latter, without adequa^^ ^^ducement or
justification. It reads also to (...) the favorite nation of privileg^ (...)
apt doubly to (...) by unnecessarily (...) with what (...) retained; and by
exciting jealousy, (...) to retaliate, to the parties from whom equal
privileges are withheld: And it gives to ambitious, corrupted or deluded
citizens, (who devote themselves to the favorite nation) facility to betray,
or sacrifice the interests of their own country, without odium, sometimes even
with popularity; gilding with the appearances of a virtuous sense of obligation
a commendable deference for public opinion, or a laudable zeal for public good,
the hale or foolish compliances of ambition, corruption or infatuation.

At the avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways, (...) attachments are
particularly alarming to the truly enlightened and independent patriot. How
many opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic factions, to practice
the (...) of seduction, to mislead public opinion, to (...) or awe the Public
Councils! Such an attachment of (...) weak, toward a great and powerful
nation, (...) the forme^ to be the sattellite of the latter.

Against the insidious wiles of foreign influence (I conjure you to believe me,
(...)) the jealousy of a (...) people ought to be (...) awake; since history
and experience prove, that (...) influence is one of the (...) of a Republican
Government. But (...), must be impartial; else it becomes the (...) the very
influence to be avoided, instead of a (...) against it. Ex^^ssive partiality
for one foreign (...), and (...) of another, cause those whom they actuate to
(...) danger only on (...) side, and (...) to veil and even second the arts of
influence on the other. -- Real patriots, (...) may resist the intrigues of the
favorite, are liable to become suspected and odious; (...) usurp the applause
and confidence of the (...).

The great to (...) conduct for us, in regard to foreign nations, (...)
commercial relations, to have with them as (...) political connection (...)
possible. ^o far as we have (...) any formed engagements, (...) them (...) good
faith. -- Here let us stop.

Europe has a (...) primary interests, which to us have none, of a very (...)
relation. Hence she must be engaged in frequen^ (...), the cause^ of which are
essentially (...) to our concerns. Hence, therefore, it must be unwise ^n us to
implicate ourselves by artificial ties, in the ordinary vicissitudes of her
(...), or the ordinary (...) and collisions of her friendships, or (...).

Our detached and distant situation invites and enables us to pursue a (...)
course. I^ we remain (...) people, under (...) government, the period is not
far off when we may (...) material injury from external annoyance; when we
(...) such an attitude as will cause the neutrality, (...) resolve upon, to be
scrupulous^y (...) nations, under the impossibi^ity of making acquisition upon
us, will not lightly hazard (...) giving (...) provocation; when we may choose
(...) or (...), as our interest, guided by justice, shall counsel.

Why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit one (...) to
(...) foreign ground? Why by ^n^^rweaving (...) with that of any part of
Europe, entangle ^ut peace and prosperity in the toils of European ambition,
(...), interest, humor or cap^ice?

It Is our (...) policy to steer clear of permanent alliances, with any port^^n
of the foreign world; so far, I mean, a^ we (...) at liberty to (...)
understood as (...) engagement. (...) public than (...) policy. (...) it,
therefore, let th^se engagements be observed in (...) genuine sense. But, in my
opinion, it (...) unnecessary, (...) would be unwise to extend them.

Taking care always to keep (...), by suitable (...) defensive posture, (...)
may safely trust to (...) for extraordinary (...).

Harmony, libera^ intercourse with all nations, are recommended by policy,
humanity, and interest. But even our commercial policy should hold an equal and
impartial hand; neither (...) nor gra^^^ng exclusive favors or (...);
consulting the natural course of things; (...) and diversifying by gentle means
the streams of commerce, but forcing nothing; establishing, with powers so
disposed, in order to give trade a stable course. (...) the rights of our
merchants, and to enable (...) government to support them; conventional rules
(...) the (...) that (...) circumstances and mutual opinion wi^^ permit, (...)
temporary, and liable to be from (...) abandoned (...), as experience and
circumstances shall dictate; constantly keeping in view, that (...) fully in
one nation to look for disinterested ^avours from another; that it must pay
with a portion of its independence for who ever it may accept under that
character; that by such acceptance, it may place itself in the condition of
having given equivalents for nominal ^avors, and yet of being reproached with
ingratitude for not giving more. There can be no greater error than to expect,
or calculate upon real favors from nation to nation. It Is an illusion which
experience must cure, which a just pride ought to discard.

In offering to you, my countrymen, these counsels of an old and affectionate
friend, I dare not hope they will make the strong and (...) impression I could
wish; that they will control the usual current of the passi^^s or prevent our
nation from running the course which has hitherto marked the destiny of
nations: But (...) I may even flatter myself, that they may be productive of
some partial benefit, some occasional good; that they now and then recur to
moderate the ^ury of party spirit, to warn against the mischiefs of foreign
intrigue, to guard against the impostures of pretended patriotism; this hope
will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your welfare, by which they
have been dictated.

How f^r in the discharge of my official duties, I have been guided by the
principles which have been delineated, the public records and other evidences
of my conduct must witness to you and the world. To myself the assurance of my
own conscience is, that I have at least ^elieved myself to be guided by them.

In relation to the still subsisting war in Europe, my Proclamation of the 2nd
of April 1793, is the index (...) my Plan. (...) by your approved voice, and by
that of your Representatives in both Houses of Congress, the spirit of that
measure has continually governed me; uninfluenced by any attempts to (...) or
divert me from it.

After deliberate examination with the aid of the best lights I could obtain, I
was well satisfied, that our country, under all the circumstances of the case,
had a right to take and was bound in duty, and interest, to take a neutral
(...). Having taken it, I determined, as far as should depend upon me, to
maintain it, with moderation, perseverance and firmness.

The considerations which respect the right to hold this conduct, it is not
necessary on this occasion to de^ail. I will only observe, that according to my
understanding of the matter, that right* so far from being (...) by any (...)
Powers, has been vir^^ally admitted by all.

The duty of holding a neutral conduct may (...) inferred, without any thing
more, from the obligation which justice and humanity impose on every nation in
cases which it is free to act, to maintain inviolate the relations of peace and
(...) toward other nations.

(...) inducements of interest for observing that conduct will best be referred
to your own (...) and experience. With me, a predominant moti^^ has been to
endeavor to gain time to our country to settle and mature its yet recent
institutions, and ^o progress without interruption, to that degree of strength
and consistency, which is necessary to give it, humanly speaking, the commands
of its own fortunes.

Though in reviewing the incidents of administration, I am unconscious of
intentional error: I am nevertheless too sensible of my de^ects not to think it
(...) that I may have committed, many errors. Whatever they may be, I fervently
beseech the Almighty to (...) or mitigate the evils to which they may tend. I
shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease to view
them, with indulgence; and that after forty-five years of my life dedicated to
its services with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent abilities will be
consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest.

Relying on its kindness in this as in other things, and (...) by that fervent
love toward it, which is so natural to a man, who views in it the native soil
of himself and his progenoturs for several generations; I anticipate with
plea^^^g expectation that retreat, in which I promise myself to realize,
without alloy, the sweet enjoyment of partaking, in the midst of my
F^llow-Citizens, the benign influence of good laws under a free government the
(...), and the happy (...) and dangers.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, 17 th September, 1796.
NEWPORT (R.I) Printed by HENRY BARBER.


