VINDICATION OF THE Validity and Divine Right OF PRESBYTERIAN ORDINATION, AS
SET FORTH IN DR. CHAUNCY'S SERMON AT THE DUDLEIAN LECTURE, AND MR. WELLE'S
DISCOURSE UPON THE SAME SUBJECT.

In Answer to the Exceptions OF MR. JEREMIAH LEAMIMG, CONTAINED IN HIS LATE
DEFENSE OF THE EPISCOPAL GOVERNMENT OF THE CHURCH.

By Noah Wells, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN STANFORD.

"But be ye not called Rabbi; for one is your MASTER, even CHRIST, and all ye
are BRETHREN."

Matt. xxiii. 8. "Feed the Flock of God, -- neither as being LORDS over God's
Heritage."

1 Pet. v. 2, 3. REPRINTED AT LITCHFIELD, BY T. COLLIER.

Extract of a Letter to the Author.
REV'D SIR,
A GENTLEMAN in this town, to whom Mr. Leaming's "Defense" was lately sent, saw
fit, a few days ago, to put it into my hands, desiring I would give it a
reading; which I have accordingly done.

How far it may be justly called, a Defense of Episcopacy against your sermon,
I am not able to say; not having had (...) pleasure of ever seeing it: But it is
with great impropriety styled a defense against mine; as nineteen parts in
twenty of what I had said, is passed over, without so much as an attempt to
examine its force, or show its inconclusiveness in point of argument. Was it
not that my name is now and then mentioned, no one would imagine he had it in
view to answer me, any more than an hundred others, who have appeared on the
same side of the question in dispute.

I esteem my sermon as full an answer to his "defense," as if wrote on purpose
to confute it; and ask no other favor than that they be carefully compared
with each other, and an impartial judgment formed thereupon. If this is done, I
cannot suppose that any one, besides Mr. L. will be disposed to think, that he
has answered the most material things advanced by Dr. Chauncy: It must be
determined, on the contrary, that he has scarce taken notice of any thing
material that I have offered.

I have no other knowledge of this gentleman, than what may be collected from
this small work of his; which has not, I confess, given me an exalted opinion
of him. Was I inclined to engage-in the episcopal controversy, I should choose
for my opponent, one that is better able to manage a dispute, than he appears
to me to be. What good purpose would it serve to write, though it were never so
clearly and strongly, when one knows before hand, that little notice may be
taken of what is wrote, and yet the whole be completely answered? -- He has
said but little, very little but what has been answered an hundred times over,
and with arguments much too powerful to be set aside by him.

I am sorry your lot is cast among those who are deeply tinctured with
high-church principles. Such are always bigots themselves, and zealously
endeavor to make others so too. This was the case among us in former years; but
these high-flying notions are now almost absorbed in a more generous way of
thinking. There are but few who dare openly profess their adherence to these
tenets, whatever their private thoughts may be. It Is indeed high time they were
universally eradicated out of men's minds, they are so senseless in themselves,
as well as contrary to the word of God.

However, as the case is circumstanced with you, it may be well for you to take
him to task, and point out his weakness; which, as I imagine, you will find no
difficult matter.

It would be doing too much honor to him, for us both to be engaged in the
dispute with him: Though I believe it is in reality a dispute with the combined
clergy in those parts. By the account I have of Mr. L. he is not equal to the
performance that comes out in his name, however insufficient it may be as an
answer to either of us.

I am, etc. CHARLES CHAUNCY.

INTRODUCTION.
WHEN I preached and published my discourse upon ordination, I had no thoughts
of engaging in a controversy. Providence had cast my lot in that part of
Christ's vineyard, where there are sundry episcopalians, interspersed among the
people of my charge, as well as in the neighborhood. Though I never could find
any scripture warrant, for the peculiarities that distinguish that church from
the rest of the protestant world; though it has many defects in its orders,
worship and discipline, and is considerably different from the plan laid down
by our Savior and his apostles, and followed by the primitive christians in
the next succeeding ages; yet as it appears to have the essentials of religion,
it has ever been my practice to treat its professors as christian brethren,
though mistaken in some points; agreeable to the apostolic direction, Him that is
weak in the faith receive, but not to doubtful disputations. A wrangling
disputatious temper among the disciples, especially among the ministers of the
Prince of Peace, is odious and unchristian. As the things in which we agree,
are, by all allowed, to be of infinitely greater importance than those in which
we differ; how can that zeal be defended which spends itself only, or
principally, about the latter, while the former are treated with comparative
neglect? Is it not much more becoming the character of christians and ministers
of the gospel, to lay aside these bickerings, and unite our endeavors in
opposing the growing cause of infidelity and irreligon, and promoting the more
important truths of our common christianity? These are the principles agreeable
to which I have ever treated our episcopal dissenters: And I challenge the
whole party (...) produce an instance, in which I have ever begun a dispute
with them upon the controverted points, or attempted, publicly or privately, to
prejudice them against their own worship or ministry. I esteem it a greater
honor to promote the real interest of religion, than that of any particular
denomination; and, if I know my own hears, had much rather be the happy
instrument of savingly converting one soul to Christ; than of making a thousand
proselytes, merely to the low designs of a party. It has ever given me pain, to
observe the prevalence of a contrary temper and conduct, in those of any
denomination, whether clergy or laity. How far this has been the case with the
episcopalians in these parts, would, perhaps, be deemed invidious in me to say.
Sure I am, if I had not observed too many instances of this kind; had I not
been repeatedly solicited, to preach and publish upon the subject, as a
necessary antidote against the effects of them; the discourse I am now called
upon to vindicate, never would have seen the light. In composing of it, I
studiously guarded against every thing offensive; for I had no desire to be
drawn into a controversy. Had I been disposed to this, I could not have been at
a loss for materials. It is well known, that besides the exorbitant,
unscriptural claims of their bishops, and the mean, servile subjection of the
presbyters, in that church; there are some things in her articles, and in her
worship and discipline many more, which are, (at least in our opinion) highly
exceptionable. However naturally many of these things fell in my way, while
writing upon this subject, I carefully suppressed them; for my maxim was to act
only on the defensive, and endeavor, by scripture and reason, to vindicate our
ministerial authority from the perpetual attacks of the party. In these
circumstances, I had reason to conclude, that the most sanguine and zealous
among them would not be offended, or look upon themselves concerned to answer
me, either from the pulpit or the press. But no sooner was the piece published,
than the episcopa pulpits, here and in the neighborhood, resounded with the old
cry, "the power, the power;" and repeatedly rung over all the various changes,
(...) the nullity of presbyterian orders and administrations, the absolute
necessity of uninterrupted succession, and the unalterable and divine right o^
episcopacy. And among the rest, it was said, Mr. L. often distinguished himself
upon the topic, with singular pathos and zeal.

IT was soon given out, that an answer to my piece would be published: But as
no particular author was named, and the rumor abated; it was generally
concluded, as they had no call to engage in the controversy, the design was
laid aside. However, after a preparation of near three years, Mr. L. has seen
fit to step forth, and favor the public with the first fruits of his pen, in
what he is pleased to call A defense of the episcopal government of the church,
containing remarks upon two late noted sermons, on presbyterian ordination.

WHAT I was to expect, from such an opponent, I was at a loss to determine;
having never had a taste of his abilities for managing a controversy. When the
book came out, I read it with a good degree of attention; and was not a little
surprised to find, that after so long preparation, the author had so little to
say, upon the two pieces he had set himself to answer. As to Dr. Chauncy's, the
Dr. justly observes, nineteen parts in twenty are passed over without a single
remark. And as to mine, whoever compares it with Mr. L's answer, will, I am
confident, make much the same remark. Whether he has so fully succeeded, in
those parts he pretends to answer, must be submitted to the judgment of the
public, to which I appeal.

FOR these and such like reasons, it was judged at first, that to attempt an
answer was no ways necessary. But as the party soon began to triumph in it, as
an unanswerable piece, and boasted of great exploits done by it, in the
addition of sundry converts to the episcopal cause; it was generally concluded,
that something ought to be wrote by way of reply. This, I hoped, would have
been undertaken by Dr. Chauncy, as every way my superior, especially in his
acquaintance with this controversy. But as he has declined the service, for the
reasons mentioned in his letter, prefixed to these sheets; it of course
devolves upon me.

As I am conscious of no other motive in the affair, than a sincere regard to
truth, and the interest of our churches, which I really believe to be the
interest of the Redeemer's kingdom; I shall endeavor fairly to examine every
thing in Mr. L's book, that looks like an argument, and give it its due weight.
For as it is truth rather than victory I aim at; so the former will shine
brightest when placed in contrast with every thing that opposes it; and as to
the latter, he who should challenge it for only nibbling at here and there a
sentence in his antagonist, must I conceive, appear with a very ill grace.
This, however, will make me more lengthy, than might otherwise be thought
needful.

ONE thing I think proper to premise. -- Since, notwithstanding the caution
used, both by the Dr. and myself, to avoid a controversy with episcopalians,
they have seen fit to engage in one; and will not suffer us even to defend our
cause, when called upon so to do, without taking the alarm; I shall not look
upon myself holden to observe the like caution, in that respect, as I did in my
sermon. If therefore in the course of this dispute, I should happen to treat
them with less ceremony: If there should occasionally drop from my pen, any
direct reflections, or free animadversions, upon some very exceptionable and
unscriptural parts of their scheme, when they fall in my way, I request the
candid reader to impute it to the proper cause.

A VINDICATION, etc.
SEC. I. Remarks upon the Letter-Writer, S. I. and Mr. L's Introduction.
MR. L. has ushered his "defense" into public view, with a letter signed, S. I.
Who this gentleman is, we are not concerned to enquire. As he has seen fit to
give us only the initial letters of his name, and left us to guess the rest; he
must expect no more ceremony than any anonymous writer, whatever honorary
titles he may happen to be dignified with.

OUR opponents, says he, have of late, without any provocation, been mustering
up their old sophisms against the ancient episcopal government of the church,
which have been long ago abundantly answered over and over. Perhaps the
gentleman thinks all arguments against his scheme, deserve the name of
sophisms. He should remember however, that though to call an argument that
pinches, by an ugly name, may be an easy method to get rid of it; yet in the
judgment of the candid, a solid refutation would be more satisfactory. That our
arguments are old, is readily granted; for so is truth: But that they are the
worse or the weaker upon that account, appears not. Nor does it appear that
these arguments have been all abundantly, I mean solidly answered. To pretend
to answer an argument, is one thing; to do it effectually, another. The former,
in the present case, we allow. The latter perhaps wants proof: We have only his
bare word for it; and as he seems to be an interested person, the public, and
not he, will be presumed the properest judge. But then, These sophisms have
been mustered up against the ancient episcopal government of the church. Had he
said against the present government of the church of England, as explained by
some of her zealous sons; the words would have read as well, and been more
agreeable to truth. Every sect, almost, is apt to boast of its antiquity; and
if bare assertions are admitted as proof, one has as good a claim to the honor
as another. That the present government of the church of England, is episcopal,
none will deny: But that it is very ancient, at least so ancient as some of its
advocates pretend, is by many denied. As to myself, I am fully persuaded, that
notwithstanding all its high pretenses to antiquity; it is comparatively a mere
novel, upstart institution. So far from being the true ancient episcopacy, that
prevailed in the apostles times, and the ages next following; that it is, in
many respects, diametrically opposite to it and destructive of it. This, I
presume, will appear in the following pages.

BUT after all, if we had attacked even the church of England, without
provocation, it was doubtless wrong. This is a charge commonly brought by our
episcopalians. Notwithstanding the uncommon generosity, with which they are
treated in this country, and the singular indulgence of the state toward them,
above what was ever shown to dissenters, in any part of the christian world;
they are often complaining of opposition and ill-usage. At least, if we will
believe them, they never begin a controversy. They are forced into it, in their
own defense. This gentleman tells us, these opponents, (meaning, I suppose, Dr.
Chauncy and I) have of late been mustering, etc. against the church, without
any provocation. Mr. L. says, I am fully persuaded, upon the strictest enquiry,
it will be found, that there cannot be one single instance produced, for thirty
years past, in which our clergy have begun the dispute. Defense, p. 7.
And, When the church of England is attacked, her clergy suppose they ought to
defend it. p. 8.
His book is therefore called a defense, etc. And this is the only reason that
causes him to publish this defense. But is this representation honest? Are
presbyterians such quarrelsome neighbors, as always to be attacking the church
of England? And beginning the controversy with her, without provotion? Nothing
less. The first piece wrote upon the controversy, in this country, was on the
episcopal side. And the first in this colony, by one with whom, I presume, S.
I. is intimately acquainted. What then can these gentlemen mean, by attacks
upon the church of England? Had either the Dr. or I, denied her the essentials
of a true church; had we disputed the validity of her ministry; -- pronounced a
nullity upon her administrations; -- ranked her clergy among the sons of Korah,
or her members with heathen Jews and infidels; or had we directly attempted to
expose any of those many things, which are, at least, highly exceptionable in
her doctrines, discipline, orders, and worship; they might, with more propriety
sound the alarm, and cry, an attack upon the church. Every one knows, how
common these cants are, from a certain quarter. But is there any thing of this
kind in the pieces Mr. L. pretends to answer? Certainly nothing. They bravely
defend our ministry, from the exceptions of these zealous advocates for
episcopacy, whose high-flying principles, lead them to anathematize all of our
communion, and leave all the protestant world, but themselves, to the
uncovenanted mercies of God. According to these gentlemen, it seems, there can
be no defense of presbyterian principles, however modest, without attacking the
church of England. This is a great mistake. Let but the church of England, even
in her present form, be put upon her original and true footing; -- let her rest
upon the foundation, which the first reformers, and all her moderate and
catholic sons since, have fixed for her; I mean the civil authority of the King
and parliament; and they never need fear being attacked by us. A defense of
presbytetian ordination and government, will be no direct opposition to the
church of England, in this view of it. Had there never been any higher claims
for her, (and, to me, it is clear there never oughts) Had her sons in this
country, contented themselves, with challenging for her, the honor of being a
valuable branch of the reformation, and of having the authority in England,
engaged for her establishment and support there; I am confident, "the annual
lecture in Cambridge," at which Mr. L. is so much nettled, never would have had
a being; nor the pieces he pretends to answer, have seen the light.

BUT the grand secret no doubt is: -- The cause of episcopacy is to be pushed
in America, at all events. And, upon trial, this it seems, has been found the
best expedient -- to unhinge and perplex the minds of ignorant people, -- to
fill their heads with airy notions of the absolute necessity of episcopal
ordination, prejudice them against their own ministers, as having no commission
from Christ, no authority to perform the divine offices of religion, and boldly
pronouncing nullity upon all their administrations. This is the general strain
of all the pieces upon the controversy, that have been wrote in this country.
If this was not Mr. L.'s design, he had no call to engage in the dispute. This,
however, is no new art. All opposers of religion, have ever made their most
successful attacks, through the sides of its clergy. Thus did Korah, Dathan and
Abiram. They fell upon Moses and Aaron, and denied their authority, as officers
in God's church. "Ye take too much upon you." The scribes and pharisees did the
same in their opposition to christianity in its infancy. They "compassed sea
and land to make proselytes," they attacked the divine author of the gospel,
and boldly questioned his authority, as a public officer in the church. By what
authority do thou these things? And who gave thee this authority? The apostle
Paul met with the same treatment. The Judaizing teachers, (who, by the way,
were notable sticklers for uninstituted rites and ceremonies in religion,)
traduced his character, denied his ministerial authority, and in that way
endeavored to prejudice people's mind, and draw off a party to follow them.
This laid him often, under the disagreeable necessity, of vindicating himself
against such aspersions; as may be seen in his epistles. The grand topic of
declamation of papists, against protestants, has ever been this. You have
thrown off the pope's authority, separated from the catholic apostolic church;
you have therefore no authentic ministry, no valid gospel administrations. The
same clamor was raised in England, by the non-jurors, against the church of
England, at the revolution. And most of us remember, how successful the same
artifice has been, in the hands of our enthusiastic seperates of this country,
in the late times. -- But to return.

FOR ten years, says Mr. L. before this, the church of England and dissenters,
lived in a peaceful state: But since they have published so many things against
that church, it has a little disconcerted the design of our clergy. If the
"design of their clergy" is to promote practical godliness, and make converts
to Jesus Christ; I am at a loss to find any thing in the books he speaks of,
tending to disconcert it. But if their grand design is, to convert
presbyterians to the doctrines of prelacy, and make proselytes to the church of
England, I don't doubt but that it has been a little, perhaps not a very little
disconcerted, by the publications aforesaid. -- He adds, Who determine, as much
as possible, to live peaceably with all men. -- Peace, without doubt, is a very
desirable thing; but if truth must be the purchase of it, we beg to be excused.
We should heartily rejoice to find them, ever more disposed to a peaceful
conduct, than at present they appear to be; and are not conscious of any thing
on our side, to make them otherwise. But if their designs are disconcerted, by
opening peoples eyes to discover the truth; if their tempers are soured, and
they become unsociable, and unpeaceful, by a bare detection of the weakness of
their cause, and they are resolved not to live in peace, unless we will give up
all pretenses to the character of ministers and christians, and, right or
wrong, come over to their party; we must plainly tell them, they hold their
friendship too dear.

THIS conduct of their ministers, says S. I. to his client, has made it
necessary for us to write again, in defense of the church; and I am glad, and
thank you, that you have undertaken this office, and so well acquitted yourself
in the discharge of it. How well Mr. L. has acquitted himself in this office,
must be left to the reader. -- However, if all our arguments are but sophisms;
especially if they have been long ago abundantly answered over and over by
others; it is no great purchase to do it again. But a smattering of logic will
serve, to answer a sophism, and detect its fallacy. And if in the present case,
this has been so often done before, some perhaps may be ready to doubt, whether
Mr. L. has not acted the plagiary, and only published the works of others, in
his own name. Besides, if all our sophisms have been so often, so abundantly
answered before, what occasion was there for doing of it again? -- Not that I
would detract from Mr. L.'s performance. It is really better than I expected
from him; and, so far as he enters into the subject, as good, I imagine, as the
cause will well admit. After all, I can hardly think he has done quite so much
execution with it, as his friend supposes. According to him, all our arguments
stand no more chance, before the formidable artillery of this mighty champion,
than mere cobwebs or puffballs, before the mouth of a roaring cannon. They
instantly vanish into dust and smoke. But no wonder: Since whatever plausible
appearance they make, they are but mere cavils.

THEIR chief appearance of strength, he adds, lies in the promiscuous use of
the words, bishop and presbyter. This gentleman must allow me to tell him, he
here labors under a great mistake. If he had read the pieces he makes so free
with, he must have seen that we argue the validity of presbyterian ordination,
from the one general commission to ministers in the gospel. As this commission
belongs to all Christ's ministers, we think they must be entitled to all the
powers it contains; therefore to ordination, which is one of these powers. We
argue it, from all gospel ministers being successors to the apostles, in their
ordinary capacity, and so possessed of all the powers belonging to them, in
that capacity, of which ordination is indubitably one. -- We argue it, from
there being but one kind, or order of ministers, to be found in the
New Testament, -- but one set of qualifications required, -- one general work
or business assigned, -- and only one method of introduction into office
prescribed for them all. Finally, we produce, as we think, plain and express
instances, from scripture, of ordination by presbyters, properly so called,
which is more than our opponents have ever been able to do, for episcopal
ordination, though often requested so to do.

IT IS true, the promiscuous use of the words, bishop and presbyter in scripture
is one of our arguments, and, we think, a good one. For if these names were
applied in common to all gospel ministers at that time; if every scripture
presbyter was really a bishop then, we see no reason why it should be otherwise
now. At least the instance he brings to convince us of our mistake; to convince
us, that though bishop and presbyter were one office in the apostles times, yet
they ought not to be so now; does not seem so happily chosen to prove the
point, though it serves well enough, to show how the alteration was introduced
into the christian church, the motives leading to it, and the means used to
accomplish it.

THE instance he produces is this. -- They might, says he, with just the same
reason, argue and conclude, that Pompey and Augustus were of the same office,
because they were both called imperatores; when all the world knows, that
within 50 years, (as the case has often been with other words) a different set
of ideas was annexed to that word from what it meant 50 years before: Which was
plainly the case, with the word, bishop, when the church came to be settled,
etc. The truth of the fact he mentions, as to the Roman state. I readily allow,
-- nor will I dispute the propriety of the application. It has indeed, in this
instance, (as he justly observes) fared with the christian church, much as it
did with the ancient Roman commonwealth. While Rome was free, and retained her
happy republican form of government; the term, imperator, meant only an officer
in the army, of equal authority with his brother officers of the same title.
But when Julias Caesar, that grand usurper, not content with the original
honors and powers of his office, as general; but fired with unbounded thirst
of dominion, found means to destroy the ancient form of government, and enslave
his country; then he appropriated the title to himself and successors, and so
the word, imperator, in process of time, came to signify, one of supreme
authority over all ^^hers, both in the army and state.

AND has it not happened, even so, with the word, bishop, in the christian
church? Originally it signified, barely a minister of Christ, a standing
officer in the church, only of equal power with the rest of his brethren in the
ministry. But the church of Rome, in imitation of the state, have long since,
destroyed the original parity, that first subsisted among the gospel ministers,
and, together with the power, appropriated the title of bishop, in its highest
signification, to the pope, the grand usurper and enslaver of God's people, in
spirituals, and made him lord paramount, over all the officers and members in
the church of Christ. And pity it is, that any protestant church, should so far
affect to ape and imitate them, as to adulterate the scriptural meaning of the
word, bishop, to appropriate the title to a pretended superior order of
officers in the church, as expressive of a lordly authority over their brethren
in the ministry, who were all originally upon a level, as to power; all true
scripture-bishops. Is not this too much like symbolizing with the church of
Rome, the mother of harlots and abominations? Is it not too lightly departing
from the scripture pattern, and treating with too much neglect, that solemn
caution, given by the great head of the church, to his ministers, be ye not
called rabbi, mas^er, lord; for one is your master, even Christ, and all ye are
brethren.

LET the candid reader now judge, whether there is not some weight in this
argument, drawn from the identity of the names, bishop and presbyter in
scripture in support of presbyterian ordination, after all this gentleman has
said to defeat it? Or whether it is, as he says, a mere logomachy, or strife
about words, fixing modern ideas to old names? Besides, who is it that has
introduced this logomachy, this strife about words? Who, that affix modern
ideas to old names? They, who have affixed to the name bishop, originally the
same, by his own confession, with presbyter; the modern additional ideas of
superior authority, and a lordly dominion, over his brother bishops and fellow
presbyters? Or we, who consider him, in the same state of equality with his
brethren, in which the scripture has fixed him? They, who arrogate to him, the
sole power of ordination and government? Or we, who, agreeable to scripture
pattern, leave these powers in common to all gospel ministers? If there is any
adulteration, any perversion of words from their original signification, "or
affixing modern ideas to old names," let those be answerable who have given the
occasion.

NOTHING of consequence occurs in the remaining parts of this letter, but what
we shall meet with in the piece it accompanies, and which will be there
considered. He indeed tells us they maintain the ancient government of the
church "was episcopal;" that Timothy was an instance of it at Ephesus, and the
apocalyptic angel another, etc. etc. To which he finally adds, the testimony of
the fathers, who, if we may believe him, were all upon their side of the
question: And then says; -- They, (the fathers) must have as well known the
form, in which the apostles, under divine inspiration, established and left the
church; as we now know how ours was, in Q. Elizabeth's time.

Answer.

IT is not true in fact, that these ancient fathers, had such perfect knowledge
of the original institution of the church, or that their writings in this case
are so certainly to be depended upon, as his argument supposes. If their
writings are a sure guide for us in one case, they are in another. But it is
well known these same fathers maintained the doctrine of the millennium, and
practiced giving the sacrament to infants; and moreover declared that they
received these things from the apostles themselves. This they assert as fully,
as they do the doctrine this gentleman cites them to prove. And yet his church,
and all others, for many hundred years, reject the testimony of the fathers in
the aforesaid instances, as being repugnant to the word of God. But further,
granting his assertion to be true, that these writers knew as well what form of
government prevailed in the apostles times, as we do, what was the
establishment of the church of England in Q. Elizabeth's time; yet this will
not prove that diocesan episcopacy is of divine right. This gentleman, and
other zealots of his party, assert, that episcopacy in England, at the time of
the reformation, was settled upon the foot of divine institution. -- Others,
not only presbyterians, but many eminent and learned episcopalians, affirm the
contrary: -- They deny it has any pretense of divine right in its original
establishment, but rests wholly upon the civil authority and acts of
parliament, for its existence in its present form. Now both of these opinions
cannot be true. If then we cannot, at this day, certainly know, upon what footing
the church of England stood in the reign of Q. Elizabeth; we certainly cannot
know from the writings of these fathers, what was the apostolic institution of
the church, even allowing that they knew it, as well as we do, what was
established by Q. Elizabeth and her parliament: For, it seems, we are far from
being agreed in that, and therefore don't certainly know it. -- But what spoils
the whole of this argument for episcopacy, is that it takes for granted a fact
which is not true. The fathers testify in favor of diocesan episcopacy,
therefore it is of divine institution. I deny the fact. It is so far from being
true, that any of the fathers of the two first centuries, declare in favor of
diocesan episcopacy, much less that this was the form of church government
handed down to them from the apostles; that, on the contrary, their writings
unanimously exhibit to view a form, diametrically opposite to and absolutely
destructive of, the present diocesan episcopacy, that prevails in the church of
England. This I propose to prove in its proper place, to which I refer the
reader.

HE goes on; This was always my way of arguing. Answer. Some men are observed,
to have a very odd and wrong-headed way of arguing, all their days. But barely
its being their way, the way they have always been used to, will not prove it
to be a good one, or serve to recommend it to those, who have been accustomed
to a better way.

HE adds, just in the same way do our dissenting neighbors, with us, very
rightly argue the cause of infant baptism, and the first day sabbath; only they
have not near so many clear, incontestible facts, either of scripture or
antiquity, for them, as we have for episcopacy; so that they must either give
up them, or embrace that, or be self-condemned, as inconsistent with
themselves. -- I answer. There is, at least in our opinion, much better
evidence, both from scripture and antiquity, in support of infant baptism, and
the first day sabbath; than for diocesan episcopacy. But if there were not,
there is this material difference between us and them. They, from scripture and
antiquity, are convinced, as they tell us, that diocesan episcopacy is of
divine institution, and therefore practice it. But then they virtually exclude
all other christians, from the benefits of the gospel, by denying the authority
of their clergy, and the validity of their administrations, and leaving them in
the deplorable state of heathen and infidels. -- We, on the other hand, from
the same testimonies, believe infant baptism, and the first day sabbath. We
accordingly practice them. But then, we have not so learned Christ, as to think
it our duty, either by our principles or practice, to unchurch and
unchristianize all who differ from us in these points: But, if they are
otherwise qualified, cheerfully admit their ministers into our pulpits, and
their members to communion, in gospel ordinances. -- We are content to enjoy
our principles, without taking upon us to damn all who differ from us. -- Upon
the whole then, we don't find ourselves greatly embarrassed with this powerful
dilemma, in which he means to entangle us, in order to draw us over to the
church. We really think, notwithstanding all he has said, we may safely retain
our old principles and practice, without incurring the character of
self-inconsistency, in the judgment of the impartial, or feeling the reproaches
of selfcondemnation in our own consciences.

HIS letter concludes with these words. -- Let us then faithfully adhere to the
doctrine, government, and liturgy OF THE MOST EXCELLENT CHURCH OF ENGLAND,
WHICH CERTAINLY ARE, AND HAVE BEEN PROVED TO BE, THE MOST SCRIPTURAL, OF ANY
NOW IN THE WORLD. -- A high encomium! and if just, abundantly sufficient to
recommend his beloved episcopacy to the good graces of all mankind. Let him
only favor us with sufficient proof of his assertion, and we will, at once,
quit our present way, and all in a body become cordial proselytes, to his most
excellent, truly apostolic, and best constituted church in the world. Till
then, he must allow us a little to hesitate, -- to consider who this pompous
character comes from. Possibly it may be just. -- Of this, however, he has
given us no proof but his bare word. Perhaps he may have observed, that it is
no new thing for men to cry; The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord,
the temple of the Lord, are these. All men are apt to like their own principles
best, and entertain a partial fondness for their own way. And for ought I can
see, -- the cry, of THE MOST EXCELLENT CHURCH, THE MOST SCRIPTUAL, PURE,
PRIMITIVE DOCTRINE, GOVERNMENT AND LITURGY OF ANY IN THE WORLD, are words, that
sound as smooth and harmoniously in the ear, and offer full as much conviction
to the understanding of an impartial judge, from the mouth of any other
enthusiastic sectary, as from that of an episcopal dissenter in New England. I
now take leave of the patron in order to pay my devoirs to his client.

SEC. II. Containing some incidental Remarks, upon sundry scattered passages in
Mr. L's book, not so immediately connected with the main point.
MR. L. charges me with a mistake, in calling Mark an apostle P. 30.
. My words are, Thus Matthew, Mark and John, are all called evangelists, though
at the same time they sustained the character of apostles. How I came to make
the mistake of calling Mark an apostle, I know not, unless through
inadvertency; as knowing it no ways affected the argument, whether he in
particular bore that character or no. A mistake however, I confess it was, and
thank him for pointing it out. I shall now do him the same friendly office, in
pointing out a few of his; some of which greatly affect the subject he is upon.
The first I shall notice is a general one that runs through his piece, as well as
the letter prefixed to it; I mean, his calling those of our communion in this
country, dissenters. It Is pity, I think, these gentlemen don't consider where
they live, before they give themselves such airs. Not that I imagine there is
any thing reproachful in the name, when properly applied, though doubtless this
is their meaning. Dissenter is one, who differs from the established religion
of the country where he lives. I must therefore inform him, if he don't know
it, that the term is merely topical. That in England, for instance, the same
person who is a member of the established church there, consequently no
dissenter; let him but only pass the Tweed into Scotland, or cross the
Atlantic, and fix in New England, and he commences a very dissenter as any in
Christendom. The reason is, in the former country, the episcopal persuasion, in
the latter, the presbyterian or congregational, is the religion by law
established. This mistake, I do not pretend, greatly affects the point in
dispute. It may tend however to give people's minds a wrong bias. At least it
is always best to call things by their proper names. And as Mr. L. as well as
I, is a young writer, it may be a kindness to him just to be reminded, that
however weak and deficient his arguments are, his readers will at least expect
of him propriety in point of diction.

IN page 37, he is chargeable with another mistake, and that too expressed in a
manner, hardly consistent with the character of a polite gentleman, upon which,
it is said, he pretty much values himself. -- What I intend is, his charging me
with downright falsehood and dishonesty for a certain passage in my book. His
words are, Mr. Wells, in P. 27, has these remarkable words. By bishops, they,
(the church) mean, I hope, true scripture bishops, not merely creatures of the
state, of human institution! On which he very genteelly remarks. I must be so
free as to tell him, he did not hope any such thing, so he knew the contrary to
be true. What he could find in these harmless expressions to awaken his ire,
(for he certainly was angry) or what induced him to cite them, and pass such
illiberal and injurious reflections upon them; I confess myself utterly at a
loss to determine. Was it that he though it they carried in them an insinuation,
that their church was really a creature of the state, in its preseat form, and
not of divine institution? No such thing was expressed. But if there had, he
ought to know that this is the opinion not only of presbyterians; but of many
great and learned writers in his own church; I may say, of the generality of
the reformers, and all the more moderate episcopalians ever since. Dr.
Stilling^^eet, says, I doubt not to make it evident that the main ground for
lettling episcopal government in this nation, was not accounted any pretense of
divine right, but the convenience of that form of church government, to ^he
state and condition of this church, at the time of the reformation. Iren. p.
3^5.

Bishop Whitegift, says, I am persuaded that the external government of the
church, under a christian magistrate, must be according to the kind and form of
government, used in the commonwealth: Else how can you make the prince, supreme
governor of all states and causes occlesiastical. Defen. of ans. 372.

Of the same opinion were Dr. Edwards, and their celebrated Hooker. The former
of which, delivers his own and Mr. Hooker's sentiments, in these words, The
judicious Mr. Hooker holds, that episcopacy may be abrogated; consequently it
is not of divine and apostolic right, but the political institution of the
church. -- Edw. remains, 257.

Agreeable to which is an act of parliament, in the reign of Hen. VIII. cap.
17, in these words, Archbishops, bishops, archdeacons, and other ecclesiastical
officers, have no manner of jurisdiction ecclesiastical, but by, under and from
his royal majesty, -- the supreme head of the church of England and Ireland, to
whom, by holy scripture, all authority and power is wholly given, to hear and
determine, all manner of causes ecclesiastical.

The same is declared in an act of parliament, made 1 Edw. VI. cap. 2. All
authority and jurisdiction, spiritual and temporal, is derived and deduced from
the King's majesty, as supreme head of these churches and realms of England and
Ireland.

Cook, Rep. de Jure Reg. eccl. fol. 8. This clearly shows, that the episcopal
government of the church in England, is not supposed to rest upon the
foundation of scripture; but upon the King's authority, as supreme head of the
church. As a further proof of which, in the beginning of the reformation,
bishops actually took out their commissions from the King, and were promoted by
his letters patent; the form of which, as bishop Burnet tells us, was, that the
King appointed such an one to be bishop, during his natural life, or so long as
the behaved well, and gave him power to ordain, or deprive ministers to
exercise ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and perform all other parts of the
episcopal function, and this they were to do, IN THE KING'S NAME AND BY HIS
AUTHORITY.

Burn. abridg. vol. 2. p. 127.
Or does he think there is a contradiction between this sentence, and the other
he pretends to quote from P. 50 of my sermon? The words I there use (for he has
not quoted them right) are these, Another argument made use of, etc. -- is,
that the New Testament has actually appointed three distinct orders in the
gospel ministry, viz. that of bishops, etc. -- Now let the candid reader
compare these two sentences, and see if there be any contradiction: Or any
thing that could provoke him to treat me so rudely. In one I say, episcopalians
argue their three orders from scripture. In the other I express my hope that by
one of those orders, bishops, they mean scripture bishops. In the former, I
assert what they declare their belief in this case to be. In the latter, I
express my charitable hope of their honesty in such declaration. These were the
hopes, the only hopes, I mentioned. But Mr. L. very politely replies, "I must
be so free as to tell him he never hoped any such thing. In some cases, I would
be far from calling his knowledge in question. But how he could know my heart;
how he could certainly tell what I did, or did not hope, is beyond me to
conceive. But he tells me, not only that I did not " hope so;" but that I knew
the contrary to be true. Now if I knew the contrary to be true, it must be
because it was true: Otherwise, it is utterly impossible I could know it to be
true. But what, I ask, is this contrary, which he says, I know to be true?
Plainly this, that by bishops, episcopalians do not mean true scripture
bishops. This, and nothing else, stand opposed, to what I declared was the
matter of my hope. All therefore I am able to make of this remarkable sentence,
is this. I had said, I hoped, by bishops, episcopalians mean true scripture
bishops. Mr. L. denies they mean any such thing. I had declared, that when they
talked so much about the divine right of episcopacy, I was charitably inclined
to think they were honest. But this gentleman plainly tells me it is no such
thing. Since therefore he must be supposed to know best, and will needs have it
so; I will grant I was mistaken, as to him in particular; though as to others
of his party, he must allow me to entertain the same charitable opinion still;
at least till they give me the same reason to alter it, as he has done in his
case. If this is not his meaning in these remarkable words of his; it is indeed
difficult to say, what his meaning is. -- They seem to have no meaning at all;
and therefore (to use another of his courtly phrases) they might have been left
out, and his defense would have been as good as it is now.

MR. L. seems to be displeased with the length of my sermon. In page 30 he has
these words, Though he (Mr. Welle's) fleers about our preaching deacons; yet I
believe it is really true, that Stephen preached as good a sermon as Mr.
Welle's divine right, etc. though it was not so long. I have examined the
passage, to which he refers in this remark, but can find nothing that looks
like a fleer there. After giving an account of the institution of deacons, Acts
6, beginning, and answering the arguments they bring for their preaching; I
have these words, Since therefore it plainly appears, that these deacons, were
in no sense, gospel ministers, but expressly appointed and set apart to quite
another service; it undeniably follows that no order in the christian ministry
can be founded upon this instance; and consequently, that their pretended order
of preaching deacons, has no warrant -- from the word of God. Now what is there
in these words, that looks like a fleer? It is true, I denied that preaching
was any part of the scripture deacon's office; and if after I had proved it was
not, I called it, a pretended order, etc. I can see nothing criminal in it,
nothing that looks like fleering. The order of preaching deacons in the church
of England, is either a real and scriptural, or a pretended and unscriptural
one. The former he knows we deny. He knows it was the very thing I was then
disproving; and if, when I had, as I thought, sufficiently disproved it, I
called it a pretended order, I can see no reason he had to be offended. I hope
he would not have me call it a real scriptural order of the ministry, when I
did not believe it to be so, and had proved it not to be so. -- But he believes
it is really true, that Stephen preached as good a sermon as mine, though it was
not so long. Possibly he does; though why he believes it, he has not told us.
Sure I am, the scripture, to which he so often appeals, furnishes no evidence
of it. That indeed gives a lengthy account of this protomartyr, but says not a
word about his preaching as I can find. It Is true it speaks of his disputing;
but then Mr. L. I presume, will not pretend that all disputing is preaching. He
has disputed against my sermon; but he has not publicly told us, he ever
preached against it, though others say he did at sundry places and times. Whether
his sermon, upon these occasions, was langer or sherter, whether it was better
or worse than mine, as it is of little importance, I am not anxious to know. Be
that as it will, I do not see what great reason he had to complain of the
length of my sermon; since long as it is, it has given him so little trouble.
For all he professedly attempts to answer of it, is only my first argument,
which being comprised in little more than two pages, could not, one would
think, give him any great pain. -- Whether it was the length, or the strength
of the other arguments, that discouraged him from meddling with them; as he has
not seen fit to tell us, every one must be left to conjecture for himself.

THE pieces Mr. L. attempts to answer, had occasionally mentioned "the right of
people to choose their ministers." This he has repeatedly remarked upon, though
not directly connected with the main point; while sundry arguments that were,
are passed by unnoticed. What could be his motive for this, is difficult to
guess. Perhaps he though it so long as people were left to claim and prize this
invaluable privilege; all he could say upon his divine-right and best
constituted-church, would be insufficient to draw them away from a communion,
where this privilege is enjoyed, to one where it is utterly denied. He attacks
Dr. Chauncy upon this head, and spends near two pages in endeavoring to
disprove it; and, as if that was too little, he falls upon it again in his
remarks upon me. He demands of the Dr. Where we find in scripture, this to be
declared a part of christian liberty, etc. I presume, scripture pattern will
satisfy for proof of this point, since it is all they pretend to bring for
episcopacy, and much more than they are able to produce. And of this kind of
proof there is plenty in scripture. From the gospel history it appears, that
this was the universal practice in the aposties times. When the vacancy made in
the breach of apostles, by the ^^^ath of Judas, was to be supplied; the vote of
the whole visible church there present, was taken in the case; so that when
Matthias was appointed, he is said to be numbered with the aposties, by the
common vote of ^^^^rage, as it is in the original. Acts 1.26.
Sunkutepsephisthae.
This is a plain matter of fact: And this solemn ^^^nsaction in the beginning
of christianity, is a standing pattern for the church in all succeeding agos.

I mentioned in my sermon, the instance of the seven deacons, who are expressly
said, ^o be chosen by the church, by the whole ^^^tionde. Act. 6.5.
Was it though it necessary that the vote of the church should be taken, in the
choice of officers, whose business was only to serve tables; how much more, in
the more important office, of ministers of the word and sacraments? As a
further proof of this right, I observed in my sermon, that this was the manner,
in which the olders ordained by Paul and Barn^bas were introduced: By the vote
or suffrage of the people, as it is in the original. Acts 14.23.
Koiretonasantes, etc. which Beza venders, quumque ipsi per suffragin creassent,
etc. when they had by votes constituted them elders, etc. This, it seems, the
translators of our bible were convinced of. For before our English bibles had
unthergone episcopul correction at this place, the words, by election, were
added. And in the margin was this note. -- The apostles did not thrust pastors
into the church, by a lordly superiority; but chose-and placed them, by the
voice of the congregation. Rat. dis. P. 27.


THESE now are so many scripture examples, of the exercise of this right, by
the primitive christians. Hence it undeniably follows, that this originally
belonged to the people; consoquently, ^o go about to rob them of it, is
unscriptural and tyrannical. Dr. Chauncy mentioned a number of proofs from the
fathers, in support of this right; and that even after the distinction between
bishops and presbyters took place. To these, many more might easily be added,
from the same quarter. I shall subjoin one from Cyprian, bishop of Carthage,
who flourished A.D. 250. The people, says he, have the chief power of choosing
worthy ministers, and refusing the unworthy. He adds, That it must be received
as a divine tradition, and an apostolic observation. Epil. 68.
The ingenious author of the inquiry into the constitution, etc. of the
primitive church, supposed to be Sr. Peter King, afterward lord chancellor,
abundantly proves, from numerous testimonies, that this was the universal
practice of the primitive church, for people to choose their own ministers. And
indeed, the contrary practice is so repugnant to reason, to all notions of
liberty, and the universal custom in all other cases, that, one would think,
nothing but the highest degree of prejudice could reconcile people to it. Do
not we esteem it a privilege to choose our civil rulers, and look upon the
people as in a degree of slavery, who are utterly deprived of it? Would we
submit to have others choose for us a lawyer to defend our property, or a
physician to take care of our health, -- and oblige us to improve these and no
other? Certainly no. But if we are so tenacious of our natural rights, where
our temporal interest and bodily health only are concerned, -- how much more
ought we to be, in things that relate to the health of our souls, our future
and eternal interest? Surely as much more, as the latter exceeds the former in
point of importance. No wonder then Mr. L. considered the want of this, a very
important objection against his favorite church; and though somewhat beside
his subject, set himself so zealously to remove it. How far he has succeeded, I
leave to the reader. But if he is not able, wholly, to vindicate his own church
in this respect, he seems to think it some excuse that others, and ours in
particular, is in the same state. This seems to be his meaning in these words:
I believe if the matter be carefully examined, it will be found, that the right
of the New England churches, to choose their ministers, is sounded, not upon
scripture, but upon the law of the province, which declares who shall be the
patrons, in each parish to choose their ministers. As far as I have been able
to understand this matter, the law of the province constitutes the heads of the
famisies to choose, etc. P. 16.


How far Mr. L. has been able to understand this matter, he must know best. The
defect of his understanding, it is not in my power to help. Whether it was for
want of understanding or will, certain, I am, the account he gives of this
affair is not true. According to the law of this colony, (and I suppose the
case is much the same in the rest of New England, where there is an
ecclesiastical establishment) the right of choosing a minister, is declared to
be, not in the heads of families exclusively; but in them and the members of
the church, whether heads of families or not. Besides, this right is not
founded, as he supposes, in the law of the colony, any more than the obligation
of any divine law, adopted by the civil magistrate. The obligation in one case,
and the right in the other, is founded in scripture. The civil law only
recognizes the right, and protects people in the enjoyment and exercise of it.
And all men acquainted with our ecclesiastical constitution, know that we are
so far from having any thing to do, with what he calls patrons, in each parish,
to choose the minister; that most people know nothing of the term, or what it
signifies, and I hope, by experience, never may. The communicants, and all
others of our people, who vote in society-meetings for other purposes, have all
free liberty to vote in the choice of a minister. And that they may act with
discretion in this important affair; they have opportunity to make trial of the
candidate while he is upon probation. -- Was it then honest in Mr. L. to say,
In the same way societies, corporations and particular persons, become patrons
in the church of England? In that church, patrons, clerical or secular, choose
the ministers for the people. In ours, he is chosen by the church and people
themselves. In the former the bishop, or some lay patron, who perhaps never saw
the candidate, and is never to fit under his ministry, has the sole power of
electing. In the latter, he is elected by the votes of those who have made
trial of him, are to maintain him, and attend upon his administrations. In our
method, the law acknowledges the natural and scriptural right of the people in
this important affair, and protects them in the enjoyment of it. But in theirs,
in defiance of both, their minister is obtruded upon them without their
consent. If therefore, in this view of the case, that good gentleman, (as Mr.
L. calls the Dr.) should really think their church, somewhat culpable in the
matter of patrons; few people, I presume, "would greatly wonder at it," save he
and those of his party; and if, as he says, their church appears to him to
stand clear of all blame in that matter; it must be owing, I think, to
prejudice and partiality in a very high degree.

I FIND but one thing more, in Mr. L's book, proper for this section. And that
is, the uncommon advertisement tacked to the end of it. I have read it over
sundry times, but cannot be certain I have hit upon his meaning after all. He
talks much about consequences; cautions his answerer against "falling upon
consequences," and declares that he "has no concern with consequences." What he
intends by them, is difficult to say. A consequence in logic, is an essential
part of every good argument. But he cannot mean this by his consequences: For
whatever they be, he places them in opposition to arguments, for want of which,
in confuting his book, they are supposed to be "fallen upon." And yet this or
something like it, must be his meaning too; for he warns his antagonist against
"flying from the subject," or what he has advanced in "his book" and "falling
upon the consequences." But if this be his meaning, he need give himself no
trouble in the case, provided he has only been careful, "to advance" nothing
but truth: For truth is ever consistent with itself; and nothing but truth will
follow from it, or be the consequence of it, and this can do him no hurt. But
if he has not: If he has advanced things in his book, that are not true, or
espoused principles that cannot be supported by scripture or reason, he must ^e
accountable for the consequences, whether he will or no. If, for instance, he
has advanced a scheme of church government, which takes the power of discipline
out of the hands of her proper pastors, and so robs her of this useful part of
Christ's institution: If, according to his principles, the episcopal churches
in America, cannot be said to have the least shadow of discipline: If it
necessarily follows from his positions, that it is better to be a papist than a
presbyterian, and an ordination received in the church of Rome, "the mother of
harlots" is lawful and valid, while one received in the truly protestant church
of Scotland or Geneva, is ipso facto null and void. Of the unaccountable
partiality of the church of England in favor of Rome, there has not long since,
as I am informed, been a striking instance in America. Mr. Houdon a Romish
priest in Canada, took a fancy to a young lady. As the doctrine of celibacy in
his church, forbid his marrying of her, they agreed to quit their country and
run off to New York. Sometime after he found means to get recommended to the
society for propagating the gospel, and without reordination, came as a
mistionary in their service to New-Rochelle, where he lately died. Much about
the same time, as I take it, Mr. Hooper, who had been ordained in the church of
Scotland, conformed to the church, but could not be admitted as a minister
without ^e ordination. He accordingly went to England, was re ordained by the
bishop and is now an episcopal minister in one of the churches in Boston.
If upon his scheme, all the protestant world, except his own church, For the
Note above referred to, see page 36.
are utterly destitute of any valid gospel adminiltrations, and in no better
state than heathen and infidels, because they lack episcopal ordination: Or
lastly, if he should be told, that upon his principles, both he, and probably
the greatest part of episcopalians in this country, are in the same deplorable
circumstances; having never received any baptism, but what was administered by
the u^^^thorized hands of those, who lack episcopal ordination, and therefore,
upon his princples, can have no power to baptize, consequently, that he, and
the greatest part of his brother-missionaries in these parts, are so far from
being the only authorized regular ministers among us, that they are not even
visible christians, and therefore, not only, have no right to administer gospel
ordinances to others, but are actually unintitled to them themselves: -- If
any, or all these things should happen to be urged against him, perhaps he will
call it "a flying from the subject, and falling upon consequences." -- And in
answer, gravely tell us, "he has no concern with consequences." But whatever he
thinks, impartial judges, it is presumed, will think, that genuine censequences,
may properly be urged in a dispute, without being chargeable with "flying from
the subject for want of argument;" and that the advocates of such principles,
from whence such consequences flow, ought to be "concerned" about them, whether
they be or no. No man should advance any principles, but what are true. From
such, no consequences will follow but what are true, and consequently good:
Good in themselves, and agreeable to every doctrine and duty of scripture,
which is infallible truth. If therefore men find, their principles are
productive of consequences, in their own nature, bad; repugnant to the laws of
charity and the great doctrines and duties of the gospel; they cannot think to
excuse themselves to the world, by saying "they have no concern with
consequences." They ought to be " concerned about them," and manifest this
concern to the world, by renouncing and abjuring such principles, as corrupt
and detestable, from which such uncharitable and damnatory consequences follow.

SEC. III. Animadversions upon Mr. L's preliminary Remarks to page 10.
I FULLY agree with our author; That it nearly concerns us to know who are the
lawful ministers in Christ's kingdom. And am well pleased with the method he
has proposed to decide this point, viz. "by an appeal to scripture and reason."
P. 8.


IN the mean time, let us attend to the observations he thinks proper to make,
previous to his entering upon this decision. His first observation is this, The
whole body of dissenters, (presbyterians he means) affirm, that bishop and
presbyter, in scripture, signify the same office: Yet they say, no instance is
to be found there of an ordination, by any person unde, the name bishop: And if
a presbyter is the same office, then there is none by a presbyter. ibid.
But now, who does not see the fallacy of this argument? He allows, with us,
that bishop and presbyter in scripture, signify the same office; that ministers
were promiscuously called by both these names, in gospel times. But then he
holds, that the business of ordination, etc. ought not to lie in common, to all
gospel ministers; but to be confined to a particular order, which in their
church, are called bishops. We, on the contrary affirm, that as bishop and
presbyter, in scripture, signify the same office; the power of ordination
belongs in common to all ministers, and therefore ought not to be confined to
some few, under the title of bishops. To prove this, we observe, that though we
have sundry accounts of ordination, in scripture, performed by ministers, yet
there is no single instance of one so performed by them, under the name bishop,
and yet to this, episcopalians appropriate the whole power of ordination. But
Mr. L. says, if this be true, that there is no account in scripture of an
ordination performed by any person under the name bishop, then it will follow,
-- What? Why "that there is none by a presbyter," that is, no instance of one
performed by a presbyter. But does it at all follow, that because the scripture
mentions no ordination as performed by ministers under their one title of
bishops, therefore there is no instance to be found there of their ordaining
under their other title, that of presbyters? Or thus, because the scripture
never calls ministers by one of their common names, i. e. bishops, when acting
in ordination; is it a necessary consequence that it never calls them by their
other common name, presbyters, when acting in that business? Is it not possible
that the same office in scripture, may be commonly denominated and known by
either of the names, bishop or presbyter indifferently, and yet only one of
these names, constantly used and applied to him, when acting in the business of
ordination? But now this is what his argument proves, or else it proves
nothing. The truth is, he has, either ignorantly or designedly, altered the
terms in his syllogism, so that his conclusion contains more in it than his
premises, which all logicians call, false reasoning. -- His argument reduced to
mode and figure, runs thus, Bishop and presbyter in scripture signify the same
office. No instance is to be found there of ordination by any person under the
name of bishop. This is his major and minor proposition. His conclusion is, --
Therefore there is no instance of an ordination performed by a presbyter.
Whereas, had he kept to the terms in his minor proposition, his conclusion must
have been, -- "Therefore there is no instance of an ordination performed by any
person under the name presbyter." Had he done this, his readers would at once
have seen the weakness and fallacy of his argument.

IN England, bishop, and lord-spiritual are synonymous terms. Now should I
undertake to prove, that there is no account in the English hisory, of an
ordination performed by a bishop, and in order to it, make use of this
argument, -- Bishop and lord-spiritual signify the same office: But there is no
account in history, of an ordination performed by any person under the title of
lord-spiritual; therefore there is no account of one performed by a bishop; and
from hence should infer, the invalidity of episcopal ordination; Mr. L. I
presume would hardly allow the argument to be good. -- And yet it is the same
he has used in this case, and full as conclusive. However, weak as it is, it
seems it wrought full conviction in his mind: For he tells us he is fully
persuaded, at that time in which the scriptures were wrote, none had power to
ordain ministers in Christ's kingdom, but those only who in scripture, are
called apostles. Page 9.
But then what becomes of bishop Timothy? Mr. L. has spent a considerable part
of his book in attempting to prove, the divine right of episcopacy, from the
instance of Timothy bishop of Ephesus. Yea it is the most plausible argument,
and indeed the only thing in his piece that deserves the name of an argument.
But if none had power to ordain ministers in Christ's kingdom, but those only,
who are in scripture called apostles, Timothy certainly had no power to ordain,
for he is never once called (...) apostle in the whole scripture, as I shall
have occasion more particularly to show anon: Consequently all pretense to
support his scheme from this argument is to no purpose. Though therefore I might
now fairly dismiss the controversy, as decided in our savor by his own
confession: Yet not to take advantage of this inconsistency of his, I shall
consider the argument when I come to it. In the mean time I entirely agree with
him in what follows in this paragraph: That the bishops in the church of
England, do not answer, to those that are promiscuously called, either bishops
or presbyters in scripture. I add, neither do they, to any order instituted in
scripture. Diocesan bishops, such as obtain in that church, are so far from
being of divine institution, that they are doubtless mere creatures of the
state, what the gospel knows nothing of.

AND so I am ready to attend upon his next observation, which is this, That
dissenters (presbyterians he should have said) are not agreed among themselves
about the orders of the ministry, -- some holding to one order, others to two,
and others again to three, etc. Page 9.
But what then? shall we mend the matter, in point of unity, or in the least
better ourselves, by going over to the church of England? By no means.
Episcopalians are really as much divided in sentiment in this respect, as those
he calls dissenters. -- Thus some of them absolutely deny that any particular
form of government or order, is established in scripture, but the whole is left
to the civil magistrate. This in particular was the opinion of their celebrated
Hooker. His words are, The ^^cessity of polity, and regimen, in all churches,
may be held, without holding any one certain form to be necessary in them all;
and the general principles are such, as do not particularly describe any one,
but sundry forms of discipline may be equally consistent with the general
axioms of scripture. -- Pref. Eccl. Pol. p. 2.19, 20. And to this agree,
Stillingfleet, Edwards, etc.
Others again think, with us, that there are only two standing orders of
officers, bishops or presbyters, and deacons, to be found there. Of this
opinion were the ^shops Cranmer, Jewel. Willet, and Stillingfleet, and indeed
the main body of the English clergy with the king and parliament, at the time
of the reformation, as I proved in my sermon, from the book called the
institution of a christian man, which was expressly approved by them all. The
words are these, In the New Testament there is no mention of any other degrees
or distinctions in orders, but of deacons or ministers, and presbyters or
bishops.

Burn. Hist. Refor. Vol. 1. p. 324.
This has always been the opinion of the more moderate episcopalians in
England; and therefore though they conform to the church of England, they do it,
not as being of divine institution, but as established by the king and
parliament. And others, with Mr. L. and his flighty brethren, assert the three
orders of bishops, priests and deacons, as of divine appointment: These plead
the absolute necessity of episcopal ordination, and reject all the protestant
world who are without it. I might add, that there have been other advocates for
prelacy, who have pleaded, with equal zeal, for the several orders of acolyths,
lectors, subdeacons, archdeacons, chirocpiscopi, archbishops, patriarchs, and
the Roman hierarchicks, for the pope, as Peter's successor, at the head of all.
-- We may see then, (to use his own phrase) the question under debate, cannot
be decided by these men; for they are not agreed among themselves.

BUT how does he prove "that dissenters are not agreed" in this point? Why he
tells us, "some never ordain their deacons," and these of course "hold, that
Christ has appointed but one order, presbyters." But how does this follow? He
himself supposes the bishop is a different order in their church, and appointed
by Christ. And yet, as far as I can learn, he has properly no new ordination
when appointed bishop, but only what they call a consecration to the episcopal
office. Though therefore some of our churches suppose, that since the civil
magistrate now takes care of the poor, which, in times of persecution, was the
deacon's business, there is no necessity of a formal ordination to that office;
it will by no means infer a denial of his being an officer in the church, of
diviner appointment. We all, I presume, are agreed that the deacon is an
officer of divine appointment, (though not instituted by Christ, as Mr. L. has
it, but by his apostles:) And that, whether we ordain him or not. He was
therefore quite mistaken in affirming, that we hold to but one order of
officers as of divine appointment.

BUT then if some dissenters hold to but one, and others to two, there are
others again, he tells us, "that hold to three orders of ministers in the
kingdom of Christ." And for this he quotes Mr. Calvin. But how came Calvin,
pray, to be a dissenter? He was indeed a dissenter from the church of Rome: And
(I hope) so is Mr. L. too. But from the church of England he never was a
dissenter, for he never belonged to it. Our episcopalians, indeed, warmly
contended, in years past, that the church of England establishment extends to
America, and consequently that all who refuse to conform to it, are dissenters.
But the highest sticklers for uniformity among them, never, that I know of,
pretended to carry the claim to Geneva, before Mr. L. It seems his head is so
turned against dissenters, since he has renounced our communion, and become a
prelatest, that he is ready to fasten the opprobrious character, upon every
one, who happens to differ from him. Besides, according to him, Calvin was no
dissenters; for he held to the three orders of "bishops, presbyters, and
deacons." I have examined the place in Calvin's institutions, from whence Mr.
L. pretends to make his quotation, and boldly affirm there are no such words
there. The sentence truly quoted, is this, As we have declared that there are
three sorts of ministers commended unto us in scripture; so all the ministers
that the old church had, is divided into three orders. Then follows; not
bishops, presbyters and deacons, as added by our author; But these words: For
out of the order of elders, were partly chosen pastors and teachers; the rest
of them had the rule of judgment, and correction of manners. To the deacons was
committed the care of the poor, and the distributing the alms. Calv. inst. lib.
4. C. 4. sec. 1.
This plainly shows what Calvin's judgment was: That besides pastors and
deacons, there was the office of ruling elders, as practiced in the church of
Scotland. But now what is this to bishops, presbyters and deacons, as quoted by
Mr. L.? This is not the only time, he has used the freedom with the authors he
pretends to quote, of making them speak what they never intended.

BUT he tells u^, In scripture we find mention made of apostles, presbyters,
and deacons, and why they should be so carefully distinguished whenever they
are mentioned in scripture, if there was not a subordination in their office,
seems very strange. P. 9.
-- Answer. Barely these names being mentioned, or even distinguished in
scripture, will not prove, that they mean different orders in the church, of
standing continuance. If so, we shall find, not only three, but five orders in
scripture. There we are told, "that when Christ ascended, he gave, not only
apostles and prophets and evangelists, but also pastors and teachers." Ephesians.
4.10.
Here are five different names of (...)-officers mentioned, and these as
particularly-(...) carefully distinguished, as those he has mentioned: And if
(...) these we add, presbyters and deacons, two of the number mentioned by him,
and which are not included in the above five; we shall, instead of three, have
no less than seven different orders, all as particularly mentioned and as
carefully distinguished as those three mentioned by him.

HOWEVER, that there is mention made, in scripture, of apostles, presbyters and
deacons, is readily granted. It Is further conceded, that presbyters and
deacons, signify two distinct offices in the church. Finally, it is allowed,
that apostles are superior to them both. But then they are so, only considered
in their extraordinary character, as apostles, in which, as I shall show more
fully hereafter, they have no successors, and so all that remain are only the
presbyters and deacons, about which there is no dispute.

HE goes on. -- Let it be carefully remarked, that those who were commissioned
to send others, who were called apostles, in the time when the New Testament
was penned. P. 10.
But then what becomes of Timothy and Titus again? His main argument for the
bishop's sole power of ordination, depends upon Timothy and Titus, being the
bishops at Ephesus and Crete. But as they are never called apostles in
scripture; it must unavoidable^ follow, either, that they never were bishops,
and so his main argument for episcopacy is demolished: Or if they were, then
what he here so often affirms, is not true.

THE word bishop, he tells us, being used to express the apostolic office, no
more altered the office, than the word, christian, altered the profession of
believers. Granted. But then there is this material difference in the two
cases: The latter was done in the apostles times: The former, by his own
confession in times posterior. The name, believer, was changed into that of
christian, by divine inspiration. Acts 11. 26. CHREMATISAI.
Whereas no such heavenly warrant is pretended for changing the name apostle
into bishop. If he will but just reconcile this material difference; I will
allow the two cases to be parallel. Till then, he must excuse me, if I think
his comparison nothing to his purpose.

BUT he goes on to tell us, in his margin, from Eusebius and Theodoret, that
bishops are the apostles successors. -- I answer. If he only means that they
are successors to them, in their ordinary capacity, as gospel ministers, we
have no dispute with him, upon that head. In that sense, we maintain that all
gospel ministers are successors to the apostles, as I largely showed in my
sermon. But if he means, that they succeed the apostles, in their extraordinary
capacity; let him produce for them the extraordinary credentials of miracles,
etc. on which the apostolic character, as such, was founded, and we will
submit. Otherwise this claim of succession, is but mere pretense. Besides,
ecclesiastical writers, as expressly call presbyters, the apostles successors,
as bishops. "The presbyters are in the place of council of the apostles."
Ignat. Epis. ad Magnes. sec. 6. "Be subject to the presbyters, as to the
apostles." Epis ad Pral. sec. 2. p. 22. "Let all receive the presbyters, as --
the hand of the apostles." ibid. sec 3. "Let all follow the presbytery, as the
apostles." Epis. ad smyr. 2. sec. 8. p. 37. "All who had seen the Lord and
preached him afterward, were called apostles." Hieron. Com. in Gal. l. 1.19.
Whatever therefore is argued, from such succession, in favor of the power of
the latter, follows with equal force as to the former.

SEC. IV. Dr. Chauncy's sermon vindicated from the exceptions contained in the
"desence of episcopacy," -- from p. 11 to 24.
BEFORE I enter upon a vindication of the Dr's sermon, from the exceptions of
another, it concerns me to do him justice, in one particular, in which I have,
inadvertently, misrepresented him myself.

IN page 67 of my sermon, I had these words; And although the above learned
writer, (meaning the Dr.) excepts Ignatius out of the number of the primitive
writers in his account, and owns, that the epistles ascribed to him, speak very
fully in favor of diocesan episcopacy, etc.

WHEN I wrote this sentence, I had my mind upon what the Dr. says, in p. 71 of
his sermon: But upon reviewing the passage, I find, I mistook his meaning. His
words are not that those epistles speak very fully in favor of diocesan
episcopacy: But that they do, as certainly, as strongly, and as constantly,
distinguish bishops from presbyters, as any of the writings of the third and
fourth centuries. Now all that the Dr. asserts is, that these epistles point
out a distinction of order between bishop and presbyter: And upon reading what
Mr. Boyse has wrote, in his "clear account of the ancient episcopacy," in which
he has every thing contained in these episles, relative to the subject; I am
fully convinced, that the bishop described in these epistles, even in the
present state of them, is very different from the dioces^n bishop. The Ignatian
bishop, was merely a parochial one, having no more than a single congregation
for his charge, with presbyters under him: Whereas the diocesan one, has many
scores, or hundreds of such congregations in his cure. The interpolations and
adulterations in these ^pistles, were doubtless made, before the bishops power
was enlarged, so as to comprehend a number of parishes in his diocese. --
Having thus corrected my own mistake; I proceed to perform the same friendly
office as to Mr. L.

As a direct proof of ordination by presbyters, the Dr. had mentioned, the
instance of Saul and Barnabas being separated to the work of the ministry, by
certain prophets and teachers, as recorded, Acts xiii. beginning. As this is so
very express and circumstantial an account, of a separation to the work of the
ministry; as all the solemn actions, contained in ordination, are here so
particularly mentioned; and as this is said to be done, not by apostles or
bishops, but by the ordinary pastors of the church, here called prophets and
teachers; Mr. L. seems to be at a loss what reply to make to it. He, at first,
seems to be doubtful as to the nature of this action; at a loss what name to
give it. "If, says he, this was an ordination:" "If this was a real ordination,
then," etc. Finally, he denies it to be an ordination. Whatever is meant, says
he, by this designation, it was not an ordination. In truth this was not an
ordination. P. 11.
He found himself so pressed with this instance, that he had no way to get rid
of the argument, but by flatly denying it to be an ordination. And indeed, this
was the only course he could take to support his scheme. For if this be once
granted to be a real ordination, the indisputable right of presbyters, to act
in this business, is firmly established, and all pretenses of confining it to a
superior order, must be given up. I shall therefore offer a few observations,
to prove that this was, in fact, an ordination; and then make some remarks upon
Mr. L.'s objections against its being considered as such.

Now by ordination, I conclude, is meant, a solemn separation, or setting apart
to an office in the church, by such as have authority to do it, and that, in
the use of those rites or actions, the scripture has appointed in this case.
The scripture rites of ordination, are fasting, prayer, and the imposition of
hands. In this way the seven deacons were introduced into office, Acts vi. 6.
which Mr. L. owns to be an ordination. In the same way Timothy was ordained. 1 Timothy iv. 14.
And in the same way he is directed to ordain others. 1 Timothy v. 22.
And this has been the general method of introducing men into the ministry, in
all subsequent ages. But now, all these things concurred in the instance under
consideration. The persons acting in it, were church officers of Antioch,
"prophets and teachers." What they undertook to do, was to " separate Saul and
Barnabas to the work of the ministry, among the gentiles." This was done by the
direction of the holy Ghost; separate me Barnabas and Saul to the work, where
unto I have called them; that is, to the work of the ministry, especially among
the gentiles, to whom they were now sent. The thing therefore to be done,
beyond dispute, was to separate these two men to the work of the gospel
ministry. How this was done, the account informs (...); For when they had
fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. As every
action, every circumstance pertaining to an ordination, is here so very
particularly and expressly found; if after all, this was not an ordination, I
despair of ever finding one, in scripture or any where else. And what still
further confirms the matter, if it needs further confirmation, is, that if I am
not much mistaken, the apostle Paul himself acknowledges it to be so. In his
inscription of his epistle to the Romans, chap. i. 5.1. he has these words,
Paul a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated to the
gospel of God. He here evidently designs to give himself, his true and proper
character, of an apostle, and minister of Jesus Christ. He therefore
particularly mentions, both his call to the apostleship, and his separation to
the gospel ministry. By the former, he most likely means that immediate call
from heaven, of which in Acts ix. Then it was he was called to be an apostle.
But we find nothing in scripture answering to this other part of his character,
viz. his separation to the gospel of God, unless it was this separation we are
now considering. And it is worthy of remark, the word in both places is the
same, both in the original, and also in our translation. In Acts 13th, The holy
Ghost said, APHORISATE, separate me Barnabas and Saul to the work whereunto I
have called them. In Romans i. 1. The apostle, says he, "was, APHORISMENOS,
separated to the gospel of God." Does it not appear highly probable, that when
the apostle wrote these last mentioned words, he had his mind particularly upon
the action we are considering? I confess I see no other sense in which they can
be well interpreted. And if so, we have the testimony, even of the apostle
himself, that this was, in fact, an ordination.

To this Mr. L. objects, that if these prophets and teachers were presbyters,
so were Barnabas and Saul. And if this was an ordination, they, who were before
presbyters, were ordained to a superior office; which, he says, is granting the
thing they contend for. I answer. Though Saul, and possibly Barnabas too, were in
office, as apostles; yet there is no account, that either they or indeed any
others, had been formally introduced into office, as standing ministers in the
church, by the imposition of hands, till now. They, and the rest of the
apostles, had hitherto, exercised their ministry, principally among the Jews.
But now, that the gospel was to be sent to the Gentiles, and churches gathered
and settled among them, upon a plan which was to be perpetuated, after the
times of inspiration were over, even to the end of the world; it seemed good to
the Holy Ghost, to order, that they should be set apart, by the solemn rite of
ordination, as a standing pattern for these future ages. This, as Dr. Chauncy
observed, was the opinion of a learned episcopal writer, Dr. Lightfoot. No
better reason, says he, can be given of this present action; than that the Lord
did hereby, set down a platform of ordaining ministers, to the church of the
Gentiles in former times. Vol. l. p. 189.
This being the case, it will by no means follow, that, "if this was an
ordination, they were ordained to a superior office," as he supposes. Though they
were in office before, they had been only "called to be apostles;" whereas now,
they were " separated to the gospel of God," by ordination, that so they might,
both have a public authentic character, and exhibit a pattern to be followed,
in all succeeding ages. Had Mr. L's head been less crowded, with the
unscriptural ideas of superiority and inferiority of orders in the ministry, he
might have recollected, that even reordination itself, does not necessarily
"advance a man to a superior office in the church." -- He doubtless knows
sundry of his brethren in America, who have been twice ordained: Once, "by the
hands of the presbytery," according to scripture pattern, and then again by the
bishop, after they conformed to his church: And yet I suppose, he acknowledges
them still, as sustaining no higher office, than that of presbyters. Though
according to his argument, he ought, in all reason, to look upon them as
dignitaries in the church; for who, (to use his own words) ever heard, that a
presbyter was ordained, unless it was, to advance him to a higher station in
the church?

BUT In truth, says he, this was not an ordination, but an ^^cion of the s^^^^
nature with that, Gal. ii. 9. When James, Cephas and John, etc. It is well,
since he will not allow this to be an ordination, he has at last found what it
is. It seems then, that it was "giving the right hand of fellowship:" For that
is what was done in the instance to which he compares it. Now giving the right
hand of fellowship, as it is a public declaration and sign, that the person to
whom it is given, is now received into a co-partnership of power and office
with the givers, must necessarily suppose that the persons giving, are at
least, equal in power with him who receives it. Consequently if what was now
done, was, as he says, giving the right hand of fellowship to Barnabas and
Saul, it will follow that these prophets and teachers were at least equal in
power to Barnabas and Saul. Since therefore, Mr. L. allows the ordaining power
to the latter, it must equally belong to the former, whether they did in fact
exercise it at this time or no; and then the validity of ordination by
presbyters will of course follow.

AGAIN. If these two actions are, as he says, both of the same nature, then it
will follow, tha^ the persons acting in both were of the same office, or endued
with equal power: But those who gave the right hand, in Gal. ii. 9. viz. James,
Cephas and John, were undoubtedly vested with the ordaining power, for they
were apostles: Consequently the prophets and teachers, who acted in the other
instance, must be vested with the same power of ordination too, whether they
actually exercised it at this time or not.

MR. L. has one objection more to this instance of ordination. It is this,
Whatever is meant by this designation, it was not ordination to empower Paul,
-- for it is beyond all dispute that Paul and Barnabas officiated as public
ministers of Christ long before this pretended ordination. P. 11, 12.
Answer* if they ^^d, it was as apostles, by virtue of their extraordinary
call; not as ordinary ministers, in the gentile church, of standing
continuance, by the imposition of hands in ordination. Though therefore with
respect to the former, "they were, as he says, apostles, not of men, neither by
man;" yet in the latter sense, they received their designation from men, as
others now do, by the imposition of hands in a proper ordination. Their
"officiating as public ministers before," by virtue of their extraordinary
call, no more proves that this was not an ordination; than the eleven apostles
so officiating, by virtue of a temporary mission from Christ in his life time,
will prove the commission, he gave them after his resurrection, was no
commission. Mr. L. allows that the commission recorded in Mat. xxviii. 19. and
John xx. 21, was that which authorized the apostles to act as ministers. And
yet we know that Christ ordained the twelve apostles, and sent them forth to
preach, long before he gave them this commission. Matt. x. Mark. iii. 14.
If therefore the eleven apostles so officiating in Christ's life time, does
not prove the commission he gave them after his resurrection, to be no
commission; neither will Barnabas and Readiness so officiating before this, prove
that this was no ordination.

THIS objection indeed the Dr. largely considered and answered in his sermon.
He there observed, that though, "Paul and Barnabas were before this,
commissioned ministers of Christ;" yet this would by no means prove that they
did not now receive a proper ordination. For the thing intended by ordination,
is not that the ordainers should commission persons to do the work of the
ministry. This is done by Christ. It only belongs to them to declare who these
persons are, and to separate them to the work to which Christ has commissioned
them. They (...) them ministers, but being author^^ hereto, give them an
authentic character as such, in the eye of the world, etc. As in the case of
the mayor of a city, the king's charter of incorporation grants the power; the
burgesses and the recorder only indigitate the proper recipient of it, and put
him legally into the execution of his office. Dud. lec. p. 10, 32, 33. The
judicious Hooker, as he is called, sully agrees with Dr. Chauncy in his notion
of ordination. He defines it, "a solemn admittance;" and says, "the only true
and proper act of ordination is, to invest men with that power which does make
them ministers, by consecrating their persons to God and his service in holy
things. Such men do hold their authority from God, (who should give them
commission but he?) Whether they be such as himself immediately, or the church
in his name, investeth."
But the Dr. is mistaken, says Mr. L. in supposing that the mayor receives his
commission from the king. He receives it, he tells us, not from the king, "but
from the persons who give him the corporation oath." P. 15. Eccl pol. 124, 410,
435.
In like manner, he argues, ministers received their commission, not from
Christ, but from those that ordain them. It is true, he says, that all power in
the church of Christ is originally derived from him. When Christ was here upon
earth, he reserved the power of making officers, in his kingdom, to himself
alone: When he was about to ascend to heaven, he told a number of his
disciples, that all power, etc. That is, if I understand him, though the great
head of the church, while he was upon earth, kept the power of making officers
in his own hand, yet when he ascended into heaven he delegated this power to
his apostles and their successors. It Is pity Mr. L. had not told us, how much
of (...) power of making officers in the church, is now Bel^gared to the
bishops; whether all, or only a part of it; or in what sense it is now in the
hands of the bishops, whether despotically or absolutely, or only
ministerially. If it be only in the latter sense in them, then they are only
Christ's ministers or instruments in introducing men into office, and investing
them with the powers of Christ's commission, as the Dr. asserted, and so don't
properly (...) the commission, but only indigitate or point out the recipi^^t
of it. All therefore they have to do in the case, is only to judge of the
qualifications of the persons to be ordained, and give them a solemn admission
to the exercise of their office, by fasting, prayer and the imposition of
hands. The commission therefore is not from them, but from Christ. But if this
power delegated to the bishops, be despotical, as Mr. L. must suppose, or else
what he here says is nothing to his purpose: If it be true, as he seems to
intimate, that bishops now, have the same power of making officers in the
church, as Christ had when here upon earth; then it will follow, that no
ministers of the gospel, since Christ's ascension into heaven, can be said to
receive their commission or authority from him, but from the ordainers: And
therefore in the case of a citymayor; if, as our author asserts, he receives
his commission, not from the king's charter, but from the recorder, and is
therefore not the king's officer, but his who gave him his oath; so in this
case, if ministers now, do not receive their commission from Christ, but from
those to whom he has delegated this power of making officers in his church,
that is, according to Mr. L. the bishop's; then they are no longer Christ's
ministers, but the bishop's who gave them commission, and consequently they
ought to preach, baptize, etc. not in the name of Christ, but of the bishop,
whose ministers they are, and who gave them their authority.

FURTHER, as Christ had all power in heaven and earth, and so was under no
limitation as to the exercise of this power in making officers in his church,
but might, if he had seen fit, multiplied these officers, and, instead of two,
appointed twenty, or two hundred different kinds or orders: So from this
principle of Mr. L's, it will follow, that not only the apostles but their
successors in office, to whom Christ has delegated this power of making
officers, have the same unlimited authority also, in this respect as he had:
That they are not confined to any particular number of orders, in the exercise
of this their office making power; but may appoint and establish, as many
different orders and degrees as they please; and instead of three orders in the
church, might have three hundred or three thousand. For Christ had undoubtedly
this power. And indeed this is the sense of the Romish church upon this point.
The pope, in virtue of his being successor to Peter, is, according to them, not
only infallible, but is vested with all the plentitude of the power that Christ
had, in this respect. And it is by this plentitude of power, with which he is
vested, not only that he has constituted that great variety of orders, found
among their clergy; but also raised those they called bishops, above presbyters
in the church. According to the doctrine of that church, bishops are superior
to presbyters, not by divine right, but merely as advanced to this superior
dignity by the plentitude of the pope's power. See Burn. Hist. Refor. Vol. 1.
page 366, Dr. Willet synop. pap. p. 269, 272, 281.
But,

THE truth of the case is, those words, "as my father has sent me, so send I
you," on which our author founds the bishop's power of making officers in the
church, have no direct reference to the power of ordination at all. They only
imply, that as Christ received his commission immediately from the father; so
he did immediately send them to disciple all nations, and teach them whatever
he had commanded. But this by no means implies, that whatever power Christ had
himself, he invested his apostles with, or gave them the same authority and
dominion in his church, that belonged to him. His power was despotical; theirs
only ministerial; and he himself warned them against aspiring at any more, Mat.
xx. 25, etc. He did not therefore make over to them a despotical authority of
commissioning others, but only a ministerial authority of investing such with
the office, his charter should authorize and oblige thereto.

HAVING thus vindicated Dr. Chauncy's notion of ordination, from Mr. L's
exceptions, I am now prepared to answer the questions he has seen fit to
propose. -- He asks, "how the ordainers are to know in these times, that Christ
has commissioned these men, as his ministers, whom they let into the ministry?"
P. 14.
-- I answer.

As the Dr. no where says that men are invested with Christ's commission,
before ordination, as the question seems to intimate: He ought rather to ask,
"how the ordainers are to know who are proper to be ordained, or vested with
Christ's commission, and declared lawful ministers?" -- And here the answer is
easy. They are to know it by the candidate's professing an inclination to enter
into the ministry, his being upon examination, found qualified for it, and, (in
case he is to take the charge of a particular church) his being chosen and
invited by the church to take the pastoral charge of them. All who have these
qualifications and this call, the ordainers may know are such, as ought to be
introduced into office in the church, and as such may safely ordain them.

AGAIN he asks, What testimony is given to the world, that the persons he (the
Dr.) has ordained, are the ministers of Christ? P. 14.
Answer. Their public ordination is a sufficient evidence in this case. This,
the Dr. had told him was the design of ordination. Not for the ordainers,
properly speaking, to authorize and empower them themselves, but "to declare
who the persons were that Christ's commission has empowered." Not to make them
officers, as Mr. L. would have it: -- But "to give them an authentic character,
as such, in the eye of the world." And (...) this, with us, is done in a very
public manner, it must be sufficiently evident to those who attend the
solemnity. And as to others, I hope, a certificate from the ordaining council
properly attested, will be deemed as good evidence, in our case, as the
bishop's license and letter of orders are in that of Mr. L. and his brethren.
We, no more than they, "expect or desire people should believe in this case,
without evidence." If they can produce sufficient testimony that their
ministers are ordained, we, I presume, can easily do the same as to ours,
notwithstanding this fleer of Mr. L. to prejudice people against us. "And
therefore, to use his words to the Dr. I hope he will now see his error and
retract it."

THUS I have endeavored particularly to answer every objection brought against
this instance of Paul's and Barnabas's separation, and, I presume, sufficiently
proved it to be a real and proper ordination. That it was so, was the declared
opinion of Chrysostom, one of the fathers. He asserts that "Paul was ordained
at Antioch," and that this is the sense of Acts xiii. 1 -- 3. As quoted by
Eusebius. inermat. p. 43.
Bishop Tailor was of the same sentiment, as I showed in my sermon. The same
was the opinion of Dr. Lightfoot and Dr. Hammond, two celebrated writers of the
episcopal side. As quoted by Eusebius. intermat. p. 43.
And Mr. Ollyffe another of them, in his dispute with Mr. Calamy, brings this
very text in favor of reordination. As quoted by Eusebius. intermat. p. 43.
Finally, "in the book of ordination used in the church of England, (as my
author says, for I have not the book by me) the order for consecrating bishops,
alleges the very fact we have been considering, as an example or precedent."
As quoted by Eusebius. intermat. p. 43.
This shows that the church of England looks upon this as a proper ordination,
however some of her zealous sons, for special reasons, are tempted to deny it.
But let it be called by what name it will, it is indubitably an express and
very circumstantial instance, of persons being separated, and sent forth to the
work of the gospel ministry, which is all the scripture means by ordination.
And as this was confessedly done, not by officers of a superior character, not
by apostles or bishops, but by teachers or presbyters, it must be considered as
a proper scripture pattern of presbyterian ordination, and a proof that such
ordination is valid.

I PROCEED now to consider what Mr. L. has to say, upon the other instance of
presbyterian ordination in scripture, as mentioned by the Dr. viz. that of
Timothy, 1 Timothy iv. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given
thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery. This, the
Dr. mentioned, as an express instance of ordination by presbyters, and very
fully answered all the objections commonly urged against it by episcopalians.
Nor do I find any material one added by Mr. L. He indeed tells us "the text
says, Timothy was not ordained by presbyters, but by prophecy." P. 18.
I answer: -- It does not say in so many words, he was ordained by either. The
word, ordained, ^^t being mentioned. But then, the thing signifying ordination;
the rite universally in use, in setting ^en apart to the ministry, viz.
imposition of hands, is particularly mentioned, and expressly said to be
performed, not by an apostle, not by an officer of a superior character, nor
yet by prophecy; but by the presbytery. His saying therefore "that Timothy was
ordained by prophecy," a phrase to which he, nor no man else can affix any
determinate idea, could be with no other view, than to confuse the minds of his
readers, and perplex an argument, which he found himself unable fairly to
answer. -- Had he attended to what the Dr. had observed, concerning the gift,
here said to be given to Timothy, by prophecy, it might have prevented his
imposing upon his readers, and betraying his own ignorance, in the
interpretation he has given of this text. At the same time, it would have saved
him the trouble of repeating that other objection, so particularly answered by
the Dr. viz. that Paul was concerned in Timothy's ordination. The word gift,
here said "to be given to Timothy by prophecy," etc. Mr. L. insists, is the
same in the original with that mentioned 2 Timothy i. 6, as given by the putting
on of Paul's hands. The Dr. allows it is. He moreover allows the same thing to
be signified, in both texts, viz. the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost.
And further, that these were communicated to Timothy by Paul's hands only. For
after mentioning the text in question, he says, The meaning of the words,
compared with what is said upon the matter in 2 Timothy i. 6, may be fully
expressed in the following paraphrase, -- Improve the gift of the Holy Ghost,
which I imparted to you, in an extraordinary measure, according to the
prophecies which went before concerning you, when you was separated to the work
of the ministry, with the laying on of the hands of the consistory of
presbyters. Dud. lec. p. 36.
In this paraphrase is fairly and methodically included, every thing contained
in both texts, concerning Timothy's ordination, and the gift here said to be
imparted to him. The gift, in both places, signifies, the extraordinary
HARISMETA or gifts of the Holy Ghost. These, the Dr. allows were conferred by
the imposition of Paul's hands only, as mentioned in 2 Timothy i. 6. This was
given by prophecy; that is, agreeable to, or in consequence of the prophecies,
which the apostle says 1 Timothy i. 18, went before concerning Timothy. Holy men
prophetically speaking by inspiration, of him, as a fit person to receive this
gift, and in consequence, to be put into the ministry; to which service he is
here, in 1 Timothy iv. 14, said to be separated, by the imposition of the hands of
the presbytery, in ordination. This makes both the accounts, perfectly
consistent, which no other interpretation, perhaps, can do. To be sure that
given by Mr. L. is very far from doing it. Indeed, as in the forementioned
instance of Paul and Barnabas; so also in this of Timothy, he seems very loath
to allow, that ordination is intended by the imposition of hands. "If, says he,
this was an ordination." Again. "If this was an ordination, then," etc. It is
easy to see, in both these instances, what were his reasons for expressing
himself so doubtfully in the case. If these were allowed to be proper
ordinations, he was fully sensible, all he could say, would be insufficient to
weaken the force of the argument, brought from them, in favor of presbyterian
ordination. And therefore he endeavors to persuade his readers, that it is, at
least doubtful, whether ordination is the thing intended. But as the evidence
in the case is so full; as every thing included in ordination is more
particularly and expressly mentioned, in these two instances, than in any
others recorded in the New Testament; and I may add, as there can certainly be
found no instance of an ordination in the whole bible, if these are not allowed
to be such; Mr. L. seems not quite willing, after all, to hazard the issue of
the controversy, upon a bare denial of this fact: But thinks it concerns him to
show, that if this was an ordination, yet it was not performed by presbyters.
And the only argument he brings for the purpose, is, "that the word presbytery,
here, does not signify a number of presbyters. His words are; It seems, the Dr.
takes it for granted, that a presbytery means a number of presbyters only.
Calling a number of presbyters, a presbytery, does not prove that St. Paul
means the same, when he used the words. P. 18.
He therefore concludes that "Paul was at the head of these elders to
constitute them a presbytery, with power to ordain." If therefore I can prove,
that the word PRESBUTERION, a presbytery, always signifies, in the
New Testament, and other ancient writers, a number of presbyters only; then his
whole objection against the Dr's interpretation of these words, is overthrown;
and this instance of Timothy's ordination, will remain an incontestible pattern
and proof of presbyterian ordination.

Now the word PRESBUTERION is to be found but in two other places in all the
New Testament, in both of which it signifies "a number of presbyters only." The
first is Luke xxii. 66. And when it was day PRESBUTERION, the elders of the
people and the chief priests and the scribes came together, etc. It is very
evident the word here means a number of elders or presbyters only: It is so
translated; the elders of the people, the sanhedrim or grand council of the
Jews: Not including the chief priests, the scribes, or indeed any other officer
of a superior rank, as Mr. L. would have it in the other instance: These are
also expressly mentioned, and very particularly distinguished in the account;
the elders of the people, PRESBUTERION, and the chief priests and the scribes.
Besides, the very persons who are here called by the collective name
PRESBUTERION; in the parallel place, Matt. xxvii. 1, are called by the common
or appropriate one, PRESBUTEROUS, (which shows the words are used synonimously)
and they are there also distinguished from the chief priests or any other
officers. It is therefore beyond all dispute that the word presbytery, here
means a number of elders only.

THE other place, in which the word occurs, is Acts xxii. 5. There it is
translated, "the state of the elders," that is, the body or company of
presbyters. Here again they are particularly distinguished from the chief
priest, or any other superior officer; for he is particularly mentioned, and
distinguished from the TO PRESBUTERION, the state or body of elders. Here it
may be noted, that the presbytery or elders among the Jews, called PRESBUTERION
or SANHEDRION, was their supreme court of judicature. We have an account of its
institution Numb. xi. 16. The right of government was vested in them, and they
were all vested with equal power. They were, as a learned writer tells us,
originally entrusted with the power of ordaining elders to supply the vacancies
made in their own body. This continued to be the practice till the time of
Hillel, when it was resolved that none should ordain, without the presence of
the Nasi or President, or a license from him.
The word is frequently used by ancient ecclesiastical writers, and always to
signify a number of presbyters only. Numbers of quotations from the fathers,
might easily be produced in proof of this. I shall adduce but one, against
whom, I hope Mr. L. will make no exceptions. It is his favorite Ignatus. He
frequently uses this word; and in him it ever signifies a number of presbyters
only. A few instances may suffice. In his epistle to the Ephesians, he says,
"Being subject to the bishop, and the presbytery." Sec. 2. TO EPISCOPO KAI TO
PRESBUTERIO.
Again, "That you may obey the bishop, and the presbytery." ibid. sec. 20. TO
EPISCOPO KAI TO PRESBUTERIO.
Again, "He that does any thing without the bishop and the presbytery." Epis.
ad Trall. p. 50. EPISCOPOU KAI PRESBUTERIOU.
Again, "Respect the bishop and the presbytery." Epis. ad Philadelphia, p. 43.
TO EPISCOPO KAI TO PRESBUTERIO.
In all these instances, and many more that might be mentioned, it is evident to
demonstration, that the word, PRESBUTERION, means a number of presbyters and
nothing else. Not as Mr. L. would have it, "a number of elders with an apostle
or bishop at their head." Thus it signifies in scripture, and in all good
authors where it occurs. Nor do I remember ever to have seen it used, in any
other sense.

DR. CHAUNCY had therefore good right "to take it for granted, that a
presbytery means, a number of presbyters only." And since this is the word used
in this instance, it is a clear consequence, that Timothy was ordained by a
number of presbyters; and therefore that presbyterian ordination, is the true
scripture ordination.

NOR will it at all alter the case though we should grant that Paul joined with
the presbytery in Timothy's ordination: For if he did, he acted, not as an
apostle, but as a presbyter, of no more authority than the rest. For it is in
this character only, that the persons who imposed hands are here said to act:
Plainly denoting that they acted as a presbytery; and consequently, that the
right of ordination is vested in such a body, and in none else.

HENCE it will follow, that what Mr. L. says about the lower house of assembly
in Connecticut, (...)
is not true. It is not true "that a number of presbyters have no more power to
ordain without a bishop, than the lower house of assembly have, to perform acts
of legislation without the governor." So far from it, that presbyters and they
only are vested with the power of ordination; and even when an apostle was
joined with them, if that indeed was the case; he acted, not as an apostle, but
as a presbyter; therefore the action is expressly said to be done by a
consistory of presbyters, as we have showed above. But if it were not so: If it
were true, as he says, that a number of presbyters have just as much and no
more authority, with or without a bishop, than the lower house of assembly have
with or without the governor; still it will be nothing at all to his purpose.
For as the lower house, can perform no act of legislation, without the
governor; no more can the governor without them. The power of the latter, in
this case therefore, is at least equal to the former. If then we allow this a
parallel case, it will indeed follow that presbyters have no power to ordain,
without a bishop: But it will equally follow, that the bishop has no such power
without the presbyters. Consequently their power in this respect is equal. But,
unluckily for our author, this will at once ruin his scheme, agreeable to which
the sol^ power of ordination is in the bishop, and the presbyters have no
manner of authority in the case. -- Thus have I very particularly, and I think
sufficiently vindicated the Dr's interpretation of this text, and proved it to
be a standing pattern and warrant for presbyterian ordination.

MR (...) goes on, -- Another objection is, that in scripture, bishops are
frequently called presbyters; therefore bishop and presbyter mean one and the
same office. In answer to this I would ask, whether apostle and presbyter mean
one and the same office in scripture? Answer this without a double meaning, and
the point is settled. P. 18, 19.
-- I answer. Considered as standing officers in the church, they most
certainly do; and the apostle Peter himself shall be my voucher. -- "The
elders, says he, which are among you, I exhort, who am also an elder." 2 Pet.
v. 1.
This then, according to him, must settle the point.

As another proof of ordination by presbyters, the Dr. observed, "that besides
deacons, the scripture mentions but one order of officers only, promiscuously
called bishops or presbyters, therefore that the ordaining power must belong to
that order." In proof of this he added sundry texts, and among others, Philip.
i. 1, where the apostle, addressing this church with its officers, makes
mention of but two orders, bishops and deacons.

IN answer to this Mr. L. says, these bishops were the presbyters of this
church; and that, besides them and the deacons, there was an apostle, viz.
Epaphroditus, presiding over them in quality of bishop. In proof of this he
quotes chap. ii. 5, 25, where Paul says, I supposed it necessary to send to
you, Epaphroditus my brother, etc. but your messenger. P. 19, 20.
In the original, he tells us, it is your apostle. Hence he infers, that in
this church, were three orders of ministers.

ANSWER. Epaphroditus being sent to Philippi is no proof he was sent there in
character of a bishop. If so then Timothy must have been their bishop also. For
Paul says, "I trust in the Lord to send Timothy unto you shortly," v. 24. But
this would be, to have two bishops in this one church, which is utterly
inconsistent with the episcopal scheme; according to which there can be but one
bishop to one church. Neither will his being called the Philippian's messenger,
prove that he was their bishop, or held any office in this church. I grant the
word in the original is APOSTOLON, an apostle. This, however, in its common and
unappropri^^ted sense, means not a bishop, or indeed any church officer; but
according to its original derivation, a messenger, or one sent. It is
accordingly so translated, wherever it occurs in scripture, in its
unappropriated sense, just as it is in this place. We meet with it in John
xiii. 16, and 2 Cor. viii. 23. But as it is used in its unappropriated sense in
both, so it is translated, as here, not apostle but messenger: But if it must
be rendered apostle in this place, as Mr. L. contends, it must also in the
others, and wherever it occurs. And if this be the case, John the baptist, and
those who were sent to him from the pharisecs, must be also acknowledged as
apostles or bishops: For they are called APOSTELLMENOI, apostles, a word of the
same theme and import with this. And therefore if this word must always signify
apostle or bishop, possibly Mr. L. will find in scripture, an instance of a
she-bishop or apostle: For Junia, which by many is supposed to be the name of a
woman, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Occumenius, Origin, Hillary the deacon,
Pelagius, Primasius, Bid, Haimo, and Premigius read, not Junia, but Julia
believing her to be a woman, as the learned Bloudel assures us.
is said with Andronicus, "to be chief among the apostles." Romans xvi. 7.
But the truth of the case is: The word APOSTOLON is here used in its
unappropriated sense. Our English bibles therefore rightly have it translated,
not apostle, but messenger or one sent. For so Epaphroditus was. He had been
sent by the Philippians to carry their bounty to Paul, as appears from chap.
iv. 18. And therefore the apostle very properly calls him their messenger.
Again. Paul's calling Epaphroditus, your messenger, plainly shows that he was
not an apostle in the appropriate sense of the word. The apostles, as such, are
never called apostles of the churches, but of Jesus Christ, whose apostles or
messengers, they are, who gives them commission, and sends them forth. Thus
Peter and Paul, often call themselves apostles of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. i. 1. 1
Cor. i. 1, etc.
but they are never once called, your apostles, or the messengers of the
church. -- Epaphroditus however is called a messenger or apostle, not of Jesus
Christ, but of the church: This plainly shows that he was not an officer in
that church, but only a messenger they had sent, to carry money to Paul. Indeed
it looks at least highly improbable, had he been their apostle or bishop, as
Mr. L. pretends, that he should be singled out by them for so inferior a piece
of service, as carrying their alms to Paul; especially, as they had a number of
presbyters and deacons, whom they might have improved in this service.

FINALLY, had Epaphroditus been the bishop of this church, is it not strange
the apostle should not mention him in his inscription of his epistle to this
church? He particularly mentions the bishops or presbyters, and deacons, but
says not a word of any apostle. This neglect, most certainly, Paul would not
have been guilty of, had Epaphroditus been their bishop, as our author
pretends. Upon the whole, these reasons must, I imagine, convince every
impartial person, that he was not the bishop of Philippi, that there were but
only the two orders of bishops or presbyters, and deacons in this church, as
the Dr. asserted, and therefore his argument for presbyterian ordination, from
this text, stands good.

MR. L's next instance of three orders, is the church at "Jerusalem. We have
clear evidence, he tells us, from scripture, that St. James resided for twenty
years together, with and over the presbyters and deacons there." Page 20, 21.
For proof of this he refers to Acts, chapters vi. and xv. chap. xxi. 18, and
Gal. i. 19.

Two things, he says, he has proved from these texts. One, that the apostle
James resided for twenty years together in the church at Jerusalem: The other,
that he resided with and over the presbyters and deacons of this church, during
that time. -- Let us examine his proofs.

As to the first, it does indeed appear from these texts, that Paul found James
at Jerusalem, three several times, and at the distance of sundry years one from
another. But then, at two of these times, the same accounts say, Peter was
there with him. And one of them mentions John as there also. If, then, from
these two accounts it can be proved, that James was at Jerusalem as bishop,
during the term aforesaid; the same must follow also as to Peter. This argument
therefore either proves that both of them so resided, or that neither did. But
as they could not, in Mr. L's senfe, be both bishops of this church, the
consequence is plain, that nothing can be concluded from these two accounts,
that either of them were. All the proof then that remains as to this fact, is
the single circumstance of his being found there by Paul, some years after.
Acts xxi. 18. But as there is no account how long he resided there, barely his
being found there, I presume, will hardly be admitted a sufficient proof of Mr.
L's assertion, that the time of his continuance was twenty years. Indeed, as
James, by our author's concession was an apostle, there is not the least degree
of probability, much less any proof, that he resided at Jerusalem, or any other
place, for any considerable time together, as his particular charge. So to do
would have been utterly inconsistent with the apostolic character, and the
charge given to the apostles by Christ, "go teach all nations," "go into all
the world, and preach the gospel to every creature," and so preach repentance
and remission of sins among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." Matt. xxviii.
19. Mark xvi. 15. Luke xxiv. 47.
How the executing this large commission, could be consistent with any of the
apostles making Jerusalem their stated residence, especially for twenty years
together, as Mr. L. asserts, for my part I am unable to understand. Wherefore
without offering a word more upon this point, I freely submit it to the candid
reader to determine, whether the evidence Mr. L. has brought, to prove that
James actually "resided twenty years together at Jerusalem, is sufficient to
support the fact." But if it should be deemed to be, it will by no means
follow, that he so resided in character of a bishop, or as Mr. L. expresses it,
"with and over the presbyters and deacons there." This is the other thing he
has here asserted, and for proof of it, he refers us to what he calls, "James's
conduct in the case St. Paul laid before him, Acts xv." I desire the reader to
turn to the place, and read the whole account, and then say, what there is in
it to prove that James, any more than any of the rest, that were present at
that council, was the bishop of Jerusalem? Is it that he was at Jerusalem at
that time? So was Peter and John, and other apostles. They therefore from this
circumstance bid as fair for the office as he. Was it that James attended upon
the council there? The same did the other apostles, yea and the elders and
brethren too. Or was it that James gave his judgment, in the determination of
the question before them? This did all that were present. And therefore when
the decree was drawn up and published, it is expressly said to go forth in the
name. "of the apostles, and elders and brethren." Verse 23.
Or lastly, was it that James in particular, spoke in the council, and declared
his sentiments concerning the case in question? -- But the same did also sundry
of the rest, as Peter, Barnabas and Paul. These are all particularly mentioned
as speaking and declaring their opinion upon the point in debate. Yea, as
giving the same sentence or judgment, that James afterward declared to be his.
What right, I demand, then had Mr. L. to say, "that James's authority was
decisive in the case," any more than that of Peter, Paul and Barnabas, who had
given the same sentence before? Certainly none. Nothing therefore from this
circumstance, or indeed from any thing else, in the account, in favor of
James's episcopal relation to, and authority over this church, and its
officers, but what equally appears in favor of the rest. And since they could
not all be bishops of it, it is a plain case that none of them are proved to be
so; consequently, that there were not three orders of officers in this church
as Mr. L. has asserted.

HIS next attack upon the Dr. is for asserting, "That the apostles as such,
were extraordinary officers, and had no successors," and then asks "in what
respects they were so?" Page 21.
I answer. Let him turn to the page in the Dr's sermon, from whence he has
quoted these words, and he will readily see. They received their commission
immediately from Christ. Their charge was unlimitted; their province the whole
world. -- They were, by office, the teachers of all nations; had power to
gather churches every where, to settle them with proper officers, to inspect
over them, to give binding rules and orders for the government of them; and all
this under the infallible guidance of the Holy Ghost. Dud. lec. p. 48.
If this don't satisfy Mr. L. I would refer him for a more particular account
of the distinctive character and qualifications of the appstleship, to Mr.
Boyse's "ancient episcopacy," p. 253, etc. To Dr. Barrow as quoted by him, p.
272, etc. and "the scripture-bishop, p. 26, etc. In the mean time, as I shall
have occasion, more particularly to consider this point, when I come to his
remarks upon my sermon, it may be sufficient to observe here, that Mr. L. does
not pretend to prove bishops nowadays, are endued with these extraordinary
qualifications, on which the apostolic character and powers were founded;
consequently the former cannot succeed the latter in the exercise of these
powers. He says indeed as to some of these qualifications, such as, "the power
of working miracles, traveling from place to place to plant churches, and
being immediately sent by Christ; that they were not peculiar to the apostles,
for others at that time had the same." But now, what is this to his purpose? If
they were not peculiar to the apostles, they were at least essential to the
apostolic character and absolutely necessary to furnish men for the duties of
it. Though therefore some, cotemporary with the apostles, might have some of
these extraordinary qualifications, essental to the apostolic office; yet as
none can pretend to them now; the consequence is undeniable, that none now can
pretend to succeed the apostles, in that part of their character and office, to
which these extraordinary qualifications were essential and absolutely
necessary. Since therefore diocesan bishops do not, cannot succeed the
apostles, in that part of their character or office which was extraordinary,
and peculiar to them; it belongs to him, if he would support his scheme, to
prove, that the apostles, in communicating their ordinary powers, did in fact
make a difference; committing a chief power to a superior order, called
bishops, and an inferior one to others, under the name of presbyters.

THIS is what he next attempts to do. -- What we assert, says he, is that the
apostles did commit a chief power to a superior order, then called apostles.
And for proof he refers us to Acts xiv. 14. Philip ii. 25. 2 Cor. viii. 23.
From these texts, he tells us, it appears, that Barnabas, Epaphroditus and
Titus are sliled aposties; and adds, that he intends to prove Timothy also, to
have been invested with the same apostolic power and office. Page 22.


ANSWER. As to, at least three of the four here mentioned, neither the texts he
has quoted, nor indeed any other in scripture, proves them to be apostles, in
the appropriate sense of the word. As to Epaphroditus, it has been already
proved that he was no apostle, but only a messenger of the church of Philippi,
sent to carry their contribution to the apostle Paul; an errand not over and
above apostolical. -- As to Titus, he is no where, in scripture, called an
apostle in any sense whatever. The text Mr. L. quotes to prove him so, is this,
Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my partner, and fellow-helper concerning
you: Or our brethren be enquired of, they are the messengers of the churches
and the glory of Christ. 2 Cor. viii. 23.
It seems Mr. L. thought Titus must needs be an apostle; because he found the
word, APOSTOLOI, messengers, in the same verse, in which Titus is named. But
unhappily for him, it is not Titus, but the brethren that went with him, who
are called APOSTOLOI, messengers. Titus is particularly distinguished from them
in the former part of the verse, as Paul's partner and fellow laborer, and not
of the number of the brethren who are called APOSTOLOI, messengers, in the
latter part of it. But if he was not: If he was, as Mr. L. supposes, of the
number of these APOSTOLOI messengers; it would be nothing to his purpose: For
it is abundantly evident, from the context, that the word APOSTOLOI is here
used, not in its appropriate sense, to signify an officer in the church; but in
the common and unappropriated one, meaning barely a messenger, or one sent. For
it is evidently on account of their being sent to Corinth to receive their
collections, and carry them to Jerusalem, and nothing else, that these persons
are called APOSTOLOI, messengers of the churches. If therefore Epaphroditus was
no apostle, much less was Titus, who is never once called by that name, in any
sense of the word whatsoever. And though Mr. L. tells us "he designed to prove
Timothy to be one;" yet as we find nothing of that kind done in the remaining
part of his book; it is probable, upon second thought, he was discouraged in the
attempt. Since therefore he has dropped him out of the number, we have a right to
do the same, and so there remains only Barnabas to be considered.

AND, it is readily granted he is called an apostle in Acts xiv. 14. But until
it is proved that he derived his apostolic power from the apostles; barely his
being called an apostle, will not prove his assertion, that the apostles did
communicate a chief power to a superior order called apostles. All that is
proved from this text, is that "Barnabas was an apostle." How he came to be so,
or from whom he received his "chief power" and superior character as an
apostle, the text is entirely silent; nor can it be collected from any thing
Mr. L. has said. If his being here mentioned with Paul, signifies that he was
vested with the same superior office and character as Paul was; no doubt he
received his apostolic commission and authority, in the same immediate way, and
from the same fountain, as Paul did. How that was, he himself has told us. For
he was an apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the
father Gal. i. 1.
At least till the contrary is proved from scripture, we have a right to
conclude this was the case: Consequently, that the apostles did not thus divide
the ordinary powers of their office, communicating to some more, to others
less, and so constituting the two orders of bishops and presbyters, as our
opponents pretend. I may therefore now with propriety, I presume, take leave of
this argument in the words of Dr. Chauncy. If the apostles did thus communicate
these powers, in a different degree, committing to some more, to others less,
and so constituting two orders in the ministry; it is what we may reasonably
expect to see evidenced. The new testament is open. If it contains any such
evidence, let it be produced. We imagine it contains clear evidence to the
contrary, and that we have given such evidence. Merely calling bishops
successors to the apostles will not prove their superiority: Though by the way
they are never called so in the sacred books. -- The bible only can settle this
point. Dud. lec. p. 49, 50.


OUR author proceeds. -- Dr. Chauncy seems to allow, that the church
universally has been governed, in the form of episcopacy, (after the first two
centuries) for several succeeding ages. But, says he, before that, in the early
days of the church, it was governed by presbyters. p. 22.
I have examined the pages, from whence he pretends to quote this passage, but
can find nothing of that kind there. If by episcopacy Mr. L. means diocesan
episcopacy, (which he must mean, or it is nothing to his purpose) the Doctor is
so far from allowing that the church was ever governed in that form, that on
the contrary he affirms and proves, that during the first century, and the
greatest part of the second, there is no distinction to be found, in the
writers of those times, between bishop and presbyter; the names being used
promiscuously for the same office, just as they are in the new testament. And
even in the third century, and onwards, after the name bishop came to be
appropriated, so as to signify something different from presbyter; he expressly
denies "that the fathers are universal or unanimous, in affirming of it for
fact, that it was a distinction importing a superiority of order, or that it
was of ap^^olical institution." Dud. Lee. p. 65.
As Mr. L. therefore has misrepresented the Dr. I hope he will do him justice.
"And, (to use his own words) will see his error and retract."

I AM now prepared to consider his rhapsody of questions quoted from Mr.
Chillingworth, and those of the same strain added by himself in pages 22 and
23, of his book: The whole of which amount to no more than this, viz. how, when
and by what means it was that the original form of presbyterian church
government, came to be changed to that of episcopalian?

FOR answer to which, and indeed, to almost every thing else he has remarked
upon the Dr's sermon, I might very fairly refer him to the sermon itself. At
least he will there see, that when this alteration of a distinction between
bishop and presbyter first began, it was very small. "The bishop was no more
than primus inter pares, the head presbyter, the praeses or moderator of the
consistory; and it was by gradual steps he attained to the power with which he
was afterward vested. These ecclesiastical superiorities and inferiorities,
which have for a long time been visible in the christian world, were unknown in
the first and purest ages: Nor did they at once take place. It was the work of
time. From prime-presbyters, arose city-bishops: From city-bishops, diocesan
ones: From diocesan bishops, netropolitans: From netropolitans, patriarchs, and
finally, at the top of all, his holiness the pope, claiming the character of
universal head of the church." Dud. Lec. p. 64.


IF this answer will not satisfy Mr. L. I will give him another, in the words
of a protestant in answer to a demand of the like kind from a papist. It is as
follows. When Arius, Nestorius, and such like heretics arose; they violently
broke out of the church, and forsook all communion. And when Mahomet came from
without, he visibly assaulted all christianity. But the papacy bred silently,
as a gangrene in the church within. That cockatrice was long a hatching in the
shell, before it did appear. It was a secret departure from the truth, caused
by errors stolen into the church, sensim, sine sensu, insensibly and unawares:
Whence appears the difference between open heresy and clandestine apostasy. The
one is easy to be known, because it works openly, in the day: The other hard to
be discovered, because it makes its approaches only in the night. Let Mr. L.
only make the small charge of the word papacy into prelacy, and the answer will
be exactly adapted to his question.

OR if this account should be thought of too late a date, I will refer him to
that given by Jerome, one of the fathers. His words are these: -- The presbyter
therefore is the same with the bishop. And therefore, by the devil's instinct,
there were parties in religion, and it was said among the people, I am of Paul,
I of Apollos, I of Cephas; the churches were governed by the common council
presbyters: But after every one thought, those he baptized to be rather his
than Christ's; it was agreed in the whole world, that one of the presbyters
should be set above the rest, to whom the care of all the church should belong,
and the seeds of division taken away. Hieron. com. in Tit. tom. 9, p. 103.


I FIND nothing more, by way of remark, upon the Dr's sermon, in the whole of
Mr. L's book, except a passage or two toward the close, which shall be
considered in their place. I therefore finish this section with this reasonable
request; -- that the Dr's sermon, our author's remarks upon it, and what has
been now offered in reply, be carefully read over and compared. If this is
done, I presume, that no one except Mr. L. and his partial admirers will be of
the mind, "that he has, as he^ cerms it, considered the most material things
advanced by the Dr. in support of his scheme," muchless, "that he has shown him
to be greatly mistaken in many things he has asserted." Page 27.
On the contrary, unless I am much mistaken, every unprejudiced judge will
find, that by far the greatest part of the Dr's arguments, are passed over,
entirely unnoticed. And as to those few that are touched upon; the objections
are so far from being conclusive, that they are really of no weight at all.

SEC. V. Reflections upon Mr. L's claim of an uninterrupted succession from the
apostles, especially through the line of the old British bishops; -- from p. 24,
to 27.
WHAT could induce our author, to fall upon this topic of the uninterrupted
succession, and set himself to answer objections against episcopacy, which
neither of the pieces he undertakes to confute, say any thing about; and at the
same time, pass over unnoticed, so great a part of the arguments contained in
these pieces, is difficult to determine; unless perhaps because he thought it
easier answering objections of his own starting, than those urged by his
opponents. Be that as it will. "Another objection, he tells us, is that they
receive their authority from Rome; and that church is so corrupt, that she can
convey none." Page 24.


I HAVE sometimes heard it remarked, indeed, as a fort of inconsistency in the
church of England, to discover such a partial affection to that of Rome, as to
allow of their orders as valid while they deny those of all protestant
churches; and boast so much of a succession through that church, which in their
homilies they call "a filthy old withered harlot, and so far from being of the
nature of a true church, that for more than nine hundred years before the
reformation, nothing could be more." This, however, Mr. L. denies. They did
not, he says, derive either their power, or christiamity from Rome. "The
British church flourished, he tells us, many hundred years -- before the gospel
took place in England." I answer: -- That christianity was early introduced
into England, is not denied. Who first preached it there, is very uncertain.
It Is still more so in what form, whether presbyterian or episcopalian, that
church was first settled. If Paul was the first who brought the gospel to
Britain and planted christianity there, as many writers say; it is presumed,
that since he himself was ordained by presbyters, that was the form of
ordination and government he would establish there. As to king Lucius, whom Mr.
L. makes to be the first christian king, and the founder of an archbishopric
in London; the time of his conversion is so uncertain, that Fuller, in his
church history, reckons up no less than twentysix different accounts of it by
different writers; between the first and last of which, there is no less than
90 years difference, as to date. Chapter Hist. p. 10.
This, with many other things mentioned by the same author gives the whole such
a fabulous and romantic a^^ that there is little or no weight to be laid on a^^
thing said about him. And indeed many doubt whether there ever was such a man
in the world.

BUT granting christianity was as early planted i^ G. Britain, as he pretends,
this will by no mean help him out with a succession through the old British
bishops, as distinct from those of the Romis^ church. He allows that the pope
"got footing in England before the reformation." But then (...) tells us "the
old British clergy opposed him with all their might, and prevented all that
came from Rome, from getting into the vacant churches, (...) far as possibly
they could." That when the first opportunity presented, at the time of the
reformation "they threw off the papal yoke." All that we^^ "ordained at Rome,
he tells us, refusing to comply with the reformation, returned to Rome, from
whence they came. The number of bishops th^^ did so were fourteen. The rest of
the bishop who were ordained, and derived their power by (...) regular
succession of ordinations from the ancient British bishops, were the men who
ordained the bishops and presbyters of our church." P. 2^.
I have transcribed the whole of this curious piece of secret history, that the
reader may have it all in one view.

IT is well known, by all acquainted with the English history, that Austin the
monk came into England toward the latter end of the sixth century. He was sent
there by Gregory, the pope (...) Rome, to convert the Anglo-saxons to
christianity. From that time to the reformation, A. D. 1530, a space of near a
thousand years, England was under the popish yoke, and overrun with all the
errors and superstitions of the church of Rome, (...) much as the rest of
Europe. The whole christians Cor. geo. gram. p. 213.
world, for many hundred years before the reformation, "wandered after the
beast;" and the church of England, during the whole of that period, was as much
(...) church of Rome, as that of France, Spain, or even Italy itself. All
equally sunk in error, superstition, and idolatry, and equally "drunk with the
cup of abominations, and filthiness of the fornications, of that old withered
harlot." Where then, I ask, will Mr. L. find a succession for their clergy,
except through the bishops of the Romish church? His attempts to derive it
through a line of "ancient British bishops," is a mere chimera, that scarce
deserves notice. There were no such bishops to be found in England, during the
greatest part of that time. I readily allow that christianity had been planted
in England, before Austin's arrival; that upon the Saxon invasion, a number of
the British christians retired into the mountains of Wales, and preserved their
liberty and christianity. It is further granted, that upon Austin's coming into
England, the old British clergy in Wales, refused at first to submit to the
Pope's authority. In consequence of which the greatest part of them were
cruelly put to the sword, in the city of Bangor, said to be effected by
Austin's means. Full. chapter Hist. lib. 2, page 63.
The remainder were too inconsiderable a handful to make any opposition to
Austin, who was commissioned by the Roman pontiff, and supported by the power
of the Saxon kings, sundry of whom are said to be his early converts. If these
Welsh bishops therefore, were those Mr. L. means by his "ancient British
bishops" from whom their clergy derive their succession, and who he tells us
"as far as possible, prevented all that came from Rome from getting into the
vacant churches;" the opposition they made, could be but very feeble at best,
and must certainly have ceased, after the greatest part of them were cut off.
And as to the remainder of them we are assured from history, that they soon
after submitted to the church of Rome: "For Laurentius, who succeeded Austin,
as archbishop of Canterbury, by demeaning himself more humbly, that his
predecessor had done, reduced the rescuent Britons to some tolerable conformity
to the Romish ceremonies." Full. chapter Hist. page 68.
And so entirely were the ancient Britons, brought under the ecclesiastical
dominion of the Romish church of England, that about A. D. 1279, near three
hundred years before the reformation, "John Peckham, archbishop of Canterbury,
actually excommunicated their prince, because he could not prevail upon him to
be at peace with England." id. Lib. 3, p. 78.
In about three or four years after this, king Edward the first, entirely
conquered Wales, beheaded I hewellin ap Griffith their last king, after he had
taken him prisoner. Salm. geo. gram. p. 354.
Since which time, Wales, the last resort of the ancient Britons, has been
annexed to England, as part of the kingdom, and incorporated with it, in all
affairs civil and eccliestical. What then can Mr. L. mean, by pretending to
keep up a distinction between the British clergy, and those of the Romish
church? Wales, for many hundred years before the reformation, was as really
under the "papal yoke," as he terms it, and received their bishops "from Rome"
as much as any other part of the kingdom.

BUT if this had not been the case: Had it been, as his argument supposes, that
there was a distinct succession of bishops kept up in Wales, in a direct line
from the ancient British bishops, even till the reformation; this will afford
him no manner of relief as to the present clergy of their church. They,
certainly, can claim no benefit from such a succession of Welsh bishops; for
not one of the Welsh bishops was concerned in the consecration of Parker, and
yet from him all the bishops in the church of England ever since must derive
their succession. The fact was truly this. In the beginning of the reformation
under Henry VIII. all the bishops, abbots and priors in England, (Fisher bishop
of Rochester only excepted) complied with it, as far as it was then carried.
Burn. eccl. hist. abridg. vol 1, page 106.
This therefore, could not be the time Mr. L. speaks of, "when all that were
ordained at Rome, refused to comply with the reformation, and returned to Rome
from whence they came." For at this time none returned to Rome; and but one in
the whole kingdom, refused to comply with the changes that were made. By the
reformation, therefore, he must mean, the revival of it in Queen Elizabeth's
reign. Then indeed, all the bishops in the kingdom, except Kitchen of Landaff,
refused to comply with it and were turned out. None of them, however, "returned
to Rome, as he asserts, save one only, and but three left the kingdom, viz.
Pates, bishop of Worchester, Scot of Chester, and Goldwell of St. Asaph. id.
vol. 2, p. 332. Full. chapter hist. B. 8, p. 58.
This is considerably short of the number fourteen, mentioned by Mr. L. Now
this being the case, that all the bishops in the kingdom, not only of England,
but Wales too, except one, were deprived; where will he go to make out a
succession for their clergy, from the old British bishops? They were all, save
one, deprived, and a new succession begun in Parker, from whom all the bishops
ever since, must derive their claim. Unless therefore, he can prove, that
Parker was consecrated by the descendants of those "ancient British bishops,"
his pretended succession from them, is inevitably overthrown. But to the utter
destruction of his scheme, so it happened, that Parker, (from-whom all the
clergy of the church of England, both bishops and presbyters, ever since,
derive their succession) was consecrated, not by any of the bishops of Wales,
but by four English bishops, who had been consecrated in king Edward's time,
had been deprived in the reign of Queen Mary, and had never been restored. For
the men who consecrated Parker, were Barlow, formerly bishop of Bath and Wells,
Scory of Chichester, Coverdale of Exeter, and Hodgskins fusfragan of Bedford.
Full. chapter hist. B. 9, page 60.
But none of these had been bishops of Wales. It is true the writ of Parker's
consecration, named Kitchen of Landaff for one. But it is equally true that he
never appeared to assist at the consecration, and so it was performed without
him by the four above named. Where then, I repeat it, will Mr. L. make out his
succession, through the line of the old British bishops? If he was so
unacquainted with history, as not to know that there was no manner of
foundation for such a pretense, he was unqualified to write upon the subject,
and ought not to have meddled with it. If not, he has designedly imposed upon
his readers, and ought "to retract."

THE truth of the case is, no history of the British church furnishes the least
foundation, even of pretense, for such a succession. Bishop Burnet says, that
the reformers in England, expressly allowed "that England received the faith
from those sent from Rome by pope Gregory the great, i. e. Austin and his
monks. Abridg. Vol. 1. page 103.
And all the advocates for uninterrupted succession, I have ever seen, till Mr.
L's book appeared, unanimously agree in tracing it up to Austin, and through
him to St. Peter. Mr. Beach in particular, some years ago, in his controversy
with Mr. Hobart, says, "the present archbishop of Canterbury is the
seventy-third, who has fet in that see, since Austin the monk." Vind. page 7.
And though I don't imagine there is any great probability of an unbroken
succession, even in that line, yet it must be sought there, or no where. 'Till
therefore Mr. L. brings us some better authority for one, through the old
British bishops, than his bare assertion; he must expect it will be treated
with that contempt, such a visionary enthusiastic scheme deserves.

I CALL this notion of an uninterrupted succession, and the absolute necessity
of it to render gospel administration valid, a visionary enthusiastic scheme.
It is so even when traced in any line. The evidence of the fact is so small,
and the probability, or rather evidence of an interruption, so great, that a
man must renounce the common principles of credibility, and act by an implicit
faith, to give in to it, or at least to lay any great weight upon it. But to be
very confident of it, and that in a line where it is absolutely certain it is
not to be found, argues, if possible, a greater degree of weakness and
credulity than what the most visionary enthusiasts are influenced by. And is
not this even the case with our author? For though he disclaims a succession
through the Romish church and lays the whole stress upon one through the old
British bishops, which never had any existence, save in a heated imagination,
he is so confident of the truth of it, that he tells us, "we have as good
evidence that their clergy derive their authority, by an uninterrupted
succession from the apostles, (meaning through the line aforesaid) as we have of
the descent of all mankind from Adam by ordinary generation." Page 26.
The highest evidence to which, even Mr. Beach, pretended in this case, and
that in a line too, which bid much fairer, than the romantic one of our author,
was only to put it upon a level, with that of the Levitical priesthood in the
family of Aaron. This indeed was much too high. But even this it seems will not
content Mr. L. Nothing short of one, equal to that "of our descent from Adam,
will serve his turn." If the faith of the advocates of this doctrine, continues
thus increasing, we may expect it will soon grow up to full assurance; and that
the next stickler for uninterrupted succession, will put the evidence of it
upon a par with that of our existence.

LET us however, examine Mr. L's proof: And here let it be noted, that we have
the most clear and express scriptural evidence of our natural descent from
Adam, and therefore are absolutely certain of it. See Genesis i. 27, and ii. 22.
Mal. ii. 15.10. Acts xvii. 26.
The same he tells us, we have for the uninterrupted succession of their clergy
from the apostles. Let it be also remembered, that this succession must be in a
line of bishops as superior to presbyters, for he calls it "a regular
succession of the episcopal power," "an apostolic succession," and "a
succession of the gospel ministry in the three orders." Barely a succession in
the line of presbyters will not suffice. For we have such a succession up to
their bishops, and yet he denies us to be the ministers of Christ. Now the
argument by which he undertakes to prove his succession, is this. Christ's
promise to his ministers, contained in his commission, in Mat. xviii. 20, must
have failed unless there has been such a succession as he pleads for, that is,
in a direct line of bishops as a superior order in the church. But why must the
promise have failed, unless there has been such a succession? There is nothing
in the commission, limiting the promise to such a superior order: Not the least
hint of the institution of such an order. The commission is but one, and
therefore one order only is instituted by it. But if there were two, or ten, it
would make no alteration: Since the promise is not limited to any one in
particular, a succession in either of them would answer all the ends of
fulfilling the promise. Mr. L. himself allows that this promise belongs to
presbyters. Page 29.
If so, then a continuation of the succession in the line of presbyters, would
as effectually serve the accomplishment of the promise, as one in the line of
bishops: Consequently, if it has been continued in the former, the promise is
fully accomplished, even though it has been broken or interrupted in the latter;
and therefore his argument from the promise, in support of a succession in the
line of bishops, is by his own confession, entirely defeated.

THE truth is, as the commission supposes but one order in the ministry, the
utmost that can be argued from the annexed promise, in favor of a succession,
even of any kind, is that there shall be a ministry continued in the church, to
the end of time. How, or in what manner ministers shall be introduced, whether
in a regular unbroken fine of succession or not, whether by a superior or
inferior order of ministers, yea whether by the officers of the church or the
brethren, as the commission is wholly silent upon this head, so nothing
relative thereto can be concluded from it. And although from other texts it
appears, that it belongs, not to the private brethren, but to ministers to
ordain; yet for aught appearing in the commission itself, a succession of
ministers, even by lay ordination, would have as effectually secured the
accomplishment of the promise, as one by presbyters, yea or bishops themselves.

THUS his bold assertion "that we have the same evidence for the succession he
pleads for, as we have for our descent from Adam, finally comes to this." For
one we have the certain, indubitable, repeated, express testimony of infallible
scripture, which is evidence of the highest kind. For the other, we have only
his forced interpretation of a particular text, which is no evidence at all.

BUT if scripture will not support his confidence in this point, perhaps he
thinks history will. For he tells us "there can be no instance produced from
all ecclesiastical history, of any one man's being owned, by the church
universal, as a bishop, who was not ordained by another bishop, or by an
officer in the church superior to a presbyter." Page 26.
'Till this is done, he thinks "it unreasonable to disbelieve the succession in
the three orders." This argument for a succession, is the universal
acknowledgment of the church, that there has, in fact, been such a succession.
Now the fact here asserted, is either true, or it is not true. If it is not
true in fact, that there has been any such universal acknowledgment, in favor
of a succession, which is doubtless the case; then his argument founded upon
such acknowledgment is at once destroyed. But if it is true, his argument
founded upon it, is inconclusive; for if it proves the point in question, it
will equally prove other things, which even Mr. L. himself will not admit as
truths. The sum of the argument, he tells us, is this: Christ, at first, did
appoint a certain number of men with power to send others: The church universal
never could be induced to receive officers, unless they were ordained by such
officers, as Christ appointed to ordain; therefore there has been a succession
of such officers, as Christ appointed at first, which are apostles, or, as they
have been since called, bishops. This evidence for the apostolic succession, he
says, is fully sufficient to satisfy a rational enquiry, whatever (...) may be
to silence the spirit of party. Page 27.
No^ if this argument proves an uninterrupted succession of bishops as superior
to presbyters, it will equally prove the Pope's supremacy, together with other
doctrines equally absurd. Let us try it in an instance or two of this kind, and
see how it will run.

CHRIST did at first say unto Peter, "unto thee I commit the keys of the
kingdom," etc. "The church universal never could be induced to submit to an
authority Christ had not instituted;" but the church universal, for many
hundred years, did in fact submit to the pope, as Peter's successor and the
vicar of Christ; therefore the pope's supremacy, etc. is of divine institution.
Or thus: -- Christ did at first appoint the sacrament of his supper, to be
administered to the proper subjects of it: The church universal never could be
induced to depart from Christ's appointment, in this respect: But the church
universal did in fact, for a long time practice giving the sacrament to
infants; therefore this practice was no departure from Christ's institution.
Whether this "evidence will be sufficient to silence the spirit of party," in
any who should happen to dispute the pretended authority of his holiness, the
pope, or the lawfulness of giving the sacrament to infants, I will not take
upon me, absolutely, to determine. Sure I am, however, it is the same evidence
he has brought, in support of his apostolic succession, "and as fully
sufficient to satisfy a rational enquiry."

I HAVE been thus long upon the point of a succession, not that the defense of
the sermons I am vindicating, is concerned in it; for neither of them say any
thing about it. Nor would I be understood, absolutely to deny, that there has
been a succession in the christian ministry. I rather incline to think there
has; though not such an one as Mr. L. contends for, in a line of bishops
superior to presbyters. Of this there is scarcely the least probability. But my
motive herein was, to expose the weakness of such high claims, and the
dangerous tendency of laying so much weight upon this same episcopal
succession, as the zealous advocates for it commonly do. As to the weakness of
the proof, I presume it has been sufficiently exposed. The danger of laying so
much stress upon it, must be obvious at first view. It naturally tends to fill
the minds of serious christians, with perplexing doubts and sears, as to the
validity and efficacy of the gospel administrations, on which they attend; and
utterly deprive them of the comfort and edification they might otherwise hope
to receive from them. At the same time, it gives a handle to deists and
infidels, to banter and ridicule the most important truths of christianity,
while they thus behold them, and that even by its teachers, sunk to a level, in
point of evidence, with the most doubtful and disputable points.

I SHALL conclude what I have to say upon this head, in the words of a learned
prelate of the church of England; Bish. Hoadley's preservative, page 75, etc.
as probably it will be more convincing to Mr. L. and those of his stamp, than
any thing I can say. They are contained in his answer to the high claims of the
nonjuror-clergy, at the time of the revolution; who refusing to swear
allegiance to king William, were deprived of their office, and others put in
their places. Upon which they condemned the whole church of England, as
schismatical, in having gone off from this same line of succession, our author
contends for, and like him and his zealous brethren, arrogated the whole power
of the church and ministry to themselves. -- Upon which the learned bishop thus
writes.

I DO not love, I confess, so much as to repeat the principal branches of their
beloved scheme; they are so different, whencesoever they come, from the voice
of the gospel. When they would alarm you, as their fellow laborers the papists
do, by telling you, that you cannot hope for the favor of God, but in the
strictest communion with their church (which is the true church of England,
governed by bishops, in a regular succession) -- that God has himself hung
your salvation upon this nicety; that he dispenses none of his favors or
graces, but by the hands of them and their subordinate priests; -- that you
cannot be authoritatively blessed or released from your sins, but by them who
are the regular priests; -- that churches under other bishops, -- (i. e. other
than in a regular succession) are schismatical conventicles, made up of
excommunicated persons, both clergy and laity; out of God's church, as well as
out of his favor: -- I say, when such arguments as these are urged, -- you
need only have recourse to a general answer, to this whole heap of scandal and
defamation, upon the will of God, the gospel of Christ, and the church of
England in particular; that you have not so learned Christ, or the design of
his gospel, or even the foundation of this particular part of his church,
reformed and established in England. The following arguments will justify you,
which therefore ought to be frequently in the thoughts of all, who have any
value for the most important points. God is just and equal, and good: And as
sure as he is so, he cannot put the salvation and happiness of any man, upon
what he himself has put it out of the power of any man upon earth, to be
entirely farisfied in. -- It has not pleased God, in his providence, to keep
up any proof of the least probability, or woral possibility, of a regular
uninterrupted succession. -- But there is a great appearance, and, humanly
speaking, a certainty of the contrary, that this succession has been
interrupted.

SEC. VI. A indication of my discourse upon presbyter an ordination, from the
exceptions contained in Mr. L's book; -- from page 27 to 38.
NOT to say any thing of Mr. L's logic, he seems to be well acquainted with a
certain figure in rhetoric, by which a part is taken for the whole.
Havi^gremarked upon one or two, among many, of Dr. Chauncy's arguments, he
roundly tells us, "he has considered every thing material advanced by the Dr."
The same method he takes, in his remarks upon me. Thus he begins them. -- "The
sum of his argument is this, there is but one commission, and of consequence
can be but one order of gospel ministers." Page 27.
Truly concise and laconic! An easy and compendious method this, of answering a
book, -- to remark upon one argument, out of many, and then pretend he has
answered the whole; though perhaps not quite so safe and honorable to the
author, unless he could be sure, the pieces he pretends to answer, had never
been seen by his readers. It Is true this was one of my arguments: I hope to
show it is a good one. But if he had read my piece, he must have observed that
I used sundry others in support of the doctrine I undertook to defend. I argued
it, from presbyters being ^^cessors to the apostles in their ordinary (...).
From there being in fact but one order (...) to be found in the gospel. From
presbyters being true scripture bishops, and the only hishops the gospel owns.
From express instances of presbyterian ordination found in scripture. And
finally, from the suffrage of antiquity, -- the unanimous judgment and practice
of the reformed churches abroad, -- the first reformers in England, and many
great and learned episcopalians since. -- How then could he pretend, "that this
was the sum of what I had advanced, in support of my principles?" However,
since he chooses to combat only this one argument, I shall follow him in his
remarks upon it. His words are, Mr. Wells says, page 17, these last words
(meaning the promise annexed to the commission) plainly show that this promise
was made, not to the persons of the apostles, but to their office as ministers
in Christ's church; and consequently that their office is to continue to the
end of the world. -- He asserts, page 16, this is the commission, and the only
commission we have any account of, -- which Christ gave to his apostles. The
consequence of which Mr. E. says, must be this, -- "that the commission
constituted them apostles, and therefore the apostolic office must continue to
the end of time." Page 28.


ANSWER. -- If by apostolic office, he means the office the apostles sustained,
as ordinary ministers in the church; I readily grant that the commission in
Mat. xxviii. did constitute them apostles, and that their office, in this sense
of it, is to continue to the end of the world. But if by apostolic office, he
means their office as apostles, properly so called, considered in their
extraordinary character, I deny that it was to be continued, and affirm there
is nothing in the words he pretends to quote from me, that will infer such a
conclusion. It Is true I said, and still say, "that the promise of Christ's
presence to the end of the world, annexed to the commission, was made, not to
the persons of the apostles, but to their office." But as what? Not as
apostles, but as I there express it, "as ministers in Christ's church," i e.
standing ordinary ministers. I also said, "that is the commission, and the only
one, we have any account of, that Christ gave his apostles." But then I added,
"in virtue of which they were empowered to act as ministers in his church," i.
e. as ordinary standing ministers, as the whole connection of my discourse
showed. Had Mr. L. thus quoted my words at large, every reader would have seen
the weakness of the conclusion he pretends to draw from them. They are so far
from giving any countenance to his notion of, "a continuation of the apostolic
office as such; that on the contrary, they very expressly distinguish between
this, and their ordinary character, and very clearly show, that it was the
latter, and not the former, that was to be perpetuated, and in which they were
to have successors to the end of time. This, I presume, is sufficient to
vindicate my words from this consequence he pretends to draw from them.

BUT, says Mr. L. "the consequence (meaning from my words) is plainly this;
that the commission constituted them apostles, or else that they acted as
apostles without any commission."

I ANSWER: -- This is by no means a plain consequence neither. Had I said, as
he has imperfectly quoted me, "that this is the only commission we have any
account of, that Christ gave his apostles," and had added nothing further, it
would indeed have followed, not as he says, "that they acted without any
commission;" but that, for aught appeared in scripture, they acted without any.
These two conclusions are very different. -- The scripture gives no account of
the ordination of Silas, Apollos, Epaphroditus, etc. I trust, however, he
himself will not from hence conclude that they acted as ministers without any
commission or ordination. But then he well knew, that when I said, "this is the
only commission," etc. I meant the only one they received as standing gospel
ministers, invested with an office to be perpetuated. -- This distinction was
fully expressed in the clause he has seen sit to suppress, viz. "in virtue of
which they were empowered to act as ministers," etc. -- His conclusion
therefore, "that this commission constituted them apostles, or else they acted
without a commission," no ways follows. For although as standing ordinary
ministers, they had no other commission, yet they might have as apostles. It
was in the former view I spoke of them, not in the latter. Certainly they were
called apostles long before this commission was given, even upon their being
called by Christ. Mat. x. 2.
Paul was called and commissioned to be an apostle, and acted as such, long
before he received ordination as a standing gespel minister. The commission of
the apostles as such, as extraordinary officers, was in an extraordinary way;
by an immediate call from heaven. As apostles, they were all with Paul "not of
men, neither by men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. Gal. i. 1.
When it was they received this commission, whether upon their first call, as
some suppose, or at the day of Penticost, as others think, is perhaps difficult
certainly to determine. As their apostolic office, properly so called, was
extraordinary, and temporary, there was no occasion the commission, impowering
them thereto, should be particularly recorded in scripture. This was given to
them in person; and as they were to have no successors in it, none else had any
concern with it. But as standing ordinary ministers, they were to have
successors to the end of time; and therefore it was necessary their commission,
in this character, should be particularly recorded; for this concerned their
successors as well as themselves. Accordingly we find, this commission is in
fact recorded: It Is that we have been considering: It Is that to which the
promise is annexed of Christ's presence to the end of the world; and the same
concerning which I asserted in my sermon, "that it is the only one, we have any
account of, which Christ gave to his apostles, in virtue of which they were
improved to act as ordinary ministers in his church." And for this purpose, no
doubt it is recorded, that it might be a standing commission, impowering,
authorizing and directing, all the true ministers of Christ to the end of the
world.

OUR author's next remark is to this purpose, -- that while I am proving from
one commission, that one order only of ministers can be virtuated by it, I
myself, in effect, allow two, and so defeat my own argument: For he says, I
call the apostles in one place, extraordinary officers, and in another,
ordinary ones, and yet these are both empowered by one commission; hence he
concludes that I am "refuted by myself." Page 28, 29.


I ANSWER, had he honestly cited the passage he pretended to quote from me, the
weakness of this conclusion of his would have been obvious at first view. It Is
true I speak of the apostles, as sustaining the twofold character or office, of
apostles, and ordinary gospel ministers. But then it is equally true that I
speak only with respect to the latter, when I say, "this is the commission and
the only commission we have any account of their receiving from Christ." This
distinction and limitation I fully enough expressed, in the passage from which
he quotes these words, though he has seen fit to suppress it by a partial and
imperfect quotation. Such acts may help to support a bad cause: A good one has
no need of them. Will it at all follow, that because the apostles, considered
ordinary ministers of Christ, are empowered by this one general commission,
that they must as extraordinary officers also be empowered by the same? If it
will not, then there is no force at all in Mr. L's conclusion from my argument,
as though it allowed of two orders being empowered by one and the same
commission. As there is nothing expressly said, or even implied in this
commission, of more than one order to be empowered by it; not the least
intimation, that the powers it contains are to be divided, and the whole given
to one order, and part only to another; and finally, as it is inconsistent to
suppose, that two or more officers, the one superior, the other subordinate,
should be virtuated and appointed by one and the same commission, we may I
think, fairly conclude, that one order of gospel ministers, and only one, is
appointed and empowered by this commission; consequently, that all the powers
contained in this commission belong to that one order, and that of ordination
among the rest. I presume therefore, my argument from the one commission, still
stands good, notwithstanding all Mr. L. has said against it.

I HAD said in my sermon, "that the apostles in their extraordinary character,
had no successors." This Mr. L. calls "a bold assertion," and demands "what
evidence I had produced to support it." Page 29.


ANSWER. As the assertion is a negative, had no evidence been produced, it
would hardly have deserved the epithet of "bold." According to the rules of
argumentation, the proof lies upon those who affirm a fact, not upon those who
deny it. Had Mr. L. however, carefully read over the page in my sermon, from
whence he pretends to quote the passage, he must have seen the evidence he
demands. My words are these, It must be remembered that the apostles sustained
a twofold character; the one extraordinary as apostles, the other ordinary as
gospel ministers. In their extraordinary capacity, they were immediately called
by Christ. Were sent forth by him to be witnesses of his resurrection. -- Were
endowed with extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, the knowledge of tongues,
the power of discerning spirits, and of working miracles. They were not
limited to any particular place, one more than another, for the exercise of
their ministry; but had the whole world assigned them as their charge; and
being under the infallible guidance of divine inspiration, they had the
superintendency and government of all the churches committed to them, until the
canon of scripture should be full, and complete rules given for that purpose in
the word of God. In this they had no successors, but this part of their office
expired with themselves: For as there is now no occasion for these
extraordinary powers, since the scripture is sufficiently attested, its canon
completed, and every thing necessary for the institution and government of the
church, particucularly revealed; so there are no men since the times of the
apostles, who can lay any claim to these extraordinary and miraculous powers;
and therefore none can pretend to be successors to them in that part of their
character which was founded on these powers. -- This was the sense in which I
asserted "the apostles had no successors," and these the reasons I assigned for
such assertion; and to me they appear conclusive. As this extraordinary
character of the apostles had its rise in the extraordinary circumstances,
attending them, and was founded in the extraordinary powers bestowed upon them,
it must necessarily have ceased, if the circumstances and powers have ceased,
on which it was founded; but that the latter have ceased, Mr. L. will not deny:
For whatever powers they claim for their bishops, the pretended successors of
the apostles; I think that of working miracles is not one of them. If he can
produce any instance of that kind sufficiently authenticated, they shall be
properly noticed; if not, he must not be offended, if people look upon the
claim a little assuming, nor pretend the "assertion is more bold" than true, if
the right to assume the character should happen to be denied. This assertion
"that the apostles as such, have no successors, which Mr. L. calls "an opinion
which has nothing to support it but the prejudices of education," is no way
peculiar to presbyterians. The learned Spanhemius, though a zealous prelatist,
in his dispute with the papists against the Pope's supremacy as Peter's
sucessor, maintains that the apostolic character is founded in an in mediate
call, the gift of tongues, and power of working miracles, and is not
perpetuared. Let the Pope, says he, now descend from the capitol. Let him, as
did the apostles, declare that he has the gift of tongues divinely infused. Let
him bring visibly the gifts of the Holy Ghost from heaven. Let him work like
the apostles, such illustrious miracles, and then we shall yield that he has
apostolic authority. He adds. They are much deceived who would bring the
apostles down to the order of particular bishops. They were not at all called
apostles, on the account that they were bishops, and consequently, apostle and
bishop are quite different things.

Spanh, dissert. 3, Numb. 17, 25, 34. 37.

Sadeel, another episcopalian, says, "None but he, who is an ignoramus in
divinity, will confound an apostle with a bishop."

Advers. Turrian: Jesuit.

Dr. Lightfoot asserts and proves, That the aportleship was an order forever
inimitable in the church. -- The apostles could not ordain an apostle by the
imposition of hands, as they could ordain elders; but they are forced to use a
divine lot, which was as the immediate hand of Christ imposed on him that was
to be ordained. That opinion took little notice of this circumstance, that has
placed bishops in the place of the apostles, by a common and successive
ordination.

Vol. I. page 745, 787.

Dr. Barrow, whose works are published by arch bishop Tillotson, and so must be
presumed to maintain his sentiments also, expressly denies, that the apostles
pretended to communicate their office as apostles. -- They did indeed appoint
standing pastors and teachers in each church: They did aslume sellow-labourers
and assistants in the work of preaching and governance; -- but they did not
constitute apostles, equal to themselves in authority, etc. For who knows
not, says Austin, that principle of apos^leship, to be preferred before any
episcopacy. And bishops, says Belamine, have no part of true apostolic
authority.

Dr. Bar. of the Pope's supremacy, p. 78.

The aposties, says Chillingworth, by laying the foundation of the church, were
to be the foundations of it, and are so called in scriptures. Therefore as in a
building it is incongruous that foundations should succeed foundations, so it
may be in the church that any other apostles should succeed the first.




OUR author's next attack upon this argument of the one commission, is from the
order of deacons, whom the apostles, he says, by virtue of this commission,
constituted and ordained. "They were ordained, he tells us, to do something
which the apostles did, before these deacons were consecrated to their office."
Page 30, 31. Chill. Relig. protest.
It is pity he had not told us what this something was, they were ordained to
do. This he purposely evades; and he had his reasons for it. If he had done
this, he was sensible it would have at once appeared, that their office was not
contained in, or virtuated by this commission, and so have overthrown his
objection against my argument, which was "that one and the same commission,
could constitute but one office only." -- This something to which these deacons
were ordained, was to serve tables, concerning which work, not the least hint
is to be found in the ministerial commission. That indeed impowers those to
whom it is given, to preach, baptize, etc. but says not a single word of
serving tables and managing the church stock, the peculiar business of deacons.
As therefore the deacon's office is not contained in, or virtuated by this
commission; so the appointment of them no ways militates against my argument,
that where there is but one commission, there can be but one order or office
empowered by it.

BUT though he cannot find the work of a deacon contained in the ministerial
commission, he seems very desirous of having their office virtuated by it, that
so he may make out two orders empowered by the same commission, contrary to
what I had asserted. "If, says he, the commission of the apostles, empowered
them to ordain but one order of officers; how came they to constitute the
office of deacons." Page 31.
I answer: -- They did it, not by virtue of the ministerial commission we have
been considering, but of that which constituted them apostles. The former, as
has been showed, bolonged to them, not as apostles, but as ordinary ministers
of Christ, empowered thereby to preach, baptize, etc. In virtue of this, they
were no more empowered to constitute a new order, than any of their successors
in the same office. But as apostles, as divinely inspired, and under the
infallible guidance of the Holy Ghost, they had power to do it. And in this
capacity, and this only, they acted, when they instituted this office. As
therefore, it was not in virtue of, or by power derived from the general
ministerial commission, that this office of deacons was instituted; so there
can be no argument brought from their appointment, in proof of two or more
offices virtuated by this commission; consequently, my argument, "that where
there is but one commission, one order only can be virtuated or empowered by
it," still stands good.

I READILY allow "the office of deacon, to be inferior to that of apostle." I
grant "it is an office in which the power of ordination is not included." And
if it will please him, I will concede too, that they may in a general sense, be
called "ministers in Christ's church." But then, as they are so, not by virtue
of the general commission given to ministers as ministers of the word and
sacraments; but by the express appointment of the apostles, acting in their
apostolic character; this will afford no argument in favor, either of his
preaching deacons, or of his notion that two or more orders are empowered by
this one commission. -- Let him show in this commission, or elsewhere, as
particular an account of the appointment of their two orders of bishops and
presbyters, as we can produce of the institution of deacons. Let him produce as
express warrant for deacons preaching, from the account of their first
institution, as we have for that of presbyters, in the general ministerial
commission; and we will readily allow their scheme of diocesan episcopacy to be
warranted by scripture: 'Till then, he must not be offended if people call it
by its true and proper name, an unscriptural scheme that has no countenance
from the word of God.

BUT he tells me, that I undertook to prove the right of people to choose their
own ministers, from the instance of deacons being chosen by the church. "Now,
says he, if these deacons were ministers, it proves that there was more than
one order of ministers at that time: If they were not, it does not prove the
point for which he brought it." Page 30.


ANSWER. Deacons being called ministers in a general sense, agreeable to the
original import of the word DIACONOS, will not prove them to be ministers in
the sense of the commission, that is, ministers of the word and sacraments. If
so, Mr. L. must admit of a fourth order into their priesthood, viz. that of
she-ministers: For the apostle calls Phoebe a minister, (DIACONON) "of the
church of Cenchrea." Romans xvi. 1.
Consequently, calling deacons ministers in this general sense, will not prove
"that there was more than one order of ministers, in the proper sense, at that
time." And yet their being ministers in this general sense, that is, officers
or servants of the church, and as such, chosen and elected by the church,
affords a good argument in proof of the church's right to choose her own
officers in general, and consequently those who are to minister in the word and
sacraments in particular. This instance therefore, of the deacons election by
the church does as effectually "prove the point for which I brought it," as if
they had been ministers in the most strict and appropriate sense of the word.
Thus my arguments for but one order of gospel ministers, stand, I trust, fully
vindicated from this cavil also.

THOUGH deacons, in the general sense above, may be called ministers, yet it is
plain from their original institution they never were designed to be ministers
of the word. The occasion of their appointment, and the business they were
appointed to do, is there expressly said to be, "to serve tables," Acts vi. 1
-- 4.
and that with a special express view that the apostles being released from
this care; might be at liberty to pursue their proper work, to "give themselves
to prayer and the ministry of the word." Who can once imagine then, that
preaching is any part of the deacons business? That when the apostles found,
that "serving tables" was inconsistent with and too much for the ministers of
the word, and accordingly instituted the order of deacons to ease them of that
burden, they should nevertheless devolve the whole burden of both upon the
deacons they had appointed? The apostles themselves were not sufficient for
both; but the deacons whom they appointed, it seems were, if the doctrine of
preaching deacons be true. When the deacon is employed in his proper work, I
know no body that "despises him" (as Mr. L. complains.) It is an honorable
office in the church, and ought to be so esteemed. But when he leaves his
business, and becomes "a busy body in other men's matters;" when he invades an
office the scripture never designed him, and presumes to preach as a minister
of the word; if he is not to be despised upon this account, most certainly he
ought to be rebuked for his rashness and presumption.

IN my argument from the one commission, I had these words. "Who has a right
to divide the powers Christ has evidently connected in his commission, and give
the whole to one order of ministers, and but half to the other; or rather to
create a new order of officers in the church which the gospel knows nothing
of?" From these last words Mr. L. attempts to prove, that I have cut myself off
from a regular ordination. For if either the bishops or presbyters in their
church, are this "new order which the gospel knows nothing of;" as we derive
our succession from the bishops of their church, by whom our first ministers in
this country were ordained, we must, he supposes, derive it from this new
order, and therefore our ordinations must be null. Page 31.


ANSWER. When any officers in Christ's church, in addition to the powers
granted them in the gospel, engross and exercise those which do not belong to
them, they are so far forth "a new order which the gospel knows nothing of."
This I take to be the case with diocesan bishops. They ingross and monopolize
the whole power of ordination and government, which the gospel leaves, in
common, to all gospel ministers. In doing this, they usurp a power, which does
not belong to them, and in the exercise of this usurped power, are "an order
which the gospel knows nothing of." This, however, does not nullity those
actions, which the gospel impowers them to perform. Now one of these is
ordination. Though therefore, in ingressing the whole power of ordination, etc.
to themselves, they act as "a new order of which the gospel knows nothing of,"
because they have no right so to do; yet barely in ordaining, they are an order
which the gospel owns, because, by the gospel, they have a right to ordain.
Again, when an order of officers, from principle, neglect a part of the duties
of their office, and which their commission obliges them to do; they are so far
forth; "a new order which the gospel knows nothing of." This is the case of the
presbyters in the episcopal church. Considered as set apart to the ministry by
ordination, they are lawful gospel ministers. But considered as abridging
themselves of one half of the powers that belong to them, as living in a state
of servile subjection to the bishop by their oath of canonical obedience; and
preaching, not in virtue of Christ's commission, but the bishops license; they
are merely of human institution, a "new order which the gospel knows nothing
of." But until it is proved, that an officer's pretending to claim and exercise
a power which he has not, destroys and nullifies the power which he lawfully
has; Mr. L's consequence, as to the unlawfulness of my ordination, will by no
means follow. If a justice of the peace should pretend to engross all the
authority of his brother-justices in a whole county, it is plain in so doing, he
would be an officer which the law knew nothing of. This, however, would not
invalidate those acts, which, as a justice, the law empowered him to do. The
Pope, with his impious and unscriptural claim of infallibility and universal
dominion, over the whole christian church, I hope Mr. L. will allow, is an
officer which the gospel knows nothing of: And yet he, and all other advocates
for uninterrupted succession, must derive it from him, or upon their own
principles, they can have no claim to the ministerial character. However
therefore this argument of his, might move one to pity its wealtness. I find
nothing in it to make us "ashamed of proper beasting in the ministerial
authority we have received."

IN page 28 of my sermon, I argued, that as a governor and justice of the peace
being different officers, must be empowered by different commissions, so if
there were different degrees of office in the gospel ministry, we might
reasonably expect different commissions, authorizing them to these offices.

TO this Mr. L. replies, that a governor, by virtue of the king's commission,
can authorize a justice of the peace and other officers, and just so the
apostles, by virtue of their commission from Christ, "can authorize men of
different orders to act in Christ's name." Page 32.


ANSWER. Though a governor can authorize a justice and other officers which the
laws of the king or constitution have appointed, yet he can create no new
officer in the state. So in the other case. Though the apostles could ordain
such officers as the gospel had appointed, yet they could make no new ones,
different from, or in addition to those which the laws of Christ's kingdom, and
the gospel constitution have established. We know it was agreeable to the
gospel constitution, that they should appoint the office of deacon; because
they have in fact done it. Besides this, we read of no other order appointed by
them. If there be any, it belongs to our opponents to produce them. -- When
Christ ascended, he left only his eleven apostles in commission; all of one
order, all equal in power. Had two or more orders been necessary in the gospel
ministry, he "who was faithful in all his house," would certainly have
appointed them, or left orders with his apostles to do it. As he has not; as
neither he nor his apostles have instituted, except deacons, any more than one
order or officers in the gospel church, it is a certain consequence there are no
other. And therefore Mr. L's plea, from what the apostles were "empowered to do
in authorizing different orders," is nothing to the purpose. What they were
"empowered to do," we must judge from what they have in fact done. And as, in
fact, they have, besides deacons, appointed no other order, we may safely
presume they were not empowered by Christ to appoint any other. As to the three
orders which he says, they appointed in the church of Jerusalem, it has already
been considered and refuted, and his assertion proved to be groundless.

HIS next attack upon me, is for saying, "that presbyters have a right to
govern the church." -- This, he says, "I labor hard to prove." Page 32.
It Is true I mentioned this occasionally, and, I think, sufficiently proved it,
without any "hard labor." He himself allows them some power of government.
"That they have a right, in subordination to "their apostle or bishop, to
govern their own flocks." Page 32.


ANSWER. What kind or degree of government, the missionary of Norwalk, as a
simple presbyter, pretends to, or what manner of discipline he exercises over
the flock there, I am not able to say. This, however, I can say, that if he
exercises any discipline at all, as a ruler in the church, it is without book.
The canons of his church and the rules of his order, having allowed nothing of
this kind to him, but reserved the whole affair to his ordinary. If therefore
he should presume to arrogate any such power, and take it upon him to
discipline any of his unruly flock, "I cannot say, (to use his own words to me)
how they will relish these high claims of his." If he should ever attempt any
thing of this kind; -- "unless he does it under the specious pretense of
opposing presbyterians," -- "and his people should once come to be cool, he
must take a great deal of pains, and use much art, to bring them tamely to
submit to this his claim of authority over them."

FOR the direct proof of the presbyters right of government, the reader is
referred to the latter part of this, and the next section. In the mean time
there is one sentence more in this paragraph, which deserves a remark. It is
this: -- "If he will allow our bishops, the same power over the presbyters,
that the apostles exercised over their presbyters, we will contend for no more
in their behalf."

ANSWER. It Is granted the apostles exercised authority over those he calls
presbyters, in the age in which they lived. But the same did they also, over
those be calls bishops; particularly over Timothy and Titus. If this then is
any argument in proof of three orders in the church, in proof of the bishop's
authority over the presbyter now, it equally proves the necessity of four
orders, and will as effectually establish the authority of the Pope over all
other bishops, as it will theirs over presbyters. But the authority the
apostles exercised over other gospel ministers, whether presbyters or bishops,
or by whatever name they were called; they did it, not as ordinary ministers of
the church, not as an order to be perpetuated; but as apostles, as officers
divinely inspired, etc. -- When therefore Mr. L. can prove his bishops, to have
the same immediate mission, miraculous powers, infallible guidance, etc. etc.
etc. which constituted the apostolic character and superior authority; it will
be then time enough for him to make, and us to grant the above demand.

MR. L. next imputes to me an argument, for support of our ordination, that I
never used. He says "I take a great deal of pains to prove, and often repeat
it, that the power of the apostles, to ordain and govern, was not expressed,
but only implied in their commission." Page 32, 33, 34.
"This, he says* I do in order to prove that the first ministers of this
country had power to ordain, though no such power was expressed, in the
commission they received from the bishops that ordained them." Page 32, 33, 34.
Though I never thought of this argument he here frames for me, yet as he
advanced some things in his remarks upon it, which may tend to mislead the
inattentive, it may be proper to make a few observations upon what he here
offers. -- He first tells me, that to the account of the commission in Mat.
xxviii. I ought to have joined that given by John; chapter xx. 5, 21, 22, 23.
Where Christ says, "As my father has sent me, even so send I you. Whosoever
sins ye remit," etc. -- "If, says he, we lay together the accounts, these two
apostles give of the matter, we shall plainly see, that in the apostles
commission, they were expressly empowered to send others -- to govern the
church -- to preach and to baptize." Page 33.


ANSWER. Great weight. I am sensible, is laid by the advocates for prelacy,
upon these words of our Savior, "as my father has sent me," etc. The warm
patrons of episcopacy, pretend here to find, the bishops exclusive right to the
power of ordination, etc. Though by what logic, is difficult to say. Papists,
from the same text, support the sacrifice of the mass. For as God the Father
sent Christ to offer a sacrifice for lin; so Christ sent his apostles, and they
others, to offer the sacrifice of the mass, that is, the real flesh and blood
of Christ in the sacrament of the supper. So that these words will prove almost
any thing and every thing. Now though I don't conceive the ministerial
commission, to be contained in these words, but rather in those of Matt.
xxviii. Yet if it will gratiry Mr. L. I am willing, for once, to allow it; to
allow the commission to be collected from both. But then I don't see what
service it will be to his cause. For though the power of government is rather
more particularly expressed, in John's account than those in Matthew's; the
ordaining power, about which we are contending, is f^as clearly expressed in
Matthew as in John: Of rather, it is expressed in neither. However, though the
commission in Matthew, says nothing expressly about sending others; yet the
promise of Christ's perpetual presence, annexed to the commission, necessarily
supposes it, as I showed in my sermon; consequently the ordaining power is
fairly implied in the commission. But the utmost that can be pretended in
John's account, is barely as implication of such power. Mr. L. supposes that
the power "of sending others," is expressed (...) these words; "As my father
has sent me, ever so send I you." Here indeed is express mention of "the
Father's sending Christ," and of "Christ's sending the apostles;" but not a
single word of "the apostles sending others," or any thing expressly intimating
that such power was committed to them. In order to this, the words must have
been, "as I send you, even so do ye send others." Mr. L. (...) conclude, will
say, that the words, "as my father has sent me," etc. contain in them a power
committed to the apostles of sending others. I gr^^ they do. But how? Not
expressly, but only b^ implication. But then the same does the commission in
Matthew. As to this then, there is (...) manner of difference. "Perhaps,
therefore, ((...) use his own words) no better reason can be given* why Mr. L.
will not allow the commission in Mat. xxviii. to be the only ministerial
commission, that that it does not comport with his scheme." According to "his
scheme," there are three gradations in the ministry. Men must be first ordained
deacons, then presbyters, and finally advanced to the highest order, bishops.
But, for this, he found, one and the same identical commission would not
suffice. He has therefore, besides tha^ mentioned by me, Matthew xxviii. found,
as he thinks, another in John xx. "This, he tells us, Christ gave to his
apostles, the night after he rose from the dead," and so before the other. By
this then, according to "his scheme," the apostles must have been ordained to
no higher order than deacons, or at most presbyters. The other commission, that
in Matthew, he tells us, "was given some time after in Gallilee, which
therefore, "to comport with his scheme," must have made them bishops. -- But,
unhappily for "his scheme," the first of these, according to him, contains the
powers of ordination and government, and the last, only those of preaching and
baptizing. According to his account, therefore the apostles must first have
been ordained to the highest office of bishops, and afterward to the lower one
of presbyters or deacons; which, to make the most of it "comports with his
scheme" but very indifferently, and must well nigh "prove faral to his design."

BUT if this will not help his own cause, he thinks it will overthrow ours. For
he says, -- "if we find that the words of the commission that their ministers
received from our bishops, are not expressive of such power, viz. (of
ordination and government:) We must conclude they did not receive such
authority as is pretended." Page 34.


ANSWER. If there is but one ministerial commission, as has been proved, then
all who are lawfully ordained, are vested with this commission, and all the
powers it contains, of which ordination is one, let the intention of the
ordainers be what they will. The bishops, who ordained our first ministers,
intended, I hope, to make them lawful ministers of Christ, and invest them with
his commission; and moreover, used words sufficiently expressive of such
intention. If they did not do this in our case, neither did they, I presume, in
that of Mr. L. and his brethen: They are therefore not lawful ministers of
Christ, not being vested with his commission. But if this was done in the case
of the latter, it was equally so in that of the former; consequently they were
vested with Christ's general commission and with all the powers of it, and
those of ordination and government among the rest.

As a proof of but one order in the ministry, I mentioned, in my sermon, the
elders of the church of Ephesus, Acts xx. and said, "the entire guidance and
government of the church was committed to these elders, without any mention of
(...) single person as their superior in office." (...) Mr. L. demands, "Where
does he find that the government of these churches was committed to these
elders." Page 34.


ANSWER. I find it in the words directed to the^ by the apostle, v. 28. He
there charges them in these words. Take heed therefore to yourselves and to all
the flock over the which the Holy* Ghost has made you overseers; to feed the
church of God. But he tells me they are here expressly said to be made
overseers, not to govern, but to feed the flock; and he is really amazed I
should assert, that the entire guidance and government of the church is
committed to them, for he can see nothing of it there. Perhaps the following
observations may help him to see it.

IN the first place, -- I find this power of government contained in the name,
by which these elders are there called. The apostle expressly calls them
ourselves. He tells them they were made, EPISCOPOUS, bishops, over this church,
and that by the Holy Ghost. This name includes in it the power of rule or
guidance. It is rendered, by the best lexicographers, by epicopus, bishop,
inspector, an inspector, praeses, a president or chief ruler. Accordingly it is
the very name that episcopalians have appropriated to the highest order of
their clergy, the bishops; and that as peculiarly expressive of the power of
government or chief rule. -- If therefore their bishops, as such, are vested
with the power of government, these elders are also; for they are expressly
called bishops; and were made such even by the Holy Ghost. Doubtless the Holy
Ghost, in making them bishops, committed to them the whole power of bishops,
and this of government among the rest. Mr. L. allows, those who are made
bishops, by other bishops in their church, or even by the grand pontiff at
Rome, to be invested with the power of governing the church. But to these
bishops at Ephesus, who were made such by the Holy Ghost; he will not allow any
such power. How partial is this, to say no more? This power of government
therefore is included in the very name by which these elders are called.

AGAIN. It is included, and that expressly, in the charges the apostle gives
them. The words are, "to feed the flock of God, POIMAINEIN. Pasco, rego, curo,
doceo. Schrevel. Lex. in verb.
-- The word in the original, signifies to rule or feed, as a shepherd does his
flock, and so includes in it all acts of pastoral government and care. It is
derived from POIMEEN, a shepherd, whose business is, not only to feed, but to
rule and guide his flock. Which title our Lord applies to himself, as
peculiarly expressive of his character, as the "chief shepherd and bishop of
souls," and of all that power and authority he exercises in that character.
John x. 2.
Accordingly he uses the same word as his apostle does here, in his charge to
Peter an apostle, and that as expressive of the whole care he was to take of
Christ's flock, both in government and instruction. John xxi. 16.
Peter uses the same word, in his charge to the elders or bishops of the
churches, to whom he directs his epistle. 1 Pet. v. 2.
That these were the proper bishops or rulers of these churches, is plain from
the apostles charging them to "take the oversight of them." EPISCOPOUNTES. To
act the bishop among them; as also from his cautioning them against " lording
it over God's heritage," i. e. using this power of government tyranically. But
to put the matter beyond all dispute; we find the word sundry times used in the
New Testament, where it cannot possibly admit of any other interpretation but to
rule, and therefore is so rendered by our translators. Thus when Christ is
spoken of under the express character of a governor: He is said, as such,
(POIMANEI) "to rule God's people Israel." Matt. ii. 6.
Again. "To him that overcomes, I will give power over the nations, and he
shall (POIMANEI) rule them with a rod of iron." Rev. ii. 26, 27.
Again it is said of the man child, "that he was to rule (POIMANEI) all nations
with a rod of iron." Chap. xii. 5.
Finally the supreme dominion and authority of our blessed Lord, "who has on
his vesture and on his thigh, a name written KING OF KINGS and LORD OF LORDS,"
is set forth by the same word, "he shall rule (POIMANEI) all nations with a rod
of iron." Chapter xix. 15, 16.
Thus with an evidence, beyond all exception, it appears, that the power of
ruling or governing the church of Ephesus, is expressly committed to the elders
of it, by the apostle, in this his charge given to them. And yet because our
translators use the word feed in this place, Mr. L. confidently asse^^ "that
the direction given to them, was only to teach or feed the people over whom
they were placed." Page 43.
He puts the words feed and teach in italics, and makes them synonimous terms;
at the same time he sets both in opposition to ruling or governing, which is
the original meaning of the word; and then tells us, "these words expressly
declare, what they were made overseers to do; that was, to feed the church of
God; there is not the least intimation they were to govern it." And he "is
really amazed, he says, that I should assert the contrary, when the place
referred to so expressly says, that the Holy Ghost made them overseers, not to
govern, but to feed the church of God." Page 34, 35.
. What the poor gentleman's amazement arose from, whether from the overbearing
luster of the evidence he opposed, or from what other cause; sure I am, he has
grossly perverted the meaning of this text, by so confidently asserting, that
nothing concerning the government of the church, is contained in it; when that
is the very thing the apostle gives them in charge; and that by a word as
expressive of it, as perhaps, any in the New Testament. I hope he did not do
this, with a dishonest design, to impose upon his unlearned readers. I will not
therefore tell him as he politely does me, "that he himself knew the contrary
to be true." This, however I will tell him, that if he did not, he was utterly
unqualified for the controversy he has undertaken, and therefore ought to have
declined it.

HAVING thus made good the assertion in my sermon, "that the government of the
church was vested in these elders, the argument deduced from it in support of
presbyterian ordination still stands good. The inference Mr. L. draws from what
he calls "this claim of mine, as to the effect which he supposes it will have,
upon the minds of my hearers, gives me not the least uneasiness. The
communicants of our church, which he is pleased to call the meeting of
Stanford, by twenty years experience, well know my principles and practice, as
to church government. Every one who reads my sermon will readily see what I
meant by saying "the entire guidance and government of the church, was
committed to the elders." That is, not exclusive of the church, but in
contradistinction to any other pretended superior officer. That they were the
only persons who, as officers, had any thing to do in governing the church.
This I expressed by saying, "the Holy Ghost had made, not Timothy, but these
elders, the sole bishops of the church." Whereas, when I am professedly
speaking of the powers committed to ministers, by Christ's commission; I
express it in these words, -- "To dispense the word and sacraments, to preside
in the government of the church, and to ordain others." Pres. ord. def. page 19.
This, I think a sufficient answer to all his quibbles, as to the "powers I
claim," in the government of the church. His remarks upon it, considering the
foundation he acted upon, and his end in view; appear as weak, as they are ill
natured.

THUS have I very particularly considered, all Mr. L's remarks upon my sermon,
and, as I think, abundantly refuted, all his objections against my arguments
from the one commission. Having sufficiently proved, that as there is but one
commission given by Christ to his ministers, there can be but one order only,
virtuated and empowered by it; consequently that all who are authorized by this
commission, to any part of the ministerial office, must be vested with all the
powers the commission contains; therefore with that of ordination, which is one
of these powers. And as this is the only argument Mr. L. has pretended to
attack, all the others in my sermon, must be presumed to stand good.

SEC. VII. A particular consideration and refutation of what Mr. L. calls "his
direct proof of episcopacy, from matters of fact recorded in scripture," --
from page 38 to 48.
THE whole of what our author calls "his direct proof of episcopacy," turns
upon "the directions given by the apostle to Timothy, compared with his charge
to the elders of Ephesus." "There are some things, says he, given in charge to
these elders, in common with Timothy: Such as, -- to take heed to themselves
and to their doctrine," etc. "But besides these, he tells us, there are several
particulars, of great importance, that Paul gave in charge to Timothy, which he
did not so much as mention to all these elders." Page 39.
-- Particularly. -- He informs him as to the qualifications of presbyterians
and deacons. -- Orders him to charge some that they teach no other doctrine.
Charges him to lay hands suddenly on no man. -- Directs him how to receive an
accusation against an elder. -- Orders him to rebuke them that sin, before all.
-- And finally charges him to keep this commandment unrebukable, till the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. "These things, he says, Paul gave in charge
to Timothy, but did not so much as mention them to the elders of Ephesus."
Hence he infers, "that Timothy was superior in office to these elders, and
charged with the government of them, and of the church at Ephesus." Page 43, 44.
He then concludes, "that Timothy had the same authority that their bishops
claim, and the elders the same power only that the presbyters, in their church,
exercise," consequently, "that episcopacy is of divine right, and the whole
dispute is at an end." Page 44.
This is the true state of his argument presented in its full force. It turns
wholly upon this. -- "Timothy had more, and more important charges given him
than these elders, therefore he was superior to them in office, vested with
episcopal authority over them. -- In answer to which I observe, --

1. THAT if his arguments proves Timothy superior to these elders; it equally
proves Peter superior to the rest of the apostles, and so establishes the
supremacy of the Pope above all other bishops, according to the doctrine of the
church of Rome.

IT is evident from the whole history of the gospel, that Peter is, in various
respects, distinguished from the other apostles. Whenever their catalogue is
given, he is placed the first. Matt. x. 2.
Are any select number chosen, upon any special occasion, Peter is always one.
He is one of the number, and the first mentioned, who were picked out to
provide for the passover, Luke xxii. 8.
-- to attend Christ in his transfiguration, Matt. xvii. 1.
and in his agony in the garden. Matt. xxvi. 37.
Our Lord frequently addresses his speech to him in particular by name, even in
the presence of the rest of the apostles. His opinion is asked concerning the
demanded tribute. For him Christ, in particular, prays that his faith fail not,
and charges him, and him only, to strengthen his brethren. The women at the
sepulcher, are directed by the angel, to go tell his disciples, and Peter in
particular, that he was risen from the dead. Mat. xvii. 25. Luke xxii. 31, 32.
Mark xvi. 7.
And, wh^^ was still more directly to the case, our Lord particularly applies
to him by name, and commits to him the government of the church, without saying
a word to the rest of the apostles; though they were all present at the same
time. -- "And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will
give unto thee, the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shall
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed in heaven." Matt. xvi. 18, 19.
In the same manner, after his resurrection, he addresses Peter only, though
the other apostles were present, with this important charge, -- "feed my sheep,
-- feed my lambs." John xxi. 15, 16, 17.
Here now are not only a number of circumstances mentioned, which seem to give
Peter a precedence to the rest of the apostles; but sundry important charges
given to him which are not given to them, though they were present at the same
time. And what is remarkable, these are the very arguments used by the church
of Rome, to establish the Pope's supremacy, as Peter's successor, and give him
a superiority to all other officers in the christian church. If therefore they
are sufficient to prove Timothy's superiority to the elders of Ephesus, they
are equally so to prove that of Peter to the other apostles, and, consequently,
to establish the supremacy of the Pope over all other ministers. As the
argument is the same, it is certainly as conclusive, in the mouth of an Italian
Roman-catholic, for the Pope's supremacy, as in that of an English prelatist
for the bishop's supremacy. And indeed it is worthy of note, that there is no
one argument used, by the latter, for the divine right of episcopacy against
presbyterians; but what has been used with equal force, and equal success, by
the former for the divine right of the papacy, against protestants. -- If then
our author insists upon this argument, as conclusive in his case, he must own
it to be equally so, in that of the Pope, and, to be consistent with himself,
must turn Roman-catholic: Or if he denies it in one case, he must give it up in
the other, and own there is no force in it when brought to establish diocesan
episcopacy. -- Moreover,

2. If this argument proves Timothy's superiority to the elders of Ephesus, it
will equally follow, and upon the same principles, that he was superior to many
others also, whom yet Mr. L. himself allows to be bishops in his sense of the
word. He has told us that Barnabas was an apostle or bishop; Page 22.
that Epaphroditus was the bishop of Philippi, and James of the church at
Jerusalem. Page 20.
But no where will he find those particular directions given to them, as are
here given to Timothy. Where does he find Barnabas the apostle, James the
bishop of Jerusalem, or Epaphroditus of Philippi receiving those more, and more
important charges, which, as he pretends, distinguish and prove the episcopal
character of Timothy bishop of Ephesus? -- In this respect even the Ephesian
elders, to whom yet our author will not allow the episcopal authority, have
evidently the advantage. Fort hey, he allows, received charges and directions
from the apostle, though not so many and important as Timothy did. But these,
whom nevertheless he owns were proper bishops, received no such charges. Either
therefore he must renounce the episcopal character of James, Epaphroditus, etc.
and give up his argument for episcopacy thence arising; or else he must allow
these elders of Ephesus to the bishops, and so give up his present argument; or
finally, which will amount to the same, must suppose Timothy to be superior to
both, and, by divine right, an archbishop, a prince, apostle or Pope. Nay
further, as there are no such particular directions and important charges, in
scripture, given, even to the twelve apostles themselves, as are here given to
Timothy, it must follow, from this argument, that Timothy was superior even to
them. And that although he received his directions and charges from the apostle
Paul, he was nevertheless Paul's superior: For we no where find such particular
directions and important charges given even to him, as are here given to
Timothy. Thus this argument for Timothy's superior power and character, while
it deprives the Ephesian bishops of pastoral authority, at the same time cuts
off all others mentioned in scripture, even the apostles not excepted, from any
claim to the powers of ordination and government.

THERE is no way, I conceive, to get clear of this difficulty, upon his scheme,
but only by supposing, that though the apostles had not these particular
directions given them that Timothy had, yet all the powers that belong to the
pastoral or episcopal function are included in their general commission given
them by Christ, and this is sufficient to constitute them proper bishops. It is
granted they were. But then the same must be granted in the case of these
elders, to whom he d^nies this power, and then his whole argument is defeated.
They also were vested with the powers included in the ministerial commission
given by Christ, and besides, had a particular charge given by the apostle,
which, as I shall show anon, necessarily supposed these powers. Either
therefore this argument entirely cuts off the apostles, and all others
mentioned in the gospel, from any claim to the powers of ordination and
government, and leaves. Timothy the only apostle or bishop; or else, if the
others are allowed to be vested with these powers, in virtue of the general
ministerial commissions the same must be granted to these elders also, and so
his argument to prove diocesan episcopacy, from this instance, looses all its
force. -- But, --

3. IT is not true, in fact, that Paul gave more important charges to Timothy,
than what he gave to these elders, and therefore, Mr. L's argument, founded
upon the supposition that he did, is not conclusive. His charge to these
elders, very expressly considers them as bishops of the church of Ephesus; yea
as appointed and fixed in the pastoral or episcopal office over that church,
even by the Holy Ghost. "Take heed therefore to yourselves, and to all the
flock over the which the Holy Ghost has fixed or established you bishops."
ATHETO EPISCOPOUS gr. Acts xx. 28.
When therefore the apostle here charges them to "take heed to the flock over
which they were constituted bishops;" it is a direct charge, to do all the work
to discharge all the duties, and execute all the powers of the episcopal
office, consequently tho^ of ordination and government which are part of those
powers. When the same apostle directs Timothy "to do the work of an
evangelist," all will allow it a command to discharge all the duties of that
office. And when our Lord, in his general commission to his apostles, bids them
"go teach all nations," etc. it is granted on all hands, to be a command,
authorizing and requiring them to exercise all the offices and powers of the
ministry. So when the apostle here commands these elders to "take heed to the
flock over which the Holy Ghost had made them bishops; it equally, comprizes in
them a charge to the exercise of the whole power and duty of a bishop, as
though they had been all particularly enumerated, as it is pretended they were
in the directions to Timothy. -- Is Timothy, for instance, "charged to see to
the qualifications of such who were to be ordained presbyters and deacons?" The
same is given in charge to these elders, when they are commanded to "take heed
to this whole flock as its proper bishops or pastors," to which office this
work belongs. Is Timothy ordered to charge the elders that they teach no other
than gospel doctrines? The same is included in the charge given to these
elders. They are expressly commanded to "take heed to the whole flock," etc. to
feed, i. e. not only to reach, but, as I have largely proved above, to rule and
govern this church of Ephesus. Paul had particularly reminded them, "how that
he had kept back nothing that was profitable to them, but had taught them
publicly, and from house to house;" that the doctrine he had preached, was
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ;" "and that he
had not shunned (...) declare unto them the whole counsel of God;" (...) that
he had showed them all these things, to the in^^nt that so laboring," i. e. as
he had done, "they ^^ight support the weak," etc. Verse 20, 21, 27, 35.
Now what can the apostle mean, by so particularly mentioning in ^is charge,
what, and how he had preached, but in set them an example, how they should
preach themselves? And that they should take care, that as other doctrine
should be taught by others, is very particularly contained in his exhortation
to them. For after he had given them the above charge, as a reason of it he
immediately subjoins "for I know this, "that after my departure, shall grievous
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock; also of your ownselves shall
men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them.
Therefore watch," etc. Verse 29, 30, 31.
But to what purpose was it for him to forewarn them of these "grievous wolves,
these false teachers," "and men speaking perverse things," when, if Mr. L's
principles be true, they had no power to prevent them? And how weak, and even
impertinent, will the apostles discourse appear, to assign that, in particular,
as a reason, why they should take heed and watch over this church, as its
proper bishops or pastors, when at the same time the apostle knew, if Mr. L's
doctrine be true, that they had no power, no authority, as rulers of the
church, to call these false teachers to account, against whom he had warned
them? Would it not appear extremely impertinent, not to say ridiculous, for the
bishop of London, Mr. L's diocesan, to give him a solemn charge, to "take heed
to the church at Norwalk, to watch over it, to feed and govern it as a proper
bishop or pastor," and that with a special view to prevent "false teachers from
thrushing themselves in, and drawing away disciples after them;" when at the
same time, his Lordship well knew, that he was so far from having any power to
rebuke an elder, to receive an accusation against these (...) teachers, and so
prevent the bad effects of their endeavors to draw away disciples after them;
that he has not authority to call to account, even (...) private christian, or
judge and censure the meanest offending member in his church? Most certainly it
would. But equally impertinent will the apostles' charge to these ^^ders
appear, unless we suppose they had power to call to account, and to censure
these false teachers, and so prevent the evils, he foresaw would otherwise
arise.

THIS power therefore most certainly they had. A power of "receiving an
accusation against as elder," against any of their own number, "any that should
arise from among themselves;" and if found guilty, "of rebuking them openly
before all, that others might fear;" a power, in short, of putting to silence
false or scandalous ministers, and of laying on hands upon others and ordaining
them in their stead. -- This power they had equally with Timothy, which though
not so particularly expressed, is yet as necessarily included in the charge
given to them, as in that given to him. Besides, Timothy himself was certainly
ordained by such elders, as has been already proved, and therefore these elders
had the same power to ordain.

AND as to "the one solemn charge more" so very remarkable, mentioned by our
author as given to Timothy, viz. "of keeping the commandment till the coming of
Christ," since he himself tells us "that this is of like nature with the
promise to the apostles, that Christ would be with them to the end of the
world;" it is evident from what he expressly allows elsewhere, that this must
belong to these presbyters, equally with Timothy, even upon supposition Timothy
was their superior. -- For, speaking of this promise, he says; "though it might
with more propriety be confined to the apostolic office, than to the other, i.
e. that of presbyters; yet we allow that it extends to both, as both are to
continue to the end of time." As this charge therefore is what he calls, when
applied to Timothy, "a charge, not merely personal, but such as had relation to
the office he sustained;" and as this, according to him, "is peculiar to those
officers of Christ, who have power to constitute other officers in the
church^^" it undeniably follows from his own concession, that these elders,
even though inferior to Timothy, had power to constitute or ordain other
officers in their church; "for to their office, he tells us, was the promise
and charge given, as well as to that of the apostles, since both are to
continue to the end of time;" consequently these elders, having his own
characteristic of those who had power to constitute others, must be invested
with the power of ordaining by his own concession: And so upon his own
principles, presbyterian ordination is scriptural, "and, to use his own words,
the dispute is at an end."

4. THAT Timothy could not be the bishop of Ephesus, left there with ordaining
power, etc. is evident from Mr. L's own definition of an officer vested with
that power. For he tells us "that at the time in which the scriptures were
wrote, none had power to ordain ministers in Christ's kingdom, but those only
who are in scripture called apostles." Again: -- "Let it be carefully remarked,
that those who were commissioned to send others, were called apostles in the
time when the New Testament was penned." Page 10.
This then, with him, is absolutely essential to the character of those who had
power to ordain at that time, viz. that they are in scripture called apostles.
But now Timothy is no where in scripture called an apostle, and therefore,
according to his own definition, could not be left at Ephesus with power to
ordain. Pity it is he had not thought of this. It would have saved him all the
learned labor of his "direct proof of episcopacy." And though it would have
deprived him of the pleasure of those confident triumphs, with which the
conclusion of it is ornamented, and robbed him of the applause which his
zealous admirers lavish upon this part of his performance more especially; yet,
in the judgment of the impartial, "his book would have been as good as it is
now, though not quite so long."

BUT perhaps he will endeavor to prove, for he told us he designed it, though
it should seem, he afterward forgot his promise, "that Timothy was admitted to
the apostolic office." But if he was, why is he never called an apostle? Paul
frequently joins him with himself, in the inscription of his epistles. And
though he takes to himself the name of apostle, yet, it is remarkable, he never
once gives it to Timothy. His style is, "Paul an apostle of Jesus Christ, and
Timothy a brother." 2 Cor. i. 1. Col. i. 1.
Now how can this be accounted for if Timothy was an apostle? Would the meek,
the humble St. Paul arrogate to himself the honorable title of apostle, and
deny it to Timothy, to ^om it was equally due? Most certainly not. Besides, if
Timothy was an apostle, he was equal to St. Paul. But that he was not, is plain
from the authority Paul exercises over him. He every where treats him, not as
an equal, but an inferior. He writes epistles to him, in which he warns,
directs, charges, commands him, in the most authoritative manner. Orders him to
come to him, to bring his cloak, his books, his parchments, and personally to
attend upon him. 1 Timothy iv. 18, and iv. 16, and vi. 13, 14. -- 2 Timothy iv. 1, 9,
13.
Is this the language of one to an equal? Especially one of St. Paul's meek and
humble spirit? Certainly not. Timothy therefore was not, could not be an
apostle, consequently, if Mr. L's doctrine be true, could not be left at
Ephesus with ordaining power; since ^one, according to him, but apostles, and
so called in scripture, had power to ordain. In short, Paul exercises the same
authority over Timothy, and that even in those directions and charges, on which
however, our author founds his episcopal or apostolic character, as he does
over the elders of Ephe^us. This would incline one to think, Timothy was
superior to these elders in no respects. -- But if he was, yet, --

5. HE was an evangelist, and therefore could not be, as Mr. L. supposes, a
resident governor or fixed bishop in Ephesus, or any other place. That he was
an evangelist, we learn from 2 Timothy iv. 6. Now the work and business of an
evangelist was utterly inconsistent with a fixed relation to any church, as its
stated pastor or bishop. He was a kind of subordinate apostle, an extraordinary
and temporary officer, whose business was to travel from place to place and
water the churches which the apostles had planted. 1 Cor. iii. 6.
Or, as Eusebius expresses it, -- "To lay the foundation of faith in strange
nations, to constitute them pastors; and having committed to them the
cultivating these new plantations, to pass on to other countries and nations."
Eccl. Hist. Lib. 3, chap. xxxi.


THIS argument of Mr. L's for episcopacy, wholly depends upon the supposition
of Timothy's being fixed at Ephesus, over the elders of that church, as their
proper bishop, with ordaining and governing powers. He every where supposes him
to be such a fixed officer in that church. "He enquires, whether Paul has not
given Timothy, a much more extensive charge to be exercised by him at Ephesus,
than he gave to the elders of the same church." Page 39.
Speaks of him "as invested with power over the church of Ephesus," -- and
charged with the government of the church at Ephesus. Page 43, 45.
He every where supposes him to be a fixed officer in that church, and the
whole of his argument depends upon this single circumstance. If he cannot prove
this, all his argument in favor of episcopacy, from the more particular
directions given to Timothy, than to these Ephesian elders, comes to nothing.
-- This Mr. L. indeed does not once attempt to prove. He seems rather to take
it for granted: And so having begged the main question in dispute, proceeds to
argue from it in support of his scheme. And all the evidence that episcopalians
ever bring, in proof of this main fact, is "Paul's beseeching of him to abide
still in Ephesus, while he went into Macedonia." 1 Timothy i. 3.
But does this sound like the language of an apostle to a fixed pastor of a
church? If Ephesus was his stated charge, why is he besought to abide there,
when he could do no otherwise, without neglecting his duty and sinning against
God? And why is he entreated to abide there, only while Paul went into
Macedonia? If he was bishop of that church, a stated residence there was his
indisputable duty, not only for that short period but during life. And he would
need no ^^treaties to oblige him to it, unless we suppose the doctrine of
non-residence, so much espoused by some of his pretended successors, was then
in vogue. But considered as an evangelist, an unfixed itiner^nt missionary,
such an entreaty was highly proper. And such an one, it is plain from scripture,
he was. Accordingly, as he is here desired, by the apostle, to stay, for a
season at Ephesus; so we find him upon another occasion sent to Corinth. 1 Cor.
xvi. 10. He is with Paul again, when he wrote his second epistle to that
church. 2 Cor. i. 1. As also when he wrote his epistle to the Colossians.
Chapter i. verse 1. At Baerea he was with Paul, and ^^ode there still with
Silas. Acts xvii. 14. The word is the same, as is used for his continuing at
Ephesus. UPEMENON, PROSMEINAI.
If therefore, in the one instance, his so abiding makes him bishop of Ephesus;
it equally makes him bishop of Baerea in the other. It Is true he soon left
Baerea, and followed Paul to Athens. Acts xvii. 15. But it is equally true that
he was to stay at Ephesus, only till Paul finished his journey to Macedonia,
and returned to him again. 1 Timothy iii. 14, chap. iv. 13. And in the second
epistle, which was written not long after the first, it is most probable, from
chap. iv. verse 12, that he had left Ephesus already: But if he had not, it is
certain he then left it; for the apostle there calls him away to Rome, and
sends Tychicus, another evangelist to Ephesus. 2 Timothy iv. 9, 12; 21. Ephesians. vi.
21, 22. In 1 These. i. 1. we find him in Athens; whence he was sent to
Thessalonica, and from thence returned back to Athens. 1 These. iii. 1, 2, 6.
After this he removed with Paul to Corinth, Acts xviii. 5. From thence he
accompanied him to Asia and Ephesus. Acts xix. 1. And thence he was sent into
Macedonia. Verse 21, 22. But it would be tedious to follow him, in all his
travels to so many different places. Enough has been mentioned of his unfixed,
itinerant manner of life, to show he was an evangelist, and therefore could not
be a fixed resident officer in any church. The same might be shown as to Titus,
whom episcopalians make to be bishop of Crete, barely because the apostle, for
some short time, left him there for certain purposes. There is the clearest
evidence from scripture, that they were both of them empowered in the work of
the evangelists. And as this was utterly inconsistent with their sustaining a
relation to any particular church, as their fixed pastors or bishops, it is a
clear consequence they did not sustain such relation. Therefore all our author
has argued in support of episcopacy, from these directions given to Timothy, is
nothing to his purpose.

6. As the scripture is wholly silent as to this notion of Timothy's episcopal
care of Ephesus; so there is nothing in any of the ancient fathers to support
this opinion, but much to the contrary. -- Dr. Whitby, who was well read in the
fathers, confesses, as I showed in my sermon, "that as to the great
controversy, whether Timothy and Titus were indeed bishops, the one of Ephesus,
the other of Crete, he could find nothing of this matter in any writer of the
first centuries, nor any intimation that they bore that name." He adds indeed,
"that this defect is abundantly supplied by the concurrent suffrage of the
fourth and fifth." "But these, as Dr. Chauncy justly observes, were times too
far distant from Timothy and Titus, to be relied on for the truth of this fact;
especially, as in these times they had greatly departed from the simplicity of
the gospel." Dud. Lec. page 51.
And if Mr. L's quotations from Iraeneus be true, this silence of the fathers
for 300 years, concerning the fact in question, is a certain evidence it never
did exist. Iraeneus's words, as quoted by our author, are, -- "We can reckon
those bishops who have been constituted by the apostles, and their successors,
all the way to our time. We have the succession of the bishops, to whom the
apostolic church was committed in every place." Page 51.
Now since, Iraeneus lived in the second century; if they had in his time, as
he declares, "the true succession of bishops in every church, and yet in there
is nothing to be found of Timothy and Titus the succession for Ephesus and
Crete, as Dr. Whitby asserts; it is an undeniable consequence that they never
were bishops of these churches, let the writers in following ages say what they
will to the contrary.

BESIDES, it is evident from ecclesiastical history, that the apostle John was
at Ephesus, and resided there for a considerable time after Paul's departure
thence, and after the writing the first epistle to Timothy, on which his
pretended episcopacy over that church is founded. Eusebius, upon the testimony
of Iraeneus and Clemens Alexandrinus, affirms, "that he returned to Ephesus,
after his release from banishment, and lived there, and among the Asian
churches, until Trajan's reign." Eusebius. His. cul. Lib. 3, 17, Iraen. adv. Haer.
III. 3.
Now if the apostle John resided at Ephesus, and ruled that church by his
apostolic power, certainly Timothy was not, could not be the supreme bishop of
Ephesus. Consequently all attempts to prove episcopacy from this argument are
to no purpose.

7. AND lastly, we need not recur to ecclesiastical history for proof of this
point. The sacred scriptures abundantly prove, that not Timothy, but the elders
of Ephesus, were the true and only bishops of this church. This is evident from
the account given of them in Acts xx. 17, 36. Before this. Paul had been
successfully laboring for near three years in and about Ephesus. Great numbers
had been converted to the faith. A flourishing church gathered, and elders
ordained. And now that the apostle was about to leave them, never to see them
more; as one deeply concerned for them, since he could not visit the church in
person, he sends for the elders of it, preaches his farewell sermon to them,
and gives him his last directions and charge, in a most solemn and moving
address. -- In all which there is not one word mentioned, or the least hint
given, of setting a single person over them as their bishop. So far from this,
the whole government of the church is expressly committed to them and them
only, in a state of equality. And what is remarkable, though Timothy was
probably now present, not a single word is said of his relation to this church.
No directions are given to him as the governor of it, nor the least hint
mentioned to these elders, to consider and obey him as their superior: But
they, the elders, are the only persons mentioned as the appointed officers in
it. They are expressly called its bishops; yea are declared to be appointed
such by the Holy Ghost. The care and guidance of the church, in all things, is
committed to them, and they are, in the most solemn manner, charged to seed,
teach, rule and govern it, as its only proper pastors or bishops. And what puts
the matter beyond dispute, they are commanded to do this with an express view
to prevent the future disorders which the apostle foresaw, were about to arise
in this church, by "grievous wolves, men speaking perverse things," "thrusting
themselves in," "to draw away disciples after them." This is the express reason
assigned for giving this charge. To prevent this, they are commanded to watch,
to rule and govern the flock committed to their care, and exercise that
authority, which, as its proper pastors or bishops, they are vested with, in
warning their people against those grievous wolves, convincing these
gainsayers, or by exercising their pastoral authority, in way of discipline; to
put to silence these corrupt teachers. But now how inconsistent will all this
appear, if they were not the pastors, but only the subject presbyters of this
church, as our author affirms? What propriety, in giving them, and them only,
this solemn charge, when they had no power, no authority to comply with the
most essential branches of it? How absurd, to direct them in the government and
discipline of this church, both as to private members and corrupt teachers,
when they could exercise no authority over either, and at the same time,
entirely to omit Timothy, to whom, and only whom, upon the episcopalian scheme,
the whole of this business belonged? The supposition is ridiculous. It destroys
the whole force of the apostle's reasoning, and renders his discourse quite
impertinent.

THE apostle, no doubt, had a tender concern for the future welfare and good
government of this church. He had long presided over it in person. He was now
taking his final leave of its officers, never to see them more. Ver. 25.
The elders understood him in this sense. They took leave of him, as their
apostolic father, in a manner most tender and affecting, with many tears.
"Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, that they should see his
face no more." Ver. 38.
This then was the proper time, to provide for the future guidance of this
church and its officers; to provide a single person to succeed him in the
government of it, had this been the scripture model, as our opponents pretend.
Had this been the gospel plan, certainly Paul would not have concealed it from
these elders, especially at such a time as this. He called them to record,
"that he was pure from the blood of all men," "that he had kept back nothing
that was profitable for them, nor shunned to declare unto them, the whole
counsel of God." Ver. 20, 26, 27.
And then immediately adds, "that the Holy Ghost had made them the fixed
overseers, bishops or pastors of this church," without so much as hinting that
any one was to preside over them. Had episcopacy "been profitable to them," the
apostle must have known it. Had it been any part of the "counsel of God," he
must have told them so; for he "kept back nothing of that." Now was the proper
time to have done it when he was giving them his last, his parting directions.
But neither before, nor now, does he mention a word of any such thing. On the
contrary, he expressly commits to these presbyters, in a state of parity, the
whole government of this church, which plainly shows, that diocesan episcopacy
was no part of "the counsel of God," and therefore not of divine institution.

IN this view of the case, the directions given to Timothy, while at Ephesus,
(if indeed he was there when he received them) will nothing weaken the force of
this conclusion: And yet on them, the whole strength of Mr. L's argument
depends. -- For, granting he was there, when he received these epistles; yet
all skillful chronologists agree, they were wrote, long before the convention
of Paul, and the elders at Miletus; and most probably, before the church of
Ephesus was settled according to gospel order, with presbyters appointed in it.
If this was the case, the directions must be sent to Timothy, for there was no
other officer to whom they could be sent. His stay, however, at Ephesus, was
but short at the longest. He was soon called away by the apostle, and there is
no account that he ever returned. If he did, it could not be as their bishop;
for this office was conferred upon the elders, by the express direction of the
Holy Ghost. Vested with this office, the apostle found them, when they met him
at Miletus; and in full possession of it, he left them, when he took his final
leave of them, never to see them more. Judge then, who is to be credited in
this case; our author, who says these elders were only simple presbyters,
without any pastoral authority in this church; or the apostle, who expressly
charges them, to exercise such authority in the government of it! -- Mr. L. who
confidently asserts, that Timothy was their only bishop, to whom they and the
church of Ephesus were subjected, as their single pastor or overseer; or St.
Paul, who assures us, that these were appointed by the Holy Ghost, in parity,
the overseers or bishops of this whole flock! -- "Look into the scriptures.
Judge for yourselves. If what I have advanced, is not fact, it may be easily
exposed. If it is an undeniable truth, it is a truth of great importance, if
religion be so."

I AM now prepared for a few remarks upon some select passages in this part of
Mr. L's defense, which will conclude this section.

HE enquires, -- "If the elders of Ephesus had power to ordain and govern, what
need of sending Timothy there?" Page 43.
leaving him there, he should have said. -- I answer, --

IT does not appear from scripture, that this church had any settled pastors at
this time. But if it had, they needed the divine directions concerning
ordination and government, contained in these epistles to Timothy, as much as
we do at this day. And who more proper to receive, and put them in execution,
than an evangelist, an extraordinary officer, and a faithful companion of Paul?
But till he can prove that Timothy was lest there, as a resident pastor over
that church, as fully as I have, that the elders were, this will be no service
to his cause. Barely his being sent to Ephesus, will not prove this. If so,
Tychicus also was their bishop, for he was sent there as well as Timothy. And
upon the same principle, Timothy must have been bishop also of Corinth,
Thessalonica, Macedonia, etc. for to all these was he sent as well as to
Ephesus. This would be to make him a prelatist as well as a non-resident, and
exhibit a complete idea of modern episcopacy. -- Again, --

HE demands a proof from facts recorded in scripture, "that mere presbyters, in
virtue of their office as such, did ordain officers in the church of Christ."
Page 46, 47.
-- Answer.

IF by mere presbyters, he means, such as those in his church, professedly
subjecting themselves to bishops, and disclaiming all pastoral authority in
ordination and government; none will pretend to prove from scripture that such
ever did ordain. -- And good reason for it. The scripture knows of no such
order. But if he means scripture-presbyters, such as those at Ephesus;
presbyter-bishops, such as Timothy and Titus were directed to ordain; I have
already proved, such presbyters did in fact ordain, and that by virtue of their
office. Of this sort were those, who ordained Paul, Barnabas and Timothy, as I
have already proved, by express facts recorded in scripture. And what is more:
-- The scriptures plainly show, that none but such ought to ordain; they being
the only ministers, authorized by Christ's general commission, and vested with
all the powers it contains.

WHAT he quotes from Mr. Beach, respecting our first ministers, who were
ordained by the English bishops, is no valid objection against this, even
allowing that there was no expressed intention, either in the ordainers, or
ordained, of conveying the power of ordination. For the commission of Christ,
not the intention of the ordainers, is what conveys the power in ordination, as
I showed in my sermon. I now add: -- These first ministers of New England were
ordained, I conclude, in the same manner as Mr. L. and his brethren were.
Either therefore he is no minister of Christ, not being vested with his
commission in ordination: Or if the words used in his ordination, were
sufficiently expressive of such investiture, in his case; they were equally so
in that of our ministers; consequently, they were clothed with all the powers
the commission contains, of which that of ordination is confessedly one.

As to the other part of this objection, the oath of canonical obedience;
though it is far from being true, that this, as he affirms, includes in it "a
solemn promise never to ordain others;" yet allowing it did, such promise,
being evidently sinful, cannot be binding upon conscience, but is ipso facto
null and void. A number of the Jews bound themselves by solemn oath, "not to
eat or drink till they had killed Paul." Acts xxiii. 12.
If this oath was binding, it was their duty to keep it; consequently, murder
is a duty. For the murder of Paul or of themselves, was a necessary consequence
of their keeping this oath. But if it was not binding in this instance, no more
was it in the case he supposes, consequently the objection is of no force.

MR. L. says, -- "Nothing is now claimed by our bishops, but the very same that
St. Paul gave in charge to Timothy. Nothing prohibited to the elders and
presbyters of our church, that he commanded the elders to do, at Ephesus." Page
47, 48.
Is this really the case? Do not their bishops claim a power of administering
the sacraments, of baptism and the Lord's supper? But where will he find this
mentioned in Paul's charge to Timothy? Do not the former claim the power of
confirmation and absolution? But does Paul mention either, in his charge to the
latter? The bishops in their church, claim the whole exclusive power of
ecclesiastical rule or government. But where do we find Paul giving this to
Timothy? On the contrary, does he not expressly charge him, that those
presbyters he was to ordain, should be "men that ruled well their own houses,
that they might be able to rule the church of God?" 1 Timothy ii. 4, 5.
Does he not expressly command, "let the elders who rule well be accounted
worthy of double honor?" Chap. v. ver. 15.
But what occasion for this, if the bishop had the sole power of government? I
add; where does he find the apostle charging his grace, Timothy lord bishop of
Ephesus, "to entangle himself with the affairs of this life:" 2 Timothy ii. 4.
To intermeddle, and bear a chief part in civil matters, to erect courts, and
preside in them, either in person, or by his lay chancellor, for the trial of
all causes, testamentary and matrimonial, etc. etc. etc.? And yet he knows a
set of bishops, pretending to be the only successors of Timothy and the
apostles, who actually claim and exercise all the forementioned powers. Paul
tells the Ephesian elders, "that the Holy Ghost had made them pastors or
bishops over the whole flock," and charges them to exercise the powers of such,
to feed, to rule and govern this church as its proper bishops, to use their
authority, if necessary, in a way of discipline, and prevent false teachers
creeping in, to draw away disciples: And is there any thing, I ask, of this
kind, allowed to Mr. L. and his brother-presbyters in their church? Not in the
least. He himself knows, that by the rules and canons of his order, he is
absolutely prohibited every thing of this kind.

THUS have I answered every thing material in this part of our author's
defense; -- particularly showed, from facts recorded in scripture, that Timothy
neither was, nor could be a fixed bishop of Ephesus, settled there, with
governing powers over these elders; but that this church was most evidently
settled upon the presbyterian plan, -- that St. Paul when taking his leave of
it, never to see it more, very expressly left the entire guidance of it, not to
a single person, not to Timothy, but to these elders in a state of parity;
consequently, that this is the true scriptural plan of church order and
government, and therefore, presbyters, or ordinary pastors, in such state of
equality, have the power of ordination, etc. committed to them.

I HAVE nothing to add, but my most earnest wish and prayer, that the great
head of the church would guide us into all truth, and inspire all protestants,
especially gospel ministers, with the spirit of meekness, forbearance and
charity toward each other, even though not exactly of one mind in all points;
that so, instead of worrying and cruelly condemning our fellow christians, and
thereby, giving advantage against us to the patrons of Popery, infidelity and
irreligion; we may all cordially unite, in opposing the common enemies of
christianity, and promoting the grand and important truths, in which we all
agree.

SEC. VIII. Mr. L's proof of episcopacy from the writings of the fathers,
contained in his appendix, -- from page 49 to 61, examined and refuted.
OUR author proposes, in this part of his work, "to enquire what form of
government prevailed, immediately after the apostles." "To answer this enquiry,
he tells us, he will exhibit a few extracts, from the ancient fathers."

HIS first extract is, from that truly ancient apostolic father, archdeacon
Echard of England, who flourished about A. D. 1699. But what purpose this
extract is designed to serve, the reader must determine for himself, for I am
not able to help him.

HIS next is from Eusebius. He, I own, is one of the fathers; but far from
being an ancient one: For he lived in the fourth century. And as he himself
tells us, in his history, "that he could trace no footsteps of any going before
him, only in a few narratives," Lib. I. cap. 1.
there is little dependence upon what he says, of things so remote from his
time. However, the passage quoted is this: -- "St. John, being by Domitian's
death, released from banishment, returned, and took the care of the church of
Ephesus; and upon the invitation of the neighboring churches, who had enjoyed
only the ministry of presbyters and deacons, he went to them, and consecrated
bishops," etc. Mr. L's def. page 49, 50.
I have carefully examined the passage in Eusebius, Mr. L. refers to; but find
it very different from what he has quoted. None of the words, set down in
italics, are to be found in the original. The passage truly rendered, is as
follows. Speaking of John, he says, -- "After the tyrant's death, he returned
to Ephesus; and being invited so to do, went also among the neighboring
nations, where he appointed bishops, established regular and complete churches,
electing to the clerical office whomsoever the Holy Ghost pointed out for the
same." Eusebius. eccl. hist. Lib. III. cap. 23.
Though I will not charge Mr. L. with dishonesty, in thus pretending to quote
from Eusebius, what is not to be found in him; since it is possible he might not
have leisure to consult the original, but taking the translation upon trust,
set down the passage as he found it, in some episcopal writer; yet every one
must see, the words added, in Mr. L's quotation, entirely alter the sense of
the passage, and make it evident it was done, by somebody, to favor episcopacy,
and impose upon the unlearned reader. With the addition of the words, -- "who
had enjoyed only the ministry of presbyters and deacons;" the passage does
indeed seem to favor the doctrine of three orders in the ministry; but let it
be read without this corrupt addition, and then let the intelligent reader
judge, what it is to Mr. L's purpose; or whether any other eight lines, taken
at random, from Eusebius, or any other author, will not as effectually prove
episcopacy, as these here quoted? Stripped of this addition, the passage
mentions but one officer, viz. a bishop in these churches; and as that, in
scripture, means the same as presbyter, by his own concession, it can be
nothing to his purpose.

HIS next quotation is from Irenaeus, -- "That Polycarp was constituted by the
apostles in Asia, bishop of the church at Smyrna." Answer: -- St. Paul, whose
authority is at least equal to that of Irenaeus, tells us, "that the Holy Ghost
constituted the elders of Ephesus, bishops of the church of Ephesus." If
therefore Polycarp's being call I bishop, proves him such in Mr. L's sense of
the word; these elders must be so too. But then what becomes of his main
argument for prelacy, from Timothy's being bishop of Ephesus? Or if he still
denies these elders to be bishops, though they are called so, the same he must
do as to Polycarp's. And so this extract fails him also.

BUT he tells us, the design of Irenaeus was to prove a succession of apostolic
doctrines, "but his argument is equally good in favor of a succession of
bishops." And this, he says, will prove "that bishops were superior to
presbyters." Answer: -- Not till he proves there were, besides these here
called bishops, any presbyters in that church for them "to be superior to."
Irenaeus, in the passage quoted, mentions but one order only. This extract
therefore, is so far from helping Mr. L's scheme of three orders, that it is
wholly in favor of our's which has but one.

THE same answer also will serve, for his three next extracts from Irenaeus. As
there is no mention made in either of them, of more than one order, viz.
bishops, nor the least hint given concerning any other; it must be presumed,
that Irenaeus knew of none, but such bishops or presbyters as are mentioned in
scripture. Consequently that the doctrine of three orders, and Mr. L's diocesan
bishop, was a stranger in the time in which this father lived. I shall only
just add: -- That Mr. L's translator, has again served him ill. For in the
first of these quotations the words of Irenaeus, as recited by Eusebius, are
not "that Clement is he of whom mention is made Philip. iv. 3," as Mr. L. has
it; but "that Linus is he, of whom Paul makes mention in his epistle to
Timothy." Eusebius. eccl. Hist. lib. v. cap. 6.


HIS next extract is from Jerome, -- "Quid facit excepta ordinatione, episcopus,
quod presbyter non facit?" "What can a bishop do, except ordination, that a
presbyter may not do? Had Mr. L. answered this question, according to his own
principles, the reader would, at once, have seen, how very little it was to his
purpose. For is there nothing in the church of England, ordination excepted,
but what is common to the presbyter and bishop? Certainly there is Mr. L's
bishop can confirm, hold spiritual courts, exercise discipline, etc. But is a
presbyter allowed to do those? Nothing less. But Jerome does not even insinuate,
that ordination belongs only to the bishop, by divine right. And had Mr. L.
read the epistle, from whence these words are taken, he must have seen, that
the whole scope of it is to prove, that in the apostles times, bishop and
presbyter were the same, both in name and office. -- This he asserts, in so
many words, and proves it from the same texts and topics, as are used by
presbyterians at this day; and then goes on to show, how, when, and upon what
occasion the government of the church was altered afterward. "That one was
afterward chosen, who should be set over the rest, he tells us, was done as a
remedy against schism." Hieron. Epis. ad Evagr. Tom. II. p. 109.
When therefore he uses the words Mr. L. has quoted, he evidently does it to
show "what was the practice of the church in his time;" not what prevailed in
that of the apostles. It Is pity Mr. L. will not be at the pains of reading the
fathers himself. It might, perhaps, save his friends many a blush upon his
account.

THE next church he mentions, as upon the episcopal model, is that of Antioch.
"In this, he tells us, was a number of believers, whom the apostles, Paul, and
Barnabas, "took the government of for some time." Strange! Two bishops in one
church at once! How different the modern episcopacy from the ancient! Formerly
one church could boast two bishops, and both apostles. But their successors, it
seems, have made such improvement in the prelatic art, that one bishop now will
serve for more than an hundred. This must be ancient episcopacy inverted.
However, this was not the case long. "Paul and Barnabas, he says, were soon
succeeded by Peter." What, Peter bishop of Antioch! We though it he had been
metropolitan of Rome. But this was not long. "Euodius soon takes his place; to
whom succeeded Ignatius;" whose epistles, we are told, contain the very model
and marrow of modern episcopacy. Accordingly our author is longer upon this
favorite patron, than all the rest of the fathers; though I think he gives us
but one or two extracts from him, and them but short. Page 52, 53.54, 55, 56.


As to the epistles ascribed to Ignatius, Mr. L. must know, if he has read Dr.
Chauncy's sermon, that they lie under very strong suspicions of forgery, or at
least of great adulteration and corruption. This the Dr. largely shows in his
appendix, and offers such arguments in support of the charge, as makes it, at
least very highly probable, if not certain this was the case. These, Mr. L.
does not attempt to answer. He indeed tells us, "that bishops Beveridge and
Pearson have fully confuted, Messrs. Daille, L'arroque, and all others, in
whatever they have advanced against these epistles." -- And I can tell him
"that L'arroque undertook to answer Beveridge and Pearson, as appears by a
manuscript found among his papers, in which he had made great progress; but at
the desire of several persons, who leaned too much to be episcopal cause, he
did not finish this reply." Nov. Rep. Lit. Tout. l. Art. 5, p. 56, 57.
A victory obtained by such arts as these, can do no great honor to the
conquerors. This story, Mr. L. if he pleases, may confront with his, concerning
Bl^ndel in page 69 of his book.

BUT if we should allow these epistles to be genuine, they will really make
nothing in favor of diocesan episcopacy, but much against it. It Is true, they
frequently mention bishops, presbyters, and deacons: But then it is equally
true, that the bishop described in these, was essentially different from the
diocesan one. The "Ignatian bishop" presided over but one single church, was
therefore no more than a congregational bishop, or pastor of a particular
church: Whereas the diocesan one, presides over many scores or hundreds of
congregations. Again, -- the former had much the same authority over his
presbyters, as the rector of a parish, in the church of England, has over his
assistant curates, who are not pretended to be of a different order, but have
radically the same power with the rector: But the church of England bishop, is
asserted to be a different order from the presbyter; by divine right, superior
to him, and vested with the sole power of ordination and government. A few
extracts from these epistles will serve to prove this. "Let all follow the
bishop as Jesus Christ; and the presbyters, as the apostles." -- "Let none do
any of those things which belong to the church without the bishop." -- "Where
the bishop appears, let the multitude, or congregation be." Ignat. Epist. ad
Smyrn. sec. 8, page 37.
"If the prayer of one or two have so much efficacy, how much more the prayer
of the bishop, and the whole church? He that comes not to the same place, is
puffed up," etc. Ad Ephesians. sec. 5.
"Do nothing without the bishop and presbyters, but when you meet together, let
there be one prayer, etc. run all together as to one temple of God, as to one
altar." Ad Magnes. sec. 7.
"Where the pastor is, there do you, as sheep follow." Epist. ad Philadelph.
sec. 2.
From these passages it appears, that the diocese of the Ignatian bishop, was
no larger, than could meet together in one place, for public worship, with the
bishop and presbyters. But it is impossible for a modern diocese, consisting of
some hundreds of congregations, to attend divine service in one place.

AGAIN: -- It is plain, from these epistles, that the sacraments were not to be
administered, but in the presence of the bishop. "Let that eucharist be
accounted valid which is celebrated in the bishop's presence, or by his
permission; where the bishop appears, let the multitude be; -- it is not lawful
without the bishop, either to baptize or to make a love feast." Ad Smyrn. sec.
8, p. 37.
"Take care to use, or frequent, one eucharist; for there is one flesh of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and one cup for union in his blood; there is one altar, as
there is one bishop." Ad Philadelph. sec. 4.
"Since every one of you by name, with common consent, meet together, -- that
you may obey your bishop and the presbytery, with an undivided mind, breaking
one loaf, which is the medicine of immortality." Ad Ephesians. sec. 20.
From these passages it appears, that as every altar, or communion table, had
its bishop; so all the communicants, in his whole diocese, steadily met
together with the bishop, to receive the sacraments, and that it was not
allowed to receive them, but from his hand, or in his presence. But now, how
different is the case from this in the church of England? There, one bishop has
many scores or hundreds of communion tables in his diocese, and a great many
thousand communicants; for whom it would be absolutely impossible, to attend
the communion at one table, with their bishop, and receive the consecrated
elements, at his hands, or in his presence.

MOREOVER, the Ignatian bishop took care, i^ person, of all the poor of his
diocese; which plainly shows it was but a single congregation he presided over.
Thus Polycarp, bishop of Smyrn^, is commanded to do. "Let not the widows by
neglected: Be thou, next to the Lord, their guardian. Let nothing be done
without thy will. Let your religious assemblies be more frequent. Enquire after
all by name. Do not proudly overlook the menservants and maidservants."
Epist. ad Poly. sec. 4, p. 41.


I MIGHT easily fill several pages with extracts to the same purpose. But these
are abundantly sufficient to show, that the bishop described in these epistles,
was not, could not be a diocesan bishop, but only a pastor of a single
congregation, agreeable to the practice in our churches. And notwithstanding
all the bustle made, with these epistles, by episcopalians; should the
episcopacy described in them, once take place; it would be as certainly ruinous
and destructive, to the English ^ierarchy, as that contained in the scriptures,
and ^ractised in our churches, would be. Then there ^ould be no longer, any of
those large and over^rown bishoprics, so much, and so justly com^ained of,
even by episcopalians themselves, con^^ning some hundreds of churches and
congregations, with but one single pastor to watch over, to ^spect, and govern
the whole: But every con^regation, every church, would have its own par^^cular
pastor for these important purposes; as the presbyterians actually have. Hence
it will follow; ^^t the episcopal ordinations at this day, are by (...) means
the episcopal ordinations of the Ignatian (...), being performed by a sort of
bishops, un^own at that time, and whose authority is incon^tent with, and
destructive of, that of the Ignatian ^^^hop: Whereas, the ordinations, called
presby^^rian, are truly episcopal ones, in the language of (...). They are
performed by such parish^^stors, as Ignatius's bishops were, having the (...)
charge, the same office, and power, as his (...). And therefore, to press
Ignatius into the (...) of diocesan episcopacy, and argue from the ^^^hop's
power, as described by him, in support of (...) which modern bishops claim, is
but to im^^se upon the reader, by mere sounds instead of ^^guments.

WHOEVER would see more upon this argument, ^ould recommend to them the perusal
of Mr. ^^yse's "clear account of the ancient episcopa^y," and, "an enquiry into
the constitution, dis^^pline, unity and worship of the primitive church," (...)
to be wrote by Sir Peter King. These au^^ors, especially the former, have
collected every thing from Ignatius, relative to the subject, and clearly shown
that the Ignatian bishop was but a pastor of a single congregation, and
therefore can afford no countenance or support of modern episcopacy.

OUR author (...) mentions Clemens Alexandrinus, as declaring in favor of his
scheme: Page 56.
But as he uses, not Clement's words, but his own, and refers to no particular
place for what he advances; it may be sufficient to tell him, that when he does
this, it will be then time enough to answer him.

HIS next voucher, is Clemens Romanus. He is made to say, "To the high priest,
his proper offices were appointed; the priests had their proper order, and the
Levites their peculiar services, or deaconships."

I GRANT there are words to this purpose, in Clement's epistle to the
Corinthians: But that "he applies these words, as Mr. L. says, to the orders in
the christian church," I utterly deny. I have carefully examined every thing in
this epistle, (...) to this point, and can find nothing that looks like such
"an application:" And I challenge Mr. L. or any one else to point it out. As
Mr. Pierce justly observes, "there are no signs of ecclesiastical monarchy, to
be found in Clement. A presbyterian can hardly describe our opinion, more
clearly, and fully, than in his words. Every thing he says, of the form of
ecclesiastical government, exactly agrees with scripture. -- He never
distinguishes presbyters from bishops; but these names signify the same with
him, as they do also with the sacred scriptures. He makes the church of Corinth
to be subject, not to one single person, but to a company of bishops or
presbyters." Vind. page 351.
He reproves the Corinthians, for making an opposition against their
presbyters, and casting them ou^ of their episcopal office. Which plainly
shows, th^^ with him, bishop and presbyter are the same office, as they are in
scripture. And having exhorted them to peace, and subjection to their spiritual
guides; the more deeply to impress their minds with this exhortation, he tells
them, "that the apostles, receiving instructions, and being sent out by Christ,
-- went forth, declaring the glad tidings of the coming of the kingdom of God;
and preaching through countries and cities, they constituted the first fruits
of their ministry, for bishops and deacons of those that should afterward
believe, having by the spirit approved them." Clem. Epist. ad Cor. i. c. 42.
And, as if he wrote on purpose, to guard against the high claims of modern
episcopacy, having mentioned in the next chapter, "how the tribe of Levi was
chosen for the priesthood, by the budding of Aaron's rod," he adds in the
chapter following -- "And our apostles knew by Jesus Christ our Lord, that
contentions would arise about the name, (or on the account) of episcopacy; and
for this cause, being endued with certain foreknowledge, constituted the
foresaid persons, (i. e. bishops and deacons) and moreover gave orders, that
other approved men might succeed in the place of the dead, and execute their
office." Ibid. c. 44.
Now who would expect a writer that could talk thus, should be pressed into the
episcopal service? This epistle of Clemens, is justly esteemed, one of the most
genuine and valuable pieces of antiquity. And as he is one of the earliest of
the fathers, living about A. D. 65, or 70, and supposed to be the same
mentioned by Paul, as one of his acquaintance, and fellow laborers, in his
epistle to the Philippians; Cap. 4, v. 3.
so it is remarkable he mentions the same church officers only as of divine
institution, that Paul himself salutes in the beginning of the same epistle,
viz. bishops and deacons: Phil. i. 1.
Moreover, he uses the names "presbyter and bishop" premiscuously for the same
office, as Paul also does in his epistle to Titus. Tit. i. 5, 7.
This clearly shows that the name bishop, in his time, had not got to be an
appropriated term, to signify an officer, distinct from, and superior to a
presbyter; consequently that he was unacquainted ^ith diocesan episcopacy.

MR. L's last testimony from the fathers, is from Jerome. "What Aaron and his
sons and the Levites were in the temple; that same are bishops, presbyters and
deacons in the christian church." Page 57.
Had Mr. L. read Jerome himself, and not trusted to some detached scraps, badly
translated by others, he must have seen that Jerome is so far from favoring
episcopacy, either in this epistle to Evagrius, or in his commentaries, that on
the contrary (...) sets himself strenuously to oppose it in both. In his
commentary upon Titus, Tom. 9, p. 103.
having declared, "that presbyter is the same with bishop, that, according to
scripture, one is the name of age, the other of office;" and largely proved,
from the same texts and arguments, as are used by presbyterians, that in the
times of the apostles, "(...) care of the church was equally divided among
many, being governed by the common council of presbyters;" he adds: "These
things are alleged that we might show, that among the ancients, the presbyters
were the same with the bishops, but by little and little, the whole care was
devolved on one, that the seeds of dissension might be plucked up. As therefore
the presbyters know, that by the custom of the church, they are subject to him
who is their president, ("praepositus;") so let bishops know they are above
presbyters, more by the custom of the church, than the real appointment of the
Lord; and that they ought to rule the church in common. Again: -- "Among the
ancients, bishops and presbyters were the same; for one is the name of dignity,
the other of age." Hieron. Epist. ad Ocean. Tom. 2, page 106.
I might fill pages with quotations from him to the same purpose. And as to the
passage Mr. L. has here quoted from him, if he will read what a dignitary of
his own church has said upon it, Dr. Stilling, ^eren. page 265.
he will at once see that it is nothing in support of his cause. He will there
see, that the whole drift of the epistle is to chastise the arrogance of one,
who had pretended, that deacons were superior to presbyters. To confute this
notion, he largely proves from scripture, that a presbyter is so far from being
inferior (...) a deacon, that on the contrary, he is really equal (...) a
bishop, being the same office, according to scripture account. Whereupon he
immediately ^dds the words quoted by Mr. L. Now can it once be supposed, that a
man of Jerome's good sense, after he had been proving the presbyter's
superiority to a deacon, by showing that he was equal (...), and in fact, a
bishop, should immediately be guil^y of such an inconsistency, as to assert a
bishop to be superior to a presbyter, as Mr. L. by his quotation ^ould make him
to do? It Is absurd to suppose it. "The plain meaning of Jerome, (as Dr.
Stilling^eet observes) is no more than this." "That (...) Aaron and his sons,
in the order of priesthood, were above the Levites, under the law; so bishops
and presbyters, (which are with him the same) in the order of the evangelical
priesthood, are above the deacons, under the gospel: For the comparison runs,
not between Aaron and his sons under the law, and bishops and presbyters under
the gospel; but between Aaron and his sons, as one part of the comparison,
under the law, and the Levites under them, as the other; so under the gospel,
bishops and presbyters make one part of the comparison, answering to Aaron and
his sons, in that wherein they all agree, viz. the order of priesthood; and the
other part, under the gospel, is that of deacons, answering to the Levites
under the law." This interpretation of Jerome's words, will make him consistent;
whereas that of our author, makes him flatly contradict himself; and so cannot
be admitted.

THUS have I particularly examined all Mr. L's testimonies from the fathers,
and, as I trust, sufficiently shown, that they make nothing in support of the
cause he has undertaken to defend: On the contrary, that all he has mentioned,
even Ignatius not excepted, are plainly on our side. More especially is this
the case as to Clemens Romanus, the earliest of all the fathers, as appears
from the above quotations. That Jerome also was full in the presbyterian scheme
of church order and government, the impartial reader, I presume, is by this
time fully convinced. -- I shall add a few more testimonies from some of the
rest, and so conclude the appeal to the fathers.

POLYCARP, next in order of time to Ignatus, A. D. 140, in his epistle to the
Philippians, has these words, "Wherefore you must -- be subject to the
presbyters and deacons, as to God and Christ." Pol. epist. ad Philip. sect. 5,
p. 186.
Here is no mention made, but of two orders of church officers. Not a word of a
bishop, as their superior. All that are named are presbyters and deacons. And
these presbyters had the care and government of the church. For in the same
epistle, he says, "Let the presbyters be full of pity, merciful to all,
reducing those that wander, visiting the sick, etc. abstaining from all wrath,
respect of persons, unjust judgment, etc. not too severe in judgment, as
knowing we are all guilty of faults." Ibid. sec. 6.


JUSTIN Martyr, who flourished, A. D. 155, -- in the clear account he has given
of the churches in his time, has these words, -- "Then is bread and wine
brought to the president of the brethren, after the president has given thanks,
and the whole people made their acclamations, they that are called deacons
among us, give to every one a part of the bread and wine," etc.

AGAIN: -- "On Sunday, those in the city and country assemble together, where
the writings of the apostles and prophets are read, etc. the reader ceasing,
the president makes an exhortation. -- After this, we ^ise and (...) our
prayers, which being ended, bread, wine, and water are brought forth. The
president, according to his ability, offers prayers and thanksgivings. -- The
elements are distributed. -- The rich contribute, the collections are lodged
with the president," etc. Just. Mart. Apol. i. page 97, etc.
A man will here scarce refrain thinking, he is reading an account, of a modern
presbyterian or congregational assembly. No mention of any officers in the
church, but the PROESTOS, president or minister, and the deacons. The former
preaches, prays according to his ability, (therefore not out of a book)
administers the supper; the latter carry about the consecrated elements of
bread and wine, and distribute them to the communicants, exactly agreeable to
the practice in our churches.

MUCH the same account, Tertullian, a presbyter of Carthage, A. D. 200, gives
us of the churches in his time. Having mentioned their assembling for the
purposes of prayer, reading the scriptures, and the exercise of discipline, in
censuring offenders, and excluding them from communion, he says. -- "In all
these things, certain approved elders preside, "who have obtained their office
by merit, not by bribes. Tertul. Apol. c. 59. page 31.
Here again we see, elders, presbyters in parity, not a single bishop,
presiding in the church, even in government, which in the diocese scheme, is
wholly confined to the bishop; the presbyters, (as Mr. L. says) having no power
to govern the church.

IRENAEUS also, (from whom Mr. L. has made sundry extracts, to prove a
succession of bishops from the apostles) in another place, speaking to the
heretics of that age, says, -- "We challenge them to show that tradition, which
was handed down from the apostles, by a succession of presbyters." Iren. lib.
3, c. 2, p. 170.
This proves, that in his time, bishop and presbyter signified the same office,
as in the scriptures: For those, who in Mr. L's extracts, he called bishops, in
this he terms presbyters. -- Again: -- "It behooves us (says Irenaeus) to
hearken to those who are presbyters in the church; to those who, as we have
shown, have their succession from the apostles; who, together with the
succession of the episcopate, have also received the certain gift of the
truth." Upon which Dr. Stillingfleet justly remarks. "What strange confusion
must this raise, in any one's mind, that seeks for a succession of episcopal
power over presbyters from the apostles, by the testimony of Irenaeus? When he
so plainly attributes both the succession to the presbyters, and the episcopacy
too, which he speaks of." Iren. p. 307.


IT would be easy to fill many pages, with extracts to the same purpose, from
these and other ancient fathers, as Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus, Cyprian, the
apostolic constitutions and canons, etc. But these, I trust, are abundantly
sufficient to show, that diocesan episcopacy, was a thing unknown in these
ages: That the more early writers, make no distinction at all between bishop
and presbyter, but use the names promiscuously, to signify the same office,
just as the scriptures do. And even in the latter ones, where some distinction
appears, it was no greater than that between the rector of a parish, and his
assistant curates, who are yet of the same order; consequently, that there is
no foundation for diocesan episcopacy, such as our author pleads for, to be
found in any of these writers: Modern episcopacy was an utter stranger to these
times.

MR. L. utterly denies "that there are any histories, giving an account of any
one single church in the universe, that has been presbyterian from the planting
of christianity." P. 71.
I believe the reader is convinced by this time, that the churches mentioned in
the foregoing quotations, were really upon the presbyterian plan. I shall
adduce a few more instances of the same kind.

IN the church of Alexandria, it appears from Jerome, that presbyters actually
ordained, for two hundred years, from the first planting of it. His words are,
-- "At Alexandria, from Mark the evangelist, to Heraclas and Dionysius, the
bishop thereof, the presbyters always named one, chosen but of them, and placed
in an higher degree, their bishop: As if an army should make an emperor, or the
deacons should choose one of themselves, whom they knew to be most diligent,
and call him ^rch-deacon." Hieron. epist. ad Evagr. tom. ii. p. 109.
Hence it appears, that the bishop of Alexandria, was no more than a
prime-presbyter, of the same office with the rest: No more than an ^rch-deacon,
of the same office with his brotherdeacons; and that even this was conferred,
not by consecration, from the hands of a superior order, but by the presbyters
themselves, who chose and appointed him thereto. If presbyters therefore could
appoint and consecrate their bishop, I hope it will be allowed that they had
power to ordain a brother-prresbyter; consequently that presbyterian ordination
was the original establishment there.

THAT the ancient Gallic or French church was presbyterian, appears from what I
have already quoted from Irenaeus, pastor of the church of Lions in France.
With him, presbyter and bishop are the same office, as they are also in
scripture. And, (as Dr. Stillingfleet justly observes) he attributes, both the
episcopacy he pleads for, and the succession through which it descended from the
apostles, entirely to the order of presbyters, and none other."

THE Irish church also, in the early times of it, was evidently presbyterian.
Certainly it was not episcopalian, of the diocesan kind. Ninnius mentions St.
Patrick's ordaining 365 bishops in that church, in the early times of it. And
Mr. Clarksen shows out of Bernard, and Baronius, that there were, in that
kingdom, well nigh as many bishops as churches. Prim. episco. p. 40.
These certainly could not be bishops of the diocesan kind, who have many
scores or hundreds of churches in their cure; but were evidently congregational
pastors of particular churches, like ours at this day.

MR. L. is at a difficulty to know what I meant, by ^aying "that the church of
Scotland had been presbyterian from the beginning." Def. page 58.
I will now tell him. -- It was not that it was so, barely from the time of the
reformation, as he pretends; but that this was its original constitution, and
continued so to be, till Popery had overrun that and all other churches; from
the errors of which, when a considerable part of Christendom was delivered, by
the glorious light of the reformation; that church immediately resumed her
original constitution of presbyterian government, and has retained it ever
since.

THAT the church of Scotland, was originally presbyterian, is proved by a cloud
of witnesses. -- Prosper Aquitanicus, in his chronicle, annexed to that of
Eusebius, tells us, -- "that Palladius was ordained, by Pope Caelestine, for
the Scots, that had already believed in Christ, and is sent to them to be their
first bishop. Pros. chron. ad ann. 429, No. 4.
The same is also affirmed by Bid, and cardinal Baronius. Fordun an ancient
historian, affirms, "that before the coming of Palladius, the Scots, following
the custom of the primitive church, had teachers of the says and dispensers of
the sacraments, who were only presbyters or monks." Lib. 3. c. 8.
Johannes Major, another ancient historian, says expressly, -- "that the Scots
were instructed in the faith by priests and monks without bishops." De gest.
Scot. Lib. 2.
The same also testifies Hector Boethius. Palladius, he tells us, was the first
of all who exercised any hierarchial power among the Scots, being ordained
their bishop by the Pope; whereas before, their priests were, by the suffrages
of the people, chosen out of the monks and elders." Fol. 132.
Buchannan and Craig testify the same.

I HOPE these testimonies will convince Mr. L. (they certainly will every
candid person) that presbyterianism was the original constitution of the church
of Scotland: And that he will no longer be a^ a loss what I meant by afferting
it was. As a further evidence that the church of Scotland was not originally
episcopalian, we find the church of England, so early as A. D. 816, disputing
the validity of her ordination, because it could not be proved to be episcopal.
For at a counsel held that year, it was decreed, -- "That no Scotchman baptize
or administer the eucharist, in England; it being uncertain whether, or by whom
they are ordained." Full. chapter Hist. B. 2, p. 109.


IN the mean time, I am at a loss to know what he means by saying, -- "that
presbytery was introduced into Scotland, at the time of the reformation, by
rebellion," unless he thinks it must needs be rebellion, for subjects to be
christians or protestants, who are so unhappy, as to have a pagan or papist for
their prince: But if so the greatest part of the English nation, episcopalians
not excepted, were guilty of rebellion, at the glorious revolution. The
parliament of Scotland, opposed the Popish Queen Mary, by introducing
presbytery, at the time of the reformation: The same did the parliament of
England, to the Popish king James the second, in joining with the prince of
Orange, for preserving their religion and liberties, at the time of the
revolution. If then "presbyry was introduced into Scotland by rebellion" in the
former instance; the same was the case as to episcopacy in England, in the
latter. Moreover, if it be rebellion for people to differ from the religion of
their rulers; all the primitive christians, even the apostles not excepted,
sta^ chargeable with this crime; for they all dissented from the religion by
law established. I hope my antagonist is not a rebel: And yet upon the
principles ^e here advances, I da^e not undertake to acquit him: -- For it is
well known, that when he forsook ou^ communion, and became an episcopal
dissenter, he adapted a scheme of religion, different from that professed and
established by the civil rulers of the colony. In charging the church of
Scotland with rebellion, I suppose Mr. L. refers to the association formed in
Scotland, for the settlement of the crown, after the resignation of Mary, queen
of Scots, a bigoted Roman catholic: But bishop Burnet tells us, that many
papists joined with the protestants in that settlement. "So that whatever was
done against the queen, was done, not upon the grounds of the reformation, but
upon a national account: in which all sides concurred." He adds, "In all this
the queen of England had secretly a hand, how much soever it was disguised or
denied." Burn. abridg. Vol. III. p. 299.


OUR author seems to blame me for saying, -- "there has never been any pretense
for lay-ordination in the church of Scotland." "This he says, may be true, and
it may not. If John Knox never was lawfully ordained, the Scotch ordinations
are no better than those in N. England." "This, he says, he supposes, to be the
case." But I must tell him, the good king Edward supposed otherwise, or he
never would, it is presumed, have improved Mr. Knox as his own chaplain, and
offered him a bishopric, as it is certain he did. Pierce's vind. p. 36, Full.
chapter hist. B. 9, p. 6.


MR. L. seems to be sure that episcopacy was the original constitution in
England. If it was, I am sure nothing he has said proves it to be so. -- The
authorities he has brought are by no means sufficient for the purpose. In the
first place, they assert no such thing in the quotations he has made from them.
They only mention that this church had bishops; but whether diocesan ones, or
only scriptural bishops, congregational pastors, they are wholly silent.
Besides, they are testimonies some ten or twelve hundred years too late, to be
depended upon, as authentic vouchers in this case. If St. Paul planted
christianity in England, as many suppose, it is natural to suppose that he would
settle the same form of ordination, he himself had received, and this has been
proved to be presbyterian.

HAVING thus attended our author, in his search after episcopacy among the
writings of the fathers, having particularly examined all his extracts, from
them, and exhibited a number more from the same writings, in support of the
contrary opinion; I now freely submit the whole -- "to the cool and candid" to
determine whether they are of so much "weight in his favor" as he seems to
"persuade" himself they are. The impartial reader will now judge, whether Mr.
L. has been able to find any more solid foundation, on which to erect his grand
fabric of diocesan episcopacy, among the writings of the fathers, than what
appears in the New Testament; consequently, what little reason he had, to be so
very confident of having fully settled the dispute in his favor, by an appeal
to these writers, and that even before he had finished his extracts from them.

UPON quitting his favorite Ignatius, he has these words, -- "But is not this
fact evident and undeniable, from the forecited passages, that in the next age
after the apostles, episcopacy was universally received, in all the churches of
Christ?" Page 53, 54.
What now, I ask, are these passages from whence this fact is so undeniably
evident? Why barely one or two quotations, from the pretended epistles of
Ignatius, without having, as yet given the least intimation, that these
epistles lay under any suspicion of interpolation, adulteration or forgery, and
without afterward examining, or attempting to invalidate, any of the arguments
brought by Dr. Chauncy, to prove their insufficiency, in point of evidence, on
that account. Besides these, Mr. L. had, as yet, brought no testimonies from
any writer, within two hundred years after Christ, except from Irenaeus only;
and these barely some scraps, detached from their connection, and which even
then, favor his cause in sound only, not in sense; as has, I trust
sufficiently appeared, from the foregoing remarks. And yet this is the whole
evidence, on which he affirms it "to be undeniable fact, that episcopacy, in
his sense of the word, was universally received, in all the churches of
Christ." What may not one make to be fact, and undeniably so, upon such
evidence as this? Much to be pitied is the man, who is so far under the
government of prejudice, as to imagine such evidence as this undeniable! Much
more, if his prejudice puts him upon representing that as undeniable evidence
to others, which is truly no evidence at all!

HE goes on: -- "Though this strangely slipped Dr. Chauncy's observation, when he
read the fathers, yet I suppose their testimony may be of some weight, with
those whose observation this point has not slipped." Page 54.


ANSWER: -- Dr. Chauncy never so much as hinted that this fact had slipped his
observation. He well knew that no such fact ever took place within that team of
time, and so must every one else, who impartially reads the fathers. What the
Dr. referred to, when he said, "unless it had slipped his observation," was this,
"that the mode of diction," "bishops, presbyters, and deacons," was ^^t to be
met with, till he come to Clement of Alexandria, who flourished toward the
close of the second century. If Mr. L. will be pleased to point out an
instance, the Dr. no doubt, will readily own "it slipped his observation." 'Till
then, he will have just occasion for blushing, whenever ^e reflects, how
grossly he has perverted the Dr's words.

MR. L. says, "he is surprised that the Dr. should deny, that the ancients
constantly assert the government of the church, to have been episcopal all
along from the times of the apostles, without producing a sentence from one of
the fathers, to support his denial." Page 60.


ONE would think, a man who engages in a public controversy, ought to be so
well acquainted with the rules of disputation, as to know, that it belongs to
those who affirm a fact, to bring evidence in proof of it; not to those who
deny it. -- This was the case here. Dr. Hoadly affirmed a certain fact to be
declared in the fathers. Dr. Chauncy denies they mention any such fact. This he
has a right to do, without proving such denial. The proof lay upon the
affirmer. It lies upon all the advocates of episcopacy in this instance. It has
often been called for: -- But the call has never yet been answered, by
producing so much as a single passage, within two hundred years after Christ,
except from the justly disputed epistles of Ignatius, wherein this fact is
affirmed, either in direct terms, or in words from whence it can be fairly
deduced. 'Till this is done, Dr. Chauncy, and all mankind have a right to deny
the fact. -- Had Mr. L. thought of this, it might have saved him his great
"surprise."

HE adds: -- "Instead of supporting this denial from the fathers, the Dr. has
quoted the opinion of the moderns." Page 60.
Mr. L. is quite mistaken in the design of these quotations. They were bro't
only to show, that in the ages posterior to the second century, and even after
the establishment of episcopacy, it was far from being indubitably clear, that
this establishment, and the practice upon it, had taken place upon the foot of
a divine right. -- And in this view there are none, I imagine, save Mr. L. and
his party, but what will think them pertinent and conclusive.

IN answer to the Dr's demand "of an example of episcopal ordination within the
two first centuries," Mr. L. instances in the ordination of Titus by St. Paul."
Page 61.
But pray how came he by the knowledge that Paul ordained Titus? He affirms it,
and that is all. If he had any proof, why did he not produce it? Sure I am, the
scripture affords him none. But if it did, how will this prove he did it in the
capacity of a bishop? Paul himself was ordained by presbyters: No doubt then he
acted as a presbyter in ordaining Titus, if he acted at all. "But, says he,
that Titus had episcopal ordination, appears from his being left in Crete to
set in order the things that were wanting," etc.

ANSWER: -- These directions given to Titus, no more prove him to be bishop of
Crete, i. e. of a superior order to the elders he was to ordain; than like
directions given to Peter, prove him to be superior to the other apostles.
Besides, those whom he was to ordain, are expressly called bishops. Tit. i. 7.
-- " That thou may ordain elders, says the apostle. He means bishops. In
every city, says he, for he would not have the whole Island committed to one
man; but that every one should have and mind his own proper cure; for so, he
knew the labor would be easier to him, and the people to be governed, would
have more care taken of them; since their teacher would not run about to govern
many churches, but would attend to the ruling of one only, and so would keep it
in good order." St. Chrysostom, in Tit. iii. 6. To the same purpose speak
Theophylact and Oecumenius.
He himself was no more, therefore could not be their superior, consequently
not their bishop, in Mr. L's sense of the word. But if he was, how does this
prove that he himself received episcopal ordination? This, if I understand it,
is Mr. L's argument: Titus himself was a bishop; therefore, he was ordained by
one, or had episcopal ordination. But how does this follow? Paul and Timothy,
he allows, were bishops: And yet, it has been proved, and that from scripture,
that they were both ordained by presbyters. And from Jerome it appears, that he
whom they called bishop, in the church of Alexandria, was chosen from among,
and set apart to his episcopal office by his presbyters of that church, for two
hundred years, in the beginning of it.

AN example of episcopal ordination, not from scripture, but from the fathers
of the two first centuries, was what was demanded. Mr. L. says he could produce
many. Why has he not then done it? Was it for want of inclination, or ability?
-- Doubtless the latter. Thus after all his boasted appeal to the fathers, they
afford him as little relief, as the scriptures do.

SEC. IX. Examination of Mr. L's appeal to the first reformers for his divine
right of episcopacy, -- from page 61 to 65.
IN both the pieces Mr. L. undertook to answer, it was observed, that this
doctrine "of the unalterable divine right of episcopacy," was a stranger to the
first reformers, even in the church of England. This was done with a view to
expose the bigotry of those anathematizing zealots, the modern sons of that
church, who, like Mr. L. unchurch and unchristianize all the protestant world
but themselves. Sundry testimonies were adduced, from the first reformers and
latter writers of the church of England, both bishops and others, to prove that
this was not the doctrine of that church, at the time of the reformation, and
many years after. -- That though for reasons of state, they concurred with the
episcopal settlement in England; yet they did not look upon it to be of divine
right, or so essential as to nullify all ordinations, unless those performed by
bishops, in their sense of the word. And it was particularly showed, that the
first who publicly maintained that uncharitable antichristian doctrine, was
the famous archbishop Laud, of papistical and persecuting memory; and that he
was publicly rebuked by his superior for so doing.

MR. L. declares himself of the same principles, and undertakes to defend them,
by an appeal to the first reformers. Let us examine his proofs.

HIS first is from archbishop Cranmer, in these words, "We read not that any,
not being a bishop, has, since the beginning of Christ's church, ordained a
priest." If by bishop, is here meant a congregational bishop, all presbyterians
will agree, that none but such have power to ordain: But then it will be
nothing to Mr. L's purpose. -- But if a diocesan bishop is intended, then all
that Cranmer can be supposed to mean is, that the business of ordaining has
been confined to such bishops, not as solely vested with that power by the law
of Christ; but only by human appointment, and the custom of the church. For
bishop Burnet assures us, that Cranmer's opinion was, -- "That bishops and
priests, were at one time, and were not two things, but one office, in the
beginning of Christ's religion." Hist. Refor. Vol. I. collec. page 223.
If they had one office, they had one and the same power: All therefore, that
Cranmer intends is, that this work of ordination, which was originally common,
had been, by the custom of the church, appropriated to bishops. This
interpretation makes Cranmer consistent, whereas Mr. L's involves him in a
plain contradiction.

HIS next extract is from bishop Jewel, in these words, -- "We believe that
there be diverse degrees of ministers in the church, whereof some be deacons,
some priests, some bishops." That Jewel here only asserts a matter of fact, or
what were the officers then in the church, not a matter of right, or what ought
to be by divine institution, is evident from what he says in his apology.
Speaking of the various degrees of the clergy in Jerome's time, he says, --
"Christ appointed not these distinctions of orders from the beginning." --
"This is the thing we defend, St. Jerome says, let bishops understand, they are
in authority over priests, more by custom, than by order of God's truth. A
priest is the same with a bishop; they are both one thing, and the churches
were at first, governed by the common advice of priests." Apol. part. 2, c. 3.
This plainly shows that in the passage quoted by Mr. L. he does not mean to
declare his belief of the divine right of three orders; but only to assert a
matter of fact; and so is no proof that Jewel owned the divine right of
episcopacy.

BUT Mr. L. supposes, this is proved to be the doctrine of the reformers, from
the preface to the book of ordination. "It is evident to all men diligently
reading the holy scriptures, etc. -- that there have been these three orders of
ministers," etc. Page 63.
Upon which he observes, -- "It must be evident to any man of common sense,
that the reformers, who composed this preface, believed the three offices of
bishops, priests and deacons, to be of divine right, or none of them to be so;
for they as positively assert that all are, as that one is." Answer: -- They do
not assert that this one is. This preface only asserts a matter of fact; that
there had been such orders from the apostles times. It does not declare that
these three orders are of divine unalterable right: -- Nor does it determine
what kind of bishops were from the apostles times, whether diocesan, or only
parochial. And if Messrs. Hoadly and Ollyffe, two episcopal divines, may be
allowed to understand the sense of this assertion, as well as Mr. L. it will be
nothing to his purpose. Mr. Ollyffe in his answer to Mr. Calamy, speaking of
this very preface, says, -- "The proposition of this rubric is formed or
expressed, with as great a degree of latitude or moderation, as ever could be
expected, from an episcopal church. It says nothing of divine right or
appointment. That is Mr. Calamy's addition, as Mr. Hoadly well observes. It
says nothing of the distinction of their powers and officers; or whether they
have been every where in every church or no: But only, that from the apostles
times, there have been these orders, etc. -- From which, the most that can be
inferred is, that in such churches where there has been need of them, or
occasion for them all, there have been three such ranks of ministers, for the
government and instruction of Christ's church, from the times of the apostles;
which yet by Mr. Calamy's leave, does not prove a divine appointment of all,
(however otherwise it may appear to him) there having been other things, in the
apostles days, which yet, for all that, are not allowed to be of divine
appointment." Here we see Mr. L's uncharitable interpretation of this preface,
as though it meant to nullify all ordinations, save those of the episcopal
kind, stands expressly condemned, by two celebrated divines of his own church.
As their interpretation is more charitable and christian-like, than Mr. L's; I
presume every person of candor will judge it the true one; and consequently,
that his argument, founded on such a stingy interpretation, cannot be admitted
as proof, that the venerable compilers of this preface, were of his contracted
and schismatical principles.

THOUGH they here speak of three orders in the church, yet they no where say,
that bishops are by divine right, superior to presbyters: -- Nor is there the
least intimation, that they looked upon all ordinations to be null and void,
unless performed by a bishop. For though they say "no man shall be accounted a
lawful bishop, unless admitted according to the form there prescribed;" yet
this is expresily limited "to that church of England." All therefore that can
be meant by this, is no more than a declaration, who they will allow to be
accounted lawful bishops of the national church of England: But this is no
proof that they believed the divine right and absolute necessity of diocesan
episcopacy, or accounted those churches to have no valid ministry and
ordinances, that are without it, as Mr. L. does. The contrary of this, is
undeniably evident from their practice, as I shall show.

OUR author's last argument, to prove that the reformers were of his
uncharitable sentiments, in this point, is taken from the 3d, 7th, 8th, 9th,
and 11th, canons of their church, which he has quoted at large. Page 63, 64, 65.


As the canons of the church of England, as they now stand, were composed at
sundry times; at periods far distant one from another; some in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, some in that of King James, etc. -- Mr. L. should have told us
which class, those he has quoted belonged to: For if they were among the number
of those passed in King James's reign; they cannot be said to exhibit the
sentiments of the first reformers, who had no hand in making them, being dead
many years before. As he has not seen fit to do this, I might justly forbear
any further notice of them, as being nothing to the purpose of his argument.

HOWEVER, allowing they were of the first class, they will by no means prove,
that the compilers of them believed the unalterable divine right of episcopacy,
and denied the validity of presbyterian ordination. The substance of them is,
(for they are too long to transcribe) "that if any person should deny the
church of England to be a true church, or declare her government by bishops,
etc. to be antichristian, or repugnant to the word of God, or upon that
account, or any other, separate himself from her communion, he shall be ipso
facto excommunicated." But now there is nothing in these canons, that will
prove the authors of them believed diocesan episcopacy, to be of unalterable
divine right. They might think it to be lawful, though not expressly of divine
institution; much less that it was absolutely necessary to the being of the
church.

As to the charity of such excommunicating, anathematizing canons, I must leave
it to the vindication of Mr. L. and those of his stamp: For as to myself, I
utterly despair of succeeding in any attempt of that kind. Americans, blessed
be God, have hitherto been unacquainted with such damnatory canons. Their
fulminations in this land, are heard, only like the distant thunders of the
vatican. -- Had not Mr. L's zeal for episcopacy, got the better of his
prudence, I should have judged he would have been more tender of the reputation
of his best constituted church, than thus to expose her nakedness, by bringing
to view these notable canons, in a country where they are so little known.
Perhaps his design was to let us know what we are to expect, if the scheme for
sending bishops to America, erecting spiritual courts, etc. in the colonies,
should take place. -- But to return: --

THE above remarks, I trust, make it sufficiently clear, that it cannot be
proved, either from the preface to the book of ordination, or from the canons,
or indeed from any thing else Mr. L. has quoted, that the reformers were of his
sentiments, as to the divine right of episcopacy. They conformed to the
episcopal church, as established by the king and parliament, as what they though it
lawful, though not necessary in itself, or of any scriptural or divine
appointment. -- That they did not look upon it as of divine institution, is
evident, --

1. FROM their express declarations, both singly, and in a collective capacity.
I have had occasion already to cite some passages from bishops Cranmer and
Jewel, in which they expressly assert it, as their judgment, "that bishop and
presbyter, in scripture, is one and the same." The bishop of St. Asaph,
Therlby, Redman and Cox, declared themselves of the same opinion. Bishop
Morton, in his catholic apology, declares, "that the power of order and
jurisdiction, which the papists ascribe to bishops, does, by divine right,
belong to all other presbyters. And particularly, that, to ordain, is their
ancient right." Cited by Mr. Boyse, Anc. Episco. page 12.
Bishop Bedel says, "that a bishop and presbyter are all one, as Jerome proves
from scripture and antiquity." Burnet's Life of Bedel, page 453, 454.
And then mentions sundry of the ancient fathers, as Ambrose, Augustine,
Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecomenius, and Theophylact, as of the same
opinion. Dr. Reynolds, in his letter to Sir Francis Knolls, mentions bishop
Pilkington, Dr. Humfrey, Whittaker, Bradford, Lambert, and Fulk, as all
declaring the same. To which number we may add, bishop Carleton, Dr. Field, Mr.
Mason, Dr. Forbes and the archbishop of Spolato, who all expressly assert the
validity of presbyterian ordination. Calam. Def. Vol. I. page 104.


To these single testimonies, I will only add, that in the time of the
reformation, the archbishops, bishops, archdeacons and clergy of the church
of England, in their book, entitled, "the instruction of a christian man,"
subscribed with all their hands, and dedicated to King Henry VIII. A. D. 1537,
in the chapter of orders, have these words, -- "In the N. Testament there is no
mention of any other degrees, or distinctions in orders, but of deacons or
ministers, and presbyters or bishops." Burn. Hist. Resor. Vol. I. col. 223.
And King Henry VIII. himself, in his book styled, "A necessary crudition for a
christian man," set out by the authority of king and parliament, prefaced with
the king's own epistle, and published by his command, A. D. 1543, in the
chapter of orders expressly resolves, -- "That priest and bishop, by God's law,
are one and the same, and that the power of ordination and excommunication
belongs equally to both, and of these two orders only, priests and deacons, the
scripture makes express mention." Call. Def. p. 90, 91. -- Boyse anc. Epis. p. 4.


THESE things, I mentioned in my sermon, to which Mr. L. has made no reply. I
now submit it to the candid reader, whether it is possible to suppose, that men
who could express themselves in this manner, were of Mr. L's principles, "that
diocesan episcopacy is of divine right," "and that all ordinations by
presbyters, are a mere nullity."

MR. L's letter-writer, S. J. tells us, -- "the sentiments of the first
reformers, are not to be learnt from some transient expressions of individuals,
but from their public acts." I have here produced instances of both, in which,
as individuals, and as public bodies, they give their testimony for the
scriptural divine rights of presbyterian ordination and government, in terms,
as express and positive, as can well be conceived. -- From these testimonies it
evidently follows, that episcopacy was not established in England, at the time
of the reformation, upon the foot of divine right; but only as a form of
government, suited to the civil institution of the state by which it was
established.

2. THIS fact further appears from the practice of the church of England,
consequent upon said establishment. It is not denied that there have been some
particular members of that church, all along, from the pontificate of
archbishop Laud, to the present day, who, like Mr. L. have espoused this
uncharitable doctrine of the divine right of episcopacy, and the invalidity of
all ministerial authority and gospel administrations, where this is wanting.
But that this is not the doctrine of the church of England, appears from her
repeated practice to the contrary, in admitting ministers to officiate in that
church, who (...) had episcopal ordination. In the reign of King Edward the
sixth, Mr. Knox was improved by him, as his chaplain, and had the offer of a
bishopric, though he had nothing but presbyterian ordination, and not even
that, if Mr. L. says true. In the same reign, Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and
P. Fagius, all foreigners, and who had been ordained only by presbyters, had
ecclesiastical preserments in the church of England conferred upon them,
without reordination. Owen's Plea for Scrip. Ordina. page 118.
Mr. William Whitingham was made dean of Durham, about 1563, though ordained by
presbyters only. Ibid. page 121.
In like manner, Mr. Travers, ordained by a presbyter beyond sea, was seven
years lecturer at the temple, and had the bishop of London's letter for it.
Ibid. page 122.
And even so late as the time of King James I. bishop Bancroft, though a rigid
episcopalian, consecrated Spotswood and two others, bishops for Scotland,
without first ordaining them presbyters, though they had received only
presbyterian ordination; and he alleged this as his reason, "that presbyterian
ordination was valid."

Now is it not abundantly evident from these facts, that the church of England,
as such, is not of Mr. L's principles, as to the point in debate? He asserts
the divine right of episcopacy, and utterly denies the validity of presbyterian
ordination: -- But here we see, the church of England, and her greatest
dignitaries and bishops, not only asserting in words, the validity of
presbyterian ordination; but repeatedly declaring this, to be the sense and
doctrine of that church, by admitting, from time to time, those who had no
other ordination, to the free exercise of the ministry, and placing them in the
highest offices in the church. Whom now shall we believe? Mr. L. who pretends,
from the rubric and canons of this church, to prove that she holds the
unchristian, schismatical doctrine aforesaid? Or she herself, who by her
practice, denies it? Must we not suppose, that the first reformers, the bishops
and dignitaries of the church of England, understand her constitution and
principles, as well as the missionary of Norwalk? -- But, --

3. THAT presbyterian ordination is valid, even in the sense of the church of
England, is evident, from the most public and express acts of the king and
parliament. The church of England is properly a parliamentary church. She
expressly acknowledges the king as her head, invested with supreme power in all
affairs, ecclesiastical. Her articles and canons are all enjoined, by authority
of parliament. 'Till this is done, they are of no force. The parlialiament,
therefore, especially if considered as composed, partly of the bishops, who
have a seat there, must be supposed to understand her constitution, and what
doctrines she maintains. But now the validity of presbyterian ordination has,
in fact, been owned and established, by the king and parliament, at two several
times, Soon after the restoration, A. D. 1661, there was an act of parliament
passed, "declaring and confirming those to be ministers, to all intents and
purposes," who were then incumbents in the several parishes; though many of them
had been ordained, after the bishops were put down in the preceding
administration, and so had only presbyterian ordination. Call. Des. Vol. I. page
216.


AGAIN: -- The same was done, A. D. 1707, by the act of union, whereby England
and Scotland were united into one kingdom. Previous to this, the parliament of
Scotland passed "an act, for securing the protestant religion, and presbyterian
church government in Scotland, to posterity." -- Now this act was made an
essential and fundamental part of the act of union, and so is confirmed by the
king and parliament of Great Britain, and thereby, the presbyterian order and
government of the church of Scotland is as fully to all intents and purposes,
established there, and by the same authority, as episcopacy is in England.
Accordingly, ever since that time, every king of Great Britain, upon his
accession to the throne, is obliged to take the following oath, -- "I G. --
king of Great Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc. -- do
faithfully promise and swear, that I shall inviolably maintain and preserve,
the settlement of the true protestant religion, with the government, worship,
discipline, rights and privileges of the church of Scotland, as established by
laws made there, in prosecution of the claim of rights; and particularly by an
act, entitled, an act for securing the protestant religion, and presbyterian
church government, and by the acts passed, in the parliaments of both kingdoms,
for the union of the two kingdoms." -- "So help me God. -- G. Rex." Dunlap.
Pref. to Westmin. confess. page 63.


HERE again we see, the supreme authority of the nation, king, lords, and
commons, expressly allowing the religion of the church of Scotland, and her
presbyterian form of government, to be the true protestant religion. As such,
they establish it to perpetuity; and the king, by his coronation oath, most
solemnly promises and swears, to protect and desend it. But how could all this
be, if the church of England, and the king as the head of it, really believed,
as Mr. L. says they do, the divine right of episcopacy, and the unlawfulness
and nullity of presbyterian ordination and government? -- Must not the king and
parliament, who are properly the church of England, be supposed to understand
her constitution, on which she was settled at the reformation, and the
doctrines she maintains, as well as Mr. L.? Most certainly they must.
Consequently, since they have so expressly declared, by their most solemn and
public acts, -- "that a church, founded upon presbyterian principles, is a true
protestant church; and as such, have established it, and engaged to preserve
and defend it in perpetuity; it undeniably follows, that the divine right of
episcopacy, was no part of the original constitution of the church of England
at the time of the reformation, or a doctrine since owned by her, as such. What
rashness, what effrontery then, is Mr. L. chargeable with, in so confidently
asserting, as he does, "that the body of the church of England divines, at the
time of the reformation, and I may say, ever since, have constantly believed
and maintained, the divine right of episcopacy?" It Is pity gentlemen of such
uncharitable and schismatical principles, cannot be contented, since it must be
so, to enjoy their unscriptural notions themselves, without vainly attempting
to fix the odious imputation upon others, and thus blackening the memory of the
good old reformers, who detested these doctrines equally with us.

UPON the whole then, if any weight is to be laid upon the most express
declarations of many great and learned men of the church of England, bishops as
well as others, at the time of the reformation, and since, in their individual
capacity, in favor of the validity of presbyterian ordination and government;
-- if any heed is to be given to the repeated instances, in which that church
has, by her practice, owned and approved of that doctrine; -- if any regard is
to be had to public acts of parliament, acknowledging and declaring
presbyterian churches and ministers, to be true, lawful, protestant ministers
and churches; it must be a most clear and indubitable fact, that the church of
England, neither at the time of the reformation, nor since, has espoused and
maintained the doctrine of the divine right of episcopacy; but on the contrary
does expressly own the lawfulness and validity of presbyterian ordination and
government. This uncharitable doctrine, is not the doctrine of the true church
of England. It is believed and maintained, only by some of her degenerate sons;
of which number I am really sorry to find so great a part of her professors in
this country, and Mr. L. among the rest.

SEC. X. Animadversions on Mr. L's appeal to the foreign protestants,
concerning the validity of presbyterian ordination, -- page 63, etc.
IN this part of his work, our author pretends to give us sundry extracts from
the foreign protestants: Not indeed to prove, that these foreign churches are
of the episcopal kind. This he knew was impossible: But though they are
presbyterians themselves, yet that they do not allow our ordinations to be
valid. Now, granting his quotations from Calvin, Beza, Le Main, etc. to be
genuine; which, considering the freedom he uses with other authors, is at least
very doubtful; they will by no means prove that these men denied the validity
of ordination, even among the dissenters in England. What they seem to blame
the old puritans for, is their separating from the established church of
England, not for maintaining presbyterian principles. Besides, it is well known
what arts were used in them times, by the sticklers for uniformity, to solicit
the opinion of foreign protestants in their favor, and get them to
discountenance the separation. "About this time, several letters passed,
between the English divines, on both sides, and several learned foreigners. --
Matters were falsely represented to them, and great arts were used, on the
bishops side, to prevent such persons writing, who they found would not write
in their behalf; and what they thought made for them, they published to the
world in way of triumph. The foreigners were told, that unless they complied
with the things enjoined, they must let in the papists to supply the cures.
Several foreigners therefore dreading that, and hoping these things would soon
be altered, spoke more favorable of them than they deserved." Pierce's Vind.
page 68.
Moreover, these foreign divines knew, that episcopacy was settled in England,
not as of divine right, but only by civil authority. Having this view of the
English hierarchy, they might think it more advisable for their brethren in
England, to submit to it, than to go into a separation barely upon this
account. For it is only on account of this, that they are, in Mr. L's
quotations, supposed to separate, and for which they are blamed. Whereas this
was but one thing, among many, that caused the separation. But what business
had Mr. L. with the dissenters of England? The pieces he attacks, undertook the
defense of the New England ministry, not that of the dissenters in England.
There was no need of it. This has been repeatedly and successfully done by many
able writers of their own. Particularly by Messrs. Baxter, Calamy, Pierce, and
more lately the dissenting gentlemen in answer to Mr. White. Besides, who does
he mean by "the dissenters in this country?" If he intends New England; bating
a few anabaptists and quakers, I know of no dissenters, save those of his
communion. Episcopacy never was established here, though its opposite is, to
the no small mortification of our author and company. If therefore, the foreign
divines had such a regard to peace, as to advise their presbyterian brethren in
England not to separate, even from an episcopal church, by law established: Who
can suppose they would not condemn Mr. L. and party, in separating from the
established presbyterian churches here, and becoming episcopal dissenters?
Wherefore, to come to the question, as he has stated it; that is, "whether our
ordinations in this country are allowed to be valid by the foreign
protestants?" In answering of it I will pursue his method, and "examine their
public constitutions, their general practice, and their private sentiments."

1. FROM the public constitutions of the foreign protestants, it is evident
even to demonstration, that they do and must approve of our ordinations as
valid. If they allow their own to be valid, they must for this plain reason
allow ours to be so; because their constitutions, at least so far as ordination
is concerned, are precisely the same with ours. Mr. L. I trust; need not be
told that our ordinations are strictly presbyterian, agreeable to our
constitution: But the same is the constitution of the foreign churches. "The
protestant churches abroad, says Mr. Boyse, Ancient Epis. p. 281.
are divided into luthetheran and reformed. For the lutheran churches we have
the concord of lutherans printed at Leipsick, containing the confession of
Augsburgh, and the apology for the same -- the Smalcaldic articles, Luther's
greater and lesser catechism." From these authentic writings, we learn what the
opinion of the Lutherans in this point is. The words are, -- "The gospel gives
to those that are placed over the churches, a command to teach the gospel, to
remit sins, to administer the sacraments, and jurisdiction also. And by the
confession of all, even our adversaries, it is manifest that this power, is by
divine right, common to all that are set over the churches, whether they be
called pastors, or presbyters, or bishops. -- Since bishop and pastor are not
different degrees by divine right, it is manifest that ordination performed by a
pastor in his own church is valid." Lib. con. tit. de pot. and jurisd. eccle.
cited by Boyse, page 282.
The confession containing this article was subscribed by three electors,
forty-five dukes, marquisses, counts and barons, the consuls and senators of
thirty-five cities, by Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, Fagius and many other
ministers to the number of eight thousand, says Mr. Calamy. Def. page 90.
It Is the common confession of the Lutheran church throughout Europe.

OF the same sentiments in this point are the reformed churches comprehending
the rest of the foreign protestants. In the Helvetic confession are these
words, -- "One, and that equal power and office, is given to all ministers in
the church. It Is certain that from the beginning, bishops or presbyters
governed the church with common care. -- None set himself above another, or
usurped dominion over his fellow-bishops." Conf. Helv. c. 18.
This confession, as Mr. Boyse says, was approved by the reformed churches of
Scotland, France, Belgium or the Dutch, Poland, Hungary and many in Germany.
Anc. Epis. p. 282.
Dr. Chauncy adds, "those of Myllhusium, Neocome, Geneva, and most of the
protestant churches, except those above mentioned." Dud. Lec. p. 77.


THE French protestant churches, in their confession presented to Charles IX.
say, -- "We believe all true pastors, wherever they are placed, to be endued
with equal power, under that only head, the chief and universal bishop." Art.
30.


IN the Belgic or Dutch confession, we have these words, "In what place soever
the ministers of the word of God are, they have all the same and equal power
and authority, as being all alike the ministers of Christ, that only universal
bishop and head of the church." Art. 31.
Mr. L. need not be told that the article of the church of Scotland is the same
upon this head.

Now can there be a more full and convincing evidence, of these foreign
churches allowing of the validity of our ordination, than this universal
agreement and testimony of their public constitutions in this point? Mr. L. and
those of his stamp, though they renounce our ordinations, yet allow of those
performed in the Romish church. The reason is, because the principles of the
papists, in this respect, are the same with theirs. Episcopacy is the doctrine
of the church of Rome; the church of England therefore allow their ordinations
to be valid, as being the same with her own. But now, with an evidence beyond
exception it appears, that all the foreign protestants are strictly of our
principles, as to the ordaining power; from whence it undeniably follows, that
they must allow and approve of our ordinations, as valid, because they are the
very same as are pointed out, in all their confessions of faith.

2. THIS point is also evident from the universal practice of the foreign
churches. All the Dutch churches throughout the united provinces, the
protestant churches in France, those of Geneva and the protestant cantons in
Switzerland, etc. -- are utter strangers to bishops, both name and thing. All
their clergy are upon a level; all equally exercising the power of ordination,
and every other branch of ministerial authority. And as to those protestant
churches which have officers they style bishops, superintendants or seniors;
they are little more than standing moderators, pretending to no superiority, by
divine right, over their brethren. "All these churches, says Dr. Stillingfleet,
acknowledge no such thing as the divine right of episcopacy, but stiffly
maintain Jerome's opinion, of the primitive equality of all gospel ministers."
Iren. page 411.
-- Nor can they do otherwise; having at bottom no other than presbyterian
ordination among them: For Luther, Calvin, Bucer, Melancthon, Bugenhagius, etc.
-- and the first reformers and founders of these churches, who ordained
ministers among them, were themselves presbyters and nothing else.

THIS again clearly proves, that they do in fact allow our ordinations to be
valid; for they are the same with theirs. Theirs are performed by presbyters,
pastors, by divine right, all in a state of equality: The same also are ours.
If therefore, they allow their own, they must allow ours, which are the same.
And that this is the case in fact, is evident from particular instances of
their practice. In Holland, though they allow a liberty of conscience to those of
other denominations, yet no ministers are supported by the public, but those of
their own profession: But it is an undoubted truth, as I am informed, that they
do in fact support one or more Scotch presbyterian ministers, just as they do
their own. This plainly shows, that they look upon the presbyters in Scotland,
as their brethren, of the same church with themselves, and undeniably proves,
that they allow of their ordination, and consequently of ours in this country,
which is the same. The Dutch churches therefore in Europe, beyond dispute allow
the validity of our ordinations. In America the case is the same. -- Here there
are sundry Dutch churches, originating from, and upon the same constitution,
with the reformed protestant churches in Holland. These allow the validity of
our ordinations. A number of years ago, a young gentleman of Dutch extract,
came to New Haven, and was ordained by our ministers, at the College there, as
a minister for the Dutch churches in the county of Albany. -- This, as my
author tells me, was done by order of the classis in Holland. The Rev. Mr.
Woosly, who was ordained by a number of Connecticut ministers, over the church
and congregation of Southold, on Long Island; after he left that people, and
removed to his plantation, in Oyster-Bay, preached and administered the
sacrament, in a Dutch church in that town, for twenty years together. The same
did the Rev'd Mr. Ketteltas since. He was ordained minister of Elizabeth-Town,
by the presbytery in New Jersey. After he left that people, at the invitation
of sundry Dutch churches in Queen's-County, Long Island, he officiated as their
minister for some time. The same gentleman is now improved in the ministry, in
the French protestant church in the city of New York. Now these are so many
express instances, in which our ordinations have been, in fact, acknowledged
and allowed to be valid by the foreign protestant churches. And yet in direct
opposition to this incontestible evidence, in the very face of these stubborn
and obstinate facts, Mr. L. has the assurance, shall I call it? To tell his
readers "that none of these foreign protestants, (meaning the Dutch, French,
etc.) will admit of a man ordained by our dissenters, (as he calls us by way of
contempt) to administer the sacraments in their churches." "That they condemn,
and find as much fault with our ordinations, as the episcopalians (meaning
himself and those of his high-flying principles) do." "And that our mode of
worship, etc. is condemned by all the foreign protestants." P. 66, 67, 68.
What heed is to be given to the testimony of a man, who thus boldly
contradicts the most glaring facts?

3. FROM the private sentiments of foreign protestants it appears, that they
both approve of our method of ordination and government, and condemn that of
the episcopal church. Gerard, a famous Lutheran divine, says, -- "During the
apostolic age, there was no such thing as a distinction, between a bishop, and
a preaching presbyter." Jamison. naz. quaer. p. 89.
-- Calvin's private judgment in this point, is well known from his
institutions and other writings. -- Heylen, Howel, and other rigid
episcopalians, speak of him as the father of presbyterians, and the most
inveterate enemy of the hierarchy. Ibid. p. 97.
-- Musculus, another learned foreigner, asserts and proves from Acts xx.
Philip. i. and the like texts which we now use, -- "that bishop, pastor, and
presbyter are all one and the same." Jamison. p. 90.
Zanchy, another foriegn divine, and one of the old reformers, professes, --
"that he cannot but love the zeal of such as hate the name of bishop and
archbishop, fearing lest with these names, the ancient ambition and tyranny,
together with the destruction of the churches, should return." Ibid. p. 9.
The celebrated Turretine, Ames, and Wollebius, divinity professors in the
universities of Geneva, Friseland and Basil, all fully declare in favor of our
ordination and oppose episcopacy, not only in the church of Rome, as Mr. L.
pretends, but in general, as unscriptural. Turret. instit. theol. par III. p.
222, etc. -- Ames Med. p. 178. -- Wall. com. theol. p. 139.
To add no more, Beza, who Mr. L. would persuade us is a friend to the English
hierarchy, in his letter to Mr. Knox, minister of Scotland, soon after the
reformation began there, writes thus, -- "But I would have you, my dear Knox,
and the other brethren, to remember that which is before your eyes: That as the
bishops brought forth the papacy; so false bishops, the relics of Popery, shall
bring in epicurism to the world. -- They that desire the churches good and
safety, let them take heed of this pest. And seeing ye have put that plague to
flight timorously, I heartily pray you that ye never admit it again, albeit it
seem plausible, with the pretense and color of keeping unity, which pretense
deceived the ancient fathers, yea even many of the best of them." Jamison. naz.
quaer. page 60.


Now who can suppose, that men of these sentiments, could be friends to
episcopacy? Who can entertain the least doubt of their being, in principle,
strictly presbyterian, when they so strongly express themselves in favor of
the latter, and in opposition, and even detestation of the former? Of the
strong attachment of the French protestants to presbyterian principles, and
their abhorrence of episcopacy, Mr. Hickman gives a striking instance, -- from
Hist. eccles. tom. p. 767. The case was this: -- One J. Antonius Caracciolus,
bishop of Troyes, turned protestant, and appeared before the protestant
consistory, desiring to be admitted to the ministry. And although he had
solemnly renounced and abjured his Romish principles, and in the presence of
the consistory, signed his abjuration of them, and his consent to the
protestant confession of faith; yet they would not receive him as a minister,
until he expressly promised to desert and forsake his episcopal function. This
he accordingly did; whereupon he was received into the ministry. This was done
by the advice of that great and good man, Peter Martyr, who happened to be
there at that time, in his way to Zurich. This therefore shows his opinion of
episcopacy.
If these testimonies, from the public institutions, the universal practice,
and the private sentiments of the foreign protestants, do not amount to a full
proof of their being strictly presbyterian in principle themselves, and of
their approbation, and allowance of our ordinations, as valid and scriptural, I
must forever despair of seeing any fact proved, in any case whatever.

BUT Mr. L. tells us, "the whole that is aimed at, in these confessions, is to
condemn the usurpation of the Pope, not to condemn episcopacy." P. 65. Boyse's
Ancient episcopacy, p. 284.
Answer: It Is evident to demonstration, from the foregoing testimonies, they
meant to condemn both; and that for this plain reason, because both are equally
unscriptural, both rest upon the same foundation. I defy any man to condemn the
Romish tyranny, at the same time, defend the English hierarchy, upon any
consistent principles. -- Episcopacy is episcopacy, whether in England or Rome.
Whoever opposes it in the latter, must, to be consistent with himself, condemn
it in the former. Besides, some of the above testimonies, especially Beza's, as
expressly condemns episcopacy in Great Britain, as at Rome. He calls it the
pest, the plague of the church, and equally ruinous to its welfare in the
former, as in the latter.

AGAIN: -- Mr. L. appeals to the foreign churches, "whether any presbyterian
ministers are maintained by them, etc. -- but only such as have been ordained
according to the method of those churches." Page 66.
Answer: -- Doubtless none but such, are received and maintained by them. And
this again is a clear evidence that they approve of and allow our ordinations
to be valid, and that our ministers and ordinations are the same, in their
opinion, with theirs, since they do, in fact, as has been shown above, receive
and maintain them in their churches, just as they do their own. How injuriously
then does Mr. L. treat the foreign protestants, thus to represent them as
patrons of his unscriptural scheme, and endeavor to fasten upon them, the
odious imputation of maintaining his uncharitable and schismatical principles?
What imposition upon the reader to attempt to beget in him a belief of this
groundless aspersion?

I HAVE now gone through with my remarks upon Mr. L's book. Have very
particularly examin^, and I trust, fully answered every thing in i^ worthy of
notice. Scripture, reason, (...) authentic history, have been my guides through
the whole enquiry; and, unles^ I am (...) mistaken, his principles and condect
(...) condemned by all three. The result i^ -- that neither in the sacred
scriptures, nor the writin^^^ first reformers, the constitutions the opin^^^
and practice of the foreign protestants, not even in the principles of the true
church of England itself, is there the least shadow of a foundation for
diocesan episcopacy, considered as of divine right.

WHEN Christ ascended, he left the eleven apostles, the only ministers of his
church; all vested with the same commission, all equal in power. Authorized by
this commission they went forth, -- preached the gospel, planted churches, and
ordained ministers in them; vested them with the same commission they
themselves bore. No account is to be found of their fixing some in a superior,
others in a subordinate station. The ministers they ordained, were all of one
order, promiscuously called bishops, pastors, or elders. As the general
commission is but one, so one method of introduction into office, one set of
qualifications in order to it, one work or business for them when introduced,
and one only, is to be found in the word of God. This was the order fixed by
Christ, and followed by his apostles. They invariably adhered to that divine
maxim of the great head of the church, -- "call no man your master upon earth,
for one is your master in heaven, even Christ, and all ye are brethren." This
was transmitted to the primitive christians, and observed in the purest and
earliest ages of the church. A defection from this original parity, it is
granted, pretty soon arose. -- "The mystery of iniquity began to work," even
before the apostles were dead. A thirst of dominion and ecclesiastical
pre-eminence, early opperated amongst the ministers of the meek and lowly
JESUS. This increased from less to more, till " that man of sin, the son of
perdition, who exalts himself above all that is called GOD, or is worshipped,"
got himself fairly mounted upon the seven-headed beast, and enslaved all
christendom with his usurped dominion. From this yoke of antichristian
tyranny, when great part of Europe was happily delivered, by the glorious light
of the reformation, the ancient parity among ministers, generally took place.
By far the greatest part of the protestant churches, recurred to the original
scriptural plan of presbyterian order and government. And where in any
instance, as in England, they adopted the episcopal mode, it was not under any
pretense of divine right, but wholly in conformity to the form of government in
the state.

THE above facts are indubitably clear, from scripture, and ecclesiastical
history, ancient and modern. On these facts the reasonings and conclusions are
founded, contained in the foregoing pages. For the truth of the facts I appeal
to the authentic writings aforesaid. For the justness of the reasonings and
conclusions deduced from them, the candid reader is now to determine.

IF diocesan episcopacy be of divine right, it is certainly contained in
scripture. If it be of such vast importance, as is pretended, it must be very
clearly and expressly revealed there. Doctrines of importance, truths essential
to religion, are not left to be collected barely from dark hints and doubtful
expressions; but are clearly revealed, and often repeated, in various modes of
diction, "that he who runs may read them." But is this the case with diocesan
episcopacy? The warmest advocate for it, I presume, will not pretend it is. All
that the learned labor of its ablest champions has hitherto been able to
produce, is barely some dark hints and doubtful expressions, which a fruitful
invention may turn to favor it; but these capable of a more rational
interpretation upon the contrary scheme. And yet to this point of doubtful
disputation, the most essential doctrines and express precepts of our holy
religion, it seems, must be made a sacrifice. That men fulfill their promises,
perform their covenant obligations, and religiously regard their solemn vows,
is not only one of the first dictates of natural religion; but very expressly
and repeatedly enjoined in the word of God. -- But when men, who have solemnly
dedicated themselves to the ministry in our churches, renounce their ordination
vows, and take episcopal orders: When professors among us, who solemnly
promised and covenanted before God, angels and men, to walk in communion with
us, rend themselves often, and join the episcopal separation, under a pretense of
the divine right of episcopacy, who does not see that doubtful points are
preferred to positive precepts; and that more weight is laid upon the former,
than the latter? If this is not to substitute "mint, anise, and cummin, instead
of the weightier matters of the law," it is indeed hard to say what is. And
after all; what is gained, in point of valid ministry and or dinances? Why
truly, upon their own principles, just nothing at all. If our ministers have no
power, then our administrations are invalid, our baptisms a mere nullity. Those
therefore who have been baptized in our churches, are in a state of mere
heathenism, let them conform to what church they will. As this is the case with
most of their ministers in this country, they must, upon this principle, be so
far from being the only regular ministers, that they are not even visible
christians; and instead of being the only persons empowered to dispense gospel
administrations, they have no right even to partake of them themselves.
Consequently all they pretend to baptize, are still in a state of heathenism,
and so all their ministers and churches, as well as ours, in the same wretched
and deplorable condition. -- Who can suppose such doctrines as these, are to be
found in the bible? Who can imagine, claims and principles, productive of such
shocking consequences, have any warrant from the gospel of Christ? A moment's
cool reflection, methinks, might show their absurdity, and give a check to the
advocates of them, in their warmest career of proselyting zeal. Verily,
gentlemen, a little more consistency of principle and conduct here, would not
be amiss. Let us first see you concerned to secure for yourselves, a valid
baptism: Then it will be time enough to press us with the argument of your only
valid ministry. When we see you properly concerned for your own safety, it may
possibly convince us that you are sincere, in your zealous att^^pts to promote
ours.

IF Mr. L. or any other, will just remove these difficulties, and favor us
with a solid, scriptural and thorough refutation of the foregoing arguments, it
will be kindly received, and properly noticed. But if only bold assertions,
false quotations, and a superficial glance, upon here and there a sentence, is
offered to the public, under the specious pretense of a full answer, it will be
treated with deferved neglect.

MAY the Father of lights direct our enquiries, and the God of truth lead us
into all truth. May the saving influences of the spirit of peace and holiness,
so remarkable in the apostles and primitive christians, be shed forth in
plentiful effusions, upon all orders and denominations. That so, however we
differ in sentiments in some lesser things, we may all agree in "choosing the
one thing needful," and finally unite our hearts and voices, in endless
hallelujahs, to our common Lord and Redeemer.

AMEN.

