A COLLECTION OF PAPERS ON THE SUBJECT OF BILIOUS FEVERS, PREVALENT IN THE
UNITED STATES FOR A FEW YEARS PAST.

COMPILED BY NOAH WEBSTER, JUN. MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
AGRICULTURE, ARTS AND MANUFACTURES IN THE STATE OF NEW YORK, AND HONORARY
MEMBER OF THE HISTORICAL SOCIETY IN BOSTON.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY HOPKINS, WEBB AND CO. NO. 40, PINE-STREET. 1796.
[PUBLISHED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.]

CONTENTS.
I. Account of the Yellow Fever in New York in 1795 -- By Dr. Valentine Seaman.
II. Account of the same, by Dr. Elihu H. Smith: to which is prefixed, III. An
account of the Fevers that prevailed in Sheffield, State of Massachusetts, in
1794 and 1795 -- by Dr. Buel. IV. An account of the Fever at Norfolk, Virginia,
in 1795 -- by Doctors Tailor and Hansford. V. Letter from Dr. Ramsay on the
same subject. VI. An account of the Fever at New Haven, in 1794 -- By Dr. Eneas
Munson, and his Son. VII. Dr. Mitchill, on Contagion. VIII. Letter from Dr.
Reynolds, on the Fever in Montgomery County. IX. Remarks on Cleanliness and
Ventilation, by the Compiler. X. Concluding Remarks, by the same.
ADVERTISEMENT.
HAD the following collection of papers been more complete, it would have
afforded double satisfaction to the Compiler. The success of this attempt has
however convinced me of the great utility of undertaking.

As facts are the basis of human knowledge, it is of great importance to
collect them. There are probably in every profession, facts enough which occur
every year, in an extensive country, to constitute a mass of information, if
collected, equal to what a long life of experience would be necessary to
acquire for any one man. If not collected, these useful facts are lost to all
the profession, except to a few individuals; if collected, they condense the
knowledge of a whole life into the compass of a few hours reading. This might
be done every year; and what could be more useful?

Though not a Physician, I have been accustomed to Philosophical inquiries, and
feel a deep interest in the prosperity of my country and the happiness of my
fellow-citizens. I am persuaded that the Americans may be convinced by facts,
that even in our climate, Epidemic and Pestilential Maladies may be generated
by local causes. If they can be convinced of this, that sources of disease and
death may be found among themselves created by their own negligence, it is a
great point gained; for until they learn this, they will never attend to the
means of preserving life and health. They will still wallow in filth, crowd
their cities with low dirty houses and narrow streets; neglect the use of
bathing and washing; and live like savages, devouring, in hot seasons, undue
quantities of animal food at ^^eir tables, and recling home after midnight
debauches.

If they can settle this point with themselves, that danger may exist at home,
some persons may profit by the conviction. Our police at any rate may be wholly
changed, and the mode of building our cities, undergo a thorough alteration.

I have to make my acknowledgments to the Gentlemen, who have favored me with
their communications. Those who have neglected my applications, doubtless have
good reasons for it; those who have treated this undertaking with contempt,
have my most hearty forgiveness.

I have been solicited to advertise for similar communications, the next year,
and am assured, that more numerous papers may be expected. But I have neither
inclination nor leisure to devote much time to this object; nor am I convinced
that the object itself will reward a continuance of my labors.

N. WEBSTER, JUN.
New York, July 1, 1796.
(CIRCULAR.) To the Physicians of Philadelphia, New York, Baltimore, Norfolk
and Newhaven.
GENTLEMEN,
AS a malignant fever has, for three summers past raged in different parts of
the United States, and proved fatal to great numbers of our fellow-citizens,
and extremely prejudicial to the Commerce of the Country, it becomes highly
important to take such efficacious steps as human wisdom can devise to prevent
the introduction, arrest the progress, or mitigate the severity of such a
serious calamity. It is a cause equally interesting to every part of the United
States; and one that deeply affects the happiness of families, and the general
prosperity of the country.

The first measure to be taken in this business seems to be, to ascertain the
following points -- Whether the bilious remitting fever, commonly called the
Yellow Fever, is of foreign or domestic origin; whether it is always imported
or may be generated in our own country; whether it is an epidemic, or depends
for propagation on specific contagion; or whether it partakes of the nature
both of an epidemic and a contagious disease.

These points, however clear to many of the faculty, are subjects of warm
controversy among others; and while professional men differ in opinion, other
citizens will differ also; and while a difference of opinion exists as to the
origin and nature of the disease, no legislative remedies, no effectual
police-regulations can be expected for the prevention of this calamity.

To decide on the origin and nature of the Yellow Fever, we want the evidence
of facts; these have occurred in the United States, sufficient in number and
clearness, to furnish evidence that shall produce universal conviction, if all
those facts were brought together and offered to the Public in a mass.

If the gentlemen of the faculty will take the trouble to furnish me,
severally, or by committees, with such facts as have fallen under their notice,
relative to the foregoing points, I will be at the pains to arrange them, and
will risk the publication and circulation of the work throughout the United
States.

In an undertaking of this kind, private interest ought not to be wholly
abandoned; but my principal motive, is to promote the best interests of my
fellow citizens, by doing what few men will undertake: that is, collecting the
fragments of knowledge which lie scattered in various places, and arranging and
publishing them for the common benefit of my country.

The particular points on which I wish to obtain information, are the following:

The origin of the yellow fever in the respective places to which you belong --
the time of its appearance and disappearance -- its symptoms and, the most
successful mode of treatment -- what proportion of persons seized with decided
symptoms of this fever have died -- how far the fever has been attended with
specific contagion, and the proofs of this -- in what situations as to free
air, water, streets and buildings, this disease has been most fatal -- what
descriptions of people have suffered most, and their mode of living -- what
malignant complains have, for two or three seasons, preceded the yellow fever
-- how it differs in symptoms from the ordinary bilious fever of the country --
whether or not you have known a fever, with the same or similar symptoms, to
occur in scattered instances, in other seasons than that in which the yellow
fever has prevailed -- and whether such cases can be traced to any known cause
-- and in short, please to communicate any other information which, in your
opinions, may throw any light on the origin, nature and cure of the disease.

The Health Committees of the Cities above mentioned, are particularly
requested to furnish such facts, on any of these points, as may have come to
their knowledge.

The Physicians of Newbern, Edenton, Wilmington and other towns in
North Carolina; of Charleston and Beaufort in South Carolina; of Savanna or
other large towns in Georgia; and the Physicians on the eastern shore in
Virginia, Maryland and Delaware, together with those of Alexandria, Richmond,
Petersburgh, or other large towns in the southern states where bilious fevers
prevail, are requested to communicate such facts and observations relative to
those fevers, as may enable the public to judge how far the ordinary remitting
bilious fever of our country corresponds in origin and symptoms, with the fatal
epidemic which has raged in Philadelphia, New York, etc.

A similar request is made to Physicians in every part of the United States,
especially in the neighborhood of the drowned land, and at Shawangunk in the
state of New York, and those who have had the care of those persons who were
taken with a malignant fever at the treaty with the Indians near lake Cayuga,
the summer past.

The Physicians about Coxsackie, the drowned lands in Salisbury in Connecticut,
and Sheffield in Massachusetts, and who attended the sick in the neighborhood
of the marshy ground on the borders of those towns -- in short, all Physicians
who have had experience in bilious fevers of a malignant kind, are requested to
communicate whatever facts can throw light on the origin, nature, or cure of
such fevers. -- They are requested to inform, in what seasons the fevers
prevail most, whether wet or dry -- at what time in summer they appear and
disappear -- at what distance from a marsh they prevail, to determine the
extent of the contagious influence arising from low grounds -- whether the
water is running or stagnant -- whether such fevers ever prevail near fresh
water ponds, whose banks are high and rocky, and the margins of which do not
abound with grass and weeds -- whether the putrid fevers arising evidently from
marsh-exhalations in the country are ever attended with specific contagion --
in short, every species of facts that can serve to explain the cause, the
progress, and the symptoms, of bilious fevers.

It is requested that your answers to these inquiries may be forwarded to me at
New York as soon as convenient, and by private conveyance, if possible. I am
persuaded that a full investigation of the causes of the disease, will enable
the government of our states and cities, to make such regulations as to guard
our commercial towns from a repetition of the calamities they have once
suffered. If the disease has been imported, more effectual measures must be
taken to prevent its introduction -- if generated in our own country, it is
absolutely necessary for our populous towns to suffer most decisive amendments,
in their docks, houses, streets, etc.

Our latitudes are the same as many countries in Asia, where the plague rages;
and perhaps our climate, which formerly resisted the progress of fatal
epidemics, is assimilating itself annually to that of Smyrna and Constantinople.

I cannot but hope, gentlemen, that you will be of opinion that this subject is
of great and universal concern to the United States; and that you will consent
to aid a plan which has the health of our fellow-citizens, and the happiness
and prosperity of our country for its object.

I am, gentlemen, your fellow-citizen, NOAH WEBSTER, JUN.
New York, Oct. 31, 1795.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE EPIDEMIC YELLOW FEVER, AS IT APPEARED IN THE CITY OF
NEW YORK IN THE YEAR 1795. CONTAINING, BESIDES ITS HISTORY, etc. THE MOST
PROBABLE MEANS OF PREVENTING ITS RETURN, AND OF AVOIDING IT, IN CASE IT SHOULD
AGAIN BECOME EPIDEMIC.

BY VALENTINE SEAMAN, M.D. ONE OF THE PHYSICIANS OF THE HEALTH COMMITEE OF
NEW YORK IN 1795.

-- -- "And though the putrid South
Be shut; though no convulsive agony
Shake, from the deep foundations of the world,
The imprisoned plagues; a secret venom often
Corrupts the air, the water, and the land."
"Even Albion, girt with less malignant skies,
Albion the poison of the Gods has drunk,
And felt the sting of monsters all her own."
ARMSTRONG. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY HOPKINS, WEBB and CO. No. 40, PINE-STREET. --
1796. -- ^^^^ERED ACCORDING TO LAW.

To BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE INSTITUTES, AND OF CLINICAL MEDICINE,
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.
THY general liberality of sentiment, together with the unparalleled manner in
which thou durst, in the noble cause of humanity, to introduce innovations in
the treatment of the Epidemic Fever of Philadelphia in 1793, amidst the
persecuting shafts of thy opponents, point thee out as a most proper patron for
the free thoughts advanced in the following pages.

Besides this, I should consider myself greatly deficient, was I to neglect
this opportunity of acknowledging the high sense of gratitude I entertain for
the benefit received, not only from thy valuable public instructions, but also
from thy ever useful private conversations.

Wishing thy long continued and increasing usefulness, in thy profession and in
the diffusion of Medical knowledge,

I remain, With respect and esteem, Thy Friend, Valentine Seaman.

TO JOHN BROOM, GABRIEL FURMAN, ANDREW VAN TUYL, JOHN CAMPBELL, ROBERT LENOX,
THEOPH. BEEKMAN, ROBERT BOWNE, NICHOLAS CARMER, ISAAC STOUTENBURGH, SAMUEL
BARD, GEORGE JANEWAY, and NATH. HAZARD,
Surviving Members of the Committee of Health of New York for 1795 --
Whose undaunted attention to the objects of their appointment, and whose
persevering care for the relief of their afflicted Fellow-Citizens, must, no
doubt, have been followed by the gratifying sense of well done, in their own
bosoms: -- Blessed be their reward.

As the following observations were drawn up partly at their solicitations, and
as the ideas and opinions advanced in them, are considered as meriting their
serious attention, they are most respectfully submitted by

Their Friend and Fellow-Citizen, THE AUTHOR

PREFACE.
THE utility of accurate Histories of Epidemics to the improvement of medicine,
has never been doubted from the time of the early and valuable publications of
Hypocrates, to the late and no less judicious observations of Dr. Rush: but as
the Yellow Fever has been so accurately and fully described and treated of by
several physicians in the West Indies, in Philadelphia, etc. it may be thought
entirely superfluous to give any account of it as it appeared in this city.
Fully sensible of the force of this remark, I long declined attempting any
thing of the kind; but as several facts have occurred to me, a general
knowledge of which I consider as highly interesting to humanity and of
importance to the community at large, and especially to the inhabitants of this
city, I am finally induced to submit them to the consideration of the public,
particularly as the Medical Society, which had made some progress in the
business, have declined the prosecution of it.

THE many accounts and complete descriptions already given of this disease,
seem to render it unnecessary to enter into a minute detail of its several
symptoms in this place; I have therefore been very short upon that part of the
subject, referring the more nice inquirer to the before mentioned authors,
particularly to Dr. Rush's account of it, as it appeared in Philadelphia, in
1793, where he will find its various appearances very particularly and
accurately delineated.

As the following observations have originated almost entirely from facts and
circumstances of the disease, as it appeared in this city; the reader will find
himself much deceived, if he looks for references to long catalogues of eminent
authors, or for an elaborate account of the diseases of the West Indies,
pestilences of Europe, or plagues of Asia: and as my conclusions are drawn
chiefly from cases and occurances, that have come within my own personal
knowledge, (which favored by my local situation in the center of the Epidemic,
and my providential preservation from its influence, till it was nearly
extinguished, were considerably numerous) he will also find that my remarks
have not been much either influenced or supported by the uncertain
communication of my brother practitioners or other citizens; hence, if decided
and undoubted facts, shall hereafter appear which shall disprove them, my error
should be assigned only to my general skepticism respecting current medical
reports, and the limited nature that I have imposed upon my sources of
information.

As some thoughts which I have advanced, are decidedly opposed to the common
sense of the faculty in general, I wish it to be considered, that they are not
the offspring of any favorite theory, or influential hypothesis; for I had
heretofore been taught and believed very differently, till the stubborn
obtrusion of facts upon my mind, forced me to change my opinion.

I AM well aware of the loss of reputation that I may sustain, from attempting,
in the course of this essay, to support opinions which are very unpopular with
the inhabitants of this city; however, the importance of the subject, has
swallowed up all personal considerations, and determined me freely to
communicate what I consider as highly essential to their welfare; and I shall
be richly paid, if my temerity shall in the least degree, tend to the
prevention of a disease, which in its partial It being chiefly confined to a
particular part of the city.
operation, in less than three months, swept off upwards of seven hundred of
our fellow-citizens; which should be sufficiently alarming to put us upon our
guard in future, for should it again arise, in a season more favorable to its
spreading, perhaps its more universal devastation will not be checked till it
has numbered thousands in its mortal list.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE EPIDEMIC YELLOW FEVER, etc.
Of the State of the Air, and Diseases preceding and accompanying the Epidemic,
and a History of the Disease.
FROM the tables of Meteorological observations, inserted immediately before
the considerations on the cause of the disease, it appears, that in the
beginning of the sixth month (June) the weather was pretty warm, but became
more moderate on the seventh and eighth days, and that its temperature was
suddenly increased on the 9th of the month, raising the Mercury 12 degrees in
Fahrenheit's thermometer in the space of twenty-four hours; it was warm on the
tenth, then became cooler for four or five days, after which time it continued
very warm and sultry for several days; on the 19th the thermometer stood at 87,
and varied between that and 69 the remainder of this month -- we had rains on
the 2d, 11th, 20th, 24th, 25th, and 30th. The mean temperature of this month
was 73 These were the states of the thermometer at one o'clock, P. M.
.

It gradually became cooler for the first five days in the seventh month
(July); on the 6th the mercury rose to 83 which was 13 higher than it stood the
day before; the next day it fell to 72; after which, in the course of six days,
it rose to 89 without any material sudden change; the weather then moderated in
some degree, so that in the last nine days of this month it did not rise above
the 80 and in one of them it stood at 68 -- the mean temperature of this month
was 81: it rained on the 3d, 10th, 18th, 23d, 24th, 27th, 30th, and 31st.

The thermometer stood near 90 most of the time during the first ten days of
the eighth month (August); on one day it was upwards of 93; in the remainder of
the month it varied between the 60th and 88th -- great part of this time it was
above 80, and there were but a few days wherein it was below 72; the medium
temperature of this month was 83; we had rains on the 3d, 9th, 10th, 11th,
12th, 13th, 20th, 21st, 23d, and 31st days, and several of them were very great.

The first week in the ninth month (September) the mercury remained between 70
and 75; in the second and third week it varied but little, one way or the
other, from 80; but we had some cool days in the latter part of the month, the
mercury being as low as 58 on the 22d and on the 30th; mean temperature about
73; we had five rainy days, viz. the 2d, 7th, 13th, 19th, and 20th.

In the tenth month (October) the temperature of the air was at no time above
75, but varied between that and 49 irregularly; the mean temperature was 62 the
latter part of this month we frequently had white frosts at night; it rained on
the 10th, 20th, and 31st.

Musquetoes were never before known, by the oldest inhabitants, to have been so
numerous as at this season, especially in the south-eastern part of the city;
they were particularly troublesome to foreigners, many of whom, had those parts
of their bodies that were exposed to them, covered with blisters from their
venomous operations.

Our summer fruits in general were no ways extraordinary; water-melons
particularly, from the wetness of the season, were very flashy and insipid.

It was remarked that many laborers employed at the different buildings, gave
out at their work, from the excessive heat of the weather.

An unusual number of persons suffered in the warm part of the seventh and
eighth months, from drinking cold water; and several fell down and died in the
streets, whose deaths were assigned to that cause, when it more probably was
induced by an apoplexy, brought on by the excessive heat of the sun; one case
came under my particular observation which was certainly of that kind, although
currently reported otherwise.

The cholera infantum, was very common in the early part of the sixth month,
and increased as the weather became warmer. Bilious cholics and dysenteries
became very prevalent in the seventh and eighth months. At this time also the
cholera morbus carried off a number of grown persons.

In the beginning of the ninth month, the measles made their appearance, but
they suddenly vanished with the above mentioned diseases, as soon as the yellow
fever had spread itself among us: I did not observe but a single case of it
during the dominion of this powerful epidemic.

The common remitting bilious fever, was no ways uncommon in the summer months,
but this also gave way, or rather perhaps, run into the yellow fever, as that
gained ground in the city.

As early as the sixth of the seventh month, I was called upon in conjunction
with Dr. Treat, then health-officer to our port, to visit Thomas Foster, a
patient brought into the almshouse, whom we found affected with all the full
marked and decided symptoms of an highly malignant yellow fever; the adnata of
his eyes and his skin were of a bright yellow, the latter covered with purple
spots, his mind deranged, his tongue covered with a dry black sordes, with
hemorrhages from his gums and nose, and a discharge of black and very offensive
matter from his stomach and bowels; he died on the ninth.

Dr. Treat was taken on the 22d of the seventh month, and died on the 30th.
Several other undoubted cases occurred, about this time, in the neighborhood of
Dover-street, but the first one that came under my particular observation, was
that of James Dalton on the 12th of the eighth month, then in the fifth day of
his illness, of which he died the day following as yellow as gold. From this
time the disease became more and more frequent; yet as we find by the accurate
accounts of the Health Committee, not above two a day upon an average died of
it, till the 24th of the month.

The increasing prevalence of the epidemic at the upper part of Water-street
and in Cherry-street, and in all the neighboring low ground between them and
Chatham and the lower part of George-streets, in the forepart of the ninth
month, became so alarming as to drive many of the most opulent of their
inhabitants to the country, while the less prudent and the more indigent
remained exposed to a disease, which, from this limited spot, in less than
three months, carried as many as five hundred to their graves.

The disease was not, however, confined entirely to this part of the city; for
in every other situation, favoring the accumulation of filth and stagnation of
putrefactive materials, there it was no stranger: it raged with peculiar
violence in the vicinity of a most intolerable pent up sink, to the west of
Peck-slip, which is the receptacle for all the refuse kitchen articles, and
yard wash of a number of lots fronting Pearl and Water-streets, that back upon
it; it was likewise very prevalent in the neighborhood of the Fly-market, also
in and about Skinner-street, as well as in some of the unregulated grounds on
the north side of the town.

If an account of the epidemic, as it pervaded the different parts of the town,
could be accurately ascertained, and depicted in colors, heightened in
proportion to the combined early time of attack, and the numbers affected
blazoned by its comparative malignity, there can be no manner of doubt, but
that the low ground in the southeast of the city as above mentioned, would
appear as the grand center of the calamity, diffusing its effects, like
diverging rays, to the adjacent parts; aiding by its most powerful influence,
different secondary centers, already smoking hot, to flame out its pestiferous
operations. The many solitary cases of the disease that have occurred in
distant healthy situations, appear to have been kindled up by imprudent
individual exposures too near these sources of infection.

The black people appeared to be as subject to the disease as the whites, but
it was not so fatal to them; of eight that I prescribed for, only one died, and
with her, the complaint having stolen in under the deceitful form of a common
cynanche, was permitted to run on for some days, before medical aid was called
for. By report of Dr. S. L. Mitchell, in behalf of a committee of the
Manumitting Society of this city, it appears that not a single scholar of the
free black school, under their patronage, died with it.

Several circumstances tended to render the disease particularly fatal to the
more indigent part of she community: 1st. The higher prices of house-rent in
the other parts of the city, having concentered a great proportion of them in
the epidemic neighborhood, and crowded them in very small confined apartments;
a number of houses contained as many families as it had rooms in it. 2d. Their
poverty not permitting them to quit their place of residence when the disease
came around them. 3d. The great difficulty of getting nurses, and their
exorbitant prices preventing them from getting proper attendance before their
situation became known to the Committee of Health, oftentimes a whole family
being taken down about the same time, their panic struck fair-day friends
quitting them in their distress, from the fear of infection. 4th. The neglect
of obtaining early medical assistance, from a hope that their disease was not
the prevailing one: and 5th. The refusal of many, after they were taken ill,
thus miserably situated, to go to Belle Vue, "lest (to use their own
expression) they should catch the Yellow-Fever and die."

Foreigners who came from a more temperate climate, as the English, Irish,
Scotch, etc. and people from the country, who had not long resided in town,
were particularly obnoxious to this complaint.

The French from the West Indies, seemed proof against the influence of this
epidemic, a numerous family of them continued in the midst of it, and viewed
without danger the death of a great many, and the disease of nearly all their
neighbors who remained in town; not one of them suffered the least
indisposition: In another boarding house of them, containing at least thirty or
forty persons, not far from Peck-slip, not any of them took the complaint,
although numbers of the other inhabitants were droping away with it, on every
side of them.

The disease spared no age or sex, although it was most fatal to the young and
those in the prime of life.

Symptoms of the disease, as exhibited in the different parts and functions of
the body.
1st. The vital functions suffered extremely in the first attack of the
disease, it generally coming on with chillness, an anxious and interrupted
respiration, with a total absence of perspiration; this however, in some
instances, came on very copiously, after the great heat that generally followed
the chill, had existed for a time, but in most cases the skin continued dry and
parched, except a sweat was induced by artificial means.

The pulse was as variable as the hues of the cameleon; in most cases it was
frequent, and after the chill had subsided, it became somewhat hard: vet
instances occurred of a preternatural slowness. I met with one case in a black
man, where it beat only forty-two strokes in a minute; and in another person
there was a complete intermission of it in every twelfth or fifteenth
pulsation: and in other patients, particularly in the 3d or 4th day of their
complaints, were physicians to judge from the pulse alone, they would declare
them in a convalescent state, at the very time they were in the most imminent
danger and sometimes within a few hours of their end. Although I firmly believe
with my most eminent teacher Dr. Rush, that the pulse is our best guide in the
knowledge of diseases, yet in no complaint that has ever occurred to my
observation, have I found this most sure index of the state of the system, so
little to be depended on. Hemorrhages from the nose, gums, stomach, uterus,
etc. were very common at the commencement, as well as in the more advanced
period^ of this disease.

2d. In the ANIMAL FUNCTIONS this disease in its first attack, produced
lassitude, and an aversion to all kind of bodily exertion with a sense of
general debility, attended with violent pains in the head and back, sometimes
shooting down the legs: these frequently preceded the chills, and in most cases
accompanied it and continued afterward, as a very distressing symptom of the
disease. The mind was oftentimes very much dejected, with imperfect vision and
memory, followed by delirium, subsuitus, tendinum, etc. before death.

There was in many cases an evident, though slight, remission in the violence
of these symptoms sometimes in the course of twenty-four hours from the time of
the attack, as also at some other periods; but in the hurry of the raging
epidemic, I was unavoidably prevented from gaining an accurate knowledge of
them.

3d. No part of the body appeared to suffer more than the NATURAL FUNCTIONS,
which includes the alimentary canal and secretions. The stomach, as in all
fevers, was affected with a degree of nausea, and sometimes vomiting at the
first accession of this disease, which frequently subsided for a while, but is
succeeded about the third day, if proper means are not used to prevent it, by
an almost unconquerable irritability and retrograde movement of this organ,
throwing up large quantities of green or yellow bile, and rejecting immediately
every particle of medicine, food or drink, that was taken into it -- afterward
discharging an aquoeus fluid containing a number of light dun colored specks in
it; this, if not checked, was followed by a puking of a fluid exactly
resembling coffee, with its grounds floating in it, which by standing, would
settle to the bottom.

The vomiting which occurs about the third day, frequently, is the only
distressing symptom that the patient labors under, his pulse becoming natural,
skin cool and moist, with an entire freedom from pain, and a perfect clearness
in the mental operations, that insuperable circumstance standing alone, as it
were, to humble the pride of physic, and to warn, in cool blood, the unhappy
sufferer of his precarious existence.

A hiccoughing often was very troublesome in the different stages of this
complaint. The bowels were very uniformly and obstinately costive: there were
some ca,+ses it is true, that were attended with frequent evacuations, but
these generally seemed rather of a partial dysentery nature, and not free
discharges from the whole course of the intestines.

The secretion of bile was greatly increased, as appeared by its copious
discharge from the stomach in vomiting, as well as from the bowels when excited
by proper purgatives. The flow of saliva and excretions from the mouth and
sauces were not much impeded; in the beginning the tongue appearing moist and a
little white, after a few days it became more thickly furred and assumed a
deeper hue, but frequently in the latter stages it became quite dry and covered
with a black crust.

The appearances on the superficies were various, the skin oftentimes retained
its natural appearance, but frequently, though not uniformly, as the disease
advanced, it assumed a yellow tinge. Musquetoe bites, which before had entirely
disappeared, showed themselves in all the parts that had been exposed to them,
in small purpleish red spots; these were often taken for petechia, which
sometimes, but more rarely appeared.

Unseemly scabs, oftentimes in the latter stages, formed about the mouth,
which, on being scratched off, frequently were followed by troublesome little
hemorrhages. These eruptions did not in this fever as it does in others,
indicate any favorable event of the complaint.

The adnata of the eyes, in the beginning where the attack was severe,
generally were tinged and suffused with a reddish color, changing with the skin
to a yellow, as the disease advanced: there were many, however, even among
those who died, whose skin nor eyes showed the least appearance of this color.

DIAGNOSIS.
If it should be established, that this fever is as highly contagious as is,
perhaps, too generally believed, its diagnosis or peculiar symptoms
distinguishing it from others, would become a matter of the greatest
importance, both to individual safety and to the welfare of the community at
large.

This part of the study of medicine has, of late, been considered of less
consequence than formerly, since the fallacy and imprudence of prescribing for
the name of a disease, has been so fully exposed and justly condemned by the
generality of physicians; -- however, in this particular complaint, as the
hopes of a cure depend, almost entirely, upon the means used in the first two
or three days of its attack, it certainly must be of prime necessity to know it
in its early stage. We cannot be too careful in detecting the existence of this
disease, for in its commencement, its evident symptoms are oftentimes no way in
proportion to the danger. Hence, as Dr. Jackson observes, (in his treatise on
the fevers of Jamaica) persons unacquainted with the nature of the disease,
would be disposed to believe that the patient expressed sufferings that were
not real. And hence physicians are sometimes led to neglect them till it is too
late to save their patients.

In the first stage of this fever it is oftentimes with difficulty
distinguished from the common bilious remittent, its symptoms in general being
exactly similar, only aggravated in degree; the pain in the head and back are
more severe and constant, and the remissions, whenever they are observable, are
more obscure; Those who are well acquainted with the disease, may often
recognize it by a certain undescribeable appearance in the countenance of the
sick, the eye is often more red, and the face more flushed than the heat of the
body and the general action of the sanguiferous system, would lead us to expect.

The remarkable irritability of the stomach, that generally comes on (when the
disease is permitted to run an uninterrupted course) about the third or fourth
day, whereby a constant nausea and retchings to vomit, immediately brings up
every thing as soon as swallowed, seems to be a pretty distinguishing mark of
this disease at this stage of it.

The yellow skin, and coffee ground or black vomitings, as they sometimes occur
in the more advanced stage, may be looked upon as decided and unequivocal
evidences of this complaint; but they cannot be considered as pathognomic
symptoms, for although they are to be found in this fever only, yet in the
greatest proportion of cases they do not attend it.

The prevailing epidemic should always have a great influence in fixing our
judgment with respect to this, as well as other diseases. Whenever it is found,
from decided cases, that it really exists in any particular situation, I should
consider every fever, in that neighborhood, attended with aggravated symptoms
of a common bilious remittent, to be of this kind; for I should suppose the
powerful operation of its cause, would certainly predominate over the milder
causes of more moderate maladies.

PROGNOSIS.
The prognosis is to be drawn from the disposition and constitution of the
persons affected, as well as from the particular symptoms. Those who had been
much debilitated by previous disease, great anxiety of mind, drunkenness, etc.
most generally admitted of but an unfavorable prospect as to the event of this
disease, as likewise did the resolute and hardy, who would not early submit to
their complaints, but endeavored to shake them off as they would a common
catarrh. I used to warn such ones at my first visits, that I feared from their
dispositions, that they would undertake to wrestle with their disease, and that
if they did they would surely fall under it, and unfortunately their conduct
too often verified my fears and justified my prognostic.

In the early stages of the complaint, if it came on very moderately, without
much affection of the head, if the eyes and countenance were not much affected,
and the bowels were easily moved by the medicines hereafter to be mentioned,
we, in general, were warranted in pronouncing a favorable termination. But when
the face and eyes were suffused with a reddish tinge, or great distress and
anxiety were expressed in the countenance, with severe pain in the head and
back, we had great cause to fear the consequences, particularly if the bowels
were obstinately constipated; this last circumstance, in every instance,
portended the greatest danger; indeed, it seemed to me that the degree of
danger was, very generally, in proportion to the stubbornness of the
constriction of these viscera and their insensibility to the impression of
purgative medicines.

In the latter stages of the complaint, when the constant vomiting came on,
there was always great danger to be apprehended; yet some have recovered after
discharging the coffee ground like matter beforementioned, but these cases
were confessedly very rare.

The other symptoms of putrescency, as a black tongue, petichiae, etc. were
generally unfavorable, although I did not find hemorrhages such terrible
occurences as they are, by the generality of authors, stated to be. In the
ninth month (September) 24th, in a communication to the Committee of Health,
among other things, I observed, that in taking a retrospective view of my
different patients with the prevailing complaint, I found among them five who
had had hemorrhages, either from the nose, gums, stomach or uterus, and one who
had lost some blood from an accidental wound in his head; these were all the
patients that I had attended, who had been affected with any hemorrhage
whatever, neither of them had died, three had recovered, and the other three
were much better than they had been. -- These three also afterward recovered;
nevertheless, some patients afterward died, whose complaints were attended
with hemorrhages; still these facts prove that they do not indicate so much
danger as is commonly believed.

Having given a cursory account of the season immediately preceding and during
the continuance of the disease, and also a history of its most material
symptoms, together with the most essential circumstances respecting its
diagnosis and prognosis, I proceed to state some facts and free thoughts
relative to a question, in my opinion highly interesting to the cause of
humanity, and greatly important to the community, for on it depends the welfare
of the afflicted individual, as well as the method of preventing or eradicating
the disease in general, viz.

Is the yellow fever communicated by contagion By contagion I mean a matter or
effluvia arising directly or originally from the body of a man under a
particular disease, and exciting the same kind of disease in the body of the
person to whom they are applied. Cullen's first lines.
or not?
Unshackled from all prejudice, I shall venture to mention several facts that
oppose the idea of the contagious nature of this disease, which, if they have
not determined me to quit the beaten path of that old established opinion, in
which I have been educated, they certainly have staggered me very much, I
therefore submit them to public consideration, conceiving that they merit the
most serious and candid attention.

1st. In several instances, persons have been taken with this disease, who had
avoided, with the utmost care, any communication with the sick, and some that
came to my knowledge, who had not been out of their houses for several weeks,
nor had any affected person been within eighty feet of them, were attacked and
severely handled by it; hence if it was induced by contagion, this complaint
must be the most highly contagious of any other; the contagion of the plague
itself, as appears by the report of physicians most conversant with it, does
not extend at farthest above ten paces from the infected body. (Howard on
Lacerettos.)

2d. Although many of the nurses and attendants on the sick, in the part of the
city where it raged, took the complaint, yet others, who lived in the same
neighborhood and cautiously avoided such employments, did not more generally
escape it. And notwithstanding many from New York died with this disease in
different parts of the country, on Long Island, in Jersey, Albany, etc. yet I
have not heard of a single well authenticated case of any nurse or attendant of
the sick, or any other persons taking it except they had lately been in the
city* It is true, popular reports have oftentimes spread the disease about the
country, yet upon close inquiry that I have made in several instances, to
ascertain their validity, I have found them to have originated from diseases of
an entire different nature, and sometimes from deaths that occurred about the
same time, and which would have happened, had the yellow fever never existed:
even should it appear that some persons were taken with a fever in consequence
of the anxious fatigue of nursing, and the distress from the loss of near and
dear relatives, which finally proved fatal to them, we are no way justified in
supposing that it was this complain; for had like attention been paid to
persons with a pleurisy or rheumatism, like consequences might have followed:
further, should an instance be produced wherein a person who had had an
intercourse with one in the country affected by this disease, should afterward
be taken with a like complaint, it would not be a conclusive proof of its
contagious nature, since sporadic cases have occurred at many places where
there was not the least suspicion, or possibility of its having been produced
by effluvia arising from a person under a like disease; Few years pass, says
Dr. Rush (account of the bilious remittent yellow fever, as it appeared in
Philadelphia, in 1793, page 159) without producing them in Philadelphia. Dr.
Lird, (diseases incident to Europeans in hot climates) says sporadic cases of
yellow fever have even occured in England.
the communication with the sick, might in such an instance, be merely an
accidental and no ways an essential concurrence.

Dr. Lining in a letter to Dr. Whytt, (Essays and Observations Physical and
Literary, vol. 2d) mentions that, when this disease raged in Charleston
(South Carolina) If any from the country received it in town and sickened in
their return home, the infection spread no further, not even to one in the same
house.

In the year 1793, during the prevalence of this disease in Philadelphia,
several persons who had lately come from that place, sickened with it and died
in this city, yet in no instance did they communicate it to others, although,
they were carefully and constantly attended.

3d. At Bell-vue, the hospital appropriated for the reception of the poor, sick
with this complaint, there was not a single attendant who took the complaint
excepting such as had been but a few days from town; notwithstanding they were
constantly involved in the midst of the effluvia arising from the numerous sick
and dead surrounding them.

There was not a single instance of the complaint being communicated to any of
the physicians at the hospital at Bush-hill at the time it raged in
Philadelphia in 1793, and among the nurses for the sick two only died, and they
(as is observed by the chief physician of that institution) probably had the
feeds of the disease, previous to their going to the hospital; and which
appeared the more likely, as many of the other nurses were not at all
indisposed, although they eat and slept in the chambers of the sick. ( Deveze
Inquirie's on the epidemic disease of Philadelphia in 1793.)

At our city almshouse, two persons died of this disease, which they must have
taken from going into that part of the town where it prevailed, as they both
frequented that neighborhood, yet in neither case did they communicate the
complaint to a single one either of their attendants, or of their numerous
companions that were crowded in the same room.

4th. There were many patients sent to Bush-hill laboring under other
complaints, and were put in the same apartments with the patients afflicted
with this fever, and where they saw persons dying with it on all sides of them,
and were surrounded by an atmosphere, as highly impregnated as it was possible
to be, with every infectious discharge that could be emitted from the bodies of
those under that complaint, and breathing the same air, still warm, from the
lungs of their dying room mates: and what is very remarkable, there was not
seen one example of these patients having the epidemic, and never
notwithstanding these circumstances so favorable to contagion, did their
disease change its character, since they were all restored. (Deveze's
Inquiries, etc.) How different was this from what happened in the city; there
it obliged all diseases to partake of its nature, and to pay obeisance to the
ruling power: (Rush's account of the yellow fever) it seems as if those
patients had been protected for a time, by their diseases, from the influence
of the cause of the destructive epidemic, till they had gained a happy retreat
from the contaminated boundaries of the town.

5th. Some contagions are communicated by contact only, as syphilis, itch, etc.
others may operate at a certain distance through the medium of the air, as the
smallpox, measels, etc. yet all, that we have accurate knowledge of, are the
most certainly effective ceteris paribus in an inverse proportion to the
distance of the body from whence they arise, and vice versa. From this
consideration, we cannot conceive any thing more certain of producing the
disease in question, than the handling the bodies of those who have died with
it, that is, if we suppose it to be caused by effluvia arising from persons
already affected; yet we find dissections of such ones have been performed, by
Dr. Mitchel in Virginia, Dr. Mackrittrick in the West Indies, Drs. Fleming and
Jackson in Jamaica, Dr. Lining in Charleston, etc. and they all have lived
afterward to publish an account of them: in Philadelphia, Drs. Physic and
Cathrall did the same, and Dr. Annan attended the dissection of others, and
although it is very probable, that they, from living in the atmosphere of that
city, may have had the disease, yet we do not find that their hardy exposures
have augmented its violence so much in them, as to enroll their names in the
register of deaths. Dr. Baily dissected a person dead with this disease in this
city, and suffered no inconvenience from it: but what would seem still more
extraordinary, Dr. Deveze and all his surgical assistants entirely escaped the
disease, notwithstanding he opened a great number of bodies, and consequently
was under the necessity of dipping his hands in their black and corrupted
blood, and of breathing the infected vapor that exhaled from them. Who could
suppose it possible for any one who never had had the smallpox, to have such
close connection with persons in every stage of that complaint, and even to
handle their bodies after death, and escape being affected with it?

6th. Specific and acknowledged contagions, all seem to arise from themselves
only: hence it would be almost as hard for me to believe that the syphilis,
smallpox, or measles, could be produced from any other cause, than from their
proper virus, obtained from persons affected with the like disease, as it would
be for me to conceive of the formation of a plant, without having received its
seed or radical from one of the same nature. Contagions seem to fix in the soil
of our bodies, and there seed, and from thence spread themselves as naturally
and regularly as vegetables do on the earth. But the yellow fever has been
produced from other causes than contagion. Lind's essay on diseases incident to
Europeans in hot climates, has many facts in proof of this disease being
produced by other causes, and without the aid of contagion. Also note p. 16.
Does it not then admit of a doubt whether it can possess a power of
propagating itself? I confess I am almost ready to believe, that it either is
always produced by contagion, or never. It is very difficult to conceive, that
two such different causes, should produce exactly similar effects.

7th. It is an acknowledged fact with respect to contagions in general, that
they are no respectors of persons, but that all of every clime and color, under
like circumstances, are equally susceptible of their operations. But this is
not the case with the cause of the disease under our present consideration: I
have already observed, in the history of the complaint, that the French people
from the West Indies, although involved in the midst of the epidemic,
universally escaped it. The same remark was made with respect to them in
Philadelphia in 1793, (Rush's account of the yellow fever). Dr. Jackson
(Treatise on the fevers of Jamaica) observes, that this disease seldom
discovers itself among those people who have lived any length of time in a
tropical country, and that it has never been observed, that a negro immediately
from the coast of Africa, has been attacked with this disease; neither have
creoles who have lived constantly in their native country, ever been known to
suffer from it. These circumstances certainly should tend to make us hesitate
in pronouncing this fever contagious.

8th. It is generally observed of contagious diseases, that they have a
determinate period of invasion after an exposure to their cause: thus, if a
thousand persons under similar circumstances, should be exposed to and receive
the infection of the smallpox or the measles, at the same time, they would
generally be taken with the complaint within a few hours one of another; but in
this disease, this would be pinning the matter too close; the supporters of its
contagious nature, find their doctrine requires that it must be permitted to
act at any time, between that of the exposure and the sixteenth day, otherwise
it would not embrace cases enough to give it a currency. This seems to be
allowing themselves great latitude, as there are but few persons during the
prevalence of an epidemic in their neighborhood, that avoid every kind of
connection or near approach to the diseased for as much as sixteen days
together. Might not intermittents, when they occur generally in the vicinity of
mill-ponds and marshes, as well be considered contagious, since few, I
apprehend, could be found among such patients, but that had some time or other,
and generally within two or three weeks, been near them that had that
complaint, or to something that might have imbibed some effluvia from them? It
may be said, that although there are but few cases, still there are some who
have agues and fevers that never have been within the reach of febrile effluvia
from an affected person: I answer, so are there of the present complaint; few
physicians who have had an extensive practice in this city, can be strangers to
the occurrence of single instances of it without any other cases existing, that
could be suspected of having communicated it to them. (See page 19, note 16.)

9th. Contagions act more or less at all places and seasons, simply of
themselves without the aid of any particular circumstance of air or climate;
but the supporters of the yellow fever being contagious, are obliged by the
force of the foregoing observations to acknowledge their imaginary fondling, at
best, but a half formed monster, and perfectly inactive without being assisted
by the concurrence of a predisposing constitution of the air. (Rush on yellow
fever) This fever exists only in warm weather; hence its cause in this city was
perfectly extinguished by the frosty nights in the 10th month. It is confined
mostly to low situations, in thick settled places; otherwise our almshouse and
the surrounding country would have sadly experienced its deleterious effects.

Let us examine a few cases which are supposed decidedly to have been caused by
contagion. Dr. Malachi Treat, is said to have taken the fever from a person in
a vessel that he was on board of the day before his indisposition; his
complaints might as well have been assigned to having visited a patient in the
Almshouse seventeen days before. But I cannot conceive why he should be
singled out as a fatal victim of the effluvia of this man's body, merely from a
moment's visit, while all his room-mates and continued attendants, universally
escaped any inconvenience: nor do I know any reason why Dr. Treat might not
have taken his complaints from the same cause as this patient did; and he was
sick and died several days before the arrival of any of the vessels, supposed
to have brought the seeds of the disorder to this city. Daniel Phoenix, the
city treasurer, is supposed without doubt, to have taken his complaints from
contagion: the corporation, some time past, having issued into circulation, for
the accommodation of the inhabitants, a great number of paper penny bills, it
has been concluded that he must have received contagion, through the medium of
some bundles of these bills, which he opened, that had been brought to him,
after having been soiled and nearly worn out, to be exchanged, and which he
opened and examined to ascertain their amount some days after he had received
them: the probability of those having conveyed contagion, Although it is very
possible, that he might have taken his complaint from the effluvia, that arose
from these bills, highly loaded with putrefactive materials that they had
collected from the hands through which they had circulated, rendered active by
their being packed up together in great numbers and confined for a time in a
close chest before they were opened, still it puts them only upon a par with
(and in my opinion corroborates the idea of the diseases being caused by)
putrefactive effluvia in general, and is far from proving them to have conveyed
contagious particles from persons laboring under such a particular disease. --
(See definition of contagion, p. 28.)
cannot be very striking, when we reflect, that he was one among the first of
those that were taken. Whence then could the bills have gathered the infection
to give to him? we cannot suppose them to have come from the West India
islands; but even if his indisposition and like circumstances should have
occured at a more advanced period of the epidemic, it would not to me, appear
to be a very likely method of communicating contagion; for persons in that
stage of the disease, which is believed to be the most infectious, seldom have
much to do with handling money, or even of wearing such clothes as have pockets
in them, that might possibly have contained some. It may be observed, he lived
in a part of the town that soon after suffered much by this complaint.

Dr. William M. Johnson's case, is published in proof of the fever being
communicated by contagion; (Daily Advertiser, Vol. 2, No. 3343) but I cannot
conceive whence the author derives his authority for asserting that his
complaints "have actually happened in consequence of intercourse with the
sick." It is true, he had previously been in company with persons that had the
disease, but he also resided in New York before he was stationed at Belle-Vue,
he consequently must have been exposed to the same general cause of the
epidemic, as his suffering neighbors were; and from inquiry, I find he had not
left town but a few days previous to his being taken ill.

Frederick Steymets, one of the Committee of Health, supposed his complaint to
be the effects of contagion, received by examining some papers that had
belonged to a patient that died at Belle-Vue hospital. Is it probable, that
these papers, which perhaps had not been within ten feet of the patient after
his disease had put on such a serious aspect, should imbibe and convey the
cause of his complaint three or four miles, while the effluvia arising directly
from his body, had no effect upon those who were constantly about him, and
performing the most menial and loathsome services for him? This valuable
citizen's activity and perseverance in the noble cause of humanity, often led
him in the most sickly parts of the city; whence, more probably, his complaints
must have originated.

The "positive facts" insisted on by Dr. Lind, (Diseases incident to Europeans
in hot climates, page 195) I consider as very exceptionable proofs of the
contagious nature of this fever, for although an infected person came on board
one of the sloops of war which lay in the river Gambia, two or three days
before the sickness began in them, yet it is very likely they would have been
sick at the same time had he not come on board, as they had not been but eight
or ten days in that river, for the same author observes that symptoms of
indisposition in some instances, do not occur till twelve days after having
received a taint from the land air. Robertson's case (p. 195) is by no means
conclusive; the little spasmodic shock that he sustained, being, no doubt, an
accidental occurance; which, had it happened at any other time, perhaps never
would have been noticed; his being taken with a fever soon after, proves
nothing but that the feeling the pulse of a person dying, did not prevent him
from getting a like complaint from the operation of causes that had been
previously applied. Nor is what occured on board the Merlin sloop (page 196)
more satisfactory: all the conclusion that I can draw from them, is, that
different classes of the men, were taken earlier or later with their
complaints, according as they had been more or less exposed to the noxious land
air.

To these remarks may be added the observation of the experienced Dr. Hunter,
(Diseases of the army in Jamaica) when speaking of the yellow fever, that "It
is a matter of some consolation in the history of so grievous a disease, to be
able to say with certainty, that it is not contagious."

It has been said, and I suspect with too much truth, that were all the
physicians in this city to assert, that our late autumnal epidemic was not
contagious, they would not be able to make the people in general believe them,
since so many think they are well acquainted with decided proofs of its being
so. This, however, will not carry a full conviction to the minds of the more
considerate and reasonable part of the community, since the most popular
opinions are not always the most just. I suppose were all the faculty in
America to unite, and declare their disbelief in the power of the imagination
to mark the foetus in utero, that they could not persuade the generality of
women, but that, crossed appetites, unsatisfied cravings, and frightful sights,
will patch their offspring with roast pig, plumb cakes, strawberries, etc. or
give them hare lips, stain them with bloody spots or something of the kind; for
most of them fancy they have facts enough within their own knowledge, fully to
support the opinion of that most influential operation of the mind.

Should it be asked, whence could the general idea of this disease being
contagious, have originated? I answer, perhaps from no better foundation than
the popular belief in witchcraft arose, in a part of Massachusetts about one
hundred years ago, as well as in different parts of Europe sometime before, i.
e. from the credulous fears of the people, worked upon by the erroneous
opinions and publications of influential personages Hutchenson's Essay
concerning Witchcraft.
. Nineteen persons were executed in and about Salem in 1692 from this
demoniacal delusion, and no doubt, but ten times that number have been
shamefully permitted to die of the yellow fever in Philadelphia See Carey's
Account of the Malignant Fever in Philadelphia, 1793.
and New York, in consequence of neglect from the fear of contagion, when
perhaps the unhappy sufferers, were as free from the power of afflicting their
friends, as the New England witches were.

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE BY GARDENER BAKER, AT THE EXCHANGE IN THE
CITY OF NEW YORK, IN 1795. Sixth Month (June)
Days of the Month. Thermometer observed at Prevailing winds. Observations on
the weather. 8 A. M. 1 P. M. 6 P. M. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. 8. 1. 6. A.
M. P. M. 1 57 69 65 N W clear 2 65 70 50 62 W S W N W rain 3 58 50 73 74 N W
clear 4 67 50 73 67 N S do. 5 68 76 50 76 50 S W do. 6 71 50 79 75 W S do. 7 74
72 50 67 N S E do. 8 64 67 65 N E do. cloudy 9 66 78 50 77 S W do. 10 71 50 79
74 S W do. 11 65 65 62 N E S E E rain do. 12 62 65 60 50 E clear 13 61 66 50 60
S E do. 14 58 60 50 59 N E S E cloudy clear 15 63 50 71 69 N W clear 16 72 78
50 76 N W S E cloudy clear 17 59 65 61 N W S E do. 18 67 79 77 50 S clear 19 75
87 79 50 S do. 20 66 74 50 68 S rain 21 71 76 76 S W clear 22 70 75 78 S W S W
cloudy 23 72 76 50 73 50 W S S E clear 24 69 74 50 70 N E do. rain 25 65 69 68
N N W N cloudy do. 26 63 73 72 N W do. clear 27 66 76 76 N W W clear 28 70 80
50 77 N W E do. 29 73 74 73 S E S do. 30 72 73 50 69 S do. rain

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK, IN 1795. Seventh
Month (July)
Days of the Month. Thermometer observed at Prevailing winds. Observations on
the weather. 8 A. M. 1 P. M. 6 P. M. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. 8. 1. 6. A.
M. P. M. 1 71 50 75 72 S S E cloudy lt. wind 2 68 70 66 50 S E E N E do. do. 3
66 71 50 68 E N E rain 4 65 69 67 50 N E E cloudy 5 67 69 50 68 S E S clear lt.
wind 6 68 83 82 S S W do. 7 65 71 69 50 N thund. and light. 8 68 50 79 77 N N W
clear hi. wind 9 71 50 84 80 S W W do. 10 76 86 78 50 W N W light. and rain 11
75 82 50 76 W S clear lt. wind 12 77 50 89 87 S do. 13 70 50 85 87 N E S W do.
14 71 82 81 50 N N E do. lt. wind 15 72 50 77 73 N S E do. 16 73 50 77 72 S E W
S W do. 17 74 78 50 76 S W S do. 18 74 82 76 50 S W S S W cloudy th. rain 19 79
84 87 S W clear lt. wind 20 77 87 50 82 W S do. 21 77 81 76 N E S do. lt. wind
22 76 85 88 S W cloudy 23 74 50 78 74 S N E S E do. th. and lig. 24 73 75 50 74
N E rain cloudy 25 78 80 74 N E cloudy lt. wind 26 71 76 50 73 E S E do. clear
27 70 50 73 50 69 50 S E N do. rain 28 69 75 79 50 78 50 N N W clear lt. wind
29 73 78 74 N E S W do. 30 69 50 67 50 66 E N do. rain 31 72 50 73 73 E N gt.
rain

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK, IN 1795. Eighth
Month (August)
Days of the Month. Thermometer observed at Prevailing winds. Observations on
the weather. 8 A. M. 1 P. M. 6 P. M. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. 8. 1. 6. 8.
1. 1 73 25 80 77 50 W S E S W cloudy 2 79 50 86 78 S W S clear 3 73 71 50 74 E
S E storm and rain 4 77 82 80 W N W cloudy lt. wind 5 80 88 50 83 W S W clear 6
80 89 50 86 W do. 7 82 93 50 84 W do. 8 82 75 87 78 W S E W do. 9 79 87 82 50 S
S W gt. rain 10 80 50 87 78 W S W clear rain 11 75 79 76 N E S E S cloudy lt.
wind 12 74 80 75 N W S E rain 13 69 75 50 75 N do. 14 69 71 75 72 50 N E S W
cloudy 15 71 73 50 73 N E S W clear 16 69 78 77 S W W do. 17 75 85 50 76 N W S
W do. 18 79 50 88 50 82 50 S W N W W do. lt. wind 19 77 86 82 W do. 20 79 50 88
63 W N do. rain 21 57 50 60 50 59 N N E rain lt. wind 22 61 50 66 67 50 N E
cloudy do. 23 66 50 68 50 68 N E S E E do. rain 24 69 71 70 E S E do. 25 73 81
77 S E S W clear lt. wind 26 76 84 77 N S S E do. calm 27 75 81 74 S E S S E
do. 28 72 79 76 S do. 29 73 75 82 80 50 S cloudy 30 76 85 79 S do. clear 31 78
75 74 72 S clear rain

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK, IN 1795. Ninth
Month (September)
Days of the Month. Thermometer observed at Prevailing winds Observations on
the weather. 8 A. M. 1 P. M. 6 P. M. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. 8. 1. 6. A.
M. P. M. 1 73 75 77 W N cloudy lt. wind 2 66 70 70 N E rain high do. 3 65 71 71
W clear 4 64 75 73 N W do. 5 67 74 50 72 N W cloudy 6 70 75 73 N W clear 7 68
50 74 N N E rain 8 71 50 78 77 S S W cloudy lt. wind 9 75 83 50 77 S W clear 10
75 82 76 S W do. 11 74 84 50 79 S W W N W do. 12 63 70 67 N N E E do. 13 68 66
70 S E S cloudy rain 14 72 50 81 80 S do. 15 75 50 85 50 82 50 S W S do. clear
16 76 87 83 S W do. do. 17 68 50 79 75 78 50 N E do. do. 18 77 78 76 S clear
lt. wind 19 60 65 50 64 N N W rain 20 60 68 50 68 W S W clear rain 21 53 50 61
57 N W do. hi. wind 22 48 58 57 N N W do. do. 23 53 68 66 W do. light do. 24 57
66 50 64 W S W S do. high do. 25 58 73 72 S W do. 26 62 50 72 65 S W N E S E
cloudy 27 66 68 75 67 E S E do. 28 66 73 25 68 50 S clear lt. wind 29 63 50 64
25 60 N W cloudy 30 50 58 75 60 N clear lt. wind

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK, IN 1795. Tenth
Month (October)
Days of the Month Thermometer observed at Prevailing winds. Observations on
the weather 8 A. M. 1 P. M. 6 P. M. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. degrees. hun. 8. 1 6. A. M.
P. M. 1 56 70 66 N W N E S clear lt. wind 2 57 61 50 60 N E E cloudy 3 55 50 63
50 62 E S E clear 4 65 50 72 50 67 75 S S E do. 5 65 75 69 S S E cloudy 6 6z 67
50 66 W S W clear 7 57 50 67 65 W S W cloudy rain 8 54 54 55 N W do. 9 51 62 50
61 N W W clear 10 48 50 63 61 W S cloudy rain 11 60 69 65 N W W do. 12 55 50 66
66 W do. lt. wind 13 60 71 66 S S W do. do. 14 61 68 68 S W do. 15 65 66 71 S
do. dis. thu. 16 52 50 62 60 W clear lt. wind 17 58 49 52 S W W cloudy high do
18 42 54 50 W S W W clear 19 38 50 49 50 49 50 W S do. 20 55 62 50 55 50 S N W
rain 21 46 52 50 53 25 N N E clear 22 44 50 53 50 55 N E S E cloudy c. wind 23
55 61 59 50 N E rain 24 52 50 63 50 58 50 N W W clear 25 47 57 57 W do. 26 47
54 50 55 W N do. lt. wind 27 43 58 50 54 N S W do. do. 28 49 60 50 60 S W W do.
29 52 70 66 W do. 30 55 69 61 W S do. 31 52 50 55 54 50 S W foggy rain

The Cause of the Fever, and the most probable method of preventing its return:
likewise, the Precautions to be used to avoid an Attack, if it should again
become Epidemic.
On the sixth of August, 1795, I received a note from John Broom, Chairman of
the Committee of Health, earnestly soliciting me to give them every aid in my
power, by my prudent advice, etc. for the accomplishment of the important end
of their institution. In consequence of which, a few days after, I made him the
following communication.

That a malignant fever exists among us, is a melancholy certainty, well-known
to the Committee of Health; that this fever, in itself, is of a dangerous
nature, there can be no doubt; but whether it is contagious or not, is a
question yet undetermined. I have not known or heard of a single well attested
proof, of any person taking the complaint from another that was affected with
it.

My advice is, that the Committee, while they continue their unremitted and
benevolent exertions, in preventing the introduction of infectious diseases
from abroad, settle not in a false security, and neglect the causes of diseases
that may exist in the city. It is from the unguarded operations of these
inwalled enemies, that I conceive we have to apprehend the greatest danger.

If I have been rightly informed, a great proportion of the persons, that have
at this season been affected with fevers of a suspicious nature, has been
confined to those whose residence or occupation has obliged them to pass a
considerable part of their time between Peck-slip and the New-slip. If so, it
certainly is a matter of consequence, to know, whether in this part of the
city, there is not some local cause that may induce so fatal a malady.

That putrefying substances, after a continuation of very warm weather, will
give rise to such complaints; the fatal operation of the dock mud deposited at
Peck-slip in 1791, the putrid coffee in Philadelphia in 1793, and the noxious
exhalations from the creek in New Haven in 1794, sufficiently prove, without
the aid of many other equally certain, though more remote facts, that might be
adduced in its support if necessary.

On these principles I have been led to search into this part of the town, for
the cause of the present complaint, and I believe my inquiries have not been in
vain: I suspect that I have discovered a fruitful matrix generating the seeds
of this complaint, and which if not properly cared for, may possibly spread
mortality in its vicinity.

A few years ago the Corporation have had Water-street, between the two
beforementioned slips, filled up, without obliging the proprietors of the
property on the north side of the street and in Cherry-street, to fill up their
yards even to a level with it. Hence, the refuse water and offal substances,
from the families occupying these places, are left to stagnate and putrify; and
what renders it particularly distressing, is, that the healthful showers, that
in general wash away all such matters from other places, here only tend to
render them more active; for by the water not running off, it dissolves and
prepares them, thus pent up, for entering into their pestilential fermentation.
Our regular and heavy rains, perhaps have been one great remote cause of the
frequency of these distressing diseases, in this neighborhood at this season.

It may be worthy of remark, that many of these tenements contain several
families; hence an additional cause for putrefactive materials.

I make no apology for giving these hints to the Committee; the impression of
their importance on my mind, rendering it a duty: the hurry of an early
communication, amidst frequent professional interuptions, must answer for their
incorrectness.

'With a sense of respect and esteem, 'I remain thy friend and fellow-citizen,
'VALENTINE SEAMAN*'
New York, 8th month (August) 17th, 1795.

The cause of the disease as above suggested, not being removed, its effects,
in full support of my apprehensions, truly spread great mortality in the
vicinity, as is seen by its history in the foregoing observations.

This early idea of the origin of the epidemic, constantly gained confirmation
from the manner in which it increased: it appeared to be almost entirely
confined to the level south-eastern part of the town, and there it was the most
general and fatal, in the particular situations that mostly abounded with these
pools of putrefactive exhalations. Thus it first became the most general in and
about the lower end of Dover-street: this is what might reasonably be looked
for when we consider that besides all the lots fronting this street being sunk
beneath the common level of it, there are also on the docks at its lower end
several storehouses and granaries, built partly over the water on piles,
without having the space under them filled up; the foundation of some of them,
on the sides fronting the water are partitioned up so as to prevent the free
circulation of the tide from washing away any thing from under them; however,
these partitions were not so tight but that they let in water sufficient to
favor the fermentation of the putrefactive materials that such a common
receptacle will always collect, not only from exterior sources, but also from
the showers of grain that frequently would pour down through holes that the
rats sometimes would gnaw in the floor. Hence there can be no wonder, that the
seeds of this disease should ripen in such a hot bed of putrefaction, aided by
the effluvia emited from the great flats of mud in the several surrounding
impaired docks, left bare during the recess of every tide. It is remarkable
that several persons employed in a large grain storehouse, thus situated over
such a source of noxious miasmata, were among the first victims of this disease.

The disease soon increased; numbers were taken in every part of that quarter
of the town, lying between the upper part of Water, Pearl and Chatham-streets,
and across to the lower part of George-street. From an attention to the subject
not only during the hurry of the epidemic, but also since its extinction, I am
led to believe according to my best judgment, that four fifths of all the lots
in this affected part of the city, were situated below the level of the streets
they fronted, whence from our regular rains, they very generally became
stagnant, putrid mud puddles. I can hardly think it possible, was it not for
the obstruction of the houses preventing a free observation of these grounds,
that any candid person acquainted with the common causes of fevers, could
harbor the least doubt after walking through this part of the town, but that
the epidemic originated from this source, rendered active by the continued
excessive heat of the sun during the last summer. It raged with peculiar
violence in the parts that were near the docks; this is what might be expected
from the additional vapor of the dock mud as abovementioned. It also was very
fatal in a part of George-street, not less than sixty persons were buried out
of it within the small compass of twenty houses. This was probably owing to the
poisonous steams discharged from large quantities of street dirt and manure,
collected during the summer and deposited near the head of it, subjoined to the
common causes abovementioned. Its fatality to the West of Peck-slip was
induced, no doubt, by the noxious vapors from the putrid sink there. The reason
of its prevalence about the Fly-market, can seem no ways strange to any one
acquainted with the situation of that place, the market being built over an
offensive sewer, whose exhalations were confined only by an imperfect board
floor, to which may be added, the effluvia constantly arising from the
putrefying animal and vegetable matter all around, as well as from the slip
that puts in at it. Skinner-street is lowly situated, unpaved and very
imperfectly drained.

That putrefactive effluvia will give rise to, and are the common cause of such
diseases, is clearly proved by the accurate observations of the most judicious
writers on the diseases of hot climates. Lind's valuable book of interesting
facts (Essay on the Diseases of hot climates) abounds with proofs of this
disease being caused by the air from the low lands in the West Indies; he
particularly mentions, that it often raged in the Greenwich Hospital at
Jamaica; which, as he observes, was unfortunately built near a marsh, and that
it could not proceed from any source of infection in the hospital. Dr. Hunter
says (Diseases of the army in Jamaica) ships lying at Port Royal in Jamaica, on
moving and taking their station higher up the harbor, have in a few days become
sickly. The men, says he, have been seized with fevers owing to the low swampy
lands along shore, and at the head of the harbor, from which last the
exhalations are carried every morning toward the ships, when the regular sea
breeze sets in, as is perceived by the bad smell which accompanies it. He says
that there are examples, where out of sixty or seventy men, employed in filling
the water casks, not one has escaped a fever, from the watering place being wet
and swampy. The same author observes, that Fort Augusta, which was at other
times a salubrious situation, became sickly in 1783, the sea that year having
risen higher than usual, so that it overflowed the whole of the ground on which
the fort stands, near a foot above the surface in some places, and on ebbing
left much slime and ouze. A few days after this, many of the men were taken
with fevers. Dr. Jackson (Treatise on the Diseases of Jamaica) as well as a
host of other authors, might be brought if necessary, to prove that putrid
exhalations are the common causes of epidemics. The above facts, together with
the many others adduced by Dr. Rush (Account of the Yellow Fever etc.) in their
support, appear to me to be sufficient to establish that opinion with every
unprejudiced person -- which if allowed, no one acquainted with the situation
of the part of this city where the yellow fever raged as above stated, can have
the least doubt but that it was owing to like causes, without the necessity of
ransacking West India vessels or innocent bags of cotton, for that which is
within ourselves, and whose very essence perhaps, is such as proves it not to
be of a transportable nature It has been observed by Dr. Rush, in Vol. I. of
his Med. Observations, as well as by Dr. Lind, that musquetoes generally attend
a sickly season -- the same was observed here during the last summer: the cause
is very clear, for circumstances favoring the rise of putrid miasmata, equally
savor the generation of these insects.
.

Many of the strenuous supporters of the contagious nature of this disease,
compelled by the force of the foregoing circumstances, acknowledge, that the
disease may be caused by other means, however they cannot entirely, give up
this favorite opinion, but persist in asserting that contagion often does
induce the disease, when the foregoing state of the air favors its operations;
and they defy any one to prove that it does not. To prove a negative is always
difficult, such a one, perhaps impossible. But since the only proof we can have
of the existence of a cause, is the necessity of it for producing known
effects, and since we are to admit, (according to Newton's first philosophic
precept) no more causes than are sufficient to explain the appearances, and, as
has been observed, (Pemberton's view of Newton's philosophy) When one cause is
sufficient, if there really should in nature, be two, which is in the last
degree improbable, we can have no possible means of knowing it, and
consequently ought not to take the liberty of imagining, that there are more
than one. Now, therefore, as the above suggested cause of our epidemic seems
fully sufficient of itself to produce it, nothing can be more unphilosophic or
imprudent than to suppose, that contagion ever had any thing to do with it.

The most probable means of preventing a like calamity in future will be --
1st, To have all the lots, particularly in the low parts of the town, filled
up, so as to afford a sufficient descent to carry off the water into the
streets, and not permit any of it to stagnate in them. 2d, To have the dirt and
filth in the streets and yards more carefully and frequently cleared away. 3d,
To have the docks repaired and regulated in such a manner, as not to permit the
mud to gather and be exposed to the sun at the ebb of the tide. 4th, To have
the spaces under the granaries and storehouses on the docks, properly filled
up or walled in. 5th, To prevent great quantities of street-dirt and manure
from being collected in heaps, and left for any time on the vacant lots, in and
about the city. 6th, To have the streets properly paved with a sufficient
descent to prevent any water from standing in them; and 7th, To have the common
sewers, in good order and well covered. An attention to these circumstances, no
doubt, will prevent the return of a like epidemic in this city; for, as I
suggested some time since to the corporation, whether the disease is
contagious, or whether it was imported or not; this one fact seems to be pretty
firmly established, that it never has spread, but by the influence of
putrefactive effluvia.

If, either from a neglect of the foregoing precautions or from any other
causes, the yellow fever should again become prevalent in any part of this
city, it certainly would be most prudent for such as have it in their power, to
remove from it; or if unavoidable circumstances, or the calls of humanity
should render it necessary for some to continue there for a part of the time,
let them if possible, shun the night air, as the harbinger of death, and
especially to avoid sleeping in that neighborhood, as they value their lives;
for perhaps in the relaxed hours of rest, the epidemic miasmata may act with
redoubled force. Dr. Lind's instances clearly shows the particular danger of
sleeping within the limits of the contaminated air; many persons having been
taken with the complaint, after having slept a night on shore in the low
ground, while others, who had passed a considerable time there during the day,
and always returned to the vessels at night, generally escaped it.

Besides, keeping from the night air of the epidemic neighborhood, and the
sleeping in a healthy part of the town: all persons who are forced to pass some
of their time in the contaminated atmosphere, should avoid with the most
scrupulous attention, excesses of every kind; not only of eating and drinking,
but also of heat, exercise and watching. But I wish to be understood, not to
mean a rigid abstinence from, or a restriction with respect to these things;
but only to advise moderation and regularity in the use of them, because it is
likely that a very low diet and the entire neglect of wine, with them who have
been accustomed to it, as well as cold, inactivity, too much sleep, fear, etc.
may as effectually predispose to this complaint, as their opposite extremes: I
believe the more regularly we support the natural healthy tone of our bodies,
the more powerful they will resist the causes of diseases applied to them.

The observation of Dr. Lining must be a great satisfaction to those who have
once suffered with this disease. He says (Essays and Observations, Physical and
Literary, vol. 2.) It is a great happiness that our constitutions undergo such
alterations in it, as forever afterward secures us from a second attack. He
certainly had a good opportunity of knowing whether it did or not, as it raged
four times in Charlestown, South Carolina (the place of his residence) within
sixteen years. In the West India Isllands an attack of this disease, which
seems almost entirely confined to persons from more northern climates, is
called a seasoning, and after which, if the patient recovers, he is supposed to
be pretty secure. I never have known of any person having had it twice
decidedly; perhaps some instances supposed to have been that fever, were only
common remittents. Dr. Rush says, (Medical Observations, Vol. 2.) that during
the prevalence of the meazles, he as well as Dr. Quier, observed several
persons (who had had that disease, and who were closely confined to the rooms
of persons ill with it) to be affected with a slight cough, sore throat, and
even sores in the mouth. And what are called nurse pocks, are no rare things
with persons (who have previously had the small pox) that have much to do with
patients in that disease: so also is it possible that some people may suffer a
slight indisposition from the cause of this disease, after having had it once,
which perhaps ought not to be considered as a full attack of it. It may be that
the great debility, remaining after a complete removal of this disease, may
predispose to an attack of some other, perhaps of a fever of a different
nature, that might even prove fatal, so like consequences might follow a severe
attack of the small pox and no one would consider this as a return of the
disease. Notwithstanding these remarks are not entirely conclusive with me, yet
they have so much influenced me, in the opinion of the impossibility of taking
this disease more than once, that should it again become epidemic here,
although I could not again venture among it with less hesitation than
heretofore, I certainly should with much less apprehension.

METHOD OF CURE.
In the treatment of this, as of all other diseases, the first object should be
to remove their cause; for although in some instanees, the human body by habit
may be enabled to resist the effects of injurious impressions, and even by
proper means to recover itself after morbid effects are inducted, while the
cause still continues; yet that physician would be considered very deficient,
who would undertake to cure an ophthalmia caused by residing in a smoky
apartment, or the cholera infantum, originating from the impurity and heat of
the city air, without first advising his patients to remove from such an
obnoxious situation, for although he might sometimes succeed in his attempts,
yet it certainly would be attended with more difficulty and uncertainty; so
also is it in the yellow fever; hence in this disease it is of the highest
importance to have the patient removed, as soon as possible, out of the reach
of the original cause of his complaints, into a more salubrious atmosphere; a
neglect of this perhaps was one main reason of the great fatality of this
epidemic; therefore, should it again prevail, it would be of the utmost
consequence, for those whose circumstances would admit of it, to secure a
proper asylum in case of an attack, and the poor ought to be industriously
sought after and earnestly advised, early in their complaints, to remove to
such places as the police may prepare for their reception. It may be remarked,
that but a small proportion died at Belle-vue who went there in the early
stages of their diseases.

Whether the original cause be removed or not, the next indications are,

1. To obviate the restricted state of the bowels, and clear the alimentary
canal of the super abundant bile that seems to attend the disease.

2. To use all means in our power to obtain a remission of the fever; and

3. During the remission, to restore the tone of the system so as to prevent a
return.

Whether the seat and throne of this disease is in the stomach and bowels,
according to Dr. Warren, or not, it must be acknowledged that it is in a great
degree upon a particular attention to them, that the hopes of a cure depend, as
it is upon a particular morbid affection of them that the greatest danger is to
be apprehended. To fulfill the first indication, a sufficient dose, viz. ten or
twelve grains of calomel, with as much jalap or rheubarb, should be exhibited
immediately and repeated every six or eight hours, till it purges freely; its
operations should be favored by the plentiful drinking of warm chicken or
barley water or gruel, and keeping warm in bed; by these means oftentimes a
free perspiration is brought on, and the second indication is accomplished at
the same time; an almost complete remission being the consiquence.

Let no one fear the largeness of the dose of the purgative, or its early
repetition as above recommended, for in no disease perhaps is it of more
consequence to obtain the speedy operation of medicine than in this; it is
probable many lives have been lost from the cautious timidity of Physicians, in
giving but small and repeated doses of cathartics, till the disease stole on to
that stage wherein the great irritability of the stomach utterly refused to
retain any more of it, before they have given a sufficiency effectually to
evacuate the intestines.

If a remission does not succeed to the operation of this medicine, but
symptoms of great excitement, with violent pain in the head, etc. particularly
in persons of a full habit of body, with a plenitude in the vascular system,
bleeding undoubtedly promised and proved of the most essential service, and
ought by no means to be neglected; but I do not wish to be understood to
recommend the indiscriminate use of the lancet by any means, for there are
innumerable circumstances, both as they relate to the previous state of the
patient, as well as to the existing symptoms, that should always govern the
judicious physician in the use of this most powerful remedy.

After the operation of the purgative, if the degree of excitement or tone in
the vascular system, should not justify the loosing of blood, or if as much has
been drawn as the state of the patient may render advisable, and still there
remain a degree of tension in the pulse, a dryness on the surface, etc. a
sudorific draught of half an ounce of spt. minderer with twenty drops of tinct.
thebaic has often been exhibited with the happiest effects; a sweat generally
succeeding with a considerable remission of all the symptoms; in conjunction
with the sudorific portion, the patient should have his feet and legs fomented
with flannels wrung out of warm water, for as long as half an hour at least; he
should also favor its operation by a plentiful dilution with the
beforementioned drinks.

The use of antimonial medicines have been greatly recommended in this state of
the disease, to bring on a remission; but I confess, in the few instances
wherein I made trial of them, they did not answer my expectations, the state of
the stomach generally being such as would not bear even the smallest doses of
them.

For the violent pain in the head attending this first stage, nothing seemed
more effectual than the constant application of linen cloths, wetted with cold
vinegar and water to the forehead and temples, and changed as soon as they
became warm.

I know not whether Dr. Jackson's method of using the warm and cold bath
alternately, has been practiced by any physicians of this city; but the dashing
of cold water over the body, and afterward drinking plentifully of a strong
infusion of rad. serpentar. has been much cried up by some; I used it in but a
single case, and although the patient was particularly attended to, yet the
looked for sweat and remission did not succeed; this was nevertheless,
accomplished afterward by the partial application of cold vinegar and water to
his forehead.

After the bowels were properly evacuated and a remission obtained, I lost not
a moment's time, but immediately applied to the use of the bark, in doses
apportioned to the state of the stomach, half a dram, if it would retain so
much, was given every two hours, otherwise half that quantity was given and
increased as the stomach would bear it; it was exhibited in milk and water or
some of the drinks beforementioned, which ever was most agreeable; a few drops
of the acid elix. vitriol with each dose of the bark, sometimes would make it
more agreeable to the stomach; it seems hardly necessary (...) that in this
case it must not be give^ in (...)* When the bark in substance could not be
(...) the cold infusion was substituted in dose^ from (...) an ounce to an
ounce, according to circumstanc^^ and repeated every two hours or oftener if it
well on the stomach. At the exacerbat^^ns of fever, the use of these remedies
was often suspend and the means beforementioned were applied to, (...) a degree
of remission was again obtained wh^^ (...) use of the bark, etc. was again
resumed. When (...) patient was costive, he had a few grains of rheuba^^ united
with each dose of his bark, till tha^ state (...) obviated.

The acid elix. vitr. was used with advanta^^ during the remission of this
disease, par^^cularly (...) hemorrhages attended it. I have already ^ention^^
it, as useful in making the bark sit easy on the st^mach; but in case the bark
should be ret^ined (...) without it, it then would perhaps be bette^ to
adm^nister it between the times of taking that medicin^ it may be that this
acid, while it covers the bit^^^ taste, may likewise tend to lessen the tonic
effects the bark.

Generally, if the abovementioned means were (...) used, and frequently
notwithstanding our g^^atest ^^tention, about the third or fourth day, the
seco^^ stage of the disease would be ushered in with (...) and constant
sickness at stomach, particul^rly upon swallowing any thing; an epispastic was
often ^^plied to the scrobiculis cordis in this situation, a^^ sometimes with
advantage; some others received ^^nefit from using warm fomentations to (...)
Laudanum was rejected; but in some instan^^^ thought a grain of solid opium was
adminis^^^^^ (...) with good effects, and small bleedings seemed sometimes
useful; this, however, as well as all other means, often failed, the stomach
throwing up every thing that was taken into it. In this desperate state, our
last refuge was to the bowels, and our only dependence appeared to be upon the
plentiful exhibition of our remedies per anum, half an ounce of powdered bark,
with a gill of milk, chicken soup or beef tea, and twenty-five or thirty drops
of laudanum, make a proper injection for this purpose; it should be repeated at
least twice a day. This means no doubt has preserved the lives of many; should
the bark be retained in the bowels till the period of administering the third
dose, it would be advisable to bring it away by a common injection of warm
water, before that is given.

From observing that none died who were affected with a salivation, I attempted
in several instances to induce that affection, by rubbing the gums with calomel
and using mercurial frictions; but as these attempts were made only in the
latter stages of desperate cases, I never succeeded. May not mercurial
frictions be advantageously used from the commencement of the disease to
produce this affection?

The diet of the patient in this disease, should be of the mildest nature;
panado, chicken soup, beef tea, roast apples and milk, tapioca, etc. appeared
to agree best with the delicate situation of the stomach, and perhaps were the
most proper food that could be taken.

In the convalescence, a continuance of the bark and elixir of vitriol, a more
nourishing diet of roasted oysters, beef-steakes, porter, etc. together with
moderate exercise in the country air, were the most effectual means of
restoring the lost tone to the debilitated systems of those who happily
survived the effects of this most dreadful disease.

FINIS.
LETTERS TO WILLIAM BUEL, PHYSICIAN, ON THE FEVER WHICH PREVAILED IN NEW YORK,
IN 1795. BY E. H. SMITH. TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, AN ACCOUNT OF THE FEBRILE
DISEASES OF SHEFFIELD, (MASSACHUSETTS) IN THE YEARS 1793, 1794 AND 1795. BY W.
BUEL.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE FEBRILE DISORDERS WHICH PREVAILED IN SHEFFIELD, IN THE STATE
OF MASSACHUSETTS, IN THE YEARS 1793, 1794 AND 1795. EXTRACTED FROM A LETTER OF
WILLIAM BUEL, PHYSICIAN AT SHEFFIELD, TO E. H. SMITH, PHYSICIAN, OF NEW YORK.
BEFORE entering directly on the subject of the disorders, which prevailed here
in 1793, 1794 and 1795, I shall mention some circumstances relative to the face
of the country in the Town of Sheffield.

The river Housatonak runs in a serpentine course through this town, from North
to South. Upon the banks of the river, on each side, is an extent of intervale,
or meadow land, averaging on both sides at about a mile in breadth. The
greatest part of this intervale is overflowed at the time of the thawing away
of the snow, in the spring; and sometimes, by large and sudden freshets, at
other seasons. The nature of the soil, in general, is such, that, very soon
after the water is off, the land is dry and fit for tillage. It is, however,
much interspersed with coves and marshes; in the former of which the water
remains stagnant a considerable part of the summer, and in many of them
perpetually; of the latter there are not many upon this river, but there are
some which remain such through the season.

Beside the Housatonak, there are two other considerable streams, running
through part of this town, which unite and empty into that river. Upon each of
these streams are large tracts of low, marshy lands; great part of which is
overflowed by freshets, and is never perfectly dry. -- There is (which is very
material) a mill-dam, on each of these streams; and the two dams occasion the
overflowing of several hundred acres of the low lands. As summer advances, and
the ponds fall, considerable parts of these lands are left uncovered by the
water; more or less, according to the drought of the summer. In both of these
ponds are large quantities of timber and other vegetable matters, which, in hot
weather, are always in a state of putrefaction. This state exists in an
increased degree as the substances become more exposed to the action of the
sun. The foetor occasioned by this putrefying mass is such, in hot weather and
when the water is low, as to be extremely offensive to the smell, at the
distance of many rods.

The inhabitants of this town, who live in the vicinity of these marshy and
drowned lands, have, as would naturally be expected, been always subject to
remittent and intermittent fevers, from its first settlement. It is, however,
generally remarked by the old people, that these disorders have of late years
-- until the three last -- decreased: owing, probably, to the clearing, or
partial draining, of the lands.

Although the disorders which have prevailed in this town, for two or three
years past, are owing undoubtedly, principally to these local causes; yet it is
not improbable that some predisposition to them was occasioned by a general
constitution of the air. To ascertain this point, with any degree of precision,
we ought to have before us an accurate history of the weather, for several
years past. Even then it would, perhaps, be impossible; as it has ever been
found a difficult matter to trace any connection between the manifest qualities
of the air, and the effects of a general constitution of it, favorable to
disease. As I am unable, either from minutes, or memory, to give any account of
the weather, I shall leave the matter unattempted.

In the year 1793, during the season in which such complaints usually appear,
intermittents and their concomitants were more frequent than they had been for
many years before. In September and October, there were a few scattering
instances of bilious fevers.

Early in the spring of 1794, inflammatory complaints, chiefly of the pneumonic
kind, were unusually prevalent. They were soon succeeded by intermittents;
which were more frequent than they had been the year before. Nothing peculiar
attended them; and they continued to occur pretty often through the summer.

Toward the last of July, the bilious, or, as it is called here, the
pond-fever, began to make its appearance; principally about the South Pond, one
of the mill-ponds beforementioned, and near the Canaan line. There were some
scattered instances about the North Pond: and a few, which were at such a
distance from both, that they were, probably, occasioned by the stagnant water
about the great river, the Housatonak. But the disorder was chiefly confined to
the vicinity of the South Pond. The influence of this pond appeared to extend
about one mile and a half from its borders. Within this place there are about
150 inhabitants; and about 80 of this number were affected with the fever: part
of them inhabitants of Sheffield, and a part of Canaan. Among those who were
sick, there were five or six instances of mortality. There were not more than
ten or twelve persons who had the disorder in other parts of this town. From
these there was but one death; and that in a case complicated with pregnancy,
and eventually with phthisis pulmonalis. People continued to be attacked with
this fever through the months of August, September and a part of October.

The disorder was, probably, in all respects, what is termed a bilious
remitting fever. It began with an ague fit; intense pains in the back, head and
limbs, soon succeeded by thirst, dryness of the skin, etc. continuing without
much variation 18 or 20 hours: a slight moisture then broke out upon the skin
-- seldom a profuse sweat; a degree of remission of the fever, and abatement of
the pains, then ensued, and continued till about the time of day of the first
attack, when another exacerbation of fever commenced, with symptoms similar to
the first. If the disease was left to itself, the remissions would sometimes
become shorter and more imperfect, as the paroxysms were repeated, until it
grew to be nearly or quite a continued fever. A diarrhea, and sometimes
dysenteric symptoms were added to the rest. Most of those who died were
attended with a preternaturally lax state of the bowels; which, in several
instances, might properly be called dysenteric. The tongue was, from the first,
covered with a white fur. After three or four days, a black stripe began to
appear; extending from the root, toward the extremity; and gradually
spreading, as the disorder advanced, till the whole tongue assumed a black
appearance. Even the teeth and gums were sometimes covered by this black fur;
and in some patients who afterward recovered.

In the treatment of this disorder, evacuation of some kind, is undoubtedly
necessary in the early stage of it. Venesection generally produced a temporary
relief from the violence of the pain, and was, probably, when the constitution
was firm and robust, and the habit plethoric, frequently useful; but it did not
appear to me to be important as a curative remedy. Emetics sometimes did well;
and where there was a great degree of nausea, I thought them useful. But
purging, with calomel and jalap, was the mode of evacuation I preferred, and
generally practiced; and the remedy which of all others appeared to me most
advantageous in the early stage of the disease.

It is unnecessary for me to say any thing more, in this place, than that
assiduous purging, in the beginning, and a plentiful use of the Bark, after the
remissions had become such as to make it admissible, were the essential parts
of the management of this disorder.

So strong was the tendency to disorders of this kind, that people continued in
some instances to be affected with intermittents, or fever and ague, through the
winter. These were very frequent in the spring, but with no peculiarities, and
yielding to the common remedy with the usual facility.

During the month of August 1795, I was in the county of Ontario, in the
western part of the state of New York. There was, at that time, a disorder
prevalent there, of the same nature with that which I found rife in Sheffield,
on my return, and which I am about to describe. It was chiefly existent in the
neighborhood of stagnant waters, and in situations similar to those places, in
this town, to which the disease was mostly confined. The treatment required
was, of course, the same.

On my return to Sheffield, which was the 5th of September, I found a number of
the inhabitants, about the North Pond, afflicted with a fever, which began to
appear about three weeks before. The people first attacked were those who lived
nearest to the pond; whole families of whom were down at once. Numbers
continued to be taken, daily, chiefly within the vicinity of this Pond, or
within three quarters of a mile of its borders, till about the middle of
October; after which time there were few instances of new attacks. In this
time, i. e. from the 10th of August to the 20th of October, of about 200 (which
is not far from the number of persons living within three quarters of a mile of
some of the borders of this pond) not less than 150 were affected with more or
less of this disease; out of which number, but one person died, and that an
aged man, previously debilitated and disordered. -- The number affected with
this fever, in all other parts of this town, did not, I believe, exceed thirty.
Of these, three died: one, an aged woman: the other two, pregnant women; of
whom, one died in the fever, the other suffered an abortion, and died some
months after, dropsical.

The disease, this year, put on a different form to what it did the last. It
might, with more propriety be called an intermittent, than a remittent fever;
though it was very different from a common fever and ague. It began, like other
fevers, with an ague fit, attended with pains in the head, back and limbs. The
duration of this part of the paroxysm was uncertain. It was succeeded by a hot
fit, whose duration was, in different persons, from six to forty-eight hours. A
remission, and, sometimes, nearly or quite, a perfect intermission, then came
on; but whose duration was as irregular and uncertain as was that of the
paroxysm before. After the first, the paroxysms were not generally ushered in
by a regular ague fit; only some slight chills were felt; and these were
irregular, both in degree and continuance. The length of the next succeeding
paroxysms and intervals could, by no means, be calculated for, from the
preceding: so completely irregular was this disorder. The fever evidently
tended to an intermittent form; but it could neither be called quotidian,
tertian, quartan, nor by any other name used by authors to distinguish the
different species of intermitting fevers. The pains in the head, limbs and
back, were very severe, particularly in the latter, which were so universally
intense, that the symptom might almost be considered as characterestic of the
disorder. In the primae viae, flatulency was nearly a constantly-attendant and
very troublesome symptom. Evidences of an increased secretion and excretion of
bile, were generally present through the disease, but were particularly
observable in the convalescence. Some degree of yellowness of the skin, which
was almost universal, indicated a reabsorption of this fluid, and a deposition
of it upon the skin. This yellowness was in two instances, which I saw, very
intense. A slight degree of delirium was very common, during the height of the
fever. The appearance of the tongue was much the same that it was last year.

My method of treating the fever of this year, was similar to that which I
employed the last year. -- Purging, in the beginning, and afterward a
plentiful use of the Bark, appeared to me to be the most successful way of
managing it. In extreme cases, particularly, a free and full exhibition of
bark, wine and laudanum, seemed the only means of salvation. It was absolutely
necessary that the patient should be thoroughly purged, previous to the use of
stimulants, otherwise the bark, wine or laudanum, would have very pernicious
effects. I saw several instances, at the westward, where, by too early a use of
these medicines, the fever was changed into a continued form, attended with a
constantly dry and yellow skin, comatose symptoms, etc. One of the instances of
extreme yellowness, which I have mentioned, was of this kind, and at the
westward. I removed this symptom, and recovered the patient, by giving repeated
doses of calomel and jalap, some perspirative medicines, and afterward the
bark, wine, etc. Each purge, in this case, lessened the degree of yellowness,
very apparently. The other instance of intense yellowness, which I saw, was in
this town, in the case of the pregnant woman, whom I have mentioned to have
died in the fever. This woman's fever never had distinct intermissions. Several
slight attempts were made to administer the bark; but it would not do. Perhaps
my timidity in the use of evacuants, on account of her situation, was injurious
to her.

The Bark did not suspend the paroxysms, in this disorder, in as short a time
as it does in common intermittents; but, if the patient was properly prepared,
and the use of it was persevered in, it never failed to have the effect.

Purging was probably useful in a twofold way: First, by carrying off the
superfluous bile; which was, evidently, secreted and excreted in a
preternatural quantity: Secondly, by reducing the sthenic diathesis, which was,
perhaps, always present, in the early stage of the disorder.

It is true, that those whose fever was suspended by the bark, were subject to
frequent relapses, and to a long and lingering state of convalescence. This
drew an odium upon that medicine; and many were induced to believe that it was
owing to the use of it that people were so long in recovering, and, of course,
that it was improper. I am convinced, however, from very attentive observation,
that those who did not take the bark, but suffered the fever gradually to wear
away, as it sometimes would, were equally subject to those inconveniences.
Indeed, this seems to be the nature of the disease. The old people in this
town, who recollect the times when disorders of this kind have prevailed here
before, and when the bark was not at all used, inform me that those who were
afflicted with them, were a long time in recovering.

It seems that, in all cases, when patients have got rid of the fever, either
by means of the bark, or otherwise, there remains an increased disposition to
the formation and excretion of bile, and that this humor accumulates in the
primae viae, till it first destroys the appetite and occasions nausea, and then
excites a spontaneous discharge by stool or vomiting, or a relapse of fever, or
both. A continuance in the use of some laxative medicine, after a recovery, has
a tendency to prevent these effects; and, if strictly attended to, would
probably prevent them, and perhaps obviate the disposition to relapse entirely.

In reflecting on phenomena of this kind, the human mind is anxious to fix on
something satisfactory as their causes. Specific contagion, I am convinced, was
in no instance, which came under my observation, either here or at the
westward, the cause of the propagation of the disorder. That marsh effluvia, to
whose action the inhabitants of some parts of this town are subject, is the
exciting cause, and is necessary to the production of the disorders in
question, is beyond any manner of doubt. This is evident from their existing
only where this influence extends. But something more is wanting; otherwise we
cannot account for their prevailing in some years, and not in others. Every
circumstance relative to the ponds I have endeavored to discover the cause why
the sickness in 1794, was confined almost entirely to the South, and in 1795,
to the North-Pond; but I can find no local circumstances to have existed which
should produce sickness about one, and not about the other, in either of these
years.
and marshes in this town has, apparently, been the same, for many years past;
and yet very little of this form of disease has appeared, for ten or twelve
years back, until the two last. We must either suppose a peculiar constitution
of the atmosphere, occasioning a predisposition to these disorders, and
coinciding with the local cause, or marsh effluvia; or that the marsh effluvia
itself is, by some peculiarity of the atmosphere, wrought up to a higher pitch
of virulence, and thus produces a higher degree of disease. I am inclined to
admit the latter supposition, as I am convinced that the fevers which have
prevailed here, for two or three years past, and the common intermittent fever,
are the same, only differing in degree. I have seen all degrees, from the
mildest form of intermittents, to the most extreme of bilious remitting fever.
It is impossible to say where the line of division shall be drawn. The disease
this year seems to have formed a connecting link between intermittent and
bilious fever; and, were I to name it, I would call it a bilious intermittent.
Should the intermittent fever, in its usual form, prevail next year, the
disorder may be said, in the three years, to have been in regular gradations
run through.

SHEFFIELD, NOV. 30, 1795.
LETTERS TO WILLIAM BUEL, PHYSICIAN, SHEFFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS, ON THE FEVER
WHICH PREVAILED IN NEW YORK, IN 1795. BY E. H. SMITH.

Advertisement.
THE following letters were written at the request, and for the information, of
a medical friend, with whom the writer has long been accustomed to correspond,
both on professional and general topics. Being composed originally without any
view to the press, and nearly finished before the idea of publication was
suggested, they will need much indulgence for many defects of expression and
method, which the writer has not leisure to correct. Much, too, must be
pardoned to that pruriency of style, and positiveness of decision, into which
persons in habits of fraternal intimacy are apt to fall, and which the laws of
epistolary intercourse do not forbid. A careful revision, would, doubtless,
have rendered these letters more acceptable, in these respects, and have
chastised them of those repetitions of sentiment and expression, which, though
partially avoided in transcribing for the press, still occur too frequently.
But this was impossible. A further, and more satisfactory, apology may be
expected, for the opinions which they contain; -- considering the youth, and
supposed inexperience, of the writer. It is not improbable that hasty and
unfounded opinions have crept into the following pages; opinions unsupported by
fact, and which informed reason would disclaim. If such there are, no person
can be more desirous, than he who has delivered, to discover them, or more
ready to relinquish them. But a conclusion against an opinion should rest on
some better foundation than the age of him who maintains it. To those who think
otherwise, the words of the learned Van Sweeten may not impertinently be
addressed.

Honor and respect are due to physicians, eminent from their long and extensive
practice of this salutary art; but they, on their side, ought not to be
supercilious, nor despise the advice of younger professors. If even a gardener
may sometimes speak to the purpose, how much more may not this be expected from
physicians, though young, when regularly educated and diligent in their
profession: they have an opportunity of observing the whole course of a disease
and its successive changes, while the others, overwhelmed with business, view
in haste some of those circumstances only which happen in the time of the
disease, and are obliged to collect the rest from ignorant nurses, who do not
always tell the truth. The public good will be most promoted, if the fire of
the young physician be moderated by the mature discretion and experience of the
old practitioner; nor let these, while they instruct, be ashamed to learn.
Comment: on the 1413 aphorism of Boerhaave.


NEW YORK, MAY, 1796.
LETTERS ON THE FEVER OF 1795.
LETTER FIRST. INTRODUCTORY.
IN compliance with your wishes, and in return for the communication with which
you lately favored me, relative to the diseases which prevailed in the
neighborhood where you reside, for the last three years, I have put together
all the scanty information I possess, respecting the fever which was the
occasion of so much distress to this City, in the last summer and autumn. -- I
regret my inability to communicate a more minute and specific statement of
facts; and the more, as there seems little probability, at present, that any
person, qualified for the task, will undertake it. Various circumstances
conspired to narrow the sphere of my observation; and this may have led me into
erroneous conclusions, which more extensive practice and wider observation
would have corrected in me, and may have corrected in others. But, how faulty
soever my reasonings may be thought, I must demand absolute and entire credit
for my facts. In these, I cannot well have been deceived: for the very
circumstances which rendered them few, made me more attentive, and gave me
leisure to be accurate. There is but one possible way in which any falsity can
be chargeable on them; and this might be, were I to pretend to decide that the
course of the disease was always such, as when it came beneath my notice. But
you will understand me strictly. I describe what I saw; and mean only then to
make a remark general, when I sow express it, and when I find a concurrent
opinion on the part of many. In my reasonings on facts, you will not blame me
for taking a range somewhat wider; for, should I, in my way, light on some
truth, interesting and important, it will well repay you for the fatigue of
accompanying me; and, should I not, your friendship will excuse me, in this
instance, as it has often done before. Of one thing further you ought to be
forwarned: That, concerning every thing connected with the fever of 1795, where
opinion may be exercised, there is variety of opinion. And as, in this contest
of jarring and hostile opinions, but one can have justice on its side, I would
have you follow mine, with diffidence, into the field of controversy. Victory
does not always incline the balance on the side of right; but even should mine
deserve defeat, it will suffer in the company of myriads.

LETTER SECOND. An account of the situation and peculiarities of that part of
the City in which the Fever most prevailed, in 1795.
THOUGH the fever continued to extend itself, to the last, yet it never became
general over the city; and, for a long time, it was mostly confined to a
particular district. As the season advanced, the peculiarities of this district
may be supposed to have become common to a larger portion of the city; and
their extension to the whole only prevented by the setting in of winter. To the
district alluded to, the East river, from Long Island ferry to Mr. Rutgers's,
forms the eastern boundary; the northern reaches from thence to
Division-street; thence westerly, down Division-street, Chatham-street, the
extremity of Pearl-street, into William-street, to Franckfort-street, down this
last to Gold-street, through that to Beekman-street, along which the line
proceeds to Pearl-street, as far as the Market, down which it should be
continued to the river. -- The space included in these bounds, is all over
which the fever, according to the best of my remembrance, exerted any power,
till after it had reached its height; when it extended down Water-street, a
little below Wall-street, and proved very mortal. It is true that there were a
few persons affected in various other parts of the town; but, during the great
part of the prevalence of the fever, it was principally active in the
north-eastern and middle parts of the district comprehended as above: and, as a
thorough knowledge of the peculiarities of this portion of our city is, in my
opinion, indispensable to the history of the disease which afflicted it, I
cannot doubt your patience with the minute description I think it necessary to
give.

The first and most obvious remark, on the greater part of the district, just
pointed out, is, that it is the lowest, flattest, and most sunken part of the
whole city. Some places are much more sunken than others; but the whole space
is evidently so, compared with the adjacent ground; and appears to have an
inclination, more or less observable, in different streets, to the East river.
This inclination is very considerable in Dover-street; a street which is said
always to have suffered from fevers of this kind, during the hot season. From
the division of Pearl and Cherry-streets, down the latter, the descent is
rapid, to some where near James's-street; about which is the lowest part of the
street, and from whence it is nearly level to the northern boundary. Beyond
this bound, the ground rises again; and the made ground, by the river side, is
also somewhat elevated: so likewise, is the whole of the ground over which the
westerly line passes -- through Division, Chatham, etc. streets. Thus you will
perceive, that the part of the city where the fever was most active, for the
longest period, forms, as it were, a basin, having its side, nearest the water,
a little inclined. Within this basin, there are several smaller cavities; one
of which, in particular will require a further description. Those streets,
also, which are not included in this hollow, but which lie along the river,
will require some attention; which shall be given them.

The extreme irregularity in the disposition of the streets, and the narrowness
of the greater number of them, are great obstacles to a free ventilation of
this city. This misfortune, common to every part of it, falls with peculiar
heaviness on that district which has just been spoken of. The comparatively
high and neighboring lands of Mortissania and Long Island, receive almost
solely the benefit of breezes from the north-east and east: The Sound, which
divides them from the city, being too narrow to add much force and freshness to
a breeze nearly spent on their heights. North, the island rises into little
hills, from which the wind passes on to the high parts of the city; rarely
visiting the low and intervening space; unless it may be the topmost rooms of
the houses: and, as the houses are generally low, the effects of a wind from
this quarter must be inconsiderable. -- North-westerly, there is somewhat more
of an opening; but even this is small. West, south west, and south, the other
parts of the town, which are higher, and thickly settled, break the force of
the gales from these points. So that, thus situated, this quarter of the city,
though it were perfectly well laid out, would have but little chance for a free
ventilation: irregularly disposed and narrow as the streets are, we must be
convinced of the impossibility of its receiving the necessary supply of fresh
air. You will understand me as speaking of a thorough ventilation, and in the
sultry season, when it is most necessary: a partial supply of air, equal to the
support of a feverish existence, it undoubtedly obtains.

Much of the ground, in the northern part of this district, is swampy, and
abounds with little pools and puddles of stagnant water. This was especially
true last summer and autumn; there being great rains, and no adequate means for
conducting off the water. Indeed, so flat are some of the paved streets, in
this quarter, that the rains did not run down the gutters, but continued in
little puddles, and were evaporated from the places whereon they fell. In the
new streets, which are unpaved, and without any gutters, numerous imperfect
ditches assisted the disposition of the water to stagnate. These places were
often muddy, when the southern part of the town was dry; and the steams from
them very offensive, when the dry streets, toward the North river, were
perfectly sweet.

Several of the paved streets, and indeed the greater number, in the district
of which I am speaking, are narrow and crooked; some with neither side walks
nor gutters, and by far the largest portion of them, miserably built. Most of
those which are unpaved, are, in all respects, still worse; the buildings
chiefly wooden, and placed on the ground; the old ones falling to decay; the
new, but imperfectly finished. Of them all, it may be remarked, that they are
much exposed, some of them more than others, to the full influence of the
docks, whatever that may be, and it cannot be salutary; or to that of a boiling
sun, from early in the morning, till the middle of the afternoon; and some of
them, to both.

So much for the streets, generally: a few particulars, concerning some of
them, are necessary to the formation of a perfect idea of this district.

A line, drawn from the corner of Ferry and Pearl-streets, up the latter, to
where William street enters it; then down William to Franckfort, and through
that, a part of Gold and Ferry-streets, to Pearl-street again, will form the
ridge of a new cavity (included in the principal boundaries above mentioned)
which seems contrived, by art, for the dwelling place of fever. This courtyard
of the palace of death, is divided by several dismal lanes, courteously
denominated streets; such as Vandewater, Rose and Jacob-streets, etc. which
form the borders to innumerable tan-vats. The whole is one vast tan-yard, the
firm parts of which seem to have been constructed by art in the midst of an
extensive quagmire. To this place, as far as I can discover, there is no
outlet. Think what must be the condition of it, in the months of August and
September! -- Yet human beings live here; and habit renders its noxious
exhalations, in some sort, harmless to them. It is remarkable that few persons,
regularly inhabiting this hollow, died of the fever last year. To those, whose
evil destiny led them to seek a new dwelling place there, it proved highly
pestilential.

Dover-street is a short, narrow street, running from the beginning of
Cherry-street, down to the East river; and contains near twenty buildings. --
The descent, from Cherry into Water-street, is very rapid. As the exposure is
nearly to the east, it receives the whole effect of the sun, from 6 A. M. to 3
P. M. in the summer. The descent makes it easy to keep the surface of the
street clean; though it prevents a free ventilation. But it has been raised,
several feet, since the buildings, which are mostly low, were erected; so that
the road is, in many instances, up to the middle of the lower story windows;
leaving the cellars to the houses, and cellar kitchens, without a communication
with the street. The yards remaining as before, are, of consequence, much lower
than the street; without vent; and, of necessity, all the water, and filth of
every kind, which gathers in them, must there stagnate, ferment and putrify.
Add to this, some of these yards are capacious, and contain little, decayed,
wooden huts; sometimes built directly on the ground; and containing,
oftentimes, several families.

Water-street, above Dover-street, is chiefly composed of low, decayed and
dirty wooden buildings. This street being either made-ground entirely, or
raised like Dover-street, the same is true of the situation of the houses and
yards. And, lest any of the filth, or water, should drain off, from any of the
yards, the western side of Water-street has been kindly converted, by the
enlightened zeal of the directors of these affairs, into a perfect dyke; which
answers its design, most completely, by preventing even the slightest leakage.
Beside, as this street lies directly on the water, it has the benefit of the
whole force of the sun, the greater part of the day; and of the exhalations
from the docks; which are here in great number, and in the highest state of
their perfection. There is, however, a better opportunity for fresh air, in
this, than in some other streets. Yet even this is an advantage which the rage
for improvement threatens to transfer to a new street, still further out in the
river; which, if completed, may form another dyke, to the increased
pleasantness and health of this quarter of the town.

Of Roosevelt, Catharine, James, Oliver, etc. streets, nearly the same remarks
are true as of Dover and the upper part of Water-street: for though they are
somewhat wider, straighter, and have more good and new buildings in them, yet
they are raised in the same manner, have sunken yards, and underground
apartments; and Roosevelt street has an open sink, where the drippings of the
tea-water pump, after having gently collected all the filth in their way, are
received; and being just enough to keep up a constant dropping, and not enough
to wash the gutter, or the sewer, the stench is most intolerable, during the
sultry months.

To many other of these streets the same remarks will apply; and to some with
aggravated force: but what has been said, will, perhaps, be sufficient to aid
your imagination in the conception of a just idea of their condition: I mean of
their necessary and unavoidable condition.

Of the Docks, it may be enough to mention, generally, that they are badly
contrived in every part of the town; and worst of all, in this part; being
broken up into numerous little wharves, thus forming narrow slips, where the
ground is left bare at ebb tide; and where vegetable, animal, and
excrementitious matters, being thrown in, at all times, instead of being cast
into the stream, ferment, putrify, and render the stench truly pestiferous.
Indeed, this is so much the case, with all of them, in the summer, that, except
to persons habituated to their exhalations, they are absolutely intolerable;
exciting, in persons of a delicate make, immediate vomiting; and in others
nausea, indigestion, headache, or some temporary illness, when exposed to them
but a short time.

In addition to the above-related facts, concerning the condition of the
streets, in that part of the city where care was most needed, it may be
remarked that, at no time, was there ever so great an apparent inattention to
preserving them clean. Besides the impediments which the level nature of the
streets, in many parts of the town, presented to the draining off of the filth
which is constantly accumulating in large towns like this, artificial
impediments were permitted; as if death were not sufficiently active, and
needed the aid of the magistrate. In all the streets where buildings were going
forward, the workmen were allowed to restrain the course of the water, in the
gutters, by forming little dams, for their convenience in making their mortar.
The effect of this stoppage of water was so great, that even in Broadway, one
of the streets the best calculated of any in the city for free ventilation, in
that part of it where the new Tontine Tavern was building, the stench was
exceedingly offensive. And in this condition was it allowed to remain for near
two months; though it was almost under the windows of the principal magistrate
of the city. If this were true of the widest, and one of the best aired and
cleanest streets, of New York, what think you was the state of those narrow,
crooked, flat, unpaved, muddy alleys, mentioned above? No one can form even a
faint idea who has not walked through them, in the middle of some one of those
deadly, suffocative days, which we experienced in September last.

But this is not all: beside those masses of semiputrid vegetable and animal
matters -- cabbage, turnips, the heads and entrails of fish, etc. which, at all
times of the year, out of compassion to men who might be usefully employed as
scavengers to the city, are allowed to complete the putrefactive process,
undisturbed, in the middle of the streets, -- the sight and the smell were
shocked, at every turn, by dead rats, fowls, cats, dogs and pigs. So remarkably
was this the case, that I question whether there could have been found a single
street, alley, or even bye-lane, of any tolerable length, which did not lend
its aid to render this exhibition full and frequent.

The preceding statement, melancholy as it may appear, will convey a very
inadequate idea of our misfortune, in respect to situation, without special
information concerning the season, as it appeared here, during the reign of the
sever; and a knowledge of the people who mostly inhabited these parts of the
city, and on whom the severity of the disorder was inflicted. With this
knowledge I shall endeavor to furnish you; but the length which this letter has
already acquired will excuse me, to you, for postponing the attempt, to a
future opportunity.

LETTER THIRD. Some Account of the Season of 1795.
PHYSICIANS, from the earliest ages of medical record, have remarked that great
peculiarities and irregularities of season, have exercised an unfriendly
influence on human health: And Hippocrates, himself, takes notice of the
difficulty, which hence arises, of forming a proper judgment, and adopting a
suitable method of cure, in those diseases which occur under such
circumstances. The importance of this division of my subject, makes me regret
that it is in my power to furnish you with no other than general information.
You will be the more ready to overlook this defect, when you recollect that I
do not pretend to deliver a history of the fever, and are informed that there
is some probability that this particular defect will be supplied by another
hand.

Generally, then -- every one knows that the summer and autumn of 1795 were
excessively sultry and excessively wet. Every article of household furniture,
or in use about a house, susceptible of mould, was speedily and deeply covered
with it. It seemed to penetrate places where we should have deemed its
appearance impossible. A friend of mine found a pocketbook of Morocco leather
quite moldy; though it was in the drawer of a private desk, enclosed within a
large desk -- both of which were usually locked -- and covered by papers. Boots
and shoes hung up by a wall, near a fireplace, heated every day, contracted
mould within twenty-four hours.

Meats spoiled in the marketplace uncommonly quick; and those which were
brought home, apparently fresh and good, in the morning, were often found unfit
to be eaten, when cooked and brought upon table.

Esculent vegetables, in general, and especially fruits, were unusually poor,
tough and tasteless. The peach, particularly that called the cling-stone, was
scarcely digestible; and often occasioned temporary illnesses, quite severe,
while it doubtless aided in the production, or aggravation, of the fever.
Vegetable growth was uncommonly rapid and abundant, in the summer of 1795. I
mention this that no mistake may arise from the above remark concerning
esculent vegetables. The wore rank they grow, beyond a certain degree, the more
tasteless they are; and the influence of a wet season, in rendering roots and
fruits tough, as well as insipid, is well known.

It is worthy of remark, that many fruit trees, plumb-trees in particular,
blossomed a second time, last year, and produced an imperfect and second crop
of fruit.




Flies were very numerous and troublesome, in every part of the city, in the
beginning of summer; but they suddenly disappeared, about the middle of July,
from the more airy parts of the town, collecting in swarms, in the less healthy
parts, and succeeded, every where, by clouds of musketoes, incredibly large and
distressing: and these continued to afflict us, long after the time when they
commonly depart. Almost every person suffered exceedingly from the bites of
these insects; and foreigners especially. In some they occasioned universal
swellings, and eruptions, somewhat like Pemphigus; and in others numerous
little ulcers. These last, a physician of my acquaintance, saw even in a native
American. The irritation, restlessness, and consequent watchfulness and
fatigue, occasioned by these animals, no doubt predisposed the well to be
affected by the fever; while they extremely harrassed the sick, and retarded
their recovery.

During the whole of this season, I remember but one thunder-storm; and this
was very gentle. There was but a single hard clap of thunder, for more than
four months, that I remember; and very little thunder and lightning, at any
time.

Our rains, excessive in quantity and frequency as they were, seemed to have
lost their wonted power of cooling the air. In those streets, most unhealthy,
and least ventilated, this effect was, in a degree, observable; but, in the
airy and healthy parts of the town, on the contrary, they never failed to
render the heat more intolerable; and the steams from the hot pavement were
like those of a vapor bath. The clouds, too, seemed to shut out every kind of
breeze. -- One of these heavy rains, which continued two or three days, seemed
to possess all the qualities of steam. It pervaded every recess of the houses,
and dissolved the best glue -- so that furniture, in many instances, which had
been long standing, fell in pieces.

Fogs, which Dr. Lind enumerates among the signs of an unhealthy climate, and
causes of diseases -- page 134 of his Essay on hot climates, etc. -- prevailed
in the city, and spread over all the most unhealthy parts, in particular, in a
remarkable manner, -- in the evenings -- for a considerable part of September
and October. The oppression, thickness, stench, and uncomfortableness in every
respect, of these fogs, was very uncommon. In a physician, who, in the
performance of his professional duty, was exposed to their influence several
hours, one night, they produced bleeding from the gums and fauces, and black
and fetid stools. -- On the city watchmen, however, they had no such effects.
About the first of October but one person had died out of their number; and he
was a man who returned to the city, a little before, and resumed this
occupation, after having been some time absent in the country. -- Whether this
security of the watchmen is to be attributed -- as it is by Dr. Rush, to the
influence of the cool night-air Page 35 of his account of the Fever of
Philadelphia: I ascribe it to the habitual impression of the cool night air
upon the bodies of the city watchmen, etc. By habit, as used above, is meant
that condition of the body which is produced by customary exposure to any
particular impression; and I design only to suggest a probability that the
watchmen escaped the fever, as much from their having been rendered by habit
insensible to the influence of the effluvia, etc. of the unhealthy parts of the
city, as from the influence of cold.
, or to that of habit, I leave others to decide, It is not impossible but that
both may concur in producing this insensibility to the cause of disease in
others.

To this imperfect account of the season, which, defective as it is, appeared
to me too important to be omitted, I have one fact to add, on the authority of
a gentleman distinguished for his attention to meteorological phenomena. He
informs me, that no Aurora Borealis has been seen, of any magnitude, in our
country, north of Pennsylvania (as far as he can learn) for near four years,
till the latter end of September 1795; and adds, that his father, a respectable
clergyman, now about 70 years of age, who noticed the same absence of these
appearances, remarks, that, according to his uniform observation, some uncommon
sickness has never failed to follow a long continued disappearance of these
phenomena. How far the experience of other observers will tend to confirm this
statement, I have had neither time nor opportunity to inquire. And, if it be
admitted as indisputable, it may still be questionable, whether this is to be
regarded as a cause of disease, or whether this disappearance and disease, be
not coordinate effects of a common cause.

LETTER FOURTH. Some circumstances relative to the principal sufferers by the
Fever of 1795.
IT is a fact, generally admitted, I believe, that, of those who were sick and
who died of the Fever of 1795, the greater number were foreigners: persons,
either just arrived from other States, from the West Indies, and from Europe;
or who had not been many months, or years, settled in this city. It is probable
that the proportion of citizens, who died, to strangers, did not exceed one to
seven. Of these strangers, it is thought, a large number were Irish; and there
are some reasons why this should be true; but I cannot pretend to know it to be
so, from my own observation. The causes productive of disease in foreigners, in
those of this nation in particular, are numerous, and some of them deserve
particular attention. This I design to bestow upon them, after remarking, that,
both among natives and foreigners, the severity of the disease was experienced
by the poor.

I. Dr. Blane, in his observations on the diseases of seamen, remarks, that it
sometimes happens, that a ship, with a long established crew, shall be very
healthy; yet, if strangers are introduced among them, who are also healthy,
sickness will be mutually produced; and Dr. Rush, in the first volume of his
"Medical Observations and Inquiries" takes notice of this remark of Dr.
Blane's, and confirms it, by a reference to the experience of our country,
during the late war. These are his words -- The history of diseases furnishes
many proofs of the truth of this assertion. -- It was very remarkable, that,
while the American army at Cambridge, in the year 1775, consisted only of
New England men (whose habits and manners were the same) there was scarcely any
sickness among them. It was not till the troops of the eastern, middle and
southern states, met at New York and Ticonderoga, in the year 1776, that the
Typhus became universal, and spread with such peculiar mortality in the armies
of the United States.

It is unnecessary to enlarge, in this place, on the oppressions and distresses
of what are called the lower order of the people in Europe. War, which doubles
the burdens upon every rank in society, exercises an aggravated violence upon
the poor. This violence, severely felt by all, in England, chiefly falls upon
the manufacturing poor; who are, at the same time, the most ignorant, abject
and depraved: in Ireland, its effects are more general, including in its circle
of wretchedness, the cultivator, as well as the mechanic. The present war in
Europe, unparalelled as it is for the number of men involved in it, has given
birth to oppressions and calamities equally new and destructive. Under these
circumstances, and when men of fortune and respectability, disgusted and
disheartened at the enormous mass of misery which every day and every hour
presented to their view, turned their thoughts toward another hemisphere, it
is not to be wondered at, that the wretched and depressed poor should pant for
a settlement in a country, where liberty is the portion of every man, and
independence the sure crown of all his honest labors; and which had been,
fallaciously, represented as courting their acceptance, and loading their
untoiling hands with every gift of fortune. -- The real blessings of our
government and country are precious and inestimable; but they are of a nature
not to be felt and enjoyed by minds depraved by ignorance and debased by
slavery. That temperate enjoyment of the goods of life, and moderate exercise
of the blessings of independence, which, alone, enlightened liberty sanctions,
can neither be conceived of, nor relished, by those who have been accustomed to
crouch beneath the iron rod of despotism. Liberty, according to their ideas,
was the reverse of all they felt; and independence, the unlimited gratification
of all their appetites. The misrepresentations, too, of speculating and
unprincipled men, who were interested in the sale of large tracts of unsettled
territory, had fostered and extended these erroneous conceptions. Hence, when
the poor and miserable emigrants, on their arrival here, found that neither
gold, nor farms, solicited their acceptance; that, in America, as well as in
Europe, their life was alike destined to be a life of toil; when they perceived
that licentiousness, the only liberty of which they had any notion, brought
punishment along with it; the disappointment, new and unexpected, became a
powerful aggravation to every other cause of disease. You will not understand
me as extending these last remarks to all emigrants to this country, nor
suppose that deceived hope was present, or active, in every case. On some, even
of the better sort, it undoubtedly had a very pernicious influence; on the poor
and friendless, effects still more melancholy. -- But to return: -- Two
motives, then, poverty and oppression at home, and the hope of independence and
wealth abroad, concurred to draw to the United States, an astonishing number of
the inhabitants of Europe; and as these motives were mostly active among the
very poor and very wretched, people of this description emigrated in the
greatest number. Of these, the largest portions fell to the share of the States
of Pennsylvania and New York; and the most worthless and profligate, probably,
rested in the capitals of those States.

The distresses in the West Indies, especially those occasioned by the
destruction of Cape Francaise, obliged numbers of the islanders, white, mulatto
and black, to take refuge here. This circumstance, harmless, in great measure,
to the people themselves, can scarcely be considered as so, in relation to the
whole. Whatever effect it may have had, all things considered, it seems
irrational to suppose it to have been good.

This collection of strangers, from various parts of Europe and America, which
had been rapidly forming for two or three years, was greatly increased by
repeated arrivals of large importations from Great Britain and Ireland, during
the fall of 1794, and the spring and summer of 1795. One or two ships came into
this port, after the commencement of the fever, filled with emigrants.

If, then, the opinion of Dr. Blane, corroborated by the testimony of Dr. Rush,
be founded in truth; that the sudden intermingling of people of various and
discordant habits, climates and nations, be a circumstance favoring the
production of disease; this cause of fever was certainly present, in New York,
in the year 1795.

II. Men who exchange their native, for a distant climate, may be considered --
says Dr. Lind, page 2d, of his Essay on the diseases incidental to Europeans in
hot climates -- as affected in a manner somewhat analogous to plants removed
into a foreign soil; where the utmost care and attention are required to keep
them in health, and to inure them to their new situation; since, thus
trans-planted, some change must happen in the constitutions of both.

"Some climates" -- he continues -- are healthy and favorable to European
constitutions, as some soils are favorable to the production of European
plants. But most of the countries beyond the limits of Europe, which are
frequented by Europeans, unfortunately, prove very unhealthy to them.

The healthiness and unhealthiness of a climate, or the effect wrought on the
human constitution by a change of climate, must be more or less considerable,
according to the extent of its connection with other circumstances. How far
such a connection was observable in this city, in respect to the Fever of 1795,
will appear by and bye.

Two remarks may be made, concerning the emigrants from the West Indies. The
first is, that they generally bear the first winter, after their arrival in the
middle and northern states, better than the natives, while they are less
incommoded by the summer heats. The second is, that they suffer less from
Fevers, during the sultry season, than Emigrants from Europe. It seems
difficult to explain the first mentioned fact; the second I shall attempt to
account for, hereafter.

The climate of this part of America differs from that of Great Britain and
Ireland in the intenser cold of its winters; more extreme and longer continued
heat of its summers; and the greater variableness of its temperature.

The great body of emigrants come over to America in large companies, crowded
together in one ship, and ill-accommodated in every respect. After a long
voyage, under such circumstances, they must be sensible, in an uncommon degree,
to the influence of a new climate, and to every sudden variation of
temperature. If they arrive, as is (...) case, in the ^^ltry season, the
effects of a (...) climate must be felt in all their force. (...) of the summer
must render them less (...) be ruggedness of the following (...) the winter
makes them (...) the scorching fun of the succeeding (...) will account for the
suffering of many (...) a season in the country before.

To this it may be added, that, in 1795, the climate must have been
particularly bad; since it may be supposed to have preternaturally affected the
natives of the country. This being admitted, it is not difficult to conceive of
its having had a pernicious influence on strangers; and being, therefore,
fairly enumerable among the causes predisposing to the fever of this season.

III. An animal diet, or a great use of animal food, especially in summer, and
when there is general disposition to fevers, is thought by many physicians, of
our own and other countries, to favor their production; and a vegetable diet,
on the contrary, to be a preventative, or preservative, against them. This,
also, was the opinion of the humane and celebrated Howard, who is known to have
abstained from the use of flesh, for many years previous to his death. -- Both
theory and fact seem to concur in establishing the truth of this doctrine; for
a satisfactory illustration of which I may safely refer you to the publications
of Drs. Rush and Mitchill.

The proportion of animal, to vegetable food, eaten at the best provided tables
in America, is so great as to astonish a European. This may be said of the
country generally -- but is especially true of the cities of New York and
Philadelphia. An objection, too, has been made by Europeans, particularly by
the French, to our mode of cooking meats. They complain, and with apparent
justice, of the imperfect action which fire is allowed to exert upon them; and
represent us as little better than the Abysinians, who devour a part of the ox,
while he is yet expiring. -- It is certain that a great change is observable in
the appearance and kind of diseases, in the United States, since our citizens
have substituted fresh meats, for salted, in summer. -- Some reasons may be
assigned for this effect, which would countenance the opinion of the French;
but they will suggest themselves to your own mind, and would require more room
than I can allow them, in this place. -- But, surely, if meats be prejudicial
to health, in our hot seasons; if they expose us, by their use, to diseases of
the kind, which prevailed here, last year; how peculiarly must this evil have
been felt by us, when they were in a condition so uncommonly bad as the year
1795 -- If the wealthy often had meats brought upon their tables, in a state of
incipient putrescency, what must have been the state of those which were
consumed by the poor? -- Add to this, that the vegetables principally used
among us, are not distinguished for their ascescency. -- These remarks apply to
all ranks of our inhabitants; and plainly show that the situation of our city,
the last year, was unusually bad, in this respect, for natives, as well as
foreigners. Other circumstances assisted to heighten the evil, in relation to
these last.

The poor of Europe, and especially of Ireland, are but sparingly accustomed to
the use of meat. In that island, it is not uncommon for people to pass through
life, without ever having tasted it, except by stealth, accident, or on
holydays. -- In this country, the great use of meat produces a comparative
scantiness in the supply of vegetables; and a proportionate poorness and
dearness of them. This is sufficient to determine the choice of the poor
toward the use of meat; and produce, in the emigrant poor, an almost total and
sudden change, in their aliment. When, too, we recollect that animal food is
more gratifying to a depraved taste; that it provokes to greater repletion,
than vegetable food; that it is more necessary to hard laborers; and that it is
most craved by those who indulge in the habitual use of ardent spirits; we are
alive, at once, to the full perception of the mischievous effects arising from
such a substitute, to their former bland and scanty meals. In those, with whom
this change of diet took place the last year, for the first, the consequences
must have been still more pernicious. For we ought to consider that if the poor
always consume the worst provisions, those who were strangers, as well as poor,
were least likely to procure those which were good; and the slightest
observation is sufficient to convince us, that their bad qualities could not
have been much obviated by the preparation common among the consumers.

May we not, then, conclude -- that the aliment used by the citizens,
generally, was favorable to the production of disease -- and that the great and
sudden change of diet, among the emigrants, considering the nature of their
food in 1795, must have disposed them, in a particular manner, to be affected
by the fever of the country?

IV. If unwholesome aliment assisted in the production, or aggravation, of the
fever of 1795, improper drinks were scarcely less active, to the same end. --
The use of ardent spirits, among all classes of citizens, and especially among
the laboring classes, is astonishingly great and general, throughout the United
States. No country in the world, in all probability, consumes an equal
quantity, in proportion to its population. In vain has the eloquence of the
most enlightened physicians and moralists been exerted against them, for
centuries: governments constitute it the interest of individuals to prepare and
circulate them; they withhold from men that knowledge which would teach them to
shun, or elevate them above the use of, intoxicating liquors; and prejudices
are excited and fostered in their favor, that the ignorant and depraved, to
whom they form a congenial gratification, may continue to consume them; to the
destruction of morals, the emolument of distillers, and the augmentation of the
revenue. As they are more easily and cheaply obtained in America, than in
Europe; as the wages of laborers are more considerable here, than there, and
therefore permit them greater indulgences; as there is every encouragement from
example; and as a fiercer sun, according to common notions, justifies a more
prodigal use of them; it is naturally supposeable that the emigrants of the
laboring class indulged in them, to an unusual degree. Unquestionably, the use
of intoxicating liquors was highly pernicious to those most accustomed to them;
to those not so habituated, it was, as unquestionably, still more pernicious.
In Philadelphia in 1793, when the fever was prevalent, Dr. Rush remarks that --
a plentiful meal, and a few extra glasses of wine, seldom failed of exciting
the fever. With us the disease was less ferocious and less active; but, as if
no means of causing it to become more so were to be neglected, an idea was,
most unhappily circulated -- and, it should seem, was countenanced by persons
bearing the title of physicians, -- that free living, the plentiful use of
vinous and ardent liquors, was a powerful preventative of the fever. The
dreadful consequences which a belief of this sort produced, were numerous, and
shocking to the last degree. The fear of death, so active in ignorant minds,
when once aroused; idleness, the parent of every vice, and listlessness, the
consequence of want of employment; all conspired, with this pernicious
doctrine, to effect the ruin of numbers. Never, I believe, was drunkeness so
common. Not a day passed that I did not meet persons reeling through the
streets, or stretched on the pavement -- sometimes in the noonday sun,
unsheltered, and sometimes exposed to the heaviest rains. I have seen three
men, lying in this condition, in one little street. These were all, as you may
suppose, among the most depraved of our poor; and most of them were foreigners.

Is it possible that conduct such as this should fail of giving new activity to
every other cause of disease?

V. I have, in a former letter, given you some account of the condition of that
part of the town, where the Fever most prevailed; it is now to be noticed that
it is in that district that the greatest number of the poor, especially the
emigrant poor, reside. In those numerous miserable dwellings, were these
wretched people crowded together; many families in one house; and not
infrequently many families of different nations. In some instances, a single
room in one of those half-under-ground huts, served as bedroom, kitchen and
shop, to a whole family; while underneath them, a cellar, half filled with mud
and water, sent up its pestilential steams; and under their window, a yard in
the same condition, was rendered still more noxious, by receiving the offals
cast out from every part of the house.

VI. But, if the sordid and almost unavoidable filthiness of their dwellings
were promotive of the disease, under which the wretched inhabitants languished
or suffered, still more so, in some instances, must have been their inattention
to personal cleanliness.

It was well remarked, formerly, by a foreigner, of the English ladies, and is
applicable, with but little deduction to our own fair country-women, -- That
they were whited sepulchers; beauteous and clean, without; but within -- You
know the rest. --

Were our country-women disciples of Zoroaster, they could not more studiously
hold sacred the element of water. -- How many of those house-wives, how many of
those maidens, the cleanliness of whose houses, and the neatness of whose
apparel, we often have occasion to admire and commend, think you, have applied
to any other parts of their persons, than their hands and faces, this purifying
element? "Who can come in, and say, that I mean her;
"When such a one as she, such is her neighbor?
" -- Let me see wherein
"My tongue has wronged her; if it do her right,
"Then she has wronged herself; if she be free,
"Why then, my taxing, like a wild-goose, flies
"Unclaim'd of any one."
AS YOU LIKE IT

-- The infrequency of bathing among both sexes and all conditions, especially
among females and the poor, in America, is surprising. -- In this respect, the
emigrant poor are in no wise more commendable; and, in every other kind of
cleanliness, still more backward. The French, alone, exhibit a laudable
conduct, in every grade of life, as personal ablution is regarded.

To every physician, who knows the importance of cleanliness to health, and how
rigid an attention to it is necessary, in Fevers, especially in those which are
called malignant, it is useless to insist on the consequences of negligence in
this particular.

I shall conclude this letter with a few remarks, which the subject naturally
inspires.

The preceding statement is strictly applicable, in all its extent, to great
numbers of those who were sick of the Fever of 1795. Your own mind will suggest
to you that there must have been many exceptions; and, likewise, among whom
those exceptions were to be found.

You will learn, from it, that circumstances unfriendly to foreigners were more
numerous and forcible, in more instances, than to natives; and will perceive,
at the same time, what is appropriate to each, and what common to all.

It will, further, be evident, that, though some of these causes may have been
sufficient, singly, to create a predisposition to disease, -- and probably did,
in some instances, create it; yet, that predisposition must have been more
considerable, and the disease which followed more severe, in proportion to the
combination of two, or more, of them.

It now remains to take a comprehensive view of the results furnished to us by
this letter, in connection with the two immediately preceding it; but this I
shall defer to another opportunity.

LETTER FIFTH. Recapitulation of Facts, and an Opinion concerning the Origin of
the Fever of 1795.
FROM the statements contained in the proceeding letters it appears, that the
Fever of 1795 was most active in SITUATIONS -- where -- There was the least
chance for free ventilation;
Where the sun exerted the greatest and longest influence; there was the least
drain for water and filth; the rains which fell stagnated; there were,
constantly, stagnant pools; the streets narrow, crooked, unpaved; the houses
partly underground, wooden, decayed or slight; there were considerable
collections of vegetable and animal matters suffered to remain and putrify; and
where the exhalations from the sewers and docks extended: --




The fever first appeared and continued to be mortal in a SEASON -- which was
unusually sultry and wet; throughout which esculent vegetables were scanty and
poor; meats tended rapidly to putrefaction, and were often consumed in a state
of incipient putrescency; --
During which -- Insects were very numerous and noxious; there was scarcely any
thunder and lightning; there were several violent and sudden alternations of
heat and cold; and the city was, in the evening, often immersed in a very
peculiar and pernicious fog: --
The Fever proved most fatal -- to the poor; to emigrants more than natives; to
the emigrant poor most of all; -- and they -- lived in situations, mostly, such
as abovementioned; were, often, crowded together, in such houses; mingled,
without distinction of nation, climate and habits; changed a mild vegetable,
for an animal diet; perhaps a semi-putrid animal diet; were chiefly laborers in
the open sun; were unusually intemperate; and were inexcusably inattentive to
the cleanliness of their houses and persons.



Such are the facts: -- what inferences would reason, unperverted by prejudice,
interestedness, or ignorance, deduce from them? How would she decide on the
so-much-agitated question of domestic, or foreign, origin? -- Were a rational
being to see hundreds of men, women and children, removed from a temperate and
equable climate, to a climate subject to the extremes of heat and cold, and to
sudden and excessive alternations of temperature; were he to observe this
removal to take place in crowded, ill-provided, ships, which were a long time
at sea, and whose arrival was at such a time as to subject them to the rigors
of a winter, severe beyond their knowledge, and under all the inconveniences
attendant on poverty, ignorance, and vice in a strange land -- or to the
terrors of a summer equally intolerable to them, from its inexperienced
sultriness; were he to view them, after sustaining, one, or more, such seasons,
of immediately, exposed to the influence of a season sultry and moist beyond
the common course, in this new climate; should he learn that they exchanged
oppression for licentiousness, and, in some cases, found all their hopes
illusory; that they substituted a scanty supply of wretched vegetables and a
gluttonous use of semi-putrid, ill-cooked, meats, for a sparing consumption of
mild and healthy vegetable food; that they were often persecuted by swarms of
insects, whose bites raised swellings or caused ulcers, when, till now, they
had been unaccustomed to any; should he see them indulging, habitually, in the
use of intoxicating liquors, to which many of them had hitherto been strangers;
were he to find them dwelling in narrow, unpaved, sunken, and illy-ventilated
streets, in which large collections of putrid matter were allowed to remain,
where there were puddles of stagnant water, or open sewers, and in the
neighborhoods of pools or docks, whose noxious qualities were heightened by the
admixture of putrefying vegetable and animal substances; -- were he to discover
the houses in which they dwelt, to be decayed or slight, and sometimes pervious
to sun and rain, -- in part, below the surface of the earth, and with yards
equally low, and in the condition of the pools and docks abovementioned;
should he, on entering these habitations, find them mingled with emigrants
front various other climates, or with natives of that to which they had
removed, equally debased, and perhaps still more so, than themselves -- with
people of discordant habits, colors, languages and countries, -- and all,
alike, inattentive to personal and household cleanliness; -- I say, were a
rational being to observe all this, and perceive all the circumstances, just
enumerated, to be concurrent, in respect to time, would he, think you, find it
necessary to recur to the East or to the West Indies, for causes of disease?
Would he deem it of much importance whether a single man died on board this, or
that, vessel? Or whether contagion might, or might not, be imported? -- Would
not these circumstances, of themselves, when viewed in connection with each
other, and compared with the known and established laws of health and disease,
impress on his mind, with all the force of intuition, a conviction of the
domestic origin of the Fever of 1795? Is it possible that he should have any
other opinion than that the causes, cure, and prevention, we equally local, and
disconnected with the prevalence or absence of similar diseases in other
countries? But, certain as I feel that this must be the inevitable conclusion
from a candid attention to the facts above-displayed, I am pleased to be able
to declare that it is unnecessary to trust to their testimony, alone, for
support to the opinion derived from their consideration. -- No direct, no
clear, evidence, ever has been, or can be, produced, in favor of the opinion
that the Fever was imported. -- I shall defer the attempt to substantiate this
assertion, to a future opportunity; in the mean time, permit me once more to
remark -- That, though all the circumstances, enumerated in this letter, as
concurring to produce the Fever, did, oftentimes, in reality concur, it is not
to be supposed that they did so uniformly. So much is true, beyond dispute -- A
concurrence of the greater number of some, or other, of them, was observable in
a vast majority of the cases of sickness. More than this was not necessary: --
for, expose the most temperate and cleanly native, to the full influence of all
the causes predisposing to this fever, beside those which his birth,
cleanliness, and temperance, would disarm, and his chance for continued health
must have been small; especially, after the additional aid which they,
questionless, derived from great numbers of sick and dead, and from the reign
of terror. The number of natives, of this description, who died, was very
inconsiderable; and, of those few, perhaps there was not an individual whose
situation, constitution, or office, did not peculiarly expose him to the
attacks of the Fever. To which may be added, the chance of his falling a
sacrifice to an inert, or destructive practice.

LETTER SIXTH. On the Evidence of the Importation of the Fever of 1795.
No direct, no clear evidence ever has been, or can be produced, in favor of
the opinion that the Fever was imported.

The authority on which the advocates of importation chiefly rest, for the
support of their doctrine, is, as far as I can discover, the letter of the
Health Committee to the Governor, of the 8th of September 1795; or, more
properly, on what is there reported to be the fact. -- I shall quote, from this
letter, the passage referred to.

On the 20th day of July, Doctor Malachi Treat, the late Health-Officer of this
port, visited the brig Zephyr, from Port-au-Prince; on board of which he found
three persons ill of fever, and the corpse of one who died that morning. The
Doctor calls the Fever, in his report, a Bilious-remitting Fever. The brig was
ordered to ride quarantine. On the 22d day of July, Dr. Treat was taken ill,
and died on the 30th, of a fever marked by a yellow skin, hemorrhages, vomiting
of black matter, resembling coffee-grounds, and all such symptoms as
characterize bilious fevers of the malignant kind. -- On the 25th day of July,
four persons, from on board the ship William, from Liverpool, which arrived
here several weeks before (all the crew having, previous to that day, and
during the voyage, been perfectly healthy) were taken ill of Fever, attended
with similar symptoms; and all died within seven days.

This ship lay at a wharf at the foot of Dover-street, in the south-easterly A
mistake of the Press for -- north-easterly.
part of this city, which lies exceedingly low, is much of it made-ground, has
an eastern exposure, and (from the streets having been raised, about three
years ago, which threw the lots and yards into hollows of considerable depth)
is almost unavoidably liable to great collections of offal, and filth of all
kinds; is a part of the town very much crowded by poor inhabitants, and
contains a great number of lodging-houses, in which seamen and strangers of the
poorer class, commonly reside; and ever has suffered most from the regular
autumnal diseases, as well as from any new and uncommon complaint. From all
which circumstances, we entertain no doubt but that the seamen of the ship
William contracted the disease, of which they died, here, and did not introduce
it into the city.

A little before, and immediately after, the attack of the seamen of the ship
William, which first called the attention of this Committee, several other
persons, in Water and Front-streets, and in the neighborhood of Dover-street,
were seized with fever, which, especially in those cases which proved mortal,
was marked by severe vomitings, a yellow skin, hemorrhagy, and, in some cases,
a vomiting a black matter, resembling coffee-grounds, -- and which generally
terminated within seven days, and proved fatal to more, in proportion to the
number seized, than is usual in the ordinary complaints of the season, in this
city.

Two remarks of considerable importance are naturally suggested by a careful
examination of the above quotation: First, that the Committee appear to have
supposed Dr. Treat, alone, to have received the disease of which he died, from
the Zephyr; and, secondly, that they have, in some sort, admitted the
possibility of such a disease as the Fever of 1795, originating here, in their
statement of the circumstances relative to the ship William. It is true that
they are inexplicit, in both instances; and the only absolute conclusion which
we are justified in deducing from what they say is, that the disease was not
introduced into this city by the ship William. This, however, narrows the
ground of controversy, considerably; for no vessels beside the William and the
Zephyr, as far as I can learn, have ever been suspected of introducing any
disease, of this kind, into this city. It is necessary, therefore, only to
disprove the assertion, in respect to the Zephyr, and the whole foundation of
the doctrine of importation is destroyed. -- But, even were we to admit that
Dr. Treat did actually derive the fever of which he died, from the Zephyr, as
no other person is known to have been infected by that vessel, and as the
doctor communicated it to no person, the advocates for importation would not be
greatly benefited by our concession. But, no such concession is necessary. The
following papers, copies of which I am kindly permitted to transmit to you,
appear to me, to establish it, beyond contradiction, that neither Dr. Treat,
nor any other person, contracted a Fever, such as prevailed in New York, in
1795, from any sick, or dead, man, or any thing else, connected with the vessel
in question.

NO I. Letter from the Captain of the brig Zephyr, to Dr. Dingley.
New York, Sept. 8, 1795. SIR,
Having been informed that many people have reported that the late
Health-Officer, of this port, caught the disease with which he died, on board
the brig Zephyr, I have thought it a duty which I owed to the public, to
contradict the report.. This, I trust, will be satisfactorily done, to the
minds of all reasonable men, by my deposition, taken before C. Dunn, jun. one
of the justices for the city and county of New York; which I desire you to
publish, for the information of the citizens, as soon as you may think proper.
-- My departure from this city is the occasion of giving you this trouble.

I am, sir, your friend and humble servant, COMFORT BIRD. Dr. Dingley.


NO II. Captain Bird's Deposition.
Captain Comfort Bird, commander of the brig Zephyr, of Boston, sailed from
Port-au-Prince on the 1st of July, and arrived at New York on the 20th of the
same month. The mate and one mariner had the Fever and Ague seventeen days on
shore, and came on board with the same disease; and the captain himself had a
Dysentery on his arrival in New York; -- and John Wheeler, aged 16 years, died
on the day of the arrival of the brig at New York, by worms crawling up into
his throat and choking him. He was sewed up in a piece of canvass, and ready
to be committed to the deep, when the late Health-Officer came on board, who
desired the captain to have the canvass opened, that he might inspect the body
-- and he only cut the canvass open over the face, and viewed the countenance,
but did not make any other examination of the body, -- which was, soon after,
carried to Governor's Island, and there interred. -- The young man who died as
abovementioned, had suffered chronic complaints, but no fever of a dangerous
nature. -- Eighteen passengers came in the above brig, all in good health, --
who have continued in this state to the present day. -- Three days after the
above event, the Health-Officer visited the same brig, in as good health as
usual.

Signed COMFORT BIRD.
Sworn before me, this seventh day of September, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five, in the City of New York. C. DUNN, JUN.

OF the undoubted veracity of Captain Bird I am assured by Dr. Dingley, who is
personally acquainted with him, and attended him, at the time, for the
dysentery mentioned in the deposition. The opinion, therefore, that the Yellow
Fever, or a contagious disease, was brought into the city, last year, by the
brig Zephyr, seems wholly unsupported by evidence. Neither is it necessary that
any imputation should rest on the memory of Dr. Treat. He saw the mariners
after they had been long affected by the Fever and ague, and perhaps with some
fever upon them at the time; and from the yellowness of the skin, common to the
advanced state of that disease, especially in hot climates, might be easily
induced to suppose it a remittent. This, however, is mere conjecture, and not
necessary to be admitte^ since the fact of the men having been sick seventeen
days, previous to their embarking for our coast, is ample proof that their
could not have been affected by the fever which prevailed and was so mortal,
here. -- Indeed, the whole testimony in favor of the idea of importation, is
too loose and slight to build any rational opinion upon. The very words of the
Committee are calculated to strengthen a contrary opinion, if rightly
considered; for they not only countenance the idea that the people of the ship
William became sick from the unhealthiness of the place where they dwelt, but,
also, that the Fever had made its appearance, in various other of the
neighboring houses and streets, previous to their being seized with it. And
what confirms the truth of this opinion is, that persons were taken with the
distemper, about this time, in other parts of the city, who had no connection
with the brig Zephyr, nor with any other vessel, and whose illness may be
satisfactorily accounted for from their situation, in other respects. An
instance of this kind fell under my own observation, the last of July; several
similar cases have been related to me; and one, if I am not misinformed,
occurred in the New York Almshouse, where the disease was distinctly marked,
before Dr. Treat's illness. -- The following statement of facts, too, will
convince every candid mind, that we ought to look at home, for the cause of
this Fever.

The ship Connecticut came to Fitch's wharf, about the 20th of July -- I think
it was on the 21st: she had just arrived from some part of England, and the
people were perfectly healthy. No vessel suspected of being infected, came to
this wharf, during the season; though the ship William lay at the next wharf,
at the distance of about two hundred feet, -- and Mr. Fitch gives the most
positive assurances that all the articles in his store, at this time, were in
good condition. At this wharf the ship Connecticut continued till after the
middle of August. The owner was employed about the ship, great part of the day;
but ate and slept in an airy part of the town. The people of the ship either
stayed on board, or at public houses near by. -- On the evening of the 25th of
July, the owner was seized with the fever; I saw him the 27th; he had good
accommodations, was in a favorable part of the town, in the third story of the
house, and recovered after an illness of about ten days, which was never very
dangerous, though the attack was severe. -- About this time, one of the mates,
the steward, and two of the mariners, of the ship Connecticut, were seized in
the same way, and with the same symptoms, as the owner. They continued in the
ship, or its neighborhood, and all died. I did not see them, but was informed,
by the owner, that the mate, in particular, vomited large quantities of blood,
and expired delirious.

Three persons, who were in Mr. Fitch's store, were taken sick, and two died,
of the Fever. One sickened on the 26th of July, one on the 6th, and the other
on the 9th of August. It was common for all these persons to sit several hours,
in the morning, in the store, with empty stomachs, -- inhaling the effluvia of
the night.

One of the first persons, who died of the Fever, was one who lived at the head
of the wharf, and had been confined for several months with a rheumatic
complaint.

For the facts contained in the two last paragraphs, I am indebted to a
communication from Mr. Fitch to Dr. Dingley, which that gentleman has allowed
me to make use of on this occasion. The account which it contains of the
condition of the wharves in his neighborhood, adds new force to the other
testimony in favor of the opinion that the Fever originated here; and is too
much to the purpose to be omitted. These are his words: --

I am positive that the disorder has originated from local causes -- because,
it has appeared in this quarter, at the same season, for several years past:
the cause why it has is, to me, mysterious; but what appears to me most
probable is, the central situation, and the motion of the tides. The tide of
flood sets directly into these wharves; collecting all the vapors and effluvia
of the city. -- The situation of the ground, between Water and Cherry-streets,
is rendered noxious by raising Water-street, and confining the stagnant waters.
-- The emptying of tubs into the head of the docks, instead of the end of the
wharves, although not peculiar to this part of the city, is a horrible
nuisance; particularly in time of sickness. -- The ponding of water, by running
a bulk-head athwart a dock, and leaving the vacancy for years, to be filled up
with every species of filth and putridity, is an object worth your attention.

A confirmation of the facts, and some of the opinions, contained in this
extract, may be found in a very singular epistle from the late Dr. Wm. Pit
Smith, to Dr. Duffield sen. of Philadelphia, dated September 1st, 1795; which I
presume you have seen and are possessed of.

On the whole, though I am not prepared to maintain that infectious diseases,
and the Yellow Fever among others, may not be, and have not been, imported, and
thus spread over parts of our country, yet this is the most that can be allowed
to the countenancers of the doctrine. For, after all, the testimony of numerous
facts furnishes clear, indubitable, and decisive evidence, that other and
peculiar circumstances must concur with such importation, to effect any general
distribution, circulation, or influence of the disease. Frequent instances have
occurred, nay do occur every year, of persons returning, from the West Indies,
sick with the Yellow Fever; languishing, for some time, in the houses of their
parents, or friends; recovering, or dying; attended by numbers, during their
illness; their very clothes, where they have died, afterward worn by their
relations; and yet no ill effects following therefrom. -- While I resided at
Wethersfield, in Connecticut, I had opportunity of obtaining precise
information of several such cases; and it is a well-established fact, in many
instances during our Fever, and especially during that of Philadelphia, in 1793.

The whole, therefore, that can be granted, or ought to be assumed by those who
maintain the disease which prevailed in New York in 1795, to have been imported
is, -- That infection may be brought into any place (and therefore into this
city) from abroad; that, under certain circumstances of the place, where it is
introduced, it becomes very active and destructive; but that, when these
circumstances do not exist, however the person immediately affected, -- if it
be introduced by a sick person -- may suffer, it is harmless, so far as the
general health of that place is concerned. -- If the subject were viewed in
this light, as most assuredly it ought to be, the question of importation, or
non-importation, would sink into it is merited insignificance; the efficient
cause, the causa fine qua non, of such Fevers, would be clearly discerned as
depending on local circumstances, capable of being wholly changed; the absolute
madness of further delay, in effecting such a change, would be distinctly and
deeply felt; a becoming spirit would animate the citizens; and suitable
exertions speedily place us beyond the possibility of being subjected to a
misfortune, similar to that which has been already sustained. For it is
inconceivable that the nature and extent of the evil should be understood, and
the remedy not be applied: and a comparatively slight and temporaly sacrifice
of property, would render this city, in reality, what the mistaken policy, or
pride, of some of its inhabitants now falsely represent it, -- as healthy as
any in the world; and leave nothing to fear, either from the Fevers of the
Indies, or the Plague of the Levant. -- But, while people continue to foster a
ridiculous vanity, concerning the city in which they reside; while they fear
that its reputation will be wounded, by permitting an idea to get abroad, that
it is unhealthy; while those engaged in commerce cherish the error, from an
apprehension that their interests would suffer from a disclosure of the truth;
while men, invested with the sacred character of physicians, countenance false
opinions, either through ignorance, a reprehensible timidity, or that they may
gather undeserved popularity and wealth; and while the magistracy are more
actuated by a mean regard for offices dependent on popular opinion, and
maintained by a compliance with it, at all hazards, than by a just and
enlightened zeal for the safety and happiness of their fellow-citizens; Truth
may be spoken, but there is no hope that it will be attended to. Considerations
of supposed interest, so various and so forcible, take deep root in the minds
of men who look only to the present moment, and are either incapable of
comprehending the whole of a subject, or unwilling to bestow on it the
necessary consideration. Thus circumstanced, they strive to banish from others,
and to smother in their own breasts, those convictions which irresistible
evidence forces upon them: as if it were possible that truth could be noxious.
-- Nothing can be more melancholy than to observe this wilful blindness, this
obstinate persistency in error, the consequences of which have been so dreadful
already, and threaten to be still more so hereafter. -- Were it possible to
impress the truth vividly on the minds of the great body of citizens; to rouse
men into action; to excite a generous disregard for temporary advantages, and a
lively interest for the future welfare of themselves and their posterity; a few
weeks might enable us to bid defiance to death, in many of the forms in which
he now assails us.

LETTER SEVENTH. Was the Fever of 1795 an Epidemic? Was it Contagious?
HAVING determined, to my own satisfaction at least, what were the remote or
predisposing causes of the Fever of 1795, I might now proceed to a description
of the disease itself, were it not proper to take some notice of two questions,
which have been consideration agitated, viz. Whether the Fever was, as the
Health Committee term it, an Epidemic? -- And, as some suppose, Contagious? --
On both these questions, I shall deliver my opinion, in as succinct a manner as
the subject will permit.

Was the Fever epidemic? -- A principal difficulty occurs in the very outset of
this enquiry; for different writers have made use of the term Epidemic,
differently; some giving it a general, others a more particular and precise
signification. Thus Van Swieten, in his Commentary on the 1380th Aphorism of
Boerhaave, places epidemic in contradistinction to endemic; while Cleghorn, a
writer of deserved authority, in the Introduction to his Observations on the
Diseases, etc. of Minorca, p. 74. constitutes a class of endemic diseases,
which he divides into epidemic and sporadic. -- Examples of like
dissimilarities, in the use of these words, are frequently to be met with, in
authors of equal credit. And thus it may possibly happen, in the present
instance, as on many former occasions, that the whole contention arises from
different conceptions of the import of a particular word. -- But our business
is rather with facts, than with definitions; I shall state to you, therefore,
what appears to me to have been the truth; and, perhaps, in the conclusion of
my statement, a definition will be found.

In the first place, every person conversant with the practice of physic in
New York, knows that a Fever, generally of the remittent or continued kind, and
variously denominated by medical writers, prevails in this city, to a greater
or less degree, every year; perhaps I may say throughout the year -- but,
certainly, in every part of it, except the winter, and particularly from July
to December: its greatest height being in the months of August, September and
October. The violence of this disease is increased or diminished by
constitutional peculiarities, and by the particular situation of the patient in
respect to air, temperature, etc. etc. Its universality, likewise, may be
considered as dependent, in a degree, on the same causes. -- Circumstances,
peculiar to some situations or individuals, occasion it to prove mortal, with
high marks of malignity, in certain instances, almost every year. That an
^^tension of these peculiarities, so as to make them common to the citizens
generally, would produce the same effects on the many, as on the few, seems
hardly controvertible. Now, this appears, to me, to have been the case, the
last year; and I have no doubt of the identity of the Fever which then raged
here, with that which has prevailed here in former years; and consider it only
as a higher grade of the same disease. -- Compare the history of Fevers, in
Sheffield, with that of Fevers in New York. -- We have a Fever, every year, at
a particular season, usually called the bilious-remitting Fever: in Sheffield,
at the same season, a Fever prevails, called the intermitting Fever. This last
evidently depends on the peculiarities of Sheffield -- such as its ponds,
marshes, etc. -- So, in my opinion, does the former arise from the
peculiarities of New York. -- The season of 1795 was a remarkable one: Was
there any apparent change in the Fever o^ Sheffield? Yes: the symptoms were
remarkably heightened; some new appearances were observable; and the disease
astonishingly obstinate. And was not this, also, true of New York? Who will
venture to deny it? -- Were either of these Fevers propagated to other, or
neighboring, places? No. You have certified this of the Fever in Sheffield; and
I have heard of no instance of the kind, in relation to that of New York. Both
Fevers, then, were proper to the places in which they prevailed; and the
inference which it would be natural to deduce from this is, that both were
endemic, and not epidemic: for the term epidemic seems to include in it the
capability of diffusion or propagation, without respect to the situation and
constitution of the patient; which the term endemic certainly does not. But,
which-ever of these titles may be regarded as most appropriate, the fact will
not be varied by the use of either; and that you will understand to be,
according to my belief, as above-stated. That the Fever of 1795 was no other
than a higher grade of that which prevails here, in the same season, every
year; deriving its severity entirely from the peculiarities of the season, etc.
as related, at large, in the preceding letters.

Was the Fever contagious? Concerning the answer to be made to this, as well as
to the former question, there has been some dispute; but, in this case, as in
that, as much difficulty has arisen in settling the import of the phraseology,
as in determining the fact.

If by the question it is meant to inquire, whether the well became affected
with the Fever, in consequence of the contact of a sick person, or the
clothing of a sick person, or from the performance of the offices of
friendship, charity, and meniality, to those who were sick, -- I answer that no
such cases have come to my knowledge; whereas numerous instances of such
contact fell under my observation, and have been related to me, to which no ill
effects succeeded.

A number of persons, not less than ten or twelve, removed, with the Fever on
them, from New York to Stamford, 40 miles; but no person in Stamford, beside
them, ever had the disorder.

Mr. Fitch, the gentleman mentioned in the preceding letter, attended the young
men who had the disease with him, and to use his own words, lodged in the bed,
warm with the effluvia of the body of the young man who died at his house --
and nevertheless, he had no Fever.

Dr. Treat, according to the account of the Health-Committee, and of his
physicians, died of the very worst degree of the Fever; yet he communicated it
to nobody.

A patient of Dr. Dingley's, in Ferry-street, who was seized with the disease,
without any previous communication with any sick person, and as early as the
17th of August, and who died with it, communicated it to none of his
attendants. And the same is true of several other patients of the same
gentleman.

The writer of some ingenious strictures on Dr. Mitchill's Pamphlet, remarks,
in a note subjoined to his first paper, that he has, in common with many of his
fellow-practitioners, indulged, without the smallest ill effect, a much more
frequent intercourse with his patients, in this disease, than usual, etc. And
the Doctor himself, though he admits the possibility of such fevers becoming
contagious, or being propagated by contact, etc. expressly denies the Fever of
1795 to have been so.

But there would be no end to an enumeration of similar facts; I shall only
add, therefore, that I made use of no precaution whatever, in respect to such
communication with patients; that I have been, for more than two hours, shut up
in a small room, with a person laboring under the worst symptoms of the Fever;
have watched several nights, and performed the most servile offices, with a
near friend, who was sick with it; and never sustained the least inconvenience
from such exposures I might superadd to all this, the ambiguous testimony of
another Physician, who, in proof of the uninfectious nature of the Fever,
affirmed that he had had thirty patients with it, and had taken the breath of
all of them.
.

But, perhaps the advocates for the Contagious, or Infectious, nature of the
disease under consideration, do not intend to confine the meaning of the term
Contagion to that substance, whatever it is, which is generated in an unhealthy
body, and by application to a sound body, excites in it a similar
unhealthiness. They may mean to describe, or designate, by it, that structure,
constitution, or vice, of the atmosphere, which disposes to, or excites
disease. If so, they are in fault -- for they employ the same term to designate
two different facts. -- But let us not dispute about words. Perhaps, the
following statement of my opinions, will lead us to the formation or attainment
of some more accurate notions on this point.

Owing to a variety of causes, which have been enumerated in the course of
these letters, I suppose the atmosphere of New York to have become vitiated, in
1795, to an uncommon degree: that there was either an unusual absence of that
principle necessary to support healthy life, or an extraordinary concentration,
diffusion, or quantity, of some other, unfriendly to healthy life. From the
operation of one, or other, of these states of the atmosphere, and of the
causes abovementioned, on the bodies of the residents in this city, I suppose
a predisposition, greater or less, according to the situation and other
circumstances of individuals, was formed, in the citizens, generally, to the
Fever which prevailed here that year. With some persons, this condition of the
atmosphere, of itself, might be sufficient to produce in them disease. But,
ordinarily, I believe, the aid of some cause, which should disturb the
regularity of the distributions, or functions, of the body, was required to
bring the system into a state of febrile action. Such, for instance, as
intemperance in eating or drinking, sudden fright, fatigue, or indeed, any
considerable irregularity in what Systematics call the Non-Naturals.

This condition of the atmosphere, I suppose, acquired strength, daily, as the
season advanced; or, in other words, the power of the atmosphere, etc. to
predispose to the Fever, was increased, as the season progressed. I say to
predispose, -- for I suspect it seldom, of itself, produced the disease, after
that had attained its height, in those who remained here constantly. Though, on
persons coming into the city, from abroad, it doubtless operated with much
greater force, in many cases, than on the citizens, at any time. This is easily
accounted for, from the known effects of custom. For "The monster Custom, who
does, etc.
" -- is angel yet in this."


The systems of those who continued here became habituated to the atmosphere;
and while those who came here from the country, with ruddy faces, sunk down in
death, the pale and yellow beings who stalked through our streets, derided
disease, and pursued their customary occupations. -- But, to return from this
digression.

Not only am I convinced of the accuracy of the preceding ideas, but I have no
doubt that this vice of the atmosphere was rendered still greater by
exhalations from the bodies of the sick -- It is a point well-established in
medicine, that the air of a room is rendered unsuitable for respiration, if a
number of healthy persons are obliged to breathe it over several times, without
the admission of fresh air from abroad. So injurious is such a confinement, in
respect to air, to the human body, that it has, in numerous instances, produced
terrible febrile diseases. And if such effects arise from the repeated
breathing over the same, or nearly the same, air, by healthy persons, we should
naturally conclude, as is the fact, that such repeated respiration (especially
when united with the constant exhalation from their bodies) by the sick, must
be still more pernicious to health. -- You will pardon me for the introduction
of remarks so trite and familiar, for the sake of the use I wish to make of
them; which is no other than this -- I have mentioned it as my belief that the
state of the atmosphere was such, in this city, the last year, as, in
conjunction with the general influence of the causes producing that state, to
predispose to, and, in some instances, produce, the Fever; and that this
ill-conditioned atmosphere was rendered still more noxious by means of the
numbers who became sick, in the course of the season; and to this I would add,
for the reasons contained in the remarks above, that I think it not improbable
that some were affected with the Fever, in consequence of the further vitiation
of the atmosphere by the sick, who, without that circumstance, would have
remained free from disease. So, likewise, there may be persons, the balance of
whose health is so tremulously sensible to every external influence, as to
preponderate to the side of disease, on the slightest impulse of its causes.
With such, the mere contact of a sick person, or a transitory exposure to the
effluvia arising from a sick body, may be sufficient to produce Fever; and
instances of this kind may have happened, in the course of the Fever in
question. Such cases, however, must have been extremely rare, if there were
any; and no one has ever come to my knowledge. -- But, with regard to Fevers
produced by such a state of the air, as above described, even when aided by the
mixture of human effluvia, arising from sick bodies, -- if these are to be
called Contagious diseases, and the cause which excited them Contagion, so,
likewise, may all other Fevers on the same principle, continued, remitting,
intermitting, Fevers, -- be called Contagious, and their causes, as marsh
miasmata, etc, Contagion. -- Now, to such a use of terms I have not the least
objection, provided the person who employs them, be uniform and explicit in his
application of them.

To conclude, -- If, in speaking of the Fever of 1795, the epithet Contagious
is meant to express that it was communicated by contact, etc. like the
Smallpox, Meazles and Plague, I must repeat it, I find no good reason for
admitting this to have been the fact; but, for the reasons before alleged, I
think there is just ground for a belief that the Fever was never excited in
this way. But if, on the other hand, the term Contagion be meant to convey an
idea of the influence of the atmosphere to predispose to, or produce, disease,
-- whether that influence arise from the abstraction, or addition, of a
principle, or be distinct from human effluvia, or combined with them -- there
appears no reason for denying the Fever of 1795 to have been Contagious. --
Still, as the term Contagion is not generally used in a sense to restricted, as
in this second instance, but is often employed by the same writer, to express
both the cause of the disease communicated by contact, etc. and of that
produced by the influence of the atmosphere, there seems to be a propriety in
rejecting it altogether, in the present instance, or at least in confining the
use of it, to designate a single mode of producing disease; and, according as
it is applied in the former or latter instance, the Fever of 1795 may be
denominated Contagious, or the reverse.

I have now gone through with the consideration of all the subjects,
preliminary to an account of the disease itself. In my next letter, I shall lay
before you, the result of those scanty observations which I had opportunity to
make. -- Knowing the causes of their imperfections, you will not fail of
extending your charitable indulgence to their author.

LETTER EIGHTH. Some Account of the Symptoms of the Fever of 1795.
AFTER the frequent confessions, which occur in the preceding letters, of the
circumscribed sphere of my observation, it were presumptuous in me to pretend
to deliver a regular history of the symptoms of the Fever of 1795. You will
observe, from the account which I shall transmit to you, that the appearances
it exhibited were too various to authorize such an attempt in any one who had
not opportunity to examine them, in relation to numbers of the sick. It is
proper, therefore, that I warn you, once more, to consider what is here
delivered as the result of my own observation only -- except where it is
expressly mentioned to be otherwise.

The Fever of 1795 was, generally, sudden in its access; so much so, in some
instances, as to resemble convulsions. In a less number of cases, it came on
gradually, and after a slowly-increasing illness of several days. It began with
great pain of the head, heat and redness of the face, and fullness and redness
of the eyes, accompanied by a strong, full, tense, pulse, and an almost
universal costiveness. Pains in the back and limbs were common; but not as much
so as of the head. A great inquietude, or anxiety, of the stomach and breast,
was common; approaching, sometimes, to syncope, and sometimes a vomiting, which
soon ceased, or continued, at intervals, through the disorder. -- The Fever
which now commenced was rarely ushered in by a chill, and continued for a
greater or lesser period, according to circumstances, with so many varieties
and combinations of symptoms, as to render it impossible to pursue a regular
description. I shall, therefore, dispose my remarks under several heads;
preserving as much connection as circumstances will permit.

I. Though the pulse was generally full, strong, and tense, in the beginning of
the Fever, it was not always so. It was sometimes weak and low, but still tense
-- if it be proper to use this term, to point out a condition of the pulse, as
it appears to me, wholly peculiar to this Fever. I well remember that, in youth
of 12, or 13, years of age, the pulse becam^ much fuller after a plentiful
bleeding; though he was of a feeble constitution, and had been slightly
affected with the Fever once before. -- In two gentlemen, who were considerably
affected by the Fever, for several weeks, but not to such a degree as to be
confined to their beds, this peculiar pulse was very distinguishable; as much
so, I think, as in any other persons whose pulse I examined.

Hemorrhages, from various parts of the body, were frequent, especially in the
advanced stage of the disease, and where it had been violent from the first.
These were from the nose, fauces, especially the gums, from punctures made in
bloodletting, and from the stomach: I saw no other. Bleeding from the nose and
fauces often occurred in the beginning of the disease, and was removable by the
general remedies. Bleedings from the punctures made in bloodletting, were seen
in the close of the disease, and were restrained with the greatest difficulty.
I recollect to have been constantly engaged in an attempt to restrain such a
hemorrhage, in company with another physician, two of the most melancholy hours
I ever experienced. Hemorrhagy from the stomach I shall mention more
particularly hereafter.

II. Symptoms of pulmonic affection were not uncommon; though I do not
recollect to have observed them till the last of September, or beginning of
October. They sometimes rose nearly to the height of pneumonia.

Hiccough was a troublesome symptom, and often accompanied vomiting; and there
was sometimes, as it appeared to me, a mingled hiccoughing and belching.

III. The marks of congestion in the brain were too numerous and unequivocal to
be mistaken. -- A violent pain in the head was one of the earliest, most
constant, and most distressing, symptoms of this disease -- Coma was a very
frequent symptom; and, as I thought, in proportion to the severity of the
disorder. Toward the close, it amounted almost to total stupefaction; it being
scarcely possible to rouse the patient. Some degree of delirium was common;
particularly at the commencement of an exacerbation of the Fever; manifesting
itself in the hurried manner in which the patient performed any action, and in
the rambling manner in which he conversed. That kind of delirium which some
have called light-headedness, was remarkably present, in one person, at the
close of his disorder. He often started up, wildly, without any apparent
object, then lay down, and commenced singing, in an interrupted, incoherent
manner; but without any violence. And the day before his death, he continued to
sing, with slight intervals, more than an hour. -- At other times, he would fix
on some particular words, and repeat them over and over; sometimes, with no
appearance of emotion; at others, with some glimmering of consciousness. -- In
another person, a patient of a physician of my acquaintance, the affection of
the brain was like that in Phrenitis. A blistering-plaster applied, if I
remember accurately, for 24 hours, to the head, which had been shaven, excited
no vessication, and scarcely any redness, though twice the usual quantity of
cantharides was incorporated, and the patient was of a delicate habit. In this
case the affection of the brain took place on the third day, and the patient
died on the fifth or sixth. -- On examination and dissection of the contents of
the cranium, all the membranes, and the very substance of the brain, were
discovered to be in a remarkable and uncommon state of inflammation. -- I have
been the more particular in relating this case, as it seems to contradict, in a
degree, the ideas of Dr. Rush, p. 50, of his History of the Philadelphia Fever:
our season having been unusually wet.

As connected with the state of the brain, it may be proper to mention here,
that the eyes were often suffused, the whites of them tinged with yellow, and
the small vessels turgid with blood. In some patients they had an expression of
singular wildness; while, in others, there was a remarkable vacuity, or absence
of expression. -- I saw no instance of squinting; nor observed any uncommon
state of the pupil: but I ought to acknowledge that my attention was not
particularly directed to the condition of the eyes, in this respect.

The state of the mind was very variable. Some were exceedingly impatient and
irascible; others, astonishingly obstinate; and this particularly, when, as was
often the case, there was a loss of memory, or some degree of mania. A strong
appeal to their good-sense, calling them by name, seemed to effect a temporary
restoration of their docility and recollection, -- which were soon lost. --
Many were very confident, at first, supposing their illness not be the Fever;
but gave themselves up to despair, immediately on being convinced that it was
the Fever. Many were full of dreadful apprehensions, from the first; and
oftentimes, exceedingly aggravated what would have been, otherwise, a slight
disease. A few, were calm, collected, undaunted, throughout their sickness. And
here it may not be unseasonable to remark, that these same varieties were, in a
degree, observable in those who continued well. Some physicians thought they
could discern a tendency, among the citizens, generally, to mania. It is
certain that fear was a terrible evil, and frequently proved the exciting cause
of the Fever.

IV. I have remarked that a great anxiety at the stomach was sometimes felt, on
the patient's being first seized with the Fever. This anxiety, it may now be
added, in some cases, extended through the complaint; but was most distressing
when the Fever was most violent. A great sense of soreness was often complained
of, when any thing was taken into the stomach, as if it were raw; -- to use the
words of one in whom it was observed. In some, the sensibility of this organ
was so excessive as to make it almost impossible to administer, either food or
medicine, by the mouth.

Patients were often afflicted with extreme pain in the bowels; but more
resembling that in dysentery, than in cholic. A discharge, generally, afforded
a present relief.

Flatulency, both of the stomach and bowels, was almost universal, and to an
extraordinary degree. -- The abdomen was sometimes distended with wind; but the
distension subsided after a conderable discharge of wind, downwards. This was
often the case in one of my patients.

Several dissections, as I am informed by the gentleman principally concerned
in them, show the stomach to have been in a remarkable state of inflammation
and excoriation. It appears to me that this disease of the stomach, or
inflammation -- (if it be proper to call it so) extended through the whole
length of the Alimentary Canal; as it is known to do in Apthae and some other
disorders; for one case of excoriation and partial mortification of the Rectum
came within my knowledge, and I have heard of several others.

I have mentioned, above, that Costiveness was almost universal at the
commencement of the Fever; but it was not always present. For though it was
observable in the greater number of patients, so much so as to deserve to be
ranked among the characteristic signs of the disease; and though a constant
tendency to a costive state, was general in those sick with the disorder; yet,
in some, the Fever was attended from the first, or for a while, by a Diarrhea;
and in one instance, the whole of the Disease appeared to me to be turned upon
the bowels, and to be converted into, or assume the form of a Diarrhea.

Some were seized with vomiting at the first, which was soon stopped, or ceased
spontaneously, and never returned. One case of this kind, proved favorable --
the patient recovering; another unfavorable, the patient dying. -- In others,
vomiting commenced the disease, and continued through it: while in others,
again, it came on in the course, or at the close of the disorder; and this both
in successful and unsuccessful cases.

V. The matters vomited up varied in color and consistence, in different
persons, and in different periods of the disease. The most common was of a
yellowish, greenish, or a muddy green and yellow, appearance, and very fluid.
Vomitings of this kind, were seen both in those who recovered, and who died;
and were both temporary and continued. -- Next, in frequency, was that of a
blackish appearance, commonly described as resembling coffee-grounds, but
bearing a nearer resemblance to blood partly burnt, and diluted with muddy
water. Several who had this vomiting recovered. -- I never saw an instance of
that tar-like vomit, which has been noticed by some writers. But, of all
others, that which struck me as evidential of the greatest derangement of the
stomach, was the vomiting up of, what appeared to be, thin blood, in which
floated a flaky, filmy substance, which I suppose to have been the villous coat
of the stomach. -- This I saw but in a single instance, a few hours before
death. This discharge was frequent, though small; and accompanied by a large
worm.

I cannot help thinking that the matters vomited up, except it be those of the
yellowish or greenish cast, have all a portion of blood mingled with them; and
that their various appearances depend -- aside from their mixture with the
contents of the stomach -- in great measure, on the quantity of blood mingled
with them. It appears to me that, in this disease, the secretion of the Bile is
greatly affected; and that, in many instances, the blood itself passes into the
biliary vessels, charged with the Bile, designed to have been separated, and
being poured into the duodenum, and discharged by stool or vomiting,
communicates the blackness observed in those evacuations. Beside this, as
appears from dissection, and from the case just mentioned, the coats of the
stomach itself are destroyed; and the numerous little vessels, which, in a
healthy state, distill into it a limpid and colorless fluid, now are
preternaturally distended, receive the blood, instead of lymph, and pour it, by
their numerous orifices, into this organ. This effusion of blood may be
supposed to increase, as the disease increases in violence, till, at length,
the tender coats of the stomach are separated, and thrown up, mingled with pure
blood. -- If these ideas be just, it is clear that no vomiting can be more
evidential of a fatal termination of the disease, than this; none can afford a
more unequivocal sign to the physician, that his attention is no longer useful
If the ideas contained in the above paragraph are accurate, they will tend to
confirm both the general notions of the disease, and of the proper mode of
cure, advanced in these letters. For --

1st. The effect of Blood-letting, in stopping the black-vomit, may be
explained on the same principle as in Hemoptoe -- by weakening the circulation,
and allowing time for coagulation.

2d. The reason why all stimulating substances increase the particular
discharges from the stomach, is evident; and, also, why cold drinks, ice, etc.
restrain them.

3d. The astonishing fluidity, or dissolution, as it is called, of the blood is
accounted for, and seen fairly to correspond with the preceding circumstances:
all of which --

4th. Demonstrate the nature of this disease; that it is not a disease of
vascular debility: -- and establish the propriety of employing evacuations, and
whatever may lessen the activity of the circulations, to effect a cure.


.

The discharges from the bowels were very dark, in general, even where no
preparation of mercury was used. They were, likewise, in most cases, remarkably
fluid, where the bowels had been once. (...) thoroughly, opened; and, where the
purgatives were brisk, and in all severe cases, excessively offensive. -- They
were, sometimes, of a dark, shining appearance, somewhat like molasses, melted
pitch, or black-lead. But I have seen stools of this color, in other diseases
-- particularly once in the Croup -- where calomel was frequently used as a
purge. -- I mention this, as it may sometimes happen, that physicians deceive
themselves, in such cases, ascribing that to the disorder, which depends on
medicines.

Some were troubled, with a retention of urine: but, more generally, with an
unusual flow; and this in one instance, I distinctly recollect, where the
quantity of fluids taken into the body, was very small.

In respect to sweating, I discovered nothing uniform. In one case, the patient
always had a profuse, clammy, sweat, when he fell into a restless sleep, with a
rise of fever. This was often observable, likewise, in that state of remarkable
anxiety which frequently preceded an evacuation by stool.

Blood drawn in this Fever, was remarkably wanting in floridity; and this was
especially true of that which was evacuated in the close of the disease --
whether by art, or spontaneous effusion. In one instance it seemed endowed with
a caustic quality, and affected a lancet so as to leave a permanent inequality
and discolouration of its surface.

VI. Sleep, for the most part, appeared unnatural and unrefreshing; attended by
great restlessness; and sometimes by great mobility of the muscles, twitching
of the tendons, and frequent starting up. One of my patients often raised
himself up, suddenly, out of bed, with every appearance of extraordinary
terror; but with no evident or clear consciousness of the act. In one person, I
saw remarkable subsultus tendinum.

There was great variety in muscular power, in different persons. A man who
died with the very worst symptoms of the Fever, the evening before his death,
rose from his bed, ran down two flights of stairs, returned, and was only
prevented from going down a second time by his nurse's having locked him in his
chamber. -- In another case, where the disease was mild, the patient felt
perfectly easy and composed, and in full possession of mental and corporeal
strength, while he lay on his bed; but, when he rose, and attempted to walk, a
sense of universal anxiety was felt, his ideas became confused, his strength
seemed to desert him, a sudden faintness came over him, and twice he sunk down,
unable to proceed.

An evacuation, by stool, often suddenly restored the patient, who was lifted
from bed, to such a degree of strength, that he continued for some time after,
to walk about the room, or sit up.

VII. I noticed no uncommon sensibility to light but in a single case; and that
was not of long duration.

Hearing, in one instance, I observed to be unusually acute; but generally, it
was much impaired; and, sometimes, seemed to be entirely lost. Perhaps this may
account for the apparent loss of memory in some persons.

The taste was either exceedingly impaired, or very fickle. The same may be
said of the appetite. When the appetite began to return, and food to be
relished, the sick were very voracious, but not easily suited. They discovered
no partiality for animal food. Thirst was moderate, in a few instances; but
oftener excessive. I have seen Porter desired; but it was not often relished,
when allowed. The same is true of coffee. Water was, universally, the most
agreeable drink; and I allowed its free use. One of my patients frequently
drank, in one night, when very feverish and restless, three quarts of water.
The appearance of the tongue varied, according to the violence and duration of
the disease, from white, to yellow, darkish, and black, like burnt blood; and
the gums often assumed this last appearance, when there had been bleeding from
them.

An astonishing insensibility to cold was nearly universal. -- I remember, in
one of those cold turns which we had in September, a remarkable instance of
this. One of my patients occupied a chamber in the second story: the room was
very large, extending the whole width of the house, and having a chimney, a
large door, and two windows at either end. The bed was hard, in the middle of
the room, the door and all the windows open, and he covered with a single
sheet, frequently thrown off in his restlessness, yet he complained of no cold,
while I was chilled through, though sheltered from the draught of air, with my
usual clothes on, and the addition of a surtout and double cloak.

VIII. Yellowness of the skin was not constantly present in this disease; at
least, not in any remarkable degree. A tinge of it was common in the eyes and
on the skin; but not stronger, in numerous instances, than in ordinary Fevers.
Some were exceedingly yellow, even to being tawny -- so that the bed and body
linen were stained, both by the sweat and urine.

I saw eruptions but in a single instance. They resembled musketo bites so
nearly, that, had I not been forewarned of this similarity by Dr. Rush, in his
account of the Philadelphia Fever, I should have mistaken them, especially
considering the numbers of these animals. -- In this instance, the eruptions
were on every part of the body; which had not been exposed to their ravages.

I have sometimes observed a coldness of the skin, on the body, generally, but
especially of the feet, of which the patient was unconscious, while the face
and breast were red and communicated a burning sensation to the touch.

IX. I have, hitherto, said nothing of the type of the Fever of 1795; and, in
truth, it is a point on which I could wish to be silent, as, of all others,
connected with the Fever, it is the one where my observation is the least
satisfactory. In its mildest form, the Fever or pyrexia, appeared to me to be
moderate and constant; without any evident or strongly-marked exacerbation:
when severe, it fell in with Dr. Cullen's idea of a Continued Fever, as stated
in his First Lines 27, more than with any other: but, in both cases, I could
not determine that there was any regularity in the rise, or diminution of
pyrexia; on the contrary, the remission (if it be proper to term it so) was
more or less protracted, and the exacerbation sooner or later, moderate or
severe, in proportion as the patient preserved a regular state of body and
mind, or was irregular in these respects. For example -- any sudden agitation
of mind, as anger, perturbation, etc. and any irregularity of body, such as
eating improper food or too much food, drinking any stimulating drink,
restlessness, too long detention of the faeces, etc. appeared to hurry on a
return of all the violent symptoms; while, on the other hand, the sick never
failed to get through the day with more ease to themselves, when no such
excess, or irregularity, happened.

In one case which came under my care, and which various causes contributed to
render the most interesting of any I attended, there were complete
intermissions, during a part of the disorder; but there was no kind of
regularity, either in their commencement, or duration; and a slight excess, in
any of the particulars mentioned in the preceding paragraph, was sufficient to
bring on a speedy and violent turn of Fever.

X. The period of convalescence, as well as of Fever, was variable. In the
former part of the time, and before the weather began to grow cool, patients
seldom died after the tenth day -- as far as I can learn; but their deaths took
place on the 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, rarely on the 8th, and still more rarely
on the 9th day. After the cold weather appeared, they sometimes dropped off
suddenly, and after having exhibited all the marks of convalescence, three
weeks from the time of their seizure. -- So, of those who recovered, some
regained their health with an elastic quickness; while others, were very slow
in the acquisition of strength; were a long time troubled with great weakness
in some of their joints, and oftenest the knees; and were afflicted by
oedematous swellings of the feet, ancles, and legs.

You have now before you the result of my observations, on the appearances of
the Fever of 1795; and I shall conclude this letter by the simple mention of
two facts, which will serve to confirm the doctrine of the great Sydenham,
concerning the despotic nature of the reigning sickness.

The Meazles had begun to appear, when the Fewer came, and they disappeared;
but no sooner was the Fever vanquished, than they returned more generally than
ever, and have continued in this city ever since. April.


I cannot learn that any febrile disease was observed in the city, while the
Yellow-Fever was present. I saw only one instance of Intermitting-Fever in a
lady, who contracted it in the country. It was slight, and was soon cured on
her coming to town, by the usual remedies. Her residence in town, likewise, was
in a part to which the Yellow Fever never came. Beside this, I heard of one
other instance, of a gentleman coming hither, from some other place, with the
Fever and Ague; which was, also, cured by the usual means.

I shall proceed, in my next letter, to bring you acquainted with those means
which were most successful in the removal of that disease which I have just
described.

LETTER NINTH. Method of Cure, in the Fever of 1795.
IT was obvious, to the slightest observation, that the mildness, or severity,
of the Fever of 1795, depended, in no small degree, on the situation of the
patient. That those who lived in the higher, drier, cleaner, and more airy
parts of the town, were more lightly affected; and that a removal, from the
other quarters, into such as were so circumstanced, was always followed by
beneficial effects to the person removed. In consequence, a milder treatment,
in every respect, especially a more sparing use of evacuations, was warrantable
in some cases, than in others; and as some practitioners were chiefly employed
among those whose favorable situations protected them from the most malignant
attacks of the disease, you will readily conceive why there should prevail, in
the minds of some, an opinion that very active remedies were unnecessary, and a
recurrence to the lancet inexpedient, at least, if not pernicious. It is true
that I did not always use it myself; but it is also true, that I never failed
to regret the omission. And though I lost no patient by the neglect, yet I am
convinced that, in every such case, however slight the disease might appear,
the cure was protracted. But, if the remedies were not always the same, the
principle on which they were administered, was uniform; and their operation the
same in kind, if not in degree. -- And, after the Fever became more general,
and the season considerably advanced, there was but little choice left in the
use of means. Positive and speedy relief was required; for to temporize, was to
kill. -- You will sufficiently comprehend, from these remarks, how far the
practice recommended below admitted of variety in the application; and I shall
detain you no longer from the consideration of the particular remedies, which
are meant to be arranged nearly in the order of their comparative importance.

I. BLOOD-LETTING. -- This was indicated by the severe pain, heat, and redness,
of the head and countenance; by the redness, turgescence, and heaviness, of the
eyes; by the oppression, pain, and anxiety, often observable at the breast; by
the fullness, hardness, tensity, or oppressedness of the pulse -- and equally
by that slender, wiry, vermicular feeling which it sometimes had --
communicating an idea of approaching numbness to the finger which felt it. It
is scarcely possible to convey an idea, by words, of minute peculiarities in
the pulse. You will recollect this, and pardon me, if I have failed in this
instance.


The effects of bleeding were, in every instance where I had an opportunity of
observing them, most salutary. The sick seldom failed of finding immediate
relief from it, and of perceiving that relief increased as the blood continued
to flow. It diminished the pains in the head, breast, and stomach: oppression,
anxiety, faintness, and heat, were moderated: the eyes rarely failed to assume
a clearer and more natural appearance: and it seemed to communicate a new
energy to the system. -- I remember an instance where a patient was so unable
to assist himself, on the second day of the disease, that, when I wanted to
bleed him, it required two persons to support him, in passing a few steps from
his bed, into the open air. -- There, he was seated and supported in a chair.
He grew easier, in every respect, as the blood flowed. -- After taking away
about twenty ounces, and tying up his arm, he rose without assistance; walked
several rods, to a Necessary; took care of himself; had a profuse evacuation,
by which he seemed to gain additional strength; and returned to his bed,
without any aid, and with a firm step.

Such were the immediate effects of bleeding early in the disease. The
importance of this remedy was not diminished by the duration of the disorder,
nor the necessity for it lessened, while the symptoms continued which made it
useful in the commencement. -- On the contrary, it was oftentimes as requisite,
and as beneficial, the fifth and the sixth days, as on the first. But this
necessity for its use, at so late a period, did not often occur, where it had
been vigorously employed, in connection with other remedies, at the first.

The following case, which I state briefly, is one among numbers, in evidence
of the advantage of early, free, and repeated bleeding.

A physician was called to a young man, with all the symptoms of the disease --
as it generally appeared at the first -- in the evening. He bled him 16 or 18
ounces; directed purges, etc. in the manner hereafter to be mentioned; and
though the weather was then cool, ordered the windows to be removed, both day
and night. The symptoms were relieved; but the next morning it was thought
necessary to repeat the bleeding; which was done, to an equal quantity. The
purges, etc. were also continued. In the evening, a third bleeding was
performed, and a like quantity of blood was taken away; and the other remedies
were continued. On the ninth day, from the seizure, the man was well, and able
to pursue his business; though his strength was not perfectly restored.

In one instance which came to my knowledge, bleeding removed an obstinate
vomiting, of many days continuance, which threatened the life of the patient,
and which had resisted all other remedies.

It seems hardly necessary to add any thing more, in favor of this remedy,
after its beneficial effects have been stated, with so much eloquence and
perspicuity, by Dr. Rush, in his various publications, respecting the Yellow
Fever.

II. PURGING. No case occurred, in my particular practice, where,
notwithstanding the vomiting, cathartics could not be administered. When this
symptom was very troublesome, they were required to be given in a solid form,
at more considerable intervals, and of as small a size as possible. The
activity of the purge was always to be proportioned to the violence of the
symptoms; and it was important that all medicines of this kind should be given
in divided doses -- so as to promote a gradual and continued discharge. -- The
operation was often very much assisted by clysters; for which water alone was
necessary.

The good effects of cathartics were not less obvious than those of
venaesection. They were indicated by the constipation, (...) generally present;
by pain in the bowels, flatulency, and tumefaction of the abdomen; by pains of
the head, heat and flushings of the face, and of the whole body; and finally,
by the vomitings: and all these symptoms they rarely failed to obviate, or
relieve. This relief, too, was oftentimes so sudden, as to seem like
enchantment. -- Frequently have I seen a patient, after an hour or more of
severe pain, restlessness, heat, thirst, and inquietude of every kind --
feeble, exhausted, and as it were, ready to expire -- rise with the greatest
difficulty, and with the aid of others, to the chair, and after his evacuation,
feel his pains removed, his heat and restlessness vanished, his strength
renewed, and himself able to fit up, or walk about, and breathe the air with
freedom: and sometimes, the discharge was followed by a refreshing sleep, and
gentle perspiration.

These benefits were neither so certainly, nor so frequently, obtained, where
the evacuations were violent and sudden. Indeed, it appears questionable to me,
whether it be ever proper to excite such discharges, in Fevers. Patients, when
much reduced, are apt to sink under such immediate and abundant evacuations.

III. COOL AIR. -- It was of the utmost importance to procure a constant
application of cool air to the body of the patient, from the commencement of
the Fever. The advantages which resulted, were universal and wonderful. -- To
this end, the sick were ordered to be placed on a hard bed, with very little
covering, in the middle of the room; and the doors and windows were, as much as
possible, kept open day and night. -- The good effects of this practice were
exceedingly increased, where the application of the cool air could be made to
the patient in an erect posture. For, not only was it more equable, but the
head was also relieved, thereby, from that sense of fullness and oppression
which was invariably experienced in a recumbent posture. The sick, therefore,
were directed to sit up, in the course of the day, with the assistance of their
attendants, as long as their strength would permit, without their becoming
exhausted. While in this situation, their feet and legs were covered more
warmly than any other part of the body: and if cloths, dipped in cold water, or
vinegar, were often applied to the temples, the relief obtained was still
greater.

IV. COOL DRINKS. -- The great thirst, which was nearly universal in this
Fever, from the first, made the drinks, of necessity, an article of early
attention. It was observable that they never could be too cold. Patients
complained of the warmth of water which had been standing but a short time; and
seemed to languish for a supply of fresh water, with an anxiety which became
truly painful, when the usual hour of its distribution approached. The water
which is used for drinking, in this city, is mostly drawn from a single pump,
called the Tea-Water Pump; and it is distributed, by means of large casks,
which are carted to every part of the town; once a day, in winter; and every
morning and afternoon, in summer.


The good effects of a plentiful use of cool, diluting drinks, were obvious.
They tempered the preternatural heat and anxiety of the stomach; often
restrained vomiting, and the faucial hemorrhage; served to dilute, and carry
off, the offensive contents of the intestines; and disposed to a more equable
and aqueous sweat. -- Of all other drinks, Water was most relished -- and on
many accounts, was the most proper. A pleasant and suitable drink was made, by
pouring warm water on fresh apples, and suffering it to cool; and likewise, by
the addition of a piece of toasted bread to water. Milk, much diluted with
water, was relished by some; some were fond of butter-milk; and as all these
possessed bland and nutritious, qualities, they were advantageously used, where
a variety of drinks was required by the capricious taste of the patient.

I had no opportunity of trying the effiacy of ICE, but the testimony of a
Physician, in whole judgment and veracity I place great confidence, is
strongly in its favor, and inclines me to believe that it may be used with high
expectations of advantage. Under his direction, it answered, better than any
thing else, in relieving heat and fever; restraining hemorrhagy; and obviating,
partially, or entirely, the vomiting -- even the black vomiting.

V. CLEANLINESS. -- This is of the utmost importance, and, in a measure,
indispensable. -- The bed and body linen should be often changed; the clothes
necessary about the bed, well aired, several times a day: there should be two
beds, one of which may be aired, while the other is in use: all unnecessary
furniture -- particularly woollen, silk and cotton -- every thing which may
absorb and retain effluvia and moisture -- should be removed: all utensils
employed about the patient, frequently changed and rinsed: the room should be
often sprinkled and dusted: the face, mouth, eyes whole head, hands -- and,
where it can be done, body of the patient, washed with cool water, several
times in the day. The more exactly -- other circumstances being regarded --
these directions can be put in execution, the better for the patient; and, as
my own experience convinces me, the more certain and speedy will be his
recovery. -- You will observe that I say cool water; for I cannot believe that
the shock which would follow from the application of cold water to the body,
would be beneficial. -- It is not here, as in the use of air; for water is so
much more perfect a conductor of heat, that the abstraction would be universal
and sudden, were it applied cold. And, beside, as much is effected perhaps, by
the ablution, as by the coldness, consequent upon bathing.

It was not in my power, in any case, to carry this practice to the extent I
wished; but, caeteris paribus, the relief of the patient was proportioned to
the degree in which it was pursued.

VI. BLISTERS. -- The advantages usually derived from the use of blisters, were
not evident. It was sometimes doubtful whether they were any way serviceable.
Yet there were instances in which they afforded relief; though mostly
temporarily. -- I have seen them, applied to the breast, relieve the oppression
at the lungs; and applied to the back of the neck, relieve the head: in both
cases, when the disease had been of some days continuance. A physician, to whom
I mentioned these remarks, informed me that his experience justified them,
except when, as was often observed by him, a hemorrhage ensued from the
vesication, and continued for some days. Perhaps it was necessary to the
efficacy of blisters, that they should have been, always, preceded by copious
blood-letting.

VII. The Tinctura Sacra, given in small quantities, at intervals, in water,
was found by one Physician, to have the happiest effects, in relieving nausea,
and obviating the tendency to vomit, in all cases where a destruction of the
coats of the stomach had not taken place. The same gentleman derived much
advantage over the disease, where, from long-continued vomiting and effort to
vomit, the stomach appeared to have sustained considerable injury, or abrasion,
from the use of Ol. Oliv. vel amygdal. dulc. -- The oil covered the inflamed,
or abraded, part, and protected it from mechanical stimulus, while it allayed
the soreness and irritation produced by the action of the diseased fluids it
contained.

VIII. FOOD. -- I have before remarked that the sick showed no preference for
animal food; on the contrary, they very generally refused it. Some, who
requested it to be prepared for them, found themselves unable to eat it, when
presented to them. -- Fruits, milk, biscuit boiled in milk or water, sago,
salep, hasty-pudding, and vegetable food, generally, were most relished by
them, both during their illness and their convalescence. -- This was peculiarly
fortunate, as any indulgence in a contrary course, was sure to be followed by
distressing effects. The more rigidly attentive patients were to preserving a
simplicity of diet, the more certain and pleasant was their recovery. And, in
all cases that I had opportunity to observe, their convalescence was always
extended or shortened, tedious or satisfactory, in proportion as they returned
suddenly to the use of meats and stimulating drinks, or adhered to vegetable
food and water.

I have now, my dear friend, made you acquainted with that course which I
generally pursued, in regard to those who came under my care. The number was
not great, nor the success always complete -- for I had not always the liberty
of employing the means I wished to, as fully and freely as was necessary to
complete success. But, I can truly say, that I never saw them do injury; and
that they appeared to me to do good, in every case, where they were employed,
and in the proportion of their trial and application. -- More than this no man
can truly declare; more than this ought never to be expected from any remedies.
The most able practitioners are destined to see their patients frequently
expire, in spite of all their care, through the obstinacy of the patients
themselves, and the prejudices of their friends, the carelessness of
attendants, or the intervention of unforeseen and unavoidable accidents. The
consciosuness of having done their duty, of having acquitted themselves, under
circumstances so distressful and embarassing, to the best of their knowledge,
and with purity of intention, will prove a never-failing consolation, though
the execrations of ignorance, and the calumnies of hatred, may pursue and
persecute them. -- Happy, -- at least in this respect, -- are those, "the
peaceful tenor of whose way," while it excites neither opposition nor malice,
and neither elevates to opulence nor fame, secures them from misrepresentation
and injustice.

LETTER TENTH. Miscellaneous remarks on Medicines used as Remedies in the
Fever, and general conclusions.
You wish to obtain every possible information, respecting the Fever of 1795;
you are not satisfied with knowing what remedies I employed, nor which were
most successful; but you would learn all that were used; the success, or
failure of each. I applaud your curiosity, my friend, for I am not ignorant of
the benevolent motives which excite it; but I fear that there is little with
which it is in my power further to gratify it. The practice which I saw, was
that which I have recommended: other remedies I know were used; but, not having
had opportunity, but in few instances, to mark their effects, I ought not, from
my own convictions, how well-founded soever they may appear to me,
precipitately to condemn either the prescriptions, or their authors. In the
variety of cases, constitutions, and circumstances, it might happen that some
of those very things, which appeared pernicious when I saw them used, were
sometimes proper and salutary. It would be presumptuous, therefore, in me, to
decide without more information; but I may be allowed an opinion; and that
opinion need not be withheld from a friend. -- I confess, then, that from the
success which attended the antiphlogistic plan of cure, I am persuaded that no
other can be salutary, or safe; and the few instances in which the effects of a
different mode of treating the Fever were observed by me, strengthened my
previous convictions of its inutility and danger.

The medicines chiefly trusted to, by those who pursued a different course from
that laid down in the preceding letter, were, as I am informed, Calomel, to
promote, or effect a Salivation, -- Bark -- Laudanum -- Wine, and other
stimulating drinks -- with an Animal diet.

Of the effects of Salivation, not having seen it take place, by nature nor
art, in the Fever of 1795, I can say nothing. Dr. Rush countenances the
practice, in his Treatise on the Fever of Philadelphia, and adds the testimony
of many respectable authorities to his own. -- As a Cathartic, Calomel,
combined with other purgative substances, was unquestionably useful. Some, I
know, thought otherwise; and that other purgatives might be more safely and
efficaciously employed; and, I confess, I saw some cases in which it appeared
to affect the stomach very painfully. But a Physician on whose judgment I have
great reliance, informs me, that he saw reason to reject a similar opinion,
which he had hastily adopted; repeated observation having convinced him, that
all the symptoms of gastric affection were worse in those who had not been
purged with Calomel, than in those who had been evacuated by its assistance.

I gave Bark, in no form, but in three cases. Two were in the early part of the
reign of the Fever, the two first patients that I had; and I am convinced it
retarded the cure in both. In the other instance, it was administered after the
Fever had left the Patient, and he was convalescent. Here it was given as any
other Bitter, and as much in compliance with his opinions, as from any
expectation of its doing good; and, as far as I can judge, with very little
effect of any kind. -- In the following case, its exhibition was not so
harmless.

A medical friend was called to visit the patient of another Physician, who had
quitted town, on account of his health. The sick man was oppressed by the most
alarming symptoms; of the number of which, were hemorrhagy and the black vomit.
The stimulating system had been steadily pursued, and was continued, under the
direction of a pupil of the physician first employed. In particular, large
quantities of Bark were exhibited, throughout the day. -- On the entrance of
the second physician, the Bark and all other medicines of the kind, were laid
aside; cool air was freely admitted; and the antiphlogistic plan of cure
strictly adhered to. The consequence was, that all the symptoms were relieved,
and a prospect opened on the patient of a recovery. The vomiting and hemorrhagy
had totally ceased. In this situation, and while the Physician was attending to
some persons whose condition was more alarming, the person who had the
immediate charge of the sick man, began, again, to administer the Bark. -- The
next day -- or the very same, at night -- all the bad symptoms recurred; the
Bark was, nevertheless, persisted in; and the man died.

Several similar cases have been reported to me; but none so minutely as to
authorize an attempt to state them to you.

The extreme restlessness of a patient, in whom I had the strongest interest,
and for whose fate the deepest anxiety, induced me, in violation of my more
sober judgment, to administer Laudanum. -- This I did not do, till he had
spent three nearly sleepless nights. -- In every instance, it undoubtedly,
increased the restlessness, clammy sweats, thirst and Fever. I was obliged to
discontinue it.

Wine, brandy and water, and especially porter, when taken by any of my
patients, had the most pernicious effects. I had occasion to see an access of
Fever, repeatedly brought on by the one, and a relapse by the other; where they
were used without my knowledge, and contrary to my direction.

Of the effects of Animal Diet, I have already spoken, and have nothing new to
add.

On the whole, it appears incontestible to me, that what is called the
antiphlogistic treatment is to be adopted in Fevers like that which prevailed
in New York, in 1795, in all its strictness, and adhered to with pertinacious
resolution. Both the symptoms of the disease, and the success attendant on the
practice recommended, concur in establishing the propriety of employing it. --
It is also to be remembered that, in this disease, not a moment is to be lost:
a day, an hour, nay almost an instant of delay, may sometimes be fatal; and the
means practiced must be powerful in proportion to the violence of the symptoms.
Neither must we be deceived by the apparent mildness of the seizure -- for a
few hours may entirely change the face of things, and we may be left to lament
that credulity which led us to temporize, and prevented the use of those
remedies, which delay alone rendered ineffectual.

But, while the Physician strenuously directs his efforts to the removal of the
symptoms of this disease, let him not overlook a passion which never fails to
aggravate them. Fear, the exciting cause, in many instances, of the Fever; the
fomenter of all its evils; and sometimes, as it were, the sole disease; is a
frequent and dreadful calamity, and one of the direst adversaries with which
medicine has to contend. -- In numerous instances, during the continuance of
the Fever of 1795, apprehension touched upon insanity; destroying all
confidence in the Physician and in remedies, or exciting an absurd and
enthusiastic reliance on pretenders and madmen: and utterly disqualfying the
patient for a proper attention to himself. -- In the well, the evil was
scarcely less. The name, alone, of Yellow Fever, seemed sufficient to induce
disease, to banish discretion, to sever the bonds of social connection, rend
asunder the ties of parental, filial, and connubial affection, and put reason
to flight. -- It was in vain to point out the folly of this terror; to declare
the disease not infectious, and easy of prevention; to offer mathematical
demonstration that other disorders were often more mortal, without exciting any
alarm; it was still the Yellow Fever, and that was an irresistible reply to
every argument. -- The city of New Haven, summer before last, lost about 50 of
its inhabitants, with the Yellow Fever. Universal consternation prevailed
throughout the place; all business was at an end; and most of the principal
inhabitants fled. -- Last summer, the Dysentery raged there: more than 70
persons died of it: but nobody fled; nobody was frightened; and the
Magistrates, very gravely, put a stop to all communication with New York, for
fear of the Yellow Fever; made vessels ride quarantine, and confined
stage-coach passengers, that no contagion might be diffused, through the city,
from their trunks and their garments. -- But, it is time to put an end to this
series of letters; and seek, by novelty, to give new interest to our
correspondence. I shall take my leave of the present subject, with an
enumeration of the inferences I have drawn from having viewed it, in the light
here exhibited to you.

1. The Fever of 1795 was Endemic: -- i. e. generated by local causes,
producing a Fever every year, in this city.

2. The peculiar ferocity of the Endemic of New York, in 1795, is ascribable to
the peculiarity of the season, together with a greater accumulation, than
usual, of the ordinary causes.

3. It was not Contagious: i. e. communicated by contact of diseased persons,
by clothes, nor by visiting the sick, etc.

4. As it originated here, its prevention will depend on a change of the local
and individual circumstances which promote it.

5. The Fever in 1795, exhibited such appearances as characterize what are
customarily denominated Inflammatory Diseases.

6. It is cured by the remedies suited to remove Inflammatory Diseases.

7. The same causes which converted the ordinary Fever of New York into the
Yellow Fever, would change the Fever which prevails around our Western Lakes
into the Yellow Fever; and, as certainly, the Intermitting Fever of Sheffield:
while the establishment of a free ventilation, the filling up of all pools,
yards, etc. and a scrupulous attention to cleanliness and simple diet, would
reduce our Fever to a simple Remittent or Intermittent, or remove it
altogether; as the filling up and cultivation of your ponds and marshes, would
forever banish all Fevers of the kind -- as general diseases -- from Sheffield.

I have now, my dear friend, performed the task demanded of me, in the best
manner I am able consistent with my leisure, and my duty toward others. I
cannot conclude without once more soliciting your indulgence, and requesting
you to recollect with what expectations and confessions I entered on the
composition of these letters. -- I have taken the words of Cicero for my motto
-- Rationem, quo ea me cumque ducet sequar --

And if I have erred in my conceptions of what is reason, and what was fact,
let my intentions prove my apology.

E. H. Smith.

LETTER FROM DOCTORS TAILOR AND HANSFORD, TO THE PUBLISHER.

LETTER FROM DOCTORS TAILOR AND HANSFORD. TO THE PUBLISHER.
NORFOLK, VIRGINIA, DECEMBER, 1795 SIR,
IF, in our attempts to add to your information respecting the fever, which
prevailed here in August last, we should draw upon us the illiberal sarcasms,
which we have observed to attend all who endeavor to serve their fellow
creatures in this way, we must leave it to you to justify our intentions, at
least, being ourselves unprepared to answer any thing which may be objected to
what we shall advanc^* We mean to state facts, or what we believe to be such,
and willing to admit that there are several ways of curing the same disease. It
will not be understood, that we reprobate the practice of others who follow a
different mode of treatment. Our observations have been drawn from thirty years
experience, with the advantage of records relating to similar diseases for a
much longer period. We do not know of a more regular mode of treating the
subject than by answering your inquiries in the order they occur, which will
perhaps comprehend every thing required at present.

The Fever we believe has its origin in the season, and exists every year in
various grades, beginning generally in the month of August, and disappearing
about the middle of October.

The precise time of its commencement and termination, and its degree of
malignancy, depending upon contingent causes. We have been accustomed to call
it a Bilious Remittent, with a tendency to putrefaction; whenever it proves
uncommonly fatal, it is aggravated, according to the best of our observation,
by the prevalence of some unusual weather for a long time together -- Thus we
have seen this disease equally malignant after a dry hot season, and after a
very rainy period. The approach of frosty weather being uniformly the cure for
the effects of either. -- The Fever of the last autumnal season, appeared first
on the river, then on the streets adjoining; was soon after diffused through
the town and suburbs, and finally the neighboring country; though in this last
not generally: as usual it declined on the approach of cold weather. -- The
month of June had been very cool, and at the change of the moon, or a little
before, it began to rain in torrents, and so continued to do, with short
intervals of close sultry weather, till August, when a violent hurricane,
attended with a flood of rain, laid waste the whole vegetable kingdom --
afterward the weather was as before, sultry and moist, with profuse showers
till the end of September. -- The first appearance of the Fever was about the
10th of August; it increased in violence and in extension during all that
month; it was perceived then to abate, and continued to do so till the last day
of September, when a few frosty nights supervening, it disappeared almost
suddenly and entirely.

There were perhaps more deaths, than for many years before; but whether
greater in number to the proportion of the sick, than is usual from autumnal
diseases, which prove as universal as that in question, we cannot undertake to
determine. The same mode of treatment generally succeeded -- as in other
seasons. Our method was plentiful depletion in the beginning, not by bleeding,
but by purging with Jalap, Calomel, Scammony, Aloes, or by the milder purges,
the Neutral Salts -- Sennae, Rhubarb, Manna, etc. as the age, sex and
constitution of the patient pointed out, -- taking care that the evacuation of
the first passages was complete, by whatever means procured. As soon as we
judged that to be sufficient -- which we always endeavored to make so with as
little delay as possible -- the bark was administered in all and every form
that it could be made to remain, without regard to quantity, or to the period,
or height of the fever, with wine, porter, and even brandy, if wine was
rejected by the inclination, habit, or stomach of the patient. We can assure
you, we have no reason to alter our mode of practice in future. In a multitude
of instances, some will occur in all diseases, when a change, and sometimes a
material change of remedies may be necessary -- such cases we found, and in
those we used Blisters, Emetics, Camphor, Opium, and often ventured upon
Cupping -- but never upon venaesection. -- This last, a long course of practice
has taught us to be at least, not advantageous. In different climates, and
under other circumstances -- when the disease may have appeared in other grades
than those we have experienced -- that operation is perhaps found useful. We
wish not to impose our opinion, as a rule for any person; sensible of the
fallability of all human judgment. We ever thought it our duty to give up our
own theories, when contradicted by events. We only mean to recommend that plan,
which long experience has taught us to be most successful. There is no proof
that this disease possessed any specific infection. It was rarely fatal to the
native inhabitants or the old settlers, speaking of the town only; but we have
been told that many of the traders from the Rivers and distant part of the
State, died immediately after leaving the port. The terror which pervaded all
parts of the country, and deprived those victims of the common attentions of
humanity, will easily account for this without applying to the malignancy of
the disease. All, or most of those born in, or who had been accustomed to a
southern climate, escaped death, and when attacked, had the disease in its
milder form.

A large number of the inhabitants enjoyed uninterrupted health; most of the
deaths happened in confined streets and buildings, and in those nearest the
river. -- Those who were accustomed to live well, (as it is termed) did not
suffer so much as the poorer class -- But the intemperate of every description
became victims when attacked -- The small pox immediately preceded this fever.
We did not observe that those who had been the subjects of it were particularly
sufferers. -- There had been no malignant complaint in the preceding winter.

A particular description of the fever, and its symptoms, does not seem to be
here necessary, because, it differed from the ordinary Bilious Remittent, only
in the rapidity with which it passed through the several stages, and in its
malignancy. -- This last circumstance we are of opinion was occasioned by the
long continued and universal heat and moisture of the atmosphere. -- The air
was evidently impregnated with putrid effluvia, arising from decayed substances
of every sort, brought down upon the creeks and rivers by the floods of rain,
and thence into the basin immediately before the town, where the stream being
wider, is less rapid than either above or below, and where of course such
decayed substances, together with the filth, etc. thrown from the shipping and
docks, became for a certain time stationary. -- This may in some measure
account for the disease appearing first in the harbor. -- The same fever, with
all its malignant and uncontrollable symptoms, occurs every year in scattered
instances, and about the season. -- In the preceding summer and autumn, several
died with it. A number of ships and vessels, which occasionally put into this
port from James's River, and from North Carolina, lost many of their people
with a fever of this fort, which they brought with them from the fresh and
brakish waters. In the present year (1795) on board a ship from Liverpool,
which did not approach nearer than five miles to the town, and with the crew of
which the captain assured us -- No communication had been from the shore,
except by the health boat, almost every individual was attacked with the
disease, in ten days after her arrival, and one of them (a European) died, and
this at a period when the disease had almost disappeared in the town. We have
before observed that the exhalations from the river, and the putrid substances
carried down its stream, might have some agency in producing or aggravating the
Fever. The French ships to which you allude The French corvettes, part of the
squadron, three of which were taken by the Thetis, Captain Cochran, arrived and
anchored in Hampton Roads, May 18. The Fever did not appear in Norfolk till
August. Capt. Cochran's crew, however, took the Fever from the French
prisoners, and twelve of them died before the Thetis arrived at Hallifax. --
Editor.
, arrived so long before the disease appeared, that it would be absurd to
suppose even a possibility of its being derived from them. We are of opinion,
that there is not the most distant reason to believe the Fever was imported at
all.

How far in towns like ours, the customary diet and general mode of living, may
operate in producing putrid diseases, remains for future observation to
determine.

It has been noticed by several medical writers, that fresh meats, and
particularly beef in southern climates, apparently generate fluxes and other
malignant diseases; -- upon the latter kind of food, and on fresh fish (both of
them frequently not of the best quality) the poorer class of inhabitants
subsist during the summers. Those whose circumstances permit them to purchase
the best kind of meats and fish, certainly experience no inconvenience from
these kinds of food.

It has gone forth that the town of Norfolk is unhealthy and subject to
malignant diseases in a greater degree than others. We may venture to assert
and trust can prove, that there are as few deaths in Norfolk in the average of
three years, as in any town of the same size -- not only in America, but in any
part of Europe, Asia or Africa, and with regard to its natural population, a
view of the streets will prove that there are as many children raised in it, as
in any town whatsoever. It should be remembered that the place has arisen from
its ashes, in the course of a few years -- that most of the new settlers have
been Europeans, a people from northern climes. That there are always a thousand
or more sailors, and strangers who are subject to the diseases of new comers --
that almost all who die, are carried for interment through the principal
street. Hence, those who are unacquainted with the town, may naturally suppose,
that deaths are more frequent, because nearly all that happen, are actually
brought into the view of every passenger.

Thus far we have attempted to lay before you as well as our leisure will
permit, the best information in our power. We have not presumed to enlarge upon
speculative opinions, but if our endeavors shall meet the approbation of those
who may peruse these sheets, and you shall think our correspondence worthy of
further solicitation; we will be ready to communicate whatever we know, or may
hereafter learn, on a subject so interesting to the American community.

Tailor and Hansford.

EXTRACT OF DR. RAMSAY'S (OF NORFOLK, VIRGINIA) LETTER TO MR. MITCHILL; --
CONCERNING THE PESTILENTIAL SICKNESS IN NORLFOLK, IN THE SUMMER AND AUTUMN OF
1795.
YOUR papers afforded a testimony of esteem, which will be a pleasant renewal
of our intimacy in Europe. The little comprehensive pamphlet on contagion, as
you required, I have read often; upon that I intend now to address you, without
entering upon a theoretical question. -- Names and terms have fettered much
medical science in its progress to that degree of perfection, the present state
of the human mind can attain to. I shall send, with little comment, a statement
of a Fever which prevailed with great mortality here, in August and September
1795. Confining myself to my own observations and the sentiments of Dr. Tailor,
a veteran of 25 or 30 years practice; and Hansford, his co-partner, of 14. You
remember when it began. The season very warm; uncommonly so -- (as the winter
has been) -- frequent showers of rain -- of very short duration, often profuse
-- Site of the town low, on a perfect level with drains on the sides of the
walks; not over ten or twelve feet from the windows; those obstructed -- Animal
and vegetable matter, and dirty linen often in them -- Town most rapidly
enlarging -- Houses chiefly of wood -- A great part where death made his sweep,
and dreadful was the hawl -- In a part where the buildings stood upon large log
frames, filled in with smaller wood of pine (chiefly the whole) that soon
decays; this made Terra Firma by mud -- Salt mud -- Many of those large log
pens, over which stand tenements, now even are not filled in, but actually
serve as a receptacle for the offals of large and poor families, so great a
majority, as nearly to constitute the whole inhabitants of that part of the
town. Being foreigners, they dealt lavishly in beef, fish, and all kinds of
fresh food -- observe, this beef was driven perhaps from one to two hundred
miles before killed, then exposed in a hot market to vend; that by one o'clock,
their dining hour, I always did, and do believe, it must have been tainted --
Observe, the fish all dead by break of day, and brought by land from twenty
down to twelve miles -- hard drinkers of spirits, mostly. The first person who
died, was Dr. Williams, a fat man, with very lax fibers, a very free liver, a
grog drinker: he was taken with the usual symptoms of what an old writer upon
the diseases of the West Indies, calls a Bilious Remittent; he vomited vast
quantities of bile; evacuated freely, as appeared to me below, but had always a
prodigious sense of weight in the region of his stomach. Belched wonderful
quantities of wind; this relieved him for a time. The most suffusion of bile in
his eyes, nay all over the body I ever saw, which increased as he vomited, and
continued until petechiae came on, with a vomiting of black offensive matter,
which continued 24 hours, when a fit or two terminated his career. -- How he
was treated, I never inquired, though he was my friend. One or two more natural
born citizens, were the whole, out of upwards of two hundred and twenty, who in
the space of six weeks, fell a victim to this disease. The symptoms were the
same in all, except an obstinate costiveness -- The natives live chiefly on
salted meats and fowls, or other kinds of poultry, which are killed but a
little time before dressing, and the better sort have the greatest variety of
vegetables, are in more airy situations, and not crowded together; and upon my
word, far more healthy this year than I have seen them before. We need not
extend our views across the Atlantic for sources of diseases; there are too
many among ourselves as you remark, and whether the principle takes Cullen's,
Rush's, or your own name, putrid animal vegetable matter, united or mixed in
water, by the heat of the sun, produces something noxious to life.

The object then deserves the attention of the police, and when medical aid is
needed, my plan is to allay the irritability of the stomach; to exhibit
injections; to increase the action of the alimentary canal downwards, which
gives me an opportunity of throwing in a cathartic to evacuate the whole tract;
this I sometimes repeat, if the distension of the stomach returns. Often when
the vomiting inclined me to believe there would be a difficulty in my intention
of evacuating as above; I have used with success, copious draughts of luke warm
water, sometimes grog -- the patient puked easier, and generally more bile, and
the spirits acted as a moderate stimulus. An infusion of Serpent. Rad. in every
stage of the disease after the foregoing practice, which appeared to claim a
preference to the cortix peruv. it often bringing on a return of the nausea and
puking, two of the most dangerous symptoms. The Bark, Columbo and Madeira wine,
whenever it could be received with quietude to the symptom, were our sheet
anchors. -- By this mode I have succeeded well.

SUMMARY VIEW OF DR. MITCHILL'S OPINION CONCERNING THE CAUSES OF EPIDEMIC
DISTEMPERS.
HE begins by examining the constituent parts of the atmosphere, and agrees
with the modern philosophers, that it consists of a little more than a fourth
part of oxigene gas or respirable air, and somewhat less than three-fourths of
mephitic air or azotic gas. These exist together in the form of a mechanical
mixture, but not in a state of chemical combination; and thus the volume of
atmospherical air, whose two sorts of particles, move freely to and among each
other, in common circumstances, contributes to the support of fire and
animation.

But though the ingredients of the atmosphere exist in a distinct and separate
form in ordinary cases, yet this is not universally the fact. Oxigene, the
basis of vital air, and azote, the base of foul air, though frequently
disjoined, do however possess attractive powers, strong enough to make them
oftentimes combine. The chief impediment to their union, is the closer affinity
which they, in their gaseous or aerial forms, possess for the caloric or matter
of heat connected with them, and from which they derive their properties as
elastic fluids. Whenever, therefore, oxigene and azote can come together
without assuming the intervening form of gas or air, then they will unite
according to the law of chemical affinities, and constitute by their junction,
a body or compound, possessing qualities very different from either of the
constituent elements.

It is known from experiment, that both these elements enter into the
composition of animal and vegetable substances. When oxigene unites with mere
caloric, as in Fontana's experiments on insects, and Ingenhouse's trials upon
plants, then vital air will be the miasma proceeding therefrom. When azote
escapes in connection with caloric only, as in Mr. Mitchill's own experiments,
upon, the lean and muscular parts of animals, and upon the air collected in the
tumid bellies of animals, drowned or strangled, the effluvium is atmospherical
mephitis. When the two substances enter into combination with each other
directly and immediately, without first taking upon themselves the aerial form,
as in Massey's experiments, the product is an acid, which, on addition of
pot-ash to it, forms nitre or saltpeter.

Here, then, during the decomposition or putrefaction of organized bodies, as
in Thouvenel's experiments, in a range of heat equal to that which the surface
of the earth acquires on the American continent, in the summer time, is an acid
compound, for^ed by chemical agency, from the same materials which constitute
in their separate state, atmospherical air; and capable as in Lavoisier's
experiment, of being resolved into it by analysis. This acid, which is thus
afforded during the decay or resolution of organic matter, consists of the like
ingredients as the air we live in, and differs from it but in two respects, to
wit, the chemical connection of the materials and their different proportion.
And the analogy between the atmosphere, plants and animals, and the acid of
saltpeter, as to their formation and constitution, must be thus very apparent.

These points being determined, professor Mitchill criticizes the preceding
chemists for their mistake in classing this acid among the mineral substances,
contends upon the authority of their own concessions, that it is generally the
result of animal putrefaction; and professes a reform of the French
Nomenclature, that the language of science may truly correspond to facts. He
accordingly derives the name of the radical term, from the Greek word, sepo, to
putrefy, and calls the azote of the French academicians septon, the putrid
principle or principle of putrefaction. He calls azotic air by the name of
septous gas, dephlogisticated nitrous air, gaseous oxyd of septon, nitrous air,
septic gas, nitrous acid, septous acid, nitric acid, septic acid, etc. etc. and
thereby, in the very phraseology, the origin and formation of the productions,
are invariably suggested to the mind.

Having in this way reformed the language of Chemistry, the professor goes on
to inquire, what is the evidence of nitrous or septous acid existing in the
atmosphere, or in any of its modifications, assuming a volatile or aerial form.
That there is something unwholesome and noxious in the exhalation from
corrupting bodies, both of the vegetable and animal kind, has been long
miserably experienced, though the precise nature of this has scarcely been
imagined, but has rather been considered as lying beyond the reach of human
research. He finds with Margraaf that this very acid exists in rain water, and
concludes with Watson, that snow-water is not free from a tincture of it. He
agrees with Chalmers in ascribing to its operation, the speedy rusting of
metals in hot latitudes, where the presence of an acid is manifest in the
atmosphere. But he does not stop here; for on considering that the plaster and
wall of old buildings, has become impregnated with the septous or nitrous acid
in the course of time, especially if the inhabitants have lived in an unclean
manner, and the houses have stood in the neighborhood of foul and corrupt
vapors, he thinks the conclusion undeniable that this acid must have existed
in a gaseous or vaporific form, before it was attracted by the clay or lime of
the mortar. While in countries where saltpeter is found spontaneously formed
and strewed over the surface of the ground, the unhealthiness of such regions
is to be ascribed to the agency of that very gas, which united in a more
concentrated state with potash, constitutes afterward the nitre of the soil.
-- The tarnishing of metallic substances, highly colored silks, the human skin
and countenance, he considers as caused in a great degree by the operation of
the same deleterious fluid, extricated from putrefying bodies.

Such a gaseous exhalation being now proved to exist, the professor endeavors
to show that epidemic diseases must be occasioned by it, and not by any other
known species of aerial fluid. This mischievous matter cannot be carbonic acid
or fixed air, because its effects upon animal bodies are entirely of a
different kind, from those manifested by infectious ailments. Nor can it be
inflammable air or hydrogene gas, whose extreme levity soon elevates it high
into the atmosphere, or whose inflammability or odorous nature would directly
make its presence evident to the senses. Still less can it be alkaline air or
ammoniacal gas, which though commonly esteemed one of the results of
putrefaction, is seldom or ever afforded but by force of artificial fire, and
if it was spontaneously evolved in low temperatures, would instantly lose its
properties by combination with fixed air, or exhibit them to the nostrils by
mingling with water. And nobody has ever imagined it was azotic or septous gas.

It being thus negatively established, that contagious air can be neither of
the fluids now enumerated, Mr. M. inquires whether that very curious and
wonderful modification of septous acid, called by PRIESTLY, dephlogisticated
nitrous air, and by TROOSTWYCK and DEIMANN, the gaseous oxyd of azote is not in
most cases the very causes of endemic maladies? This opinion he adopts, with
this latitude and extent however, that the septous acid, as well in any other
volatile form, as in that of the oxyd, may be, and is productive of extensive
and dreadful sickness. It is very abundantly produced in the operations of
nature, and may not only be considered as evaporating from putrefying
substances, but as formed in the atmosphere, by the instrumentality of
lightning, after the manner of its production by electrical explosions in
Cavendish's experiment.

The reasons why this plentiful production has generally been hitherto
overlooked, are, 1st. That as it has ever been considered a mineral substance,
because of its being usually procured by the decomposition of nitre, no one has
thought of investigating its history, as an animal production: and 2ndly.
Though it is fatal to breathing animals, yet it possesses at the same time a
power to support combustion, and has few obviously sensible qualities, so that
persons who have lived half their lives in an air more or less infected with
it, never once imagined the existence of such a thing.

To these products of putrefaction, all of which Mr. M. has made the subjects
of public experiments, are the phenomena ascribed to human and marsh miasmata,
to be referred. The copious extrication of such gases, their local origin,
their limited diffusion, their deleterious effects, all point to some
modification of the nitrous acid as their cause. And upon the prevalence and
action of this kind of fluid in the atmosphere, does he account for the
frequency and universality of endemic and epidemic disorders; rejecting
altogether the pretended distinction between contagion and miasma, concluding
with Gardener, Bingle and Carburi, that they are but varieties of the same
thing, and differ from each other but in degree.

The exhalation from graves mentioned by Faurcroi, and from dissecting rooms
described by St. John, as well as the Harmattan breezes of Guinea noticed by
Lind, and the Simaom blasts of Arabia, witnessed by Bruce; he thinks are, in
all probability, modifications of a similar aerial production. And this may
serve to give an idea of the extent and scope of his seasoning on the
occasional production of a gas, which while it continues to surround and invest
the inhabitants of particular spots or countries; often destroys their lives,
or at least impairs their health. The effect of this being manifested upon the
skin and lungs only, appears in the form of intermitting and remitting sits,
and in those peculiar cases of anxious and suffocating fever, of which some
extreme and exquisite relations have been made by Lind, Chisholm and Jackson.

The same reasoning by which Mr. M. became convinced of the existence and
agency of those various compounds of the septous principles, in cities, swamps,
and marshes, led him to examine whether they were not sometimes produced within
the Human stomach. The worst distempers we hear of in hot climates, occur less
among the Natives, than among the Europeans, who for the purposes of commerce
or warfare, visit the torrid zone. They adapt their dress to the climate, but
rarely make any alteration in their gross and northern diet. In hot countries,
the digestive powers are very apt to fail. The aliment, particularly among the
Anglo-Americans and English, who love to eat their meat half raw, soon runs
into a putrefactive mass, and the corrosive acid formed in the skeptic process,
excites that sad and shocking train of symptoms, which constitute and
characterize the Yellow-Fever. This malady, the very name of which strikes the
citizens of the United States with terror, is so particularly inherent in the
stomach and bowels, that Richter, Wade, and other well-informed practisers,
have boldly termed distempers of this type, Intestinal, or Gastric, or
Dysenteric Fevers.

That the food of most persons who suffer by these complaints is in a
considerable proportion, animal, and putrifies in the stomach and intestines,
no body has ever doubted. In a range of heat, not much greater than occurs in
the subjacent earth, or surrounding air, the products of putrefaction must be
nearly the same, in the stomach, as out of it; and the septous principle, in
some or other of its modifications, be the result. The greenness of the bilious
discharges, is evidence enough in many cases of the existence of an acid in the
alimentary canal; and was there not too much of it produced to be neutralized
by that alkaline liquor, the bile, far less mischief would be done by it. And
while flesh-eaters are miserably afflicted, he observes that the Arabians,
Gentoos, Chinese and Negroes, who, though inhabitants of sultry climates,
subsist chiefly on vegetable fare, are very little affected by this kind of
sickness -- Most vegetable substances being either less prone to corrupt, or if
they putrefy, affording little or none of that peculiar azotic product which
renders animal rottenness so foul and destructive.

Thus, upon the idea of skeptic acids and vapors, vitiating the pulmonic
functions, and thereby impeding breathing, or interrupting the digestive
process, and eroding and inflaming the stomach and intestines, Mr. Mitchill,
thinks the phenomena of most febrile ailments, whether of the endemic,
epidemic, or dysenteric; contagious, infectious or gastric, intermittent,
remittent or continued forms, may fully and fairly be explained.

Having by this mode of experimental inquiry ascertained the proximate cause of
fever, the professor proceeds to give a theory of it; and after the manner of
Cullen, takes a single paroxysm of an intermittent as an instance. Judging from
its effects, he considers contagious air as always in some degree stimulant;
though from its non-respirable property, operating upon the lungs in breathing,
in such a way as by subducting heat and oxygene from the body, to diminish
action and energy, and thus induces a state of direct debility. This
debilitating process may be carried suddenly to a fatal extreme, as when the
concentrated pestilential air, inhaled, kills upon the spot; or when in a less
noxious form, it may not extinguish life immediately, but cause an anomalous
disease of three days continuance, without remission, or in which there are
five or six hot and cold fits, in twenty-four hours, eventually terminating in
death. In a form yet more dilute and mild, epidemic air may occasion common
remittent and intermittent distempers.

The cold stage of fever, Mr. Mitchill considers as depending upon impeded
respiration, and the impeded respiration as depending upon the vitiated quality
of the air taken into the lungs; or in some flighter cases, where the stomach
is originally thrown into a disordered condition, the lungs by association with
that organ, are thrown into a disorder too, and for a time perform their
functions imperfectly.

Thus he presumes it is, that the impeded state of respiration, is attended
with a smaller evolution of heat and oxygene in the lungs, and consequently
with more or less diminution of the circulation of the blood, and a
proportional degree of chilliness or coldness throughout the body. The duration
and degree of the cold fit will correspond to the continuance and power of the
causes disturbing the pulmonic organs, either by acting upon them directly or
indirectly through the medium of the stomach.

From the small quantity of heat and oxigene, communicated to the blood in the
lungs, and its consequent slow and feeble circulation, can the shrinking,
paleness, tremors, coldness, debility and other symptoms, be sufficiently
explained, as the constitution is now deprived of its two chief stimulants.
But, why, it may be asked, does not the continued operation of the vitiated air
upon the lungs, or the associated condition of the lungs with the stomach, go
on in an increasing series even unto death? It is a fact that sundry poisonous
substances grow by degrees habitual to the human constitution, and by custom
lose their primary operation. This disposition to become familiarized to
contagious air, is particularly evident, as respects the inhabitants of Guinea
and the West Indies. The constitutions of these people are so seasoned to the
air and climate they live in, that in ordinary cases, it excites in them no
disturbance at all. Now, common paroxysms of intermitting fever, are instances
of temporary seasonings, which the constitution experiences, of a kind quite
analogous to what is perpetual with the Africans and Creoles.

The cold fit does sometimes terminate, in death; and this happens when the
constitution cannot acquire the habit of enduring the noxious cause with
impunity. In the generality of cases, however, the infectious gas loses its
power of operation, before the constitution is debilitated to death, and as
soon as it becomes for this time so much accustomed to the contagious fluid, as
no longer to be disturbed by its presence, the cold fit ends. The length and
violence of the cold fit will thus be, other circumstances being equal, in a
compound ratio, of the impediment given to the respiration by the infectious
gas, and the facility wherewith the constitution accommodates itself to its
action. If three persons then inhabit one house, it is possible that one of
them may become so quickly accustomed to the air, as to have no distemper; a
second may have a moderate disease of a few fits; while the third, possessed of
a constitution not easily molded to a new habit, may be incommoded by a
violent and obstinate disease.

In every paroxysm of an intermittent, the infection thus wears itself out; but
this is only a temporary reconcilement of the body to its action. When after a
repetition of fits, the disorder becomes milder and milder, and after a while
wholly ceases, this is a case of lasting reconcilement. And in this way, may a
large proportion of small intermittents cure themselves, while the credit of it
is given to the bark! This power of habit daily does wonders, and labors more
effectually for the good of the sick than bark, opium and antimony put together.

The attack of contagion being thus for a time overcome, respiration grows
free, full and frequent; the lungs cease to be molested by it; more vital air
is decompounded there, and more stimulus is applied to the heart and arteries,
by means of the increased heat and oxygene now in the blood. The stimuli
operate more powerfully on account of the accumulated excitability of the body;
and a degree of excitement is thence produced, which sometimes ends in death,
sometimes causes delirium, and in almost every case exceeds the healthy range
of heat. Persons therefore who die in the hot fit, die of the indirect debility
induced by the increased heat and oxygene, acting upon the increased
susceptibility of the system.

The duration and violence of the hot stage will be, other things being alike,
in a compound ratio of the excitability accumulated in the cold stage, and the
heat and oxygene evolved in the hot one. When the excitability is exhausted by
the operation of the stimuli, the violence of action will cease, and the body
grow cool.

The sweating stage follows of course, as in other cases of the subsidence of
violent action. For after the exhausted excitability of the constitution allows
excessive action to go on no longer, the respiration grows more moderate and
easy, the heart beats with less frequency and force, and the arterial
contractions are more regular and health-like; and as these alterations go on,
the hydrogene and oxygene of the blood, now run together in the extreme vessels
of the skin, and forms the moisture which bedews the surface and this
afterward flying off by evaporation, cools by degrees the whole body down to
its ordinary temperature. And as the arterial extremities of the rest of the
body, assume their ordinary condition by the subsidence of excitement, the
other secretions which had generally been suspended during the fit, now return
as before. After this, the constitution, so far accustomed to the contagious
poison, regains its former vigor and functions, as far as the exercise
endured, and the functions injured during the several stages, will allow.

His doctrine of fever in short, is concisely this: -- The contagious fluid, by
interfering with pulmonic action, brings on the cold stage, and would continue
the same until its termination in death, did not the constitution in the mean
time, acquire such a habit as to gain a temporary insensibility to its action.
This habit being induced, the cold stage abates by reason of the state of
direct debility into which the body had been brought; respiration becomes
consequently quicker; heat and oxygene are let loose in the lungs, and becoming
incorporated with the blood now warm, stimulate every part with more than usual
power, and occasion the phenomena of the hot stage, which terminates as soon as
the accumulated excitability of the system is sufficiently exhausted. -- The
sweating stage next ensues, which after what has been said, hardly requires any
further explanation.

The interval between one fit and the succeeding one, will be proportionate to
the strength and duration of the habit acquired, Some persons thus experience
but one fit, and the disease vanishes; for under the same circumstances, they
are never invaded by a second. Others suffer two fits, or a succession of fits,
and after a while become so accustomed to the stimulus, that if always applied
in the same degree of strength, its effect is no longer felt upon the body. In
other instances again, so hard is it for the constitution to be molded to a
settled habit of opposition, that after enduring a great number of invasions,
it becomes so enervated and worn down, as at length to die exhausted.

The species of fevers whether quotidian, tertian, quartan, or of whatever
type, will be determined by the readiness or tardiness wherewith the contagion
gains a new ascendancy over the body, or breaks the habit. And to this mobility
of the animal frame, or ease with which the habit is broken, is to be ascribed,
as well the frequency of the returns, as the length and severity of the
paraxyoms.

The anomalous cases of fevers, which have puzzled Physicians to explain and
nosologists to arrange, are as Mr. M. thinks, thus very naturally accounted
for; since according to the variation of the cause (since the contagious
atmosphere may be more or less dense or concentrated, and may be more or less
charged with carbonic acid, hydrogene gas, and other non-respirable airs) will
be the variety in the effect produced, and as there may be infinite gradations
in the noxious cause, so there may be endless variations in the morbid effect,
which it would be impossible to describe in words, and useless if it could be
accomplished.

Hence he explains why a succession of fits long continued, may dispose the
constitution to a repetition of fits, even when the morbid cause is away. For
though there may be a habit produced of insensibility to contagion, yet a habit
may in the mean time be established in the bodily motions, of falling
periodically into trains of action, even when the original cause is withheld or
removed. Here then there will be produced a habit of having paroxysms after the
manner of temporary seasonings, while at the same time there may be a habit
formed of resisting contagion altogether, or of obtaining a permanent seasoning
as to that.

And to this principle of the animal frame, he thinks may be referred all the
febrile ailments from the most trifling intermittent to the more serious
remittent, and to the solemn forms of continued fevers; without calling in the
aid, even mentioning the names of spasm, vis medicatrix, or reaction of the
system: always wishing to be understood as comprehending within the present
theory, the animal movements referable to the beforementioned causes solely,
and not extending it to embrace common catarrh, quinsy, pleurisy, peripneumony,
rhumatism and other diseases of the pyrexious type, which Mr. Mitchill supposes
to proceed from another and a very different cause.

TWO LETTERS RELATIVE TO THE YELLOW FEVER, AS IT APPEARED IN NEW HAVEN, IN THE
STATE OF CONNECTICUT, IN THE YEAR 1794.

I. Letter from Dr. Monson, jun. to the Publisher, on the Origin, Symptoms,
Progress, and Disappearance of the Yellow Fever, in New Haven -- etc. etc.

II. Letter from Dr. Monson, sen. on the Treatment pursued, and most
successful, in the Cure of the Yellow Fever in New Haven -- etc. etc.

TWO LETTERS RELATIVE TO THE YELLOW FEVER, AS IT APPEARED IN NEW HAVEN, IN THE
STATE OF CONNECTICUT, IN THE YEAR 1794.
LETTER FIRST. On the Origin, Symptoms, etc. of the Yellow Fever, in New Haven.
DR. MONSON, JUN. TO THE PUBLISHER.
SIR,
IN giving a history of the origin of the Yellow, or Pestilential Fever, as it
appeared in this City, in the year 1794, it will be necessary to premise some
account of those diseases which prevailed here, immediately before; that the
Public may be enabled to judge whether there is any analogy between them and
the Fever in question.

Sometime in 1792 and 1793, the Scarlet Fever, or Ulcerous Sore Throat, made
its appearance in Litchfield, Water-town, and the towns in the vicinity of
New Haven; and raged with great mortality.

In September and October 1793, many of the Inhabitants of this town were
affected with a slight Influenza; stinging pains in their jaws and limbs,
soreness in the muscles of the neck, with a light Fever. -- In November and
December following, several children were affected with the Ulcerous Sore
Throat. The symptoms were not alarming; and in every instance it terminated
favorably. -- In January 1794, the disease assumed a more malignant appearance.
In February, March, April, May, June and July, it was highly putrid; and many
fell victims to its malignity.

On the 10th of June 1794, the Pestilential, or Yellow Fever, appeared here. --
Doctor Hotchkiss visited Isaac Gorham's wife, on the Long-Wharf. -- She
complained of a violent pain in her head, back and limbs; her eyes were dull,
and slightly inflamed; she had nausea at stomach, was obstinately costive, with
a moderate degree of Fever. No marks of inflammation were discoverable, by
inspection, in the throat. -- The distressful symptoms, abovementioned,
continued till the fourteenth; when her pain and distress suddenly subsided;
and she was elated with the prospect of a speedy recovery. In the evening, she
vomited matter resembling coffee-grounds; and died on the 15th. -- The
Physician, who attended her, was ignorant of her complaint till he saw what she
vomited. He then declared her disease to be the Yellow Fever.

On the 15th of June, I visited Elias Gorham's daughter, a child of 8 years of
age, in Chapel-street, three quarters of a mile from Isaac Gorham's house. She
had been sick three days; her countenance was flushed with a deep red color;
her eyes were dull, and highly inflamed; she had violent pain in her head,
back, and limbs; nausea, and frequent vomiting; obstinate costiveness; a quick,
full, hard, throbbing pulse; her skin was hot and dry; and her tongue covered
with a thick white fur. On the 16th, her pain and distress suddenly abated; in
a few hours, she vomited up matter resembling coffee-grounds; and died the next
day. -- I inspected her throat, during her illness, and could discover no marks
of inflammation.

I was surprised at the singular appearance of the disease, and hearing of the
death of Mrs. Gorham (Isaac Gorham's wife) inquired of the mother if her
daughter had been on the wharf. She informed me that the child had lived with
her aunt (Isaac Gorham's wife) nearly a week.

The 23d of June, I visited the child's mother. She complained of violent pain
in her head, back, and limbs; nausea; frequent vomiting; obstinate costiveness;
with a considerable degree of fever. These symptoms continued five or six days;
then gradually abated; and soon after she recovered her usual health.

On the 20th of June, Mr. Elijah Austin died in New York; and his clerk, Henry
Hubbard, died in Derby. They complained within three or four hours of each
other; and Mr. Hubbard vomited matter resembling coffee-grounds.

The inhabitants of this town were alarmed at these sudden deaths, and
requested the Select-Men to make diligent inquiry into the origin of this
disease.

On examination, it appeared -- That, in the beginning of June, Capt. Truman
arrived from Martinico, in a sloop that was infected with the contagion of the
Yellow Fever: that this vessel lay at the wharf, within a few rods of Isaac
Gorham's house: that she had on board a chest of clothes, which had belonged to
a mariner, who died of the Yellow Fever, in Martinico; and that his chest was
carried into Mr. Austin's store, and opened in the presence of Capt. Truman,
Mr. Austin, Henry Hubbard, and Polly Gorham; the three last mentioned of whom,
died, in a short time after their exposure to the contents of the chest. --
Hence it is highly probable that Mrs. Gorham caught the disease from the
infected sloop, or clothing. Mr. Austin's store stands within three or four
rods of Isaac Gorham's house; and no person in town was known to have the
Yellow Fever previous to Capt. Truman's arrival.

June 26th, Isaac Gorham lost an infant child with the Yellow Fever; and soon
after his son and daughter were affected with it: -- the former died. --
Solomon Mudge died on the 30th; Jacob Thomson's negro woman, on the 1st of
July; Archibald M'Neil on the 9th; Polly Brown on the 3d of August; John
Storer, jun. and John Hide, on the 8th: and widow Thomson, on the 10th. --
Jacob Thomson's negro woman, Solomon Mudge, John Storer, jun. and John Hide,
had visited Mr. Gorham's house, a few days before their illness; Polly Brown
and Mrs. Thomson, nursed in Mr. Gorham's family; and Archibald M'Neil nursed
Solomon Mudge. -- Elias Gill, died on the 12th of August; and Samuel Griswold's
wife, on the 7th: the former, visited Mr. Gorham's house; the latter nursed in
his family.

There were a number of persons who caught the disease at Mr. Gorham's (...),
and recovered.

Mrs. Thomson, on the first day of her illness, was moved half a mile from Mr.
Gorham's, into George-street. Luther Fitch, caught the disease from Mrs.
Thomson, and communicated it to his servant maid. Both recovered. -- Mr. Fitch
lives in College-street, nearly three quarters of a mile distant from Mr.
Gorham's house. -- I could trace the disease throughout the town. No person had
the Yellow Fever, unless in consequence of attending the sick, or of being
exposed by nurses, infected houses, clothing, or furniture.

I have inquired of several aged persons in this town, relative to the yellow
Fever, whether they knew of its having ever been here, previous to June 1794,
and there is but a single instance; the facts relating to which are these: --
In the year 1743, a transient person, by the name of Nevins, who came from the
West Indies, lodged at the house of Nathaniel Brown, an innkeeper, in this
city. The man was taken very sick, in the night; and died shortly afterward;
and his body was very yellow, after death. -- Mr. Brown's wife sickened in a
short time, and died, of the same complaint; which was, at that time, supposed
to be the Yellow Fever.

I am credibly informed that several persons, at Mill-River, in Fairfield
county, and also at New London, died with the Yellow Fever, in August and
September 1795. It was propagated there by infected persons from New York.

Capt. John Smith died in this town, the 20th of August 1795. He caught the
disease in New York, and communicated it to one of his negro servants.

The following is an account of the number who died, with the Yellow Fever, in
New Haven, in the different months of the year 1794.

June 6 July 3 August 16 September 26 October 12 November 1 Total, 64

Of this number, forty-eight vomited matter resembling coffee-grounds, or port
wine. -- There were about a hundred and sixty persons who had the Yellow Fever.
-- Three persons recovered who vomitted matter like coffee-grounds; but none
recovered, that I remember, who vomited matter resembling port wine. -- Some
vomited a viscid, tough mucus, similar to the white of an egg; others, matter
like chocolate; which were as fatal as the black vomit.

The Yellow-Fever was attended with specific contagion in every instance, and
proved equally mortal in every part of the town, in proportion to the number
that were sick. No age, nor sex, were exempted from it is ravages. All
descriptions of people were alike susceptible of receiving the contagion.

In the month of September, when the Yellow Fever raged with the greatest
violence, the inhabitants, in general, were almost entirely free from every
other complaint. It was remarked by the citizens, that they never knew it so
healthy, at that season of the year -- excepting the Yellow Fever.

The following is an accurate register of the number who died of the
Scarlet-Fever, or Ulcerous Sore Throat, in 1794.

February 3 March 5 April 5 May 10 June 15 38 July 7 August 3 September 2
October 2 14 38 Total, 52

It was computed that 750 persons had the Scarlet Fever. -- This disease
appeared in almost every family in town, indiscriminately; and was evidently,
an Epidemical disease, which originated in the constitution of the air, --
while the Yellow Fever was propagated only by contagion.

The symptoms of the Yellow Fever, generally, were as follow: -- Languor;
lassitude; rigors; a dull, heavy, inflamed eye, with a dilated pupil; the
countenance flushed, with a deep red color; violent pain, in the head, back,
and limbs; nausea; frequent vomiting of matter highly bilious; bitter taste in
the mouth; tongue covered with a thick, whitish or yellow fur; a very quick,
full, hard, throbbing pulse; skin hot and dry; thirst very inconsiderable;
obstinate costiveness -- and when stools were procured, they were of a
bottle-green color, or resembled tar, or molasses: -- These were the general
characteristics of the disease; when it appeared highly inflammatory. -- In
some instances, the pulse was very slow -- diminished in frequency below the
healthy standard -- and very feeble; there was great oppression about the
precordia; faintness; disposition to coma; a silly look of the eye; exquisite
irritability of the stomach; constant vomiting; faultering in the speech; the
countenance of a tawny, or copper color; tongue moist, without any fur, and of
a bluish or coal black appearance. -- In some I observed a tort, quick, small
pulse, and sometimes slow, which would rise on bleeding, and become quicker and
fuller.

Where the disease raged with great violence, and was highly malignant, the
remissions of Fever were scarcely perceptible to the most attentive observer.

The pulse would continue hard and full, till within a few hours before death;
when the pain, distress, and fever, would suddenly abate, and the pulse return
to its healthy standard. Soon after, the sick were affected with a vomiting of
matter, resembling coffee-grounds, or port-wine; or with a coldness of the
extremities, which gradually increased, till death closed the scene.

When the disease terminated favorably, there was a gradual remission of the
fever, pain, distress, nausea, and vomiting.

Some were affected, on the third or fourth day, with hemorrhage, from the nose
and gums; and sometimes, these symptoms would occur at a later period.

Others were affected with petechiae, carbuncles, and livid spots, on the face
and breast, as large as a dollar. One patient had a number of livid blotches,
as large as a damson; some of which discharged a dark-colored, bloody matter.
This patient recovered, on the 27th day of the disease.

A young woman had the black vomit, on the third day of her illness. On the
sixth, she had a large abscess form, on the superior part of the right thigh,
near the head of the Os Femoris; and a large carbuncle, on her loins, of the
bigness of a common sized bread cake, and of a livid color. It suppurated on
the tenth day; the mortified parts sloughed off, and denuded the spine. On the
same day, she had a deep abscess form on the left thigh, nearly opposite to the
one on her right. These abscesses produced deep, sinuous ulcers, which did not
heal till the fourth month of her sickness. On the fifth month, she was able to
walk, with the assistance of crutches; and soon after regained her health.

Capt. David Phipps's wife, on the ninth day of her illness, was affected with
the hiccoughs, and died on the eighteenth. On the seventeenth, she expectorated
matter of an orange green color, and extremely fetid. -- I have mentioned this
circumstance as a rare occurrence; very few being affected with hiccoughing, or
subsultus tendinum.

The Yellow Fever generally proved fatal on the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth
days. There were three or four instances of its terminating fatally in
thirty-six hours. If the patient survived the seventh day, he almost always
recovered. At this period the fever frequently appeared to make a complete
crisis. On the eighth day, it assumed the type of a double remittent: two
distinct remissions were evident in the course of twenty-four hours,
accompanied by profuse and intolerably fetid sweats, and often with white and
read miliary eruptions. This fever seldom made any regular crisis. It often
continue^ till the twenty third or twenty fourth day, and abated gradually. --
In the course of the disease, they often vomited a large quantity of green
bile, -- resembling the expressed juice of red pepper leaves. This evacuation
seemed to relieve the disagreeable nausea which most of them were affected
with. -- The discharge of bile was commonly the effort of nature; gentle
emetics, seldom or never, procuring a discharge of bile.

I saw two instances of reinfection.

The effects of the contagion were, generally, obvious on the third, fourth, or
fifth day, after exposure. In one instance they did not appear till the
thirteenth.

The bodies, of those who died of the Yellow Fever, were either of a tawny, or
copper color: Some were of a deep yellow; and one almost of an orange green.
Three appeared as if they were sprinkled with ink.

In respect to the origin and nature of the disease under consideration, I
esteem it justifiable to reason from facts alone. I am fully of opinion that
the Yellow Fever is seldom, or never, generated in this country, and that it is
always imported from abroad. An objection to the idea of its being generated in
this country is, that it was never known in the interior of this state, or of
the United States; so far as I can learn. Had it ever appeared in Connecticut,
before the year 1743, and June 1794, we should, undoubtedly, have had some
record of the fact. There is no such record, and no person remembers to have
heard of such a disease, but at these periods, prevailing in any part of the
state. There are numbers of aged persons in New Haven, who remember the Putrid
Ulcerous Sore Throat, Smallpox, Meazles, Dysentery, etc. raging here, with
great mortality; but have no recollection of any Yellow Fever. Hence we may
rationally conclude that it never did appear, in this state, but in the years
1743, and 1794.

It is evident, from facts beforementioned, in this letter, that the Yellow
Fever was propagated in no other way than by contagion; and that this is a
specific contagion, and no more diversified, in its operation on the human
system, than that of the Smallpox and Meazles.

If the citizens of large commercial cities were attentive in tracing the
origin of the Yellow Fever, on its first appearing among them, they would often
find that the disease was imported. In some instances it would be extremely
difficult to discover the origin. -- But the mischief lies in this -- that the
inhabitants of such cities, whenever a contagious disease makes its appearance
among them, endeavor to suppress all rumor of it, from an apprehension of
alarming the country, and injuring their commerce: unwilling to believe that
there is evil in the city, till the disease spreads in every direction. Then,
indeed, when it is too late, they are solicitous in the use of means to arrest
its progress. As it extends itself slowly, at first, seasonable exertion might
both detect its source, and prevent its increase; but when it is diffused
through a city, it spreads with rapidity, and it is no longer possible to
discover where it began. -- But as, whenever the Yellow Fever has appeared in
the United States, it has always been in seaport towns, and originated near
wharves, docks, and warehouses, there seems to be high probability that the
disease is imported.

With sincere esteem, I am yours, etc. ELIJAH MONSON.
NEW HAVEN, April 24, 1796.
LETTER SECOND. On the Treatment most successful in the Cure of the Yellow
Fever, in New Haven, in 1794, etc. etc. DR. MONSON, SEN. TO THE PUBLISHER.
DEAR SIR,
THE communication which accompanies this, from my Son, contains an account,
sufficiently minute, of the origin, symptoms, fatality, etc. of the Yellow
Fever, as it appeared in New Haven, in 1794, together with his reasons for
believing it to be a disease of foreign derivation, and of specific contagion.
-- I have reserved to myself the task of conveying to you some information
respecting the plan of cure generally adopted; on the juvantia and cedentia;
and relative to sporadic cases with similar symptoms.

In June 1794, when the pestilential or Yellow Fever, made its first appearance
here, the Scarlatina Anginosa was rife, with great malignancy. It did not, at
all, admit of the use of the lancet; but, on the contrary, we found the bark,
mineral acids, and high stimulating cordials, most successful in promoting the
cure. This Fever exhibited considerable variety of symptoms, in different
circumstances and habits. Sometimes, the soreness of the throat preceded the
scarlatinous efflorescence; at others, the cuticular eruption appeared previous
to the difficulty of swallowing and soreness of the throat: and in others,
again, there was no eruption on the skin, from first to last, and only a
temporary complaint in the throat, but a gangrenous affection of the Tensils,
which was soon communicated to the habit, and proved suddenly fatal. The
Scarlatina Anginosa being thus the constitutional Epidemic, and ushered in with
many of the same symptoms with the supervening Pestilential Fever, it will not
appear very extraordinary that, on its first appearance, the one should be
mistaken for the other. This was the case, in respect to a number of those
first seized with the Yellow Fever; who being treated with bark and cordials,
without much previous evacuation, rarely recovered. Indeed, of seventeen, or
eighteen, who were earliest affected, fourteen died. But, whether this should
be ascribed to the treatment, at this period, solely, or to the nature and
virulence of the infection, I am not satisfied. For I am confident that the
Fever assumed a more malignant aspect in those who received the infection from
the Fomites of the disease (which was mostly the case at first) than where it
was derived immediately from the bodies of the sick: which observation, if
just, confirms the opinion of Dr. Cullen, respecting contagion.

This extraordinary mortality having convinced us of the impropriety of
trusting to, or using, cordials, bark, etc. we, with one accord, had recourse
to the lancet; endeavoring, at the same time, early to cleanse the first
passages with strong purges, composed of Jalap, Calomel, and Aloes: for the
sick were obstinately costive, in general, and required much physic to move
them, and frequent repetitions to keep the bowels open. These evacuations were
very evidently attended with the most speedy relief of headache, nausea, and
oppression; the stools procured, by the purges, were commonly of a greenish, or
dark bilious tinge; and, where the bile was brought off copiously, it was not
usual to see that yellowish suffusion of the eyes, and surface of the skin,
throughout the course of the disease, which was formerly accounted a principal
diagnostic, and has given name to the Fever.

The repetition of the lancet was necessary, to third or fourth day, in some
habits, as were the mercurial purges.

There was little dependence to be placed on diaporetics, by reason of the
extreme irritability of the stomach.

Baths and fomentations, in some cases, were highly palliative.

The fermenting mixture, sometimes restrained the vomiting. This effect was,
likewise, produced by blisters, applied to the region of the stomach. When
applied just above the knees, they appeared to be attended by decided
advantage, in diminishing the frequency of vomiting, relieving the head,
palliating nervous affections, removing coma, and encouraging diaphoresis.

Clysters, often thrown up into the bowels, were peculiarly serviceable, not
only to assist in effecting the more easy and thorough transit of the Physic,
but to cool the bowels, attenuate the viscid colluvies, and dispose to
perspiration.

The Bark, in the decline of the Fever, answered a good purpose, where it could
be retained; but there were but very few who could bear it in substance, and
not many in any form.

Opium, whether administered to relieve pain, or stay the vomiting, was
observed to have the most pernicious as effects; especially in the early stage
of the disease. A man and his wife, who had been accustomed to the use of
Laudanum, on former occasions, when seized with the distressing symptoms of
this Fever, had recourse (in the beginning of their illness, and previous to
any medical advice) to the liberal use of that medicine, for the relief of
their pains; and both died in about thirty six-hours.

A free, cool, well-ventilated apartment was of the greatest importance.

The passions of the mind had a very sensible effect on the sick. -- The
passion of fear, in particular, was not only highly predisposing to the
reception of the contagion, but a very fatal concomitant. Hence the
pusillanimous and fearful, when exposed to the cause of the disease, rarely
escaped; and hence the fatal consequences which, in sundry instances, followed
from funeral knells, which were, in general, manifestly detrimental.

On the 6th of September, I was myself seized with the common symptoms of the
Fever. My habit being slender, and as I had been wo^n down with fatigue and
much exposed to the night air, I was cautious of using the physic in the
quantity I had been wont to give it to my patients; at the same time fearful I
should not be able to retain it on my stomach. I found, by the gradual
introduction of it, I had, by the third day, considerably affected my habit
with the mercury. I no sooner perceived my gums and fauces touched, than I
found that almost intolerable oppression about the precordia yiedling and
subsiding. -- Upon reflection, I recollected a circumstance which before I had
not attended to -- That, where the mercury, in the purging pills generally
used, had so far insinuated itself into the habit as to produce any soreness of
the mouth and gums, the patients had universally recovered. I mentioned this
circumstance to my brethren of the faculty, who, on recollection, assured me
that their uniform experience confirmed the fact: none of them having lost a
patient, where the mercury had produced ptyalism.

Thenceforward our main object, after cleansing the first passages, was to
introduce mercury into the system, as fast as possible, both by the stomach and
by friction. -- This appeared to be a more eligible and successful treatment,
than to repeat the mercurial purges through the course of the Fever.

Notwithstanding the evident symptoms of inflammation, in this Fever, I cannot
say but that, in sundry instances, large and repeated bleedings appeared to
sink the patient, and proved detrimental; and purging, also, was sometimes,
carried to excess. Yet, in no instance, was bleeding pushed to near that
extremity, as was often practiced in Philadelphia. -- I would not, however, be
understood, in any measure, to censure the practice of the faculty in
Philadelphia; for it is well known that diseases of the same name and type, at
different times and places, require different treatment. The Yellow Fever, too,
when it prevailed among us, may be supposed to partake, in some degree, of the
nature of the constitutional epidemic then existing; -- I mean the Scarlatina
Anginosa, in which nothing was more fatal than the lancet: for, whatever
inflammatory symptoms appeared in the beginning, there was almost universally,
a sudden transition, from the inflammatory, to the putrid diathesis, which
called for the early use of tonics, and highly stimulating cordials. And the
Yellow Fever, though ushered in with strong inflammatory symptoms, yet
terminated, when fatal, with those of an opposite nature.

There were no dissections made in this town; but, from all the symptoms
attending, I could not have entertained a doubt of finding a morbid affection
of the liver, had not gentlemen of the faculty, and eminent in their
profession, in Philadelphia, and in other places where this Fever has
prevailed, decided to the contrary. But there has never been, I believe, any
uniform appearance of this Viscus discovered on the dissection of those who
have fallen a sacrifice to this disease. -- But if the liver be not primarily
affected, may it not be a question whether the remarkable yellowness, noted in
the eye, and over the whole surface of the body, be any thing more than a
consequence of that costive, torpid state of the intestines, in the early stage
of the disease, which, by retaining the bile, now constantly pouring into them
in its usual, or perhaps increased quantity (as may be supposed from increased
excitement of Fever) allows an absorption by the Cacteals to take place, and
thus produce this phenomenon -- according to the suggestion of M. Portal?

Many circumstances seem to favor the idea that the liver is affected
primarily: such is the pain, either dull or acute, so universally perceptible
on pressure with the hand on the region of that viscus, and which increases
with the disease; -- (and I have known it to that degree, that half the weight
of one's hand would produce swooning) -- and such, also, is that tensity and
distention of the integuments. -- Both Warren and Hillary supposed the liver to
be the seat of the Fever; and Dr. Broag, who performed many dissections in this
Fever, and in the Dysentery of hot climates, observes that the liver was almost
always found diseased. And Dr. Hunter remarks, that a diseased state of the
liver and spleen has an intimate connection with the diseases of hot climates.

But whether the disease of the stomach and intestines precede that of the
liver, or the reverse, they must all be more or less affected, in the progress
of the Fever. For it cannot be supposed that so violent and long-continued a
derangement of the alimentary canal, as is evident in the Yellow Fever, could
take place, without extending its disorder to the functions of the liver, if
not to its very substance. -- But perhaps a decision on this point can make
little alteration in the method of cure; a local inflammation in any of the
Viscera being, doubtless, to be submitted to the same general plan of treatment.

There is nothing in the histories of the Yellow Fever, which I have seen, more
extraordinary than that gentlemen, clearly eminent in the profession, should so
decidedly give it as their opinion that the disease is not infectious. Dr.
Hunter remarks that, in no instance, did the Yellow Fever prove more infectious
than the Remittent; and that it was to him matter of consolation to be able to
declare it not to be an infectious disease. And Dr. Mosely, if I am not
mistaken, is of the like sentiment. -- Now, with us, the contrary of this is
demonstrated by the most obvious facts.

In a climate where the disease is not epidemical, and where it is not
generated, we are under advantages to decide, with much more certainty, in
respect to its infectious nature, than we should be in a hot climate; where the
long-continued heat, in conjunction with a number of other causes, is
productive of the disorder, and where it would, therefore, be very difficult to
determine when the Fever was constitutional, and when propagated by contagion.

We have never, in this part of the country (except in a single instance in the
year 1743, mentioned in the preceding letter) been acquainted with a Fever
altogether similar to the one in question. True, some chronic complaints in the
viscera, as well as acute sporadic fevers, ending in sphacelation, have been
attended with the vomiting of a fluid, putting on the appearance of
coffee-grounds, and terminated in a black vomit. We have often seen continual
endemial fevers, intermittent, and remittent bilious fevers, originating from
the putrid gates of animals and vegetables commixed, -- as from draining of
ponds and stagnant waters: -- but no disease from these sources, or any in our
climate, I conceive, ever compared with what is generally known by the name of
the Yellow Fever -- no disease attended with so great rapidity, or
characterized by that deep-shaded, universal yellowness, and vomiting of
black-colored matter -- oozing from the surface of the stomach.

Dr. Ferrier observes, that pestilential disorders are not to be ascribed to
animal putridity. Instances have been adduced in which thousands of dead
bodies, have been left to putrify on fields of battle, without producing
pestilential fever; nor have fevers been observed to originate, or to rage more
severely, in houses surrounding Churchyards; though the stench is often
insufferably offensive. And, says the same author, it is a question whether the
dead body of a person who perished with the plague or fever, be capable of
communicating infection. -- I conclude, then, that the contagion of the Yellow
Fever is specific contagion; and that, in this climate, it is propagated by
animal poison, in a gaseous form, proceeding from a living human body diseased
-- and in no other way -- and suppose it to act immediately on the nervous
system.

In hot climates, where the Yellow Fever is generated, there is a combination
of causes that do not exist here. There is. Dr. Blane tells us, something
peculiarly noxious in the land air. -- The most pernicious practice, to
Europeans, when newly arrived in hot climates, is exercise in the heat of the
sun. This, joined to intemperance, renders such climates so fatal to
foreigners. -- Besides the obvious effects of bad air, depending on heat and
moisture; the Dr. mentions several instances of the singular quality of air in
particular places -- which, though its influence cannot be accounted for, has
yet certainly the effect of producing the diseases peculiar to such places.

I regret that my leisure, from the avocations of business, will not permit me
to furnish you with a more ample and better arranged statement of the facts and
reasonings, in relation to the present subject. -- Next to our acquaintance
with the Deity, and the terms of acceptance with him, the knowledge of the
natural evils to which human nature is subjected, and the means of avoiding,
and removing them, demand our highest and most serious attention. -- To this
end, I highly approve of your design; and that prosperity may attend you, in
your laudable undertaking, for these purposes, is the ardent wish of

Your Friend, and Humble Servant. ENEAS MONSON.
NEW HAVEN, APRIL, 1796.
LETTER, OF DR. REYNOLDS, TO THE PUBLISHER.
SIR,
I AM happy to hear that you purpose collecting a history of the Epidemic
Bilious Fever that has of late made such ravage in several places in America.
By thus placing within so small a compass, the practical experience of those
who have had an opportunity of treating and being acquainted with that disease,
much useful knowledge of the subject may be disseminated, and the general good
of mankind promoted.

To aid this undertaking, I send you the following, which if you think worthy
of notice, will find a place in your collection.

For the fall and winter of the year 1792, and in the summer following, an
Epidemic Bilious Fever, appeared with much violence in the town of New-Galway.

In general the first attack was not severe -- for one or two of the first
days, the patient might rather be said to be unwell, than sick. -- But this
state continued not long -- soon a violent fever, with severe pains in various
parts of the body, commenced -- very frequently a nausea and vomiting, and
sometimes a violent purging, were early companions of this disease. In patients
of a delicate constitution, the pulse was small and quick from the beginning;
but in others of a more robust habit, the pulse was full and in some cases very
regular, although the other symptoms were much aggravated. -- They seldom
complained of much thirst after four or five days, although the mouth and
tongue were dry and foul. -- Most of those cases that proved fatal continued
till after the twelfth day, and many till the twentieth from the onset of the
disorder.

In some few cases at the beginning of the disease, bleeding appeared to give
some relief. But in most of the instances where I had an opportunity of
observing its effect, it was evidently hurtful. -- The same I can testify with
respect to frequent purging.

My general mode of treating this disease, I published in the Albany Register
(a copy of which I send enclosed) -- And I have since frequently had the
satisfaction to hear from gentlemen of the faculty, that my mercurial method
had proved remarkably beneficial within their experience. -- It Is not within my
power to trace the origin of this disease, in this place, to any known cause.
The country has been improved about ten years, and previous to this, and since,
has been remarkably healthy, except a small number of cases of the Maligna
Angina, which not only occurred in this, but in all the neighboring towns,
where nothing of the Bilious Fever followed. It began late in the summer, and
continued till the the next spring. It was expected that the winter would check
its malignancy; but on the contrary, many of the worst cases happened in
December.

In the summer following, a very extraordinary case happened. Upon the border
of a marshy piece of land, a horse died, and was suffered to remain above
ground and putrify. A young woman who lived near the place having frequent
occasion to pass near the carcass, was seized with a violent pain in her head
and sickness at the stomach. On the second day from the attack, a physician was
called, who let blood from the arm; but her fever increased, and she soon
became delirious. On the third day when I first saw her, every symptom appeared
fatal. Upon her feet and hands, fingers and toes, a number of blisters,
surrounded by inflammation, appeared -- and a real mortification had already
begun upon the ends of some of her toes -- The blisters and places of
mortification continued to increase till the morning of the fourth day, when
she died.

The fatality attending this case, will show the necessity of burying all
animals that may die in the summer season near any habitation. A precaution
little attended to in the country.

STEPHEN REYNOLDS.
Montgomery County, State of New York, December 27 th, 1795.
The following is the Paper mentioned in the foregoing Letter. FOR THE ALBANY
REGISTER.
THE method recommended by Dr. Rush of treating the contagious Fever now so
prevalent in Philadelphia, is by some physicians objected to, betreating the
Contagious Fever now so prevalent in cause so simple; by others, from an idea
that mercury can never be advantageously used in fevers, especially in those of
a putrid kind. Fully convinced that those objections are made either from
prejudice or mistaken theory, I view it an obligation incumbent on me to bear
this public testimony in favor of this new mode of treating putrid fevers.

In the neighborhood of New-Galway, for several months past, an Epidemic Fever,
attended with the same symptoms as that in Philadelphia, has raged to an
alarming degree, and many have fallen victims to its fury. -- To a number of
those cases I have been called, and have treated them in the following manner,
with the happiest success.

In the first or inflammatory stage of the disease, I gave calomel from 20 to
30 grains, sufficient to prove cathartic, with a moderate opiate after the
operation. The next day, and during the continuance of the fever, gave 2 grains
of calomel, morning, noon, and night, and opiates occasionally -- giving
frequently an infusion of Rad. Serpent. Virg. in water; at the same time
ordering that wine or lemonade be mixed in all their drinks. This method
pursued in the early stage of the disorder, a copious sweat will ensue, and the
patient soon recover. If this happy time for relief is neglected, the fever
puts on the highest symptoms of putrefaction, and often terminates in death. --
I ought to mention that the symptoms attending those cases that I have seen,
have not been so violent or suddenly fatal as it is said of that in
Philadelphia -- owing, probably, to a difference in the climate.

Let those who condemn this practice, consider that the Materia Medica
furnishes nothing that will so effectually open all the secretions at once, as
Mercury. From thence I think this conclusion is easy, that nothing will so
speedily discharge from the circulation whatever matter may happen to be
present, as this Divine Medicine.

That the art of physic may so improve, that old age shall be the only weapon
used by death, is the

Sincere wish of a Servant to the Sick, S. REYNOLDS.
Montgomery, Oct. 1795.
REMARKS ON CERTAIN CAUSES OF DISEASE IN LARGE CITIES, AND THE MEANS OF
PREVENTING THEM. WRITTEN IN DECEMBER, 1795.
THE prevalence of the bilious remitting Yellow Fever, in this and the
neighboring States, for a few years past, and its fatal effects, in many of the
large towns, render an investigation into the causes that have produced it,
highly interesting to the citizens of the United States, and especially of the
mercantile towns.

The question whether the Epidemic, which has proved destructive in
Philadelphia, New York, New Haven, Baltimore and Norfolk, was the offspring of
local causes in our own country, or of imported infection, has been much
agitated, and to this moment, well-informed men are divided in opinion on the
subject.

Without giving any opinion at present on this point, one thing may safely be
averred, that, whether imported, or generated by local causes in our own
country, the epidemic influence and destructive effects of this malignant
bilious fever, are greatly increased by local causes, which are wholly within
the command of human power. It can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of all
rational, candid men, that whatever be the origin of the disease, a great
proportion of its deleterious effects, is to be fairly ascribed to the
negligence of men. This point must be admitted; for it can be proved by a
series of decisive facts in this city; and I am informed also, by facts in
Philadelphia, Baltimore, Norfolk and New Haven. This circumstance lessens very
much the importance of deciding the question, whether imported or not; for if
imported, it does not spread, unless its progress is favored by unwholesome air
in this country.

My main design is to persuade my fellow-citizens, that the general health of
this metropolis depends greatly on their own exertions; and that although human
power cannot guard against every instance of disease, yet it may prevent, in
all cases, a disease propagated by contagion, from spreading so as to become a
general calamity in a populous city. To enforce a conviction of this kind, I
shall produce only the evidence of incontestible facts or acknowledged truths,
and the conclusions fairly deducible from them.

Diseases, for my purpose, shall be divided in the following kinds.

I. Those which are neither contagious nor epidemic, but generated in
particular persons by local and temporary causes, as the peripneumony and
pleurisy.

II. Those which are propagated solely by contagion, as the smallpox.

III. Those which are epidemic and are not ordinarily communicated by
infection, as common colds, and the intermittent fever.

IV. Those which may be both epidemic and contagious; as the Dysentery, Scarlet
Fever, Yellow Fever, etc.

The first class, depending mostly on accident, or the negligence or vices of
individuals, are not the objects of my present inquiries.

The second are for the most part easily avoided by preventing a communication
with the diseased. Some remarks that will hereafter occur may be applicable to
cases of this kind.

The third class are for the most part out of the reach of public regulations.
Individual precaution may do much to prevent or mitigate epidemics; but this is
foreign to my present subject.

The fourth class of diseases are more or less under the control of human
regulations, according as they depend more or less for propagation on an
epidemic imperceptible influence, or on contagion by means of a communication
with the sick. The influenza which appeared in 1789 and 1790, was said to be
contagious; but if this was true, the disease could not have spread by
communication with the diseased; for hundreds and thousands of persons were
seized in a day, without any intercourse with each other. -- Its propagation
therefore must have been by means of invisible causes existing in the
atmosphere.

What then are the causes of epidemic diseases of the pestilential kind?

It is evident there are two principal sources of disease. -- The first is the
air we breathe -- The second, our food and drink. These causes may, and often
do, act separately; and not unfrequently they act jointly in producing disease.

Irregularities in diet and the use of improper food are things that depend
mostly on the will of individuals; and if they produce less disease at one time
than another, it is because the season is more or less favorable. The object of
my present inquiries, is principally to explain the other great source of
pestilential diseases, impure air; to demonstrate how much it is in our power
to prevent it existence or lessen its effects, especially in populous cities;
and hence to enfore the necessity of a total and thorough reform in our police.

It is fact that is evident to all the world, that the natural state of air,
unmixed with any substances exhaled from our earth, is the most fit for
respiration and perfectly salubrious. Atmospheric air, even in its purest
state, is found to be a compound fluid. -- The parts, when separated by
chemical process, are unfit for respiration, and a portion may be extracted
from the purest air, which is instantly fatal to the life of animals. Chemists
suppose they have ascertained the proportion of the parts of good and bad air,
which exists in the natural state of the atmosphere See an ingenious little
treatise on Contagion, lately published by Dr. S. L. Mitchill; in which,
notwithstanding the technical terms employed, a common reader may find much
instruction.
. This is not material to my purpose. It is sufficient for the purposes of
common utility, to know that air is salubrious when it is pure; that is, in its
natural state, unmixed with effluvia from the surface of the earth -- and on
the other hand, that the air is unwholesome and unfavorable to life, in
proportion as it is impregnated with morbid exhalations from the earth.

The morbid exhalations which affect the air, proceed mostly from fermenting
animal and vegetable substances. In what proportion these substances produce
such noxious effluvia, is not material; as it is a given point that both may
produce them. That state of animal and vegetable substance which seems to
generate the poisonous air in greatest quantities and with most rapidity, is
the state of putrefaction; which is the natural process by which such
substanees are decompounded and resolved into their original component parts.

Putrefaction is carried on by air, heat and moisture. Without air, all action
ceases in the animal and vegetable world; and the greater the heat and moisture
to which such substances are exposed, the more rapid will be the process of
putrefaction.

As all animal and vegetable substances contain a quantity of noxious matter;
and as they must be continually decaying and putrefying, in greater or less
quantities, on the surface of the earth; and as they necessarily discharge,
during this process, a poisonous effluvia into the atmosphere; it becomes a
serious question, especially for the inhabitants of large towns, and in the
neighborhood of extensive marshes, by what means they can avoid the
inconveniences and fatal effects of such an atmosphere. Let us then attend to
the following considerations.

The exhalations of a deleterious kind, like the effluvia of all other kinds,
proceed from certain objects as from the center of a circle; and if not forced
from their direction by winds, probably diverge in straight lines. Near the
objects from which they proceed, they are in their most dense or concentrated
state; and as the objects usually lie on or near the earth, the air near the
earth must be impregnated with the greatest quantity of this morbid matter.
Perhaps also the specific gravity of this foul air may be greater, than of pure
air. But it is probable that it is capable of rising and diffusing itself in
the atmosphere; and that it becomes attenuated by occupying a larger space in
the common air, until it is thoroughly incorporated. In this manner, it is most
dangerous, because most concentrated near the earth; and at a distance, is more
harmless.

The means of avoiding the injurious effects of these exhalations are various.

I. By removing the animal or vegetable substances, which generate noxious air.
This is an article of infinite consequence to cities.

II. When the sources of poison cannot be removed, as with respect to large
marshes which cannot be drained, the obvious method of avoiding the ill
effects, is to avoid, as much as possible, breathing the air in the
neighborhood. Farmers would do well to set their houses as far as is possibly
consistent with their business, from such low grounds.

III. When people necessarily live in places where large quantities of morbid
effluvia usually impregnate the atmosphere, ventilation of their streets and
houses is among the most effectual means of preventing the concentration of the
poison and its fatal consequences.

So far as regards the police of a city, the whole doctrine of preventing or
mitigating the injurious effects of bad air, is comprehended in the following
articles -- to remove the sources of the poison, or to dissipate it as much as
possible.

To remove the sources of the evil, infinite care should be taken in building
cities, to leave no low grounds or hollow places among the buildings, as
receptacles of water and filth. The back yards should, in every case, be raised
above the pavement of the streets, and the streets should be so raised, as to
give a considerable descent into the adjoining river or sea. No trouble or
expense will justify a neglect of this regulation. The health and the lives of
citizens absolutely depend on this precaution. If the land in the rear of the
building lots is naturally lower than in front, it should be raised by carting
in earth. It should be an article of the police of every city, that no man
should erect a house, without at the same time, raising the back yard, to give
a descent into the street. The yard should also be paved, if among other
buildings in a compact part of the city; and no filthy water from the house
should be suffered to lodge in back yards. People should learn that it is not
large piles of animal or vegetable substances alone, that generate foul air;
but every small substance, and all the water that has been used in a family,
add to the sources of this evil. Water itself may be absorbed in the earth or
evaporate; but any filthy substance it may contain, lodges on the surface of
the earth, exposed to the action of the sun, and furnishes a portion of
poisonous effluvia. Hence in cities, smooth pavements, though they may augment
the heat of the air in some small degree, contribute not a little to preserve a
pure air, by facilitating cleanliness. And it is a remarkable fact that the
inhabitants of the suburbs or skirts of many of the large towns in America, who
live beyond the pavements, are much more subject to the common autumnal
complaints, than those who reside within the pavements.

Water is perhaps the best purifyer of the houses and streets of cities, as
well as of infected clothes. -- The use of water cannot be too liberal; but
care should be taken that none of it remains to stagnate about or near
buildings. Water imbibes the poison of foul substances, and therefore when
houses, back yards and streets are washed, the water should be enabled, by
suitable channels, to run off into the sewers or adjoining river. If the
natural surface of the earth is too level for this, no pains should be spared
to remedy this inconvenience by artificial elevations. It is no excuse for
neglecting these things, to say they are expensive; because they cannot be so
expensive as epidemic diseases. The loss of business for one season, in such a
city as Philadelphia or New York, would build all the streets in this city,
where the fever has been most fatal Half a million of dollars is probably a low
estimate of the loss incurred by New York the last season.
. But when we take into consideration the loss of life, the tears, the
distresses of bereaved parents, and of helpless widows and orphans -- the idea
of expense, for the purpose of preventing such calamities, loses all its
terror. -- Labor and perseverence will conquer all difficulties of this kind;
and if all possible means of rendering cities healthy are not used, why are
they built at all? Why should cities be erected, if they are to be only the
tombs of men? A frequent recurrence of malignant and fatal epidemics will
besides lessen the business of a town, and this sinks the value of real estate.
It is therefore the proprietor's interest as well as his duty to attend to
every circumstance that can insure the health of his tenants.

But as among a multitude of people, the artificial causes of disease must be
numerous, and much dirt and filth will be found, to produce impure air,
whatever pains are taken to preserve cleanliness; it becomes a serious inquiry
how streets and buildings may be best constructed for ventilation. As water
absorbs the poison of filth or washes it away; so wind dissipates the morbid
effluvia, and renders it altogether harmless: or at least diffuses it so as to
lessen its action upon the system. If we examine the progress of the late fever
in this city, we shall find its ravages in a direct proportion to the want of
cleanliness and ventilation in the several streets and houses.

To know how much depends on a free air in the cure of fevers, most persons
need only to attend to the facts within their observation. But this is a
circumstance of so much importance to a city, that it deserves particular
consideration.

Air, as well as water, is a fluid, which, by the laws of nature, is kept in
almost continual agitation. Its natural state, as before observed, is perfectly
salubrious; that is, fitted for the purpose of preserving life and health.
Whatever poisonous qualities it may contain, it receives them from substances
within the human body, or on the surface of the earth. But it is a law of
fluids to purify themselves by motion. Thus whatever impure qualities the air
may receive from putrefying substances, and which may be raised by heat and
float in a stagnant air, may, by violent agitation, either be so attenuated or
diffused, or so intimately combined with other parts of the air, as to be
rendered totally harmless. Whatever therefore tends to obstruct the motion of
the air near the earth; that region of air which men constantly breathe;
restrains, in a greater or less degree, the natural tendency of the air to
purify itself. Hence the infinite importance of attending to the means of
giving a free current of air through houses and the streets of a populous city.

The streets of a city should, if possible, be strait. -- The stale notion of
censuring uniformity in a city, is worthy only of weak minds. Crooked or
winding streets tend to break the force of the wind; as with a stream of water,
which is retarded at every bend. This article however is not of the first
consequence.

It has been doubted whether wide streets in a large town are very beneficial;
as the action of the sun on the pavement is violent, and the heat is increased,
and as the quantity of shade is less in proportion in wide streets than in
narrow ones. But wide streets, if kept clean, are doubtless the most healthy,
as they admit a larger quantity of pure air, and a more free circulation.

Another article in the laying out of streets for healthiness, is, a suitable
elevation of the parts distant from the sewers or river, to give a descent for
the water to run off with some force and rapidity. A moderate elevation is not
sufficient; for though, in such a case, the water itself may drain off slowly,
yet it leaves most of the filth behind, which is the source of poison to the
inhabitants. In this particular, Front-street and Water-street, in this city,
are very ill constructed. The natural position of those streets, which are made
along the shore of the East River, is nearly on a level. It was the business of
the police to remedy this, in the mode of pa^ing.

Two obvious modes of preventing the inconveniences of level ground, suggest
themselves. First to raise the middle of the street, then to give the whole a
more round or spherical form, than is necessary on a declivity. Where a
considerable declivity occurs, the water will run off with force, whatever be
the form of the pavement. But on a level, some artificial elevation must be
contrived. On a declivity, the form of the pavement should be the section of a
large circle -- on level ground, the section of a small circle, is a better
form.

The second improvement in making streets on level ground, is to raise the land
in the center, between two gutters or sewers. Thus for instance Water-street,
between Pine-street and the Fly-market, should be raised much higher than at
present, in the central point between the two streets. The inconvenience of an
elevation of two or three feet in such a distance, is trifling, when put in
competition with cleanliness.

Perhaps also smooth gutters along the sides of the streets, next the foot
walk, might be made of hewn stone, and so laid as to be durable. This would
amazingly facilitate the cleaning of streets which are nearly level.

Another article in constructing a city for health, is, that as few streets as
possible should terminate within the city; that is, enclosed, at the ends as
well as sides, by ranges of buildings. Wherever a street terminates by a block
of houses, the circulation of air is obstructed. Violent winds indeed penetrate
into every place; but most of our summer winds are light, and in the sultry
season, which ventilation is most wanted, because the exhalations of a noxious
quality are most considerable, there is very little wind in the open country;
and in the confined streets of a city, none at all.

Lumber-street, is an example of a street terminated by three story buildings
in Liberty-street. There are many others of the same kind, and some with no
direct opening to either river, as Garden-street and Batavia-street. This
circumstance makes no small difference in the free circulation, and
consequently in the purity of the air Let a dam be erected five feet high,
across a stream of ten feet depth. This dam would check the current near the
bottom of the river, for a considerable distance. The same is true of air, in a
less degree.

Every person has observed the effect of friction in retarding the current of a
river. The current near the sides and bottom is slower than in the middle; by
means of the friction of the water against the earth. A remarkable proof of
this is, that the tide in rivers flows and raises the water 6 or 8 inches,
before the ebb current has done running on the surface of the water. The flood
tide meets with less resistance from the ^low under current, than from the
rapid current above -- it checks the under current first, and thus raises the
water, while the ebb current on the surface is yet running.


.

In the construction of dwelling houses, equal attention is required to the
form and position, in order to promote ventilation. Under ground stories for
the habitation of families, it would be well to prohibit altogether. As
work-shops they are less pernicious; but are generally unfavorable to health.
In some cases, rooms partly below ground are so situated, as to admit a current
of air through them. In such cases, they may be occupied with more safety.

The circumstance of admitting fresh air through rooms by opposite
corresponding windows or doors, is one that ought never to be neglected, in low
situations and crowded places. The difference in the circulation of air, is
immense, when the air can pass through a room in a direct line. Side doors and
windows do not effectually answer the purpose; and when there is no opening
into a room, but on one side, there can be very little circulation. It might be
well worth the attention of people who build houses, to consider whether it
would not favor health materially, to construct doors or windows between the
front and back rooms of their houses, in such a manner, that they might be used
in summer, but closed and concealed in winter. In many situations, this
arrangement would prove highly agreeable, and contribute greatly to health.

If the foregoing principles are just, it is worthy of our attention to compare
the actual situation of New York, as it relates to the means of preserving
health, cleanliness and ventiliation.

The natural situation of a great part of this city, is as well calculated for
salubrity of air, as it is possible to conceive one to be. The form of the
Island is adapted for cleanliness in a remarkable manner; the land gradually
rising from each river, the filth is, by every rain, washed down the declivity
on each side toward the river, and where it is not obstructed in its passage,
by some artificial means, is carried into the water and swept away by the
tides. The city is open on the south west point to refreshing breezes from the
bay; and the restriction which prevents the corporation or citizens from ever
converting the walk at what is called the battery, into streets and house lots
to be enclosed and covered with buildings, has insured the lives and health of
thousands of citiizens. Fresh air enters Broad-way, Greenwich-street,
Broad-street, etc. and penetrates freely into the city; ventilating those
spacious streets and dissipating the noxious air necessarily generated in a
large town. On the west, the streets which cross the Island, are open to fresh
air, from the Hudson, and the straight direction and the breadth of those
streets, conspire with the declivity of the ground, to give all that part of
the city, the advantage of ventilation and cleanliness,

On the east side of the Island, the declivity of the ground is favorable to
cleanliness, from the height of the land to Pearl-street, the last street
erected on the natural earth. Water-street and Front-street are built on made
land -- the water every tide penetrates, by subterraneous passages, to the
cellars in Water-street, and what is perhaps worse, the streets are so level,
that not only the filth made on them, but great part of what is brought down
from the higher land in John-street, Maiden-lane, Pine-street and Wall-street,
lodges upon the pavements or in the sewers. In paving and building on this made
land, no effectual provision was adopted to carry off the water and filth; and
the inhabitants severely feel the consequences of that neglect.

Here then we find, if not in all cases the sources, yet the peculiar region,
of fatal maladies. Here diseases of a malignant kind in hot weather first
appear, and from some point, take their departure and spread desolation.

If we proceed further northward, we shall find, in what was called the Swamp,
a still more fatal neglect of the means of preserving health. The ground now
covered by Roosevelt-street, James-street and Catherine-street, extending from
the East River toward the Tea-water Pump, was a few years ago covered with a
pond of water. The ground is artificial; and not only so, when the streets, a
few years ago, were paved, they were raised from two to four feet above the
foundation of the original houses. The back yards are few of them paved, and
being lower than the streets, they are the reservoirs of every species of filth.

So far as regards salubrity, this part of the city is most unfortunate; indeed
it is scarcely possible to conceive of a situation worse calculated for
preserving the lives of the inhabitants.

The natural situation of this quarter of the city is not favorable for
cleanliness and ventilation. A straight line from the Battery to Corlaer's hook
would pass by Beekman's-slip, Peck-slip, New-slip, etc. at several hundred feet
distance; the shore being a curve. By this means, the part of the city forming
this curve, is shielded from the direct course of the westerly winds, the most
salubrious that blow on this continent and which prevail nine months in the
year. On the north west, the higher ground and buildings prevent the direct
access of the wind; so that that part of the city, which is the oldest,
best-settled, and where filth is most apt to collect, has the least advantage
of free air. The direct course of the wind being broken by the higher ground on
the north west and the southern point of the island, the pure air from those
points seldom blows with violence along the eastern shore, and the light
breezes of summer, instead of sweeping currents, afford little more than gentle
eddies that are insufficient to purify the atmosphere which the citizens
breathe.

The high ground in the rear of the ship-yards and above George-street are very
injurious, in preventing ventilation. The land is nearly on a level with the
chimnies of the houses from George-street to Roosevelt-street. This breaks the
current of air in almost every direction; for it has been before observed, that
the under current of air is checked by objects to the height of those objects.

Those natural disadvantages of situation are not remedied by the mode of
building and paving the streets below. The streets are nearly level; the back
yards are unpaved and receive every species of filth, which accumulates the
whole year, and in summer must supply a prodigious quantity of foul
exhalations. It is impossible for the inhabitants of such streets to be healthy
in a hot season.

The eastern part of Water-street is in a similar state. The pavement is raised
above the first floors of the buildings and above the ground between that
street and Cherry-street. Of course water and filth collect in the rear of the
buildings and in the cellars. The wharfing is equally bad; some of the wharfs
only half finished admit the tide; but prevent the filth received from the
streets and houses, from being swept away. This is the case about the place
where the fever appeared the summer past. The wharfs should be made solid and
complete and well paved -- solid to admit of the least possible subterranean
filth and stagnant water, and well paved to carry off what is formed on the
surface.

Such are the facts relative to the situation of this city, as adapted to
cleanliness and ventilation. A great portion of the city is high, cleanly and
well ventilated -- but some parts are low, level, and dirty, and covered from
westerly winds. The former has invariably escaped the ravages of epidemic
bilious fevers, and the latter has repeatedly suffered by their fatal effects.
Let any candid man walk over the city, and examine the situation of each
street, and he will find that the epidemic has been fatal, in a very exact
proportion to the causes of disease which have been described.

Before I conclude this subject, I would make some remarks on the manner of
constructing the common sewers, as also the wharves and docks.

The principal sewers in the city, such as those in Broad-street, Fly-market
and Burling-slip, are built on ground, subject to a flux and reflux of tide. If
the tide penetrates through them, it carries back the filth which is received
from the streets, and prevents it being swept into the sea, for 6 hours every
flood. If any part of the fewer is above high water, a great portion of the
filth will be met by the tide, and lodged; and, what is worse, if the sewers
are wholly above high water, and not washed by the tides, and if they are
nearly in a horizontal position, great quantities of filthy putrefying
substances will always be collected in them. In all these cases, a fetid air is
generated and emitted from these reservoirs of impure matter.

These considerations suggest the impropriety of all sewers under ground,
unless in places where tides or running water constantly wash them clean. If
all the water of a city is drained off on the surface of the earth, any
collection of filth, by means of sudden showers or other causes, is visible,
and may be easily removed.

Never was a greater mistake than constructing an arched sewer under ground, in
Fly-market. The land in Maiden-^ane is so high, that it would have been very
easy to conduct the water above ground into the dock; und nothing could have
been more cleanly and salutary, than to have had the market washed by the
copious streams of water which are collected, every shower, from William-street
and Liberty-street, and united just above the market. It seems as if nature had
contrived a situation in tha^ spot, for a clean wholesome market, and that all
the ingenuity of the corporation had been formerly exercised, to defeat her
beneficent intentions. So well adapted for this purpose have been the means
used, that the water is directed under ground, at the very point where it is
most wanted above ground. As all the water is thus carried off, and as the
street is nearly level, all the filth of the dirtiest place in the city, is
left as a nuisance to annoy half the inhabitants of the city, who are obliged
to resort to that market.

As if this was not enough, a floor is made to the market, and so loosely put
together, as to suffer filth and offal to get beneath the boards, where it is
out of the reach of any slight attempts to sweep the market. This is an
inexcuseable fault -- because the expense of removing the floor, and laying a
smooth brick pavement, which is easily washed and always firm, is too
inconsiderable to be noticed. The cleanliness of the Philadelphia market, which
is thus paved, should have suggested this improvement, long before this time
Since writing the above, this market is undergoing a material alteration.
.

Equally ill-constructed are the wharves. Docks, in which all manner of filth
is collected, are left dry at low water, which never ought to be the case. For
although the water of the sea, and pure earth covered with it, are not
unwholesome, yet when mixed with other substances, the compound may prove
highly noxious. It appears to me that the docks should be filled out so far as
that the earth should, at low water, be entirely covered. The wharves should be
made as solid as possible, to prevent water from penetrating and stagnating in
them, or conveying into the interior structure of them, vegetable and animal
substances which may lodge and putrefy. They should also be so constructed on
the top as to be easily kept clean. The deep holes and miry places about our
wharves in rainy weather, are as unhealthy in hot weather, as they are
inconvenient at all times. They are in many places so narrow, as to endanger
the legs and lives of men among the carts, hogsheads and bowsprits, and in the
hurrying season of autumn, it is not too much to calculate that ten per cent.
of the labor of men employed on them is lost by their interfering with each
other.

What complete remedy can be suggested for these evils, I will not undertake to
decide. It is a common concern, and among the citizens who are interested in a
general and thorough correction, some will be found to point out the principles.

It seems obvious however, that a total stop should be put to extending the
made-ground into the rivers. This artificial earth is always porous; it admits
and retains water; of course all cellars in such ground are damp and
unwholesome. Perhaps it might be well to fill up the docks, and give the front
of the solid wharves a strait direction -- leaving no ground bare at low water;
so that every substance, washed or swept into the water, should be floated
away. -- The wharfing might be extended to any convenient distance into the
rivers, by erecting piers, connected by bridges. It appears, however, proper,
that all the wharves should be permitted to extend only equal distances -- the
same of the stores on the wharves -- they should present a uniform front. This
would render them all more airy and healthy; and no man could obstruct his
neighbor's air or view; a matter of no small consequence, as it regards
pleasure and health.

It is a fact clearly ascertained, that the process of vegetation contributes
to the salubrity of the air. -- The more trees, grass-plots and flowers can be
cultivated in a city, the more healthy. All broad streets, will admit the
growth of Trees, and these are as ornamental as they are useful. The objection
to them in cities on account of their obstructing the use of engines in fires,
is not of much weight. A case of this kind can rarely happen; and when it does,
an ax or two will level the tree almost in a moment. Besides, the objection is
more than balanced by the security they afford one half the year against fire.
A tree, when full of green leaves, may break the force of a fire and save a
house.

An instance like this happened in Boston, where a thick coat of creepers on
the side of a house next the approaching fire, so far broke the flames, as to
be a principal means of saving the building. It is useful therefore to
encourage the planting of trees in this city, in every situation, where
commanding reasons do not prohibit it.

The following Remarks are judged worthy of a place in this Collection. From
the French and American Gazette. MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS.
THE inhabitants of New York, as justly alarmed as the Philadelphians were two
years ago, at the havoc of disease, saw, if not with a jealous, at least with
an amazed eye, a Frenchman dwelling under the same roof with himself, enjoy the
purest health, whilst he fell, as it were, struck with a thunder bolt, without
being able to experience any relief from medical skill; we, ourselves,
surprised at this singularity, have scrutinized into the wonderful secrets of
nature, as far as can be allowed to an human, and of course a weak eye; and we
attributed the difference to the manner of living, customary to both nations,
and their treating themselves.

The more we examine the modes of living of an American and Frenchman, whether
indisposed or in good health, the more we persist in our system, and in the
idea that the American cannot totally preserve himself free from this raging
fever, which commonly breaks out in hot weather, but by following another
regimen directly opposite to that which he has till now used.

Although the American seems commonly to enjoy the best health, though his high
color announces the strongest constitution, yet we are much inclined to think
that he would not run so many risks in the summer time, were he to live more
soberly during the other seasons; were he to live upon more wholesome food;
were he less fond of strong liquors, tea, and green fruits, and would he make a
frequent use of baths and lotions; which are as wholesome for the intestines,
as necessary for exterior cleanliness.

We will not follow the Americans through the paths of private life; but we
shall say that, in general, temperance is not observable among them, nor that
moderation of which the French daily reap the advantage; the latter relish
Burgundy and old Bourdeaux wine, and seldom allow themselves to drink
spirituous liquors; while the former disapprove of Claret, as too weak, and
prefer Madeira, Sherry, Port, Rum, and Gin, which must, of course, inflame and
throw the blood into a fermentation. Notwithstanding this, we see Americans,
who say they have been advised to use them, especially during the disorder, in
order to give tone to the stomach.

The French never drink any tea, unless they feel their stomach uneasy. In the
morning and in the evening, the Americans seem to swim in tea, which is so
strong, that an English tea pot would make as many as twenty, according to the
French fashion. Should what has been said by skilful and learned Doctors be
true, that tea is one of the most corrosive vegetables, the juice or essence of
it must of course make a slow but strong impression on the nerves, and occasion
the dissolution of the blood. It is likewise customary to eat with their tea,
heavy cakes of all kinds, and toasts which are not reckoned to be good unless
they are thickly covered with butter; which increases the bilious mass of
humor.

We shall not repeat the observations which we have heretofore made, upon the
averseness the Americans feel for soup and restorative broths, on their eating
their meat running with blood, with scarcely any bread, and plenty of heavy
potatoes, the only vegetables which are seen on their tables; whilst the French
always give the preference to vegetables, and especially to those which are
light and wholesome. But we cannot help observing, that in the months of May,
June and July, the streets and markets were seen in the morning furnished with
an immense quantity of fruits, the most part of which are either green or
unripe. In the evening all those fruits have disappeared and have been eaten;
hence, bloody fluxes, dysenteries and bad chyles, which unwholesome food must
undoubtedly produce.

As to baths, baths of cleanness, injections, etc. there are few French, in the
least careful of their health, who do not make use of them.

The Americans, far from practicing those useful and wholesome tokens, look
upon them as ridiculous and unbecoming.

It is no longer surprising that Americans, heedless of their health, living on
unwholesome foods and drinking heating liquors, should prove so little disposed
to resist the impression of scorching hot weather, which opens the pores, and
occasions, if we may be allowed the expression, a continual depredation on the
vital principles, through a thousand issues, always open. It is not to be
wondered that heat and dampness, which on this continent more rapidly succeed
each other than in any other climate, should soon bring into a state of
fermentation, humors impregnated with so many principles of putridity. Will any
one wonder at seeing the unfortunate seized with the fever, fall so suddenly
victims to it, when they are seen to swallow remedies which, far from keeping
down and cooling the fermentation, increase it; when they are seen undergoing
copious bleedings, storing in emetics, bark, Madeira, and other spirits called
tonical, producing in the body the same effects as oil or fire? Finally, we see
when these unfortunate people are left by themselves, deserted, and given up by
their nearest relation, whom a panic keeps as far from them as from persons
infected with the plague, sorrow and despair, much more than the most violent
remedies with which they are treated, hurries them to an unavoidable death.

For these two years, the French have been noticing these salutary observations
to the Americans, who listen to them with coolness, although many of them
perceive the justness of these hints, but habit is a second nature. As soon as
the epidemic seems to abate, as soon as the coolness of the weather brings back
the hope of seeing it disappear, they will hastily return to their homes, go on
with their old habits, their usual way of living, and on the smallest
indisposition send for their dear doctor, who exclusively is master of their
confidence. We are acquainted with French physicians, who at Philadelphia
treated with success two hundred persons taken with the disorder, and those
very same persons have not afterward vouchsafed to send for those to whom they
were indebted for their lives, even to be bled by them.

The following Observations from the Manchester Mercury, contain useful hints,
and cannot be inapplicable to many situations in the United States.
MANCHESTER MERCURY, FEB. 2. MR. HARROP,
AFTER having endeavored, for the last four years, to call the public attention
to the dangerous situation of the poor in this town and neighborhood; it gives
me the highest satisfaction that a number of the most respectable inhabitants
have been induced to adopt the ideas which I had suggested, respecting the
regulation of Cotton Mills, and the erection of Fever Wards. As it is of great
importance, that a knowledge of the facts, and reasoning, on which their
determination has been founded, should be extensively communicated, you will
oblige me by inserting the following extracts from a Memoir, which I drew up at
the desire of the original meeting.

I am, Sir, your very obedient servant, J. FERRIAR.
Dawson-street, Jan. 18, 1796.
TO THE GENTLEMEN MEETING AT THE BRIDGEWATER ARMS.
GENTLEMEN,
AT the request of some of your number, who originally proposed this meeting, I
submit to your consideration a few remarks toward the formation of a Board, or
Committee for superintending the health of the manufacturing poor in Manchester
and Salford. A principal object of this Committee, must be that of diminishing
the frequency of the Epidemic Fever, which has so often alarmed us in this
place, which is now very prevalent in some parts of the town, and has spread
itself to a very unusual extent in some of the neighboring towns. The
circumstances which produce and propagate this disease, seem to require more
immediately the interference of a public body, and these once remedied, the
general health of the poor must be greatly improved. Having already published
my sentiments pretty full on this subject; I shall remark, without entering
into any reasoning, that the principal sources of fever among our poor, are
lodging-houses, cellars, cotton-mills, and the incautious intercourse of the
poor with each other, in places infected.

1. Respecting lodging-houses, I have observed elsewhere, that the most
desirable means of prevention, would be to subject them to licenses, which
would bring them under the control of the magistrates. -- At present, as the
town is much less crowded than it was in 1792, the mischief arising from these
houses is less; and until the Committee can acquire the proper powers; it would
perhaps be sufficient to be at the expense of white-washing such as shall be
reported to be infected and dirty, or where they are found to be over-crouded,
to prevail on some of the lodgers to remove, which may be readily done.

2. The number of damp, and very ill-ventilated cellars, inhabited in many
parts of the town, is a more extensive and permanent evil. It may be necessary
to explain to gentlemen who have not visited such places; that they each
consist of two rooms under ground, the front apartment of which, used as a
kitchen, though frequently noxious by its dampness and closeness, is greatly
preferable to the back room; the latter h^s only one small window, which though
on a level with the outer ground, is near the roof of the cellar; it is often
patched with boards or paper; and, in its best state, is so much covered with
mud, as to admit very little either of air or light. In this cell, the beds of
the whole family, sometimes consisting of seven or eight, are placed. The floor
of this room is often unpaved; the beds are fixed on the damp earth. But the
floor, even when paved, is always damp. In such places, where a candle is
required even at noonday to examine the patient, I have seen the sick without
bedsteads, lying on rags; they can seldom afford straw.

This deplorable state of misery becomes frequently the origin, and certainly
supports in a great degree the progress of infectious fevers. I have been able
in many instances to trace the infection from cellar to cellar, and to say
where it might have been stopped by prudent management on the part of the
infected family. But it is likewise very difficult to eradicate the fever, when
it seizes a family thus situated. It generally attacks them all in succession,
and the convalescents, from their consinement in the midst of infection, have
frequent relapses, attended with increasing danger, so that the disease
continues in the same spot for several months together. -- The recovery even of
those who do not relapse, is also tedious and imperfect, beyond the conception
of any who have not experienced cases of this nature. The want of proper nurses
must be added as none of the least evils attending this unfortunate class of
people. I have no hesitation in asserting that many lives are annually lost,
from this cause alone. It is extremely difficult at present to procure a nurse
of good character upon any terms; and it is often necessary to employ persons
on whom little dependence can be placed, that the sick may not be entirely
destitute of assistance.

Great advantages would therefore be derived from removing the infected, and in
some instances, perhaps, the whole family, from such dreadful habitations as I
have described, into a clean, airy house, which should be provided by the
Committee, till their own cellars could be white-washed, and sweetened by
slacking quicklime on the floors. It is a question for the decision of the
Committee, whether they would prefer renting a house, or building a fever-ward
for this purpose. I confess, that I should incline to the latter, for these
reasons:

1. In the erection of a fever-ward, situation, air, and convenience would be
better consulted; in renting a house, some of these very important objects
might be unavoidably superseded.

2. Upon such a permanent establishment, one or more women of decent character
might be induced to undertake the office of nurses.

3. By thus bringing the worst and most neglected cases under one roof, the
chance of spreading infection would be diminished, while attention to the
patients on the part of the nurses would be better secured, than if the
patients were dispersed in different houses, as, in reality, it would be very
difficult to obtain a complete house, upon any rent, for such a purpose.

To explain this observation, I must beg leave to repeat a circumstance which I
have stated in my last volume of Medical Essays. Previous to the building of
our dispensary, when a patient happened to be seized with an infectious fever
in the Infirmary, the disease was apt to spread to an alarming degree, so as to
require a general dismission of the patients. But since a few rooms have been
added to the Dispensary, for the purpose of secluding persons thus attacked,
from the rest of the patients, though bad fevers have been accidentally
introduced, yet by removing the patients on the first attack into the
fever-ward, the disease has always been prevented from extending, without the
necessity of dismissing a single patient. In like manner, I conceive, that by
building a fever-ward in each of the Infirmary districts, and removing into
them the worst cases, from the worst houses, the progress of infection would be
materially checked, and a great quantity of disease and mortality would
annually be prevented. This plan would also give additional success to the
Infirmary Physicians. It would add the chances arising from cleanliness, free
ventilation, and careful nursing, to the efficacy of medicines.

4. In a separate building, the access of unnecessary visitors would be better
prevented. It may give the Committee a clearer idea of the extent of this
danger, to mention, that an elderly woman, just recovering from the fever,
informed me, that she had fifteen children, all settled in the town, and all of
whom had undergone the fever within these two months.

At present, perhaps, it would be most expedient for the Committee to try the
effect of a single fever-ward, in some part of the town where infection more
frequently prevails. In a town like this, such buildings can never become
entirely useless, even if the plans of the Committee should extend to the
length at which I have hinted. The want of proper sewers in several of the
streets, and the offal of slaughter-houses, left to putrefy before the doors in
several places, are nuisances which deserve the serious attention of the
Committee.

5. On the subject of the propagation of infection in Cotton Mills, it may be
necessary to observe, that although it has been supposed that fever may be
imported in the Cotton, and though this opinion does not seem improbable in
itself, yet no direct proof of fevers originating from this source has ever
been obtained. On the appearance of the present Epidemic at Ashton, an alarm of
this kind was spread, because the fever broke out in the picker's room of a
manufactory there; but I am informed, from very respectable authority, that the
infection was actually carried thither from Manchester, by a girl who went to
be employed as a picker at Ashton. I apprehend that the mischief arising from
some Cotton Mills, as they are at present managed, results from

I. The custom of working all night.

II. Negligence in washing the floors and frames.

III. Negligence respecting the personal cleanliness of the work-people, and
especially of the children.

IV. Imprudence in permitting convalescents, or persons coming from infected
houses, to resume their work, with their clothes saturated with infection.

V. Want of proper ventilation, particularly during the night labor, when the
air of the room is rendered additionally impure by the candles.

With regard to the three first articles, I am uncertain how far the Committee
could with propriety interfere. If the proprietors and overseers of
manufactories could be interested in the views of the Committee, very
advantageous regulations might be formed.

The custom of working all night totally frustrates every attempt to ventilate
the mills thoroughly, while the dirtiness of the persons employed renders them
more disposed to receive the infection of fever. This custom should, if
possible, be discontinued.

The other circumstances might be easily regulated by the overseers, who would
perhaps be induced to pay more attention to them, if premiums were held out, to
overseers who preserved a given degree of health among the persons under their
care.

The remonstrance of so respectable a body as a Committee of this nature, may
also be expected to have a proper influence, when they call the attention of
the proprietors of manufactories, to practices evidently destructive of health
and life.

The great difference in the healthiness of different cotton mills, which it
would be invidious to point out here, but which may may be easily learnt from
the lists of home-patients kept at the Infirmary, for the last five years,
sufficiently proves the benefits of care respecting the circumstances I have
mentioned, and the danger of inattention.

The readmission of convalescents into manufactories, while they are in a state
capable of infecting others, is an obvious cause of increasing and perpetuating
fevers. To prevent this, it would be proper to retain patients in the
fever-wards, till their clothes and persons should be sufficiently purified,
and to caution the overseers of manufactories against the reception of
irregular patients, who might return to their employment without leave from
their physician.

A similar hazard, which arises from incautious visits to the sick, may be most
effectually counteracted by regulations in the fever-wards. It would be cruelty
to refuse access to near relations, in dangerous cases; but they might be
taught to lessen the danger of receiving infection, by placing themselves
between the patient's bed and the window -- by averting the face while the
patient speaks -- and by carefully avoiding to sit down upon the bed.

All linen belonging to the patients should be washed in the fever-wards, for
the same reason.

I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your very obedient Servant, J. FERRIAR.

PREVENTION AND SUPPRESSION OF FEVER. Extracts of a letter from Dr. Haygarth,
of Chester, to Dr. Percival, dated January 6th, 1796.
"You may remember that in the Chester Infirmary, we have, for the last twelve
years, received all infectious fever patients that require our assistance, into
the Fever-wards, one for each sex, appropriated to this purpose. -- During this
period, it never was suspected, that infection has been communicated to a
single patient in other parts of the house. -- In the present war, Chester has
been unusually exposed to the danger of infectious putrid Fevers. Many new
raised regiments, coming from Ireland, with numerous recruits taken out of
jails, remained in Chester for a few weeks after their voyage. Great numbers of
these soldiers and their women were ill of putrid fevers, and were immediately
received into the Fever wards of our Infirmary. If such contagious patients had
been distributed in the small alehouses and poor lodging-houses through the
city, the consequences to many of our inhabitants must have been dreadful.

By taking out of a house the first person who sickens of a Fever, we preserve
the rest of the family from infection, together with indefinite number of their
neighbors, who would otherwise catch the infection. At this very time, when the
inhabitants of Manchester and many other places, are afflicted with a fatal
contagious Epidemic, only two patients are now in our Fever-wards, and both
convalescent: And the Apothecary to the Infirmary, who attends the Out-poor of
the whole city, informs me that he has now not a single fever patient under his
care. Sometimes, but very seldom, our two Fever-wards have been somewhat
crowded with patients. I should judge that about four, or six spacious Wards
might be sufficient for Manchester, though the inhabitants are much more
numerous, and perhaps more liable to fevers from their unhealthy dwellings,
occupations, etc. -- I am confident that our two Fever wards do ten times more
real good in the prevention of misery, tha^ all the other parts of the
Infirmary.

CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS.
From the preceding papers, in union with other accounts of the Yellow Fever,
already public, it appears that the following points are well established.

I. That the Yellow Fever, so called, is only the most malignant degree of
ordinary bilious fever.

II. That this Fever may be, and often is generated in the United States,
especially in the more filthy parts of populous towns.

III. That it is not ordinarily infectious, that is, attended with specific
contagion; but may be rendered so, by peculiar circumstances, that conspire to
increase its malignancy.

It seems to be proved that in New Haven, the disease was introduced and
propagated by infection. In Philadelphia, it is admitted to have been, to a
considerable degree, contagious. In New York and Norfolk it is equally clear,
the disease was not introduced nor generally propagated by infection. Our best
accounts from Baltimore state, that the disease there was not infectious.

IV. It is demonstrated, beyond all controversy, that bilious fevers are
ordinarily produced by the impure air generated by the putrefaction of
vegetable and animal substances. To this effect there must concur the following
causes -- vegetable or animal matter, heat and water. Heat and water acting on
vegetables, or heat alone on animal matter. Withdraw any one of these causes,
and the effects cease. Hence, this important lesson is deducible.

High and dry situations, in the country, and remote from stagnant water,
should be selected for healthiness -- and similar positions for cities; but
with this additional caution -- to keep them clean. The people of a city make
filth enough every week, to generate pestilence, in the hot season, and it will
produce sickness, more or less every season, unless the streets and yards are
constantly, not only swept, but washed. Washing the streets and back-yards
should be as much a business of police from June to November, as lighting lamps
or regulating weights and measures. It should also be an object of police to
calculate the mode of paving and draining streets, for cleanliness, and to
direct individuals to do the same on their back yards. A vigilant police will
inspect every article of building, and see that no sources of pestilence and
death are lurking behind houses and stores.

V. Another important conclusion results from the facts stated; this is, that
country people have not the smallest reason for alarm, on account of the
spreading of the Yellow Fever. It is indeed certain that people from the
country, during the existence of this fever in town, are more exposed (if they
visit the town and breathe the air of it) than the inhabitants. But it is
demonstrated by experience that this fever will not spread in a pure air. It
did not spread even in New York, over the western and well-ventilated part of
the city. Hence when the sick remove from town into the country, or when
citizens are taken ill with the fever, after leaving the city, the people in
the country have no occasion to avoid the sick, or neglect to administer to
them all possible comfort and relief; for there is little danger of taking it
in a free wholesome air. Place the sick in an open airy room and keep it clean,
and the attendants are in little danger of receiving it.

The panic that seized the whole continent, when the disease appeared in
Philadelphia, is now found to have been needless and without just cause; and it
is presumed that such inhuman caution and barbarous measures as were adopted on
that occasion, will never again disgrace our country. Instead of shutting doors
against the flying citizens, let every one open his house and give them an
hospitable reception.

VI. The last remark on this occasion is that though the immediate causes of
epidemics may be well understood in most cases; yet there appears to be a
necessity, in other cases, to resort to a general predisposing influence in the
atmosphere.

Sometimes it happens that very malignant diseases will not spread in a
country, even when introduced from abroad. At other times, a small spark will
enkindle a flame that cannot be resisted.

In one year, the putrid sore throat spreads its ravages in one town -- the
next year, in a bordering town. This year the dysentery attacks one town, or
perhaps a single street, with fatal malignity -- the next that town is free
from it, and the adjacent town is attacked. These facts are within every man's
remark.

But there has been for 6 or 7 years past, an extraordinary run (to use a
vulgar phrase) of malignant diseases and epidemics. The Influenza, in the
summer of 1789, first made its appearance at the southward. It traveled
regularly northward, and reached Boston the first week in November. The next
spring, it began in our frontier settlements, in March, and traveling
southward, reached the Atlantic towns in May. Of this fact, I was a witness.

The scarlet fever succeeded. It appeared in 1789, or '90, in the state of
New York, and has passed slowly through the eastern states, reaching Boston and
Portsmouth the last year, and it has not yet disappeared in that quarter.

To these succeeded the Yellow Fever, in various places, which has also had its
run.

During the autumnal seasons, a few years past, dysenteries have also proved
uncommonly mortal, in various parts of the country.

During the same seasons, the Yellow Fever has been unusually frequent and
fatal, on the coast of Africa, and in the West Indies.

To what cause shall we attribute this general prevalence of malignant diseases
in various quarters of the globe, at the same time? Specific contagion cannot
be the cause; it will not even account for the rapid progress of the Influenza
in Europe, and in this country, for whole towns were seized with it in a day.
The Scarletina Anginosa is highly infectious; but it was not propagated
generally nor principally by infection. On the other hand, children were seized
with it in various parts of the country, remote from the diseased, and without
having the least connection with them.

Nay more, I can witness that when the disease was fatal to multitudes in
New York in 1791, and the year before in its worst forms in Connecticut, the
same disease, with slighter symptoms, was even epidemic in Hartford. The mild
form in which it appeared, seemed to be but a prelude to the disease which in
the two succeeding years proved so fatal. I was witness to it, in this mild
form in my own family: a severe catarrhal affection, accompanied with high
fever, and a partial efflorescence of the skin about the throat and breast.

This fact would seem to prove, not only a general predisposing cause in the
atmosphere, but a progressive state of that cause.

Another fact would seem to justify this remark. It is well known that
foreigners, coming from other climates, are very easily affected with the
diseases prevalent at the time of their arrival, and more easily take such
disorders than natives. -- Now it is a fact within my observation, that
foreigners arriving from Europe at New York in 1794, were seized with the
scarlet fever, after it had ceased to affect native citizens. The result of
this observation is, that the decrease of the predisposing influence of the
atmosphere, is progressive, and that it was sufficient to affect foreigners,
for some time, after it ceased to affect persons accustomed to breathe the air
of our climate.

Indeed something of the same kind is true, with respect to the Yellow Fever,
in New York. The same disease had appeared, in a few instances, for two or
three seasons preceding the year 1795. Several cases occurred in 1794. These
cases seemed to be harbingers of the more general mortality of the last season.

I do not know that this disease appeared in Philadelphia, in the last season
preceding the fatal autumn of 1793; but several cases have occurred the two
last years. A friend of mine who lost two clerks in the fatal season of 1793,
lost two others in 1794, and one in 1795; all from the same counting house.

In these cases, there is no pretense of infection. -- The disease must have
sprung from local causes, or the predisposing influence of the air inhaled by
these unfortunate people.

I am therefore inclined to believe that independent of local causes, the
atmosphere may be and is often affected by some general invisible causes,
which, at particular seasons, dispose the human body to particular diseases.
Whether this disposition in the air proceeds from the prevalence of particular
winds -- of rains -- of heat -- or of frost; or whether the aspects of the
planets, on the various action of that all-powerful elementary ^^id, electric
fire, which seems to be the most energetic principle in the system, may not
vary the combination of substances composing vital air, are questions for the
investigation of the philosopher. The facts which are within common observation
are sufficient to point to the proximate causes of disease, and that when these
are known, most of the evils of sickness, are brought within the influence of
human management -- many of them may be obviated -- all of them, mitigated.

If it is clearly ascertained, that the gas generated by the decomposition of
animal and vegetable substances, in putrefaction, is fatal to healthy life;
then it becomes a duty to deposit such substances in places where they cannot
annoy us. It is as much the duty of the citizens of populous towns, to cleanse
their streets, and their back yards, wash their houses and bathe their persons,
as it is to provide a Hospital for the indigent sick, or a grave for the dead.

Thus in the country, people should choose dry situations for their houses,
remote from marshy grounds. They should particularly guard against the noxious
effects of the heat on land just drained of water. While land is covered with
water, even if stagnant, no very pernicious effects are to be apprehended; but
terrible are the effects of a hot sun on the putrid substances that line the
bottoms of ponds, when they are suddenly exposed, by the draining off of the
water.

Thus, also, settlers on new lands are to guard against the first effects of
clearing moist land. While vegetable substances are covered with water, they
are harmless; and while marshy grounds are shaded by thick forests, they
produce no disease. The heat is not sufficient in the deep shade of a forest,
to extricate the noxious Gas It is said that a degree of heat equal to 80 by
Farenheit's scale, is necessary to extricate the deleterious gas from vegetable
substances -- a degree never felt in the recesses of a shady forest.
. But on opening those marshy grounds to the action of the sun, all the latent
seeds of disease are set in motion and impregnate the surrounding atmosphere.
Then the inhabitants become sickly, and continue, more or less, to be so in hot
weather, till the surface of the earth is effectually dried or cleansed by
ploughing and cultivation.

ADDITIONAL REMARKS.
SINCE the preceding observations were composed, the Editor has received the
following remarks, from a friend, with liberty to make them public. And as they
appear to him of sufficient importance to justify an insertion in this place,
he presumes no apology is necessary for so doing; although they are, in part, a
repetition of his own. A subject so important to the welfare of the citizens of
the United States, can hardly be exhibited in too many points of view.

THE means of prevention, not only of Yellow Fevers, but of all other fevers,
in any degree of the same nature, are principally two: and this is equally true
in respect to individuals and communities. These two means are temperance and
cleanliness.

I. TEMPERANCE. No truth is more certain, or more easily demonstrable by
numerous and important facts, than that different climates require different
modes of living. It is from inattention to this simple truth that a large share
of all the physical evils of men arise. -- Thus, many kinds of food and various
liquors, are harmless, and even necessary in cold countries, which are
absolutely pernicious in hot climates. Thus, exercise in the open air, is
highly advantageous and healthful, at all hours in the day, in temperate
regions; while in many parts of the world, beneath the torrid zone more
especially, an exposure to the fogs of the morning, the heats of the noontide,
or the dews of the night, are certainly destructive. -- Considerations of this
nature are very little thought of, and still less attended to, among people at
large: and indeed the mass of population, in the greater part of the earth, are
incapable of appreciating the consequences of the observance or neglect. -- In
all their changes of place, they carry with them the same customs; and it is by
long experience only that they are taught the necessity of adapting their
habits to their new situations.

By far the largest portion of the United States has been peopled by emigrants
from the northern countries of Europe. Wherever they have settled they have
continued, with very trifling deviations, to pursue their accustomed
occupations and modes of living. Meats and stimulating liquors are more used in
northern climates, than in southern, and with less disadvantage. Our ancestors
continued to consume them after their settlement in this country, in the same
manner as before; the consequences have been unfortunate; of late, by
connection with other circumstances, they have become still more destructive,
and we are beginning to be alarmed. -- A numerous train of facts; the example
of almost all Asia, Africa, and the south of Europe; demonstrate the advantages
of temperance, both in foods and drinks, and the fatal effects of a departure
therefrom. Rice, and other grains, fruits, and water, form nearly the sole
articles of consumption, among the inhabitants of these countries, during the
sultry season. It is only on their seacoasts, where commerce has collected
foreigners from all parts, and especially from Europe, and where every species
of riot and intemperance is common, that the pestilential Fevers, of which we
hear so much, prevail. -- In the south of Europe, in Italy, for instance, even
in the maritime cities, where the people either from necessity or choice,
abstain from meats, wines and other intoxicating liquors, during great part of
the year, general and pestilential diseases rarely appear: particularly, among
those nations who are attentive to cleanliness.

The city of Naples contains about four hundred thousand inhabitants; of whom
thirty or forty thousand are said to belong to the class of beggars. -- In that
climate the rains prevail, with little intermission, for three months -- from
February to May. From May to September, a drouth, equally severe, and scarcely
allayed, in many years, by a single plentiful rain, renders the heat almost
intolerable. The wages of a laborer not exceeding eight pence this currency, a
day, and meat being rarely had in their markets for less than four pence the
pound, and vinous liquors in the same proportion, -- the mass of population is
excluded from any share of these luxuries; of consequence they support
themselves on vegetables, roots, sallads, fruits, etc. -- and dilute their
food, and animate their spirits, with water and lemonade. -- Yet this city has,
for a great number of years, known no general disease. And for ten years, no
febrile disease, of any sort, was common among them. -- They, also, pay great
attention to personal cleanliness. Facts of this sort are very important, and
form the best comment on the discordant opinions of our physicians.

II. CLEANLINESS. It is to the rigid observance which the eastern nations pay
to ablution, that, in connection with their habitual temperance, we are to
ascribe their superior health and longevity; and to the neglect of the
inhabitants of the southern parts of America, in respect of both these
particulars, their sickness and mortality. -- It is impossible to press this
matter too forcibly upon nations, communities, families, and individuals. All
are concerned in it. -- The people of the United States, as a people, are noted
for household cleanliness. They are far below the Dutch in respect to the
salubrity and purity of their towns; and below the French, Italians, and even
Swedes and Russians, in regard to personal cleanliness.

In many parts of Italy, public baths are more numerous than coffee-houses and
taverns. In France, machines and utensils for bathing, form an essential part
of the household furniture of every well-regulated family; and a woman would as
soon think of going into company, with unwashed hands and uncombed hair, as
without having made use of the bath. In Sweden and Russia, the poorest and most
abject of both sexes, would hold themselves unworthy to appear before the Deity
in his temple, on the Sabbath, if they had not devoted some part of the
preceding day to personal ablution. This is not the case in England; and the
consequences of these national customs may be traced in the history of our own
country. Who does not recollect the mortality which prevailed among the early
English colonists in Virginia? Who has not read, or heard, of the long fevers,
as they were called, of the New England states? -- But did ever any person
learn that these misfortunes afflicted Pennsylvania and New Jersey while they
were called New-Sweden? -- Philadelphia and the neighboring parts of
New Jersey, were originally settled by Swedes. These people were neither more
robust, nor more circumspect, in the generality of things, than the English
settlers; but they brought with them their habits of personal cleanliness, and
they were rarely visited by diseases. -- Even so late as when Professor Kalm
visited this country, the practice of universal weekly bathing, was still
preserved, among the remnant of the Swedish inhabitants.

In former ages, and among the celebrated nations of antiquity, personal, as
well as general cleanliness, was consecrated by numerous rites, and
incorporated into every religion. Among a barbarous and ignonorant people, this
was, perhaps, the only means of securing a proper observance of this duty. It
were fortunate for the United States if the old dispensation were revived, in
this particular. The laws of Moses, in relation to the virtue of cleanliness,
bear impressed on their front, the characters of a wisdom nothing short of
divine. -- The days of prophets and of miracles are past; but surely, in a
matter of such essential importance to the well-being of our country, the care
of legislation should be extended to supply the neglect of the moralist. Those
rulers but partially consult the durable felicity of the people they govern,
who through ignorance, indolence, or a spirit of parsimony, miscalled economy,
overlook, or fail to remedy, a defect so interesting to private and public
happiness, to individual and general tranquillity and virtue.

IN addition to the preceding observations, one remark further may be addressed
to the people of the United States, generally, but more particularly to the
settlers on the new lands. -- Great and sudden alterations in the face of a
country, rarely fail of being followed by changes in the state of the
inhabitants of that country, proportionably rapid and considerable. The opening
of new land and water communications, the draining of marshes and destruction
of forests, have a most extensive, and often unfortunate influence, for a time,
on the country in which they take place. As one of the surest means of
preventing bad consequences, the attention of the people engaged in
undertakings of this kind, should be turned to the inducing as rapid and
luxuriant a vegetation, on all such clearings up, as possible. It behooves them,
likewise, to pay a double regard to the duties of order, temperance, and
cleanliness. The most fatal effects follow from neglect in these particulars;
and especially from that free use of spirituous liquors, which from erroneous
notions of their utility, is so commonly resorted to.

Number of Persons who died of the Fever in New York, -- in 1795.
July. Sept. Oct. 26 1 1 2 1 10 29 2 2 3 2 14 30 2 3 1 3 13 Aug. 4 1 4 29 3 2 5
1 5 22 4 1 6 6 6 17 7 1 7 4 7 16 9 8 8 2 8 15 10 4 9 3 9 18 11 1 10 6 10 12 12
1 11 4 11 11 13 2 12 3 12 11 14 4 13 5 13 12 15 2 14 12 14 9 17 1 15 16 15 14
18 1 16 16 16 14 19 5 17 11 17 8 20 2 18 14 18 8 21 1 19 21 19 9 22 4 20 10 20
6 23 1 21 17 21 8 24 2 22 15 22 4 25 6 23 19 23 10 26 4 24 18 24 8 27 8 25 31
25 4 28 2 26 31 26 4 29 3 27 27 28 2 30 3 28 17 31 1 29 14 30 14 308 75 344 344
75 Additional 5 732

Of these, about 150 only were citizens of New York. The rest were emigrants,
many of whom arrived during the sickness. Four hundred and sixty-two of the
number belonged to the Catholic Congregation, under the Rev. Mr. O'Brien; most
of whom were so recently from Ireland, that Mr. O'Brien did not know one
twentieth of them. See an Extract from his Letter, in Dr. Bailey's Account of
the Fever.


