Engraved for the American Spectator.

NUMBER XXXI.

Published by D West 1796.



THE AMERICAN SPECTATOR, OR MATRIMONIAL PRECEPTOR. A COLLECTION (WITH ADDITIONS
AND VARIATIONS) OF Essays, Epistles, Precepts and Examples, RELATING TO THE
MARRIED STATE, From the most celebrated Writers, Ancient and Modern. ADAPTED TO
THE STATE OF SOCIETY IN THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC.

Published according to Act of Congress.

BOSTON: Printed by MANNING and LORING, For DAVID WEST, Proprietor of the
Copy-Right. 1797.

TO THE LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OF THE UNITED STATES, This Work, DESIGNED TO
PROMOTE A MORAL, PERMANENT, AND HAPPY UNION BETWEEN THE TWO SEXES, IS Devoted
and Dedicated BY THE AMERICAN SPECTATOR.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THE Author of this Collection has long desired from the press, some judicious
work, adapted to the meridian of the UNITED STATES; directing the choice of a
companion for life: delineating and enforcing the duties and moral pleasures of
the conjugal state; and depicting, in striking colors, the foibles and vices,
which are its disgrace and bane.

Among the distinguishing blessings of a benign PROVIDENCE which claim our
national gratitude, the condition of society, as it respects the two sexes,
appears of the first magnitude. An apposite and valuable Note offers itself
from the learned and philosophic PRIESTLEY. The sources of general happiness in
a state, must not always be looked for in such striking circumstances, as
government, religion, laws, arts, and commerce, though an attention to these be
allowed to be the most essential in a well-regulated state. Allowing these
requisites to prosperity to be in the best condition imaginable, we must wait
till we have taken a nearer view of a people, in private and domestic life,
before we can justly pronounce, whether they really enjoy their situation. We
must not infer, that because men's liberty and property are secure, and in a
way of being advanced, that therefore they are happy. We must also inspect
their prevailing manners and customs, consider the terms upon which common
acquaintance live and converse together, and particularly in what manner the
two sexes behave to one another. Other objects of attention are such, as may
more properly be said to guard against unhappiness. These are the things which
actually impart the chief pleasures that sweeten the cup of life, which diffuse
a spirit of cheerfulness over society, and give a relish to all the advantages
of it. -- Lect. on Hist.


In this sequestered happy region, "Marriage," which generally has love for its
basis, is honorable in all; and the sexes have not yet learnt, from the
example of the elder world, to cherish illiberal sentiments of each other.

Here is no invidious distinction of patricians and plebeians, fixing an
unnatural barrier between kindred souls; and prompting to the gratification of
family pride by splendid, rather than virtuous and affectionate alliances. The
female mind is, probably, no where, so generally cultivated, and adorned with
that knowledge and sentiment, which qualify for the conjugal, and parental
relations. The RIGHTS OF WOMEN, as well as OF MEN, are acknowledged; and (a few
instances excepted, in which the application of American or Republican to the
title of Husband is a mere solecism) they are caressed as the first and dearest
friends of their partners. The necessary means of supporting domestic life, are
the reward of industry to every class of our citizens: which invites to the
early and general establishment of the matrimonial union.

When, therefore, we consider the aspect, which this union has upon the history
of human life, and the happiness or misery inseparable from it; the due
regulation of our choice must be esteemed of high moment.

The very numerous and uninformed pupils in the school of matrimony, require
the advice of some friendly PRECEPTOR; who, taught by personal observation, and
the sentiments of others well-skilled in the knowledge of mankind, may prevent
a precipitate step in such an important instance; and teach the most probable
method of acquiring permanent felicity in the married state. Neither does the
condition of persons, already united in the hymeneal bonds, preclude the aid of
such a PRECEPTOR, or, at least, impartial SPECTATOR, in preventing or
correcting errors, and discharging the various conjugal and parental offices,
with fidelity and evergrowing delight.

To promote these great objects, is the design and tendency of the subsequent
Work, being chiefly a Collection from the most celebrated Writers ancient and
modern.

Much has been read upon the subjects here discussed, and much rejected, as too
local, and totally inapplicable to the state of society in the AMERICAN
REPUBLIC; or as deviating from the delicacy and dignity of virtuous attachment.
The author acknowledges his obligations to the English MATRIMONIAL PRECEPTOR
for the origin of his plan, and for many valuable Numbers previously collected,
which he has adopted, with necessary amendments. Two or three instances
excepted, he has designedly omitted selecting from the SPECTATOR, which
supplied the materials for nearly a fourth part of that work; because it is in
most hands. The extracts from CICERO's and PLINY's epistles are presented, in
the present Collection, from the elegant and unrivalled translation of MELMOTH.
A few obvious remarks of the Compiler are interspersed with those of the
periodical and other writers, which enrich his volume. In selecting from these
writers, around whose brow an impartial and enlightened public has agreed to
entwine the merited laurel, and who therefore need not a particular eulogy;
variety connected with instruction and entertainment has been sedulously sought.

Many severe animadversions, which have been applied indiscriminately by
Europeans to the female world, have been here omitted or softened; because the
AMERICAN SPECTATOR contemplates a very small part of his countrywomen, as
involved in their cens^res. Even the gentle Mrs. GRIFFITH speaks of a universal
spirit of dissipati^n, which seems to reign among all ranks of women. HEAVEN
avert the period, when this may be predicated of the Daughters of COLUMBIA!
A similar regard to propriety and truth has led him to pass by general
censures of his own sex.

The arrangement has not been hastily executed; but has been the subject of
mature and frequent reflection and revision. The strictest delicacy has been
maintained through the whole.

The Work has been attempted, from an ardent desire of promoting the essential
interests of society in the native country of its Author. He flatters himself,
that, aided by such respectable authority, he may successfully teach not a few
of his own sex, THE ART OF MAKING THEMSELVES AND THEIR COMPANIONS HAPPY. He
hopes to contribute to the improvement and felicity of the FAIR SEX, for whom
he early imbibed a very respectful attachment, and to which he professes
himself indebted for the DEAREST SOLACE of his life.

The execution of this plan has been completed at the instance, and sanctioned
by the approbation, of several amiable and judicious friends of each sex.
Amusement and instruction truly estimable, present themselves from the pages of
a CICERO, a PLINY, a PLUTARCH among the ancients; of an ADDISON, a STEEL, a
JOHNSON, a HAWKESWORTH, a FORDYCE, an AIKIN, and others among the moderns,
eminent in the walks of literature and of life. It is designed for the humbler
as well as the more elevated ranks, for the country as well as the city. It may
be equally serviceable to the Readers scattered along the frequented coasts of
the ATLANTIC, or to those seated by the streams of the PENOBSCOT, the MERRIMAC,
the CONNECTICUT, the HUDSON, the DELAWARE, the OHIO, the POTOMAC, the TENNESSE,
the ROANOKE, the SANTEE, or the SAVANNAH.

An impartial public will determine concerning the usefulness of the design, or
the judiciousness of the execution.

CONTENTS.
Numb. 1. THE Female Sex vindicated, or the comparative Estimate of the two
Sexes considered. Page. 13 2. On the Nature and End of Marriage, and the Means
by which that End is to be obtained. JOHNSON The reasons for tracing my
obligations to Dr. JOHNSON, as the real, rather than Dr. TAILOR the ostensible
Author, may be seen, MONTHLY REVIEW, Vol. I. page 351. for 1790.
Page. 17 3. Personal Beauty produced by moral Sentiment. HAWKESWORTH Page. 23
4. The Ladies directed in the Choice of a Husband. -- Goodnature described.
Page. 27 5. Directions to Ladies for their Conduct to a Husband. Page. 32 6. Of
Love. Characters of various LOVERS. CONNOISSEUR Page. 37 7. On Match-making. Of
Match-makers by Profession. Account of a droll Accident occasioned by the
Mistake of a Match-maker. Page. 41 8. The Character of a jealous Wife. Page. 44
9. On excessive Neatness in a Wife; with a Letter from a Husband complaining of
this Evil. Page. 48 10. Jealousy described. ADDISON Page. 52 11. Jealousy how
to be allayed. Page. 57 12. Cautions concerning Marriage: Story of EUGENIO.
GENT. MAG. Page. 63 13. The Causes of Disagreement in Marriage. JOHNSON Page.
67 14. A Letter from a Father to his Son, on the Choice of a Wife. AIKIN Page.
71 15. A Letter to a Lady, on the Choice of a Husband. SPECTATOR Page. 78 16.
On Conjugal Affection. MRS. GRIFFITH Page. 81 17. On Temper. Page. 86 18.
Observations on the Impropriety of marrying a Woman, where we know her
Affections are engaged by another, with an affecting Case of Matrimonial
Infelicity resulting from this Cause. BABBLER Page. 91 19. Strictures on the
Absurdity of those Ladies, who through a Fondness for Admiration, admit the
Visits of a Man, who openly manifests a Design upon their Peace and Reputation.
Page. 95 20. On the dangerous Inattention which Ladies sometimes testify to the
Morals of their Lovers. Page. 98 21. The Folly of those People exposed, who
avoid entering into Marriage through Fear of meeting with a tyrannical Wife;
yet stoop to any Servility from a ridiculous Dread of offending an infamous
Strumpet. Page. 102 22. Thoughts upon a Wedding. The Marriage of an amiable
Nephew -- and Reflections on the Manner of spending a Wedding Occasion. Page.
105 23. On the Importance and Excellence of maintaining an inviolable Affection
in the married Life. Address from an affectionate Husband to his Wife, with an
Ode on her Wedding Day. History of the BISHOP of LUcON and MADAME DE ROUVRAIE,
two celebrated Platonic Lovers. Page. 109 24. Women cautioned against Flattery.
STEELE'S LOVER Page. 116 25. A Letter from a Lady to her young Friend, on her
Marriage. MRS. RAWSON Page. 120 26. From the same to the same; upon the Birth
of a Daughter. Page. 124 27. On the Tyranny of Husbands. -- PLINY's Letters to
CALPHURNIA. TATLER and MELMOTH Page. 127 28. Marriage, by whom ridiculed.
CICERO's Letters to TERENTIA. Page. 130 29. An Allegory for the Use of those
Ladies, who have lost the Affections of their Husbands, and are willing to
regain them. TATLER Page. 134 30. Love and Lust distinguished -- The Advantages
of Matrimony, and Folly of Keeping. Page. 137 31. A Picture of domestic Life,
in which the greatest Quarrels that happen between married People are proved to
spring in general from the most trifling Circumstances. A humorous Dialogue
between two venerable Lovers. Page. 141 32. The Necessity of paying a Regard to
Trifles, in order to procure Happiness in the Marriage-State. TATLER Page. 146
33. On the Importance of the Art of Pleasing, with criminating Letters between
a Husband and a Wife. MIRROR* Page. 148 34. The Happiness resulting from kind
and mutual Attentions, exemplified in the History of HORATIO and EMILIA. Page.
152 3^ CLE^ and AURELIA contrasted. LOUNGER Page. 157 36. A Caution addressed
to married Persons, as united by the brittle Tie of human Life; from the
Confessions of LUCILIUS. Page. 162 37. On Economics as a Science. KNOX'S
LUCUBRATIONS Page. 166 38. A Letter to a very good-natured Lady, who was
married to a very ill-natured Man. STUDENT Page. 169 39. On Matrimonial
Quarrels. Page. 172 40. On the Choice and Qualities of a Wife ANON. Page. 175
41. Conjugal Love; a moral Story. MUSEUM Page. 178 42. The Temple of HYMEN; a
Vision. Page. 181 43. A Letter to a young Lady on her going to be married to a
rich old Man. GENT. MAG. Page. 186 44. Marriage of HYMENAEUS and TRANQUILLA.
JOHNSON Page. 188 45. Marriage, a Blessing or a Curse, as it is wrongly or
rightly understood. VARIOUS AUTHORS Page. 191 46. Virtue, Cheerfulness, and
Constancy, absolutely necessary to make the married State happy. MANNERS,
CLARISSA, etc. Page. 194 47. On the Brutality of Husbands. SPECTATOR.
HUMOURIST. PLAIN-DEALER Page. 197 48. The Duties of a good Wife. VARIOUS Page.
202 49. On the same Subject. CONDUCT of a MARRIED LIFE Page. 205 50. Matrimony
the most important Step a Man can take in private Life. MUSEUM Page. 208 51.
The affecting and instructive Story of CONSTANTIA. Page. 212 52. On female
Accomplishments. FORDYCE's Dialogues on Education Page. 217 53. Connection of
the two Sexes: the Grounds of it: the moral Ends and Duties of Marriage.
FORDYCE's Elements of Moral Philosophy Page. 221 54. Connection of Parents with
their Children -- The authority founded on that Connection -- Duties of Parents.
Page. 226 55. Conjugal Precepts, translated from PLUTARCH. Page. 230 56. On
compulsory Laws respecting Marriage; with the Story of an unfortunate
Separation at Rome. BE Page. 234 57. A Letter from a young Lady, with a
Description of the MAID's Husband. WORLD Page. 237 58. Virtue tried and
triumphant, in the Stories of SCIPIO and AMANDA. VALERIUS, MAXIMUS, LIVIUS etc.
Page. 241 59. Caution to young Ladies, especially young Heiresses, or the ill
Effects of forming imprudent Connexions, exemplified in the Story of Harriet
Darnly. Mrs. BON^^TE Page. 250 60. On the Snares of personal Beauty, and the
Necessity of cultivating mental Excellence. Page. 256 61. A Vision. In which
various Classes of Lovers pass in Review before the Author. ANONYMOUS Page. 259
62. A Dialogue between Leander and Eugenio, PHILANTHROPIST Page. 263 63. Letter
to a young Gentleman upon his Marriage. Mrs. THRALE Page. 266 64. The Maid of
the Hamlet, or the Success of virtuous Love, in the Story of Laura and Vincent
Plomer. A Tale. Addressed to affluent Parents. BACON Page. 270 65. Conclusion.
Pleasing Views of Matrimony; with a Letter to the AMERICAN SPECTATOR,
exhibiting the grand Basis of a happy Union, and an Estimate of the Advantages
and Disadvantages of Marriage. Page. 279
THE AMERICAN SPECTATOR, OR MATRIMONIAL PRECEPTOR.
Number I.
THEY (i. e. the ancient Germans) PAID UNCOMMON ATTENTION TO THEIR WOMEN,
BELIEVING THEM TO BE ENDOWED WITH SOMETHING MORE THAN HUMAN.

TACITUS DE MOR. GERM. TRANSL. Under his forming hands a creature grew,
Manlike, but different sex: so lovely fair,
That what seemed fair in all the world, seemed now
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained,
And in her looks; which from that time infused
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before.
MILTON.
IN discharging the office of MATRIMONIAL PRECEPTOR, I consider it as a duty
incumbent upon me, to vindicate the FEMALE SEX against the indiscriminate
aspersions of illiberality. Incongruous would be the attempt, of recommending
an indissoluble union with that sex, whilst they were viewed unworthy of our
confidence or complacence.

A favorable opinion of their moral and mental accomplishments, will naturally
produce an honorable attachment in the gentlemen, who would seek their
approbation, not by adulation and folly, but by the manly virtues.
Imperfection, we acknowledge, is stamped upon the daughters, as well as the
sons of Adam. It is one design of this work, to exhibit and correct the errors,
to which they are exposed. But it is a sentiment, supported by personal
observation, and the most respectable authorities, that, in a comparative
estimate of the two sexes, the scale will greatly preponderate in their favor.

The subsequent letter of the classical MELMOTH presents a just representation
of the subject. It seems calculated to lead my gentle readers to the
cultivation of every female excellence, that will render them ornaments of
society in single life, and qualify them for distinguished usefulness and
rational enjoyment in the conjugal or parental relations.

"It seems evident, that there are certain moral boundaries, which nature has
drawn between the two sexes; and that neither of them can pass over the limits
of the other, without equally deviating from the beauty and decorum of their
respective characters. Boadicea in armor is, to me at least, as extravagant a
sight, as Achilles in petticoats.

"In determining, therefore, the comparative merit of the two sexes, it is no
derogation from female excellency, that it differs in kind from that which
distinguishes the male part of our species. And if it generally shall be found,
(what, upon an impartial inquiry, I believe, will most certainly be found) that
women fill up their appointed circle of action with greater regularity and
dignity, than men; the claim of preference cannot justly be decided in our
favor. In the prudential and economical parts of life, I think it undeniable
that they rise far above us. And if true fortitude of mind is best discovered
by a cheerful resignation to the measures of Providence, we shall not find
reason, perhaps, to claim that most singular of the human virtues as our
peculiar privilege. There are numbers of the other sex, who, from the natural
delicacy of their constitution, pass through one continued scene of suffering,
from their cradles to their graves, with a firmness of resolution, that would
deserve so many statues to be erected to their memories, if heroism were not
estimated more by the splendour than the merit of actions.

"But whatever real difference there may be between the moral or intellectual
powers of the male and female mind; nature does not seem to have marked the
distinction so strongly as our vanity is willing to imagine: and after all,
perhaps, education will be found to constitute the principal superiority. It
must be acknowledged, at least, that in this article we have every advantage
over the softer sex, that art and industry can possibly secure to us. The most
animating examples of Greece and Rome are set before us, as early as we are
capable of any observation; and the noblest compositions of the ancients are
given into our hands, almost as soon as we have strength to hold them: whilst
the employments of the other sex, at the same period of life, are generally the
reverse of every thing that can open and enlarge their minds, or fill them with
just and rational notions. The truth of it is, female education is so much
worse than none, as it is better to leave the mind to its natural and
uninstructed suggestions, than to lead it into false pursuits, and contract its
views, by turning them upon the lowest and most trifling objects.

"We seem, indeed, by the manner in which we suffer the youth of that sex to be
trained, to consider women agreeably to the opinion of certain Mohammedan
doctors, and treat them as if we believed they have no souls: why else are they
Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troul the tongue, and roll the eye?
MILTON.

"This strange neglect of cultivating the female mind can hardly be allowed as
good policy, when it is considered how much the interest of society is
concerned in the rectitude of their understandings. That season of every man's
life, which is most susceptible of the strongest impressions, is necessarily
under female direction; as there are few instances, perhaps, in which that sex
is not one of the secret springs, which regulates the most important movements
of private or public transactions. What CATO observed of his countrymen is in
one respect true of every nation under the sun -- 'The Romans,' said he,
'govern the world, but it is the women that govern the Romans.' Let not,
however, a certain pretended Cato of your acquaintance take occasion from this
maxim to insult a second time that innocence he has so often injured: for I
will tell him another maxim as true as the former, That there are circumstances
where no woman has power enough to control a man of spirit.

"If it be true, then, (as true beyond all peradventure it is) that female
influence is thus extensive; nothing, certainly, can be of greater importance,
than to give it a proper tendency, by the assistance of a well-directed
education. Far am I from recommending any attempts to render women learned, yet
surely it is necessary they should be raised above ignorance. Such a general
tincture of the most useful sciences, as may serve to free the mind from vulgar
prejudices, and give it a relish for the rational exercise of its powers, might
very justly enter into the plan of female erudition. That sex might be taught
to turn the course of their reflections into a proper channel, without any
danger of rendering them too elevated for the feminine duties of life. In a
word, I WOULD HAVE THEM CONSIDERED AS DESIGNED BY PROVIDENCE FOR USE AS WELL AS
SHOW, AND TRAINED UP NOT ONLY AS WOMEN, BUT AS RATIONAL CREATURES. Adieu."

Number II.
THEREFORE SHALL A MAN LEAVE HIS FATHER AND HIS MOTHER, AND SHALL CLEAVE UNTO
HIS WIFE.

ADAM.
IT may be asserted to the honor of Marriage, that it has few adversaries
among Men either distinguished for their abilities, or eminent for their
virtue. Those who have assumed the province of attacking it, of overturning the
constitution of the world, of encountering the authority of the wisest
legislators, from whom it has received the highest sanction of human wisdom;
and subverting the maxims of the most flourishing states, in which it has been
dignified with honors, and promoted with immunities; those who have undertaken
the task of contending with reason and experience, with Earth and with Heaven,
are men who seem generally not selected by nature for great attempts, or
difficult undertakings. They are, for the most part, such as owe not their
determinations to their arguments, but their arguments to their determinations;
disputants heated, not with zeal for the right, but with the rage of
licentiousness and impatience of restraint. And perhaps to the sober, the
understanding, and the pious, it may be sufficient to remark, that Marriage and
Religion have the same enemies.

That an institution designed only for the promotion of happiness, and for the
relief of the disappointments, anxieties, and distresses to which we are
subject in our present state, does not always produce the effects, for which it
was appointed; that it sometimes condenses the gloom, which it was intended to
dispel, and increases the weight, which was expected to be made lighter by it;
must, however unwillingly, be yet acknowledged.

It is to be considered, to what causes effects so unexpected and unpleasing,
so contrary to the end of the institution, and so unlikely to arise from it,
are to be attributed; it is necessary to inquire, whether those who are thus
unhappy, are to impute their misery to any other cause, than their own folly,
and to the neglect of those duties, which prudence and religion equally require.

That nothing but vice or folly obstructs the happiness of a married life, may
be made evident by examining,

First, The Nature and End of Marriage.

Secondly, The Means by which that End is to be attained.

First, The Nature and End of Marriage.

The vow of marriage may be considered as a vow of perpetual and indissoluble
Friendship; Friendship which no change of fortune, nor any alteration of
external circumstances can be allowed to interrupt or weaken. After the
commencement of this state there remain no longer any separate interests; the
two individuals become united, and are therefore to enjoy the same felicity,
and suffer the same misfortunes; to have the same friends and the same enemies,
the same success and the same disappointments.

It has long been observed, that friendship is to be confined to one, or that,
to use the words of the axiom, He that has friends, has no friend. That
ardour of kindness, that unbounded confidence, that unsuspecting security,
which friendship requires, cannot be extended beyond a single object. A divided
affection may be termed benevolence, but can hardly rise to friendship; for the
narrow limits of the human mind allow it not intensely to contemplate more than
one idea.

It is remarked, that Friendship amongst equals is the most lasting; and
perhaps there are few causes to which more unhappy marriages are to be
ascribed, than a disproportion between the original condition of the two
persons. Difference of condition makes difference of education; and difference
of education produces differences of habits, sentiments, and inclinations.
Thence arise contrary views, and opposite schemes, of which the frequent,
though not necessary consequences, are debates, disgust, alienation, and
settled hatred.

Strict friendship is to have the same desires and aversions. Whoever is to
choose a friend is to consider first the resemblance, or the dissimilitude of
tempers. How necessary this caution is to be urged as preparatory to marriage,
the misery of those who neglect it sufficiently evinces. To enumerate all the
varieties of disposition, to which it may on this occasion be convenient to
attend, would be a tedious task; but it is at least proper to enforce on this
head one precept, which was never yet broken without fatal consequences, Let
the Religion of the Man and Woman be the same. How can he be happy, who sees
the person most dear to him in a state of dangerous error, and ignorant of
those sacred truths, which are necessary to the approbation of GOD, and to
future felicity? If they previously stipulate for the free enjoyment of their
own opinion; the education of children will soon make it necessary to
determine, which of the two opinions shall be transmitted to their posterity;
and how can either consent to train up in error and delusion those from whom
they expect the highest satisfactions, and the only comforts of declining life?

On account of this conformity of notions it is, that equality of condition is
chiefly eligible; for as Friendship, so Marriage either finds or makes an
equality. No disadvantage of birth or fortune ought to impede the exaltation of
virtue and of wisdom; for with marriage begins union, and union obliterates all
distinctions. It may indeed become the person who received the benefit, to
remember it, that gratitude may heighten affection; but the person who
conferred it ought to forget it, because, if it was deserved, it cannot be
mentioned without injustice, nor if undeserved, without imprudence. All
reproaches of this kind must be either retractions of a good action, or
proclamations of our own weakness.

Friends, says the proverbial observation, have every thing in common. This is
likewise implied in the marriage-covenant. Matrimony admits of no separate
possessions, nor incommunicable interests. This rule, like all others, has been
often broken by low views and sordid stipulations; but, like all other
precepts, founded on reason and truth, it has received a new confirmation from
almost every breach of it; and those parents, whose age had no better effect
upon their understanding, than to fill them with avarice and stratagem, have
brought misery and ruin on their children, by the means which they weakly
imagined conducive to their happiness.

There is yet another precept equally relating to Friendship and to Marriage; a
precept which, in either case, can never be too strongly inculcated, or too
scrupulously observed; Contract friendship only with the good. Virtue is the
first quality to be considered in the choice of a friend, and yet more in a
fixed and irrevocable choice. This maxim surely requires no comment, nor any
vindication; it is equally clear and certain, obvious to the superficial, and
incontestable by the most accurate examiner. To dwell upon it is therefore
superfluous; for, though often neglected, it never was denied. Every man will,
without hesitation, confess, that it is absurd to trust a known deceiver, or
voluntarily to depend for quiet and for happiness upon insolence, cruelty, and
oppression. Thus Marriage appears to differ from Friendship chiefly in the
degree of its efficacy, and the authority of its institution. It was appointed
by GOD himself, as necessary to happiness, even in a state of innocence; and
the relation produced by it, was declared more powerful than that of birth.
Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto
his Wife. But as notwithstanding its conformity to human nature, it sometimes
fails to produce the effects intended, it is necessary to inquire,

Secondly, By what Means the End of Marriage is to be attained.

As it appears by examining the natural system of the universe, that the
greatest and the smallest bodies are invested with the same properties, and
moved by the same laws; so a survey of the moral world will inform us, that
greater or less societies are to be made happy by the same means; and that
however relations may be varied, or circumstances changed, Virtue, and Virtue
alone, is the parent of felicity. We can only, in whatever state we may be
placed, secure ourselves from disquiet and from misery, by a resolute attention
to truth and reason. Without this, it is in vain that a man chooses a friend,
or cleaves to a wife. If passion be suffered to prevail over right, and the
duties of our state are broken through, or neglected, for the sake of
gratifying our anger, our pride, or our revenge, the union of hearts will
quickly be dissolved, and kindness will give way to resentment and aversion.

The duties, by the practice of which a married life is to be made happy, are
the same with those of friendship, but exalted to higher perfection. Love must
be more ardent, and confidence without limits. It is therefore necessary on
each part to deserve that confidence by the most unshaken fidelity, and to
preserve their love unextinguished by continual acts of tenderness; not only to
detest all real, but seeming offenses; and to avoid suspicion and guilt, with
almost equal solicitude.

But since the frailty of our nature is such, that we cannot hope from each
other an unvaried rectitude of conduct, or an uninterrupted course of wisdom or
virtue; as folly will sometimes intrude upon an unguarded hour; and
temptations, by frequent attacks, will sometimes prevail; one of the chief acts
of love is, readily to forgive errors, and overlook defects. Neglect is to be
reclaimed by kindness, and perverseness softened by compliance. Sudden starts
of passion are patiently to be borne, and the calm moments of recollection
silently expected. For if one offense be made a plea for another; if anger be
to be opposed with anger, and reproach retorted for reproach, either the
contest must be continued forever, or one must at last be obliged by violence
to do what might have been at first done, not only more gracefully, but with
more advantage.

Religion, which subdues every baneful appetite and passion, and inspires the
most sincere affection toward the friend of our bosom, is then the basis of
happiness, and the operating power which makes every good institution valid and
efficacious. And he who shall attempt to attain happiness by the means which
GOD has ordained, shall surely find the highest degree of satisfaction that our
present state allows; if, in his choice, he pays the first regard to virtue,
and regulates his conduct by the precepts of religion.

Number III.
Nunc scio quid sit AMOR.
VIRGIL. Now know I what is LOVE.

THOUGH the danger of disappointment is always in proportion to the height of
expectation, yet I now claim the attention of the ladies, and profess to teach
an art by which all may obtain what has hitherto been deemed the prerogative of
a few; an art by which their predominant passion may be gratified, and their
conquests not only extended but secured; "the art of being PRETTY."

But though my subject may interest the ladies, it may, perhaps, offend those
profound moralists, who have long since determined, that BEAUTY ought rather to
be despised than desired; that, like strength, it is a mere natural excellence,
the effect of causes wholly out of our power, and not intended either as the
pledge of happiness or the distinction of merit.

To these gentlemen I shall remark, that beauty is among those qualities, which
no effort of human wit could ever bring into contempt; it is, therefore, to be
wished at least, that beauty was in some degree dependent upon SENTIMENT and
MANNERS, that so high a privilege might not be possessed by the unworthy, and
that human reason might no longer suffer the mortification of those who are
compelled to adore an idol, which differs from a stone or a log only by the
skill of the artificer: and if they cannot themselves behold beauty with
indifference, they must, surely, approve an attempt to show that it merits
their regard.

I shall, however, principally consider that species of beauty which is
expressed in the countenance; for this alone is peculiar to human beings, and
is not less complicated than their nature. In the countenance there are but two
requisites to perfect BEAUTY, which are wholly produced by external causes,
color and proportion: and it will appear that even in common estimation these
are not the chief; but that though there may be beauty without them, yet there
cannot be beauty without something more.

The finest features, ranged in the most exact symmetry, and heightened by the
most blooming complexion, must be animated before they can strike; and when
they are animated, will generally excite the same passions which they express.
If they are fixed in the dead calm of insensibility, they will be examined
without emotion; and if they do not express kindness, they will be beheld
without love. Looks of contempt, disdain, or malevolence, will be reflected, as
from a mirror, by every countenance on which they are turned; and if a wanton
aspect excites desire, it is but like that of a savage for his prey, which
cannot be gratified without the destruction of its object.

Among particular graces the dimple has always been allowed the pre-eminence,
and the reason is evident; dimples are produced by a smile, and a smile is an
expression of complacency: so the contraction of the brows into a frown, as it
is an indication of a contrary temper, has always been deemed a capital defect.

The lover is generally at a loss to define the beauty, by which his passion
was suddenly and irresistibly determined to a particular object; but this could
never happen, if it depended upon any known rule of proportion, upon the shape
or the disposition of features, or the color of the skin: he tells you that it
is something which he cannot fully express, something not fixed in any feature
but diffused over all; he calls it a sweetness, a softness, a placid
sensibility, or gives it some other appellation which connects beauty with
SENTIMENT, and expresses a charm which is not peculiar to any set of features,
but is perhaps possible to all.

This beauty, however, does not always consist in smiles, but varies as
expressions of meekness and kindness vary with their objects: it is extremely
forcible in the silent complaint of patient sufferance, the tender solicitude
of friendship, and the glow of filial obedience; and in tears, whether of joy,
of pity, or of grief, it is almost irresistible.

This is the charm which captivates without the aid of nature, and without
which her utmost bounty is ineffectual. But it cannot be assumed as a mask to
conceal insensibility or malevolence; it must be the genuine effect of
corresponding sentiments, or it will impress upon the countenance a new and
more disgusting deformity, AFFECTATION: it will produce the grin, the simper,
the stare, the languish, the pout, and innumerable other grimaces, that render
folly ridiculous, and change pity to contempt. By some, indeed, this species of
hypocrisy has been practiced with such skill as to deceive superficial
observers, though it can deceive even these but for a moment. Looks which do
not correspond with the heart, cannot be assumed without labor, nor continued
without pain; the motive to relinquish them, must, therefore, soon
preponderate, and the aspect and apparel of the visit will be laid by together;
the smiles and the languishments of art will vanish; and the fierceness of
rage, or the gloom of discontent, will either obscure or destroy all the
elegance of symmetry and complexion.

The artificial aspect is, indeed, as wretched a substitute for the expression
of sentiment, as the smear of paint for the blushes of health: it is not only
equally transient, and equally liable to detection; but as paint leaves the
countenance yet more withered and ghastly, the passions burst out with more
violence after restraint, the features become more distorted, and excite more
determined aversion.

Beauty, therefore, depends principally upon the mind, and consequently may be
influenced by education. It has been remarked, that the predominant passion may
generally be discovered in the countenance; because the muscles by which it is
expressed, being almost perpetually contracted, lose their tone, and never
totally relax; so that the expression remains, when the passion is suspended:
thus an angry, a disdainful, a subtle, or a suspicious temper, is displayed in
characters that are almost universally understood. It is equally true of the
pleasing and the softer passions, that they leave their signatures upon the
countenance when they cease to act: the prevalence of these passions,
therefore, produces a mechanical effect upon the aspect, and gives a turn and
cast to the features, which make a more favorable and forcible impression upon
the mind of others, than any charm produced by mere external causes.

Neither does the beauty which depends upon temper and sentiment equally
endanger the possessor: "It is," to use an eastern metaphor, "like the towers
of a city, not only an ornament but a defense:" if it excites desire, it at
once controls and refines it; it represses with awe, it softens with delicacy,
and it wins to imitation. The love of reason and of virtue is mingled with the
love of beauty; because this beauty is little more than the emanation of
intellectual excellence, which is not an object of corporeal appetite. As it
excites a purer passion, it also more forcibly engages to fidelity: every man
finds himself more powerfully restrained from giving pain to goodness, than to
beauty; and every look of a countenance in which they are blended, in which
beauty is the expression of goodness, is a silent reproach of the first
irregular wish; and the purpose immediately appears to be disingenuous and
cruel, by which the tender hope of ineffable affection would be disappointed,
the placid confidence of unsuspecting simplicity abused, and the peace even of
virtue endangered by the most sordid infidelity, and the breach of the
strongest obligations.

But the hope of the hypocrite must perish. When the factitious beauty has laid
by her smiles, when the luster of her eyes and the bloom of her cheeks have
lost their influence with their novelty; what remains but a tyrant divested of
power, who will never be seen without a mixture of indignation and disdain? The
only desire which this object could gratify, will be transferred to another,
not only without reluctance but with triumph. As resentment will succeed to
disappointment, a desire to mortify will succeed to a desire to please; and the
husband may be urged to solicit a mistress, merely by a remembrance of the
beauty of his wife, which lasted only till she was known.

Let it, therefore, be remembered, that none can be disciples of the GRACES,
but in the school of VIRTUE; and that those who wish to be LOVELY, must learn
early to be GOOD.

Number IV.
Felices ter et amplius
Quos irrupta tenet copula: nec malis
Divulsus querimoniis
Suprema citius solvet amor die.
HOR. Thrice happy they, in pure delights,
Whom love with mutual bonds unites;
Unbroken by complaints or strife,
And binding each to each for life.
FRANCIS.
THOUGH I devote this lucubration to the ladies, yet there are some parts of it
which I hope will not be wholly useless to the gentlemen* and, perhaps, both
may expect to be addressed upon a subject, which to both is of equal importance.

It has been universally allowed, and with great reason, that between persons
who marry there should be some degree of equality, with respect to age and
condition. Those who violate a known truth, deserve the infelicity they incur:
I shall, therefore, only labor to preserve innocence by detecting error.

With some ladies it is a maxim, that "the best husband is a reformed RAKE;" a
maxim which they have probably derived from comedies and novels, in which such
a husband is commonly the reward of female merit. But the belief of this maxim
is an incontestable proof, that with the true character of a RAKE the ladies
are wholly unacquainted. "They have," indeed, "heard of a wild young gentleman,
who would rake about the town, and take up his lodging at a bagnio; who had
told many a girl a pretty story, that was fool enough to believe him; and had a
right to many a child that did not call him father: but that in some of these
frolics he thought no harm, and for others he had sufficiently suffered." But
let the ADVENTURER be believed, these are words of dreadful import, and should
always be thus understood*

"To rake about town and lodge at a bagnio, is to associate with the vilest and
most abandoned of human beings; it is to become familiar with blasphemy and
lewdness, and frequently to sport with the most deplorable misery: to tell
pretty stories to credulous girls, is to deceive the simplicity of innocence by
cunning and falsehood: to be the father of a nameless progeny, is to desert
those, whose tears only can implore the protection, to which of all others they
have the strongest and the tenderest claim; it is more than to be a man without
affection, it is to be a brute without instinct. To think no harm in some of
these frolics, is to have worn out all sensibility of the difference between
right and wrong; and to have suffered for others, is to have a body
contaminated with diseases, which in some degree are certainly transmitted to
posterity."

It is to be hoped, that the mere exhibition of this picture, will be
sufficient to deter the ladies from precluding happiness by marrying the
original; and from discouraging virtue, by making vice necessary to the
character which they prefer.

But they frequently act upon another principle, which, though not equally
fatal and absurd, may yet produce great infelicity.

When the RAKE is excluded, it will be generally supposed, that superior
intellectual abilities ought always to determine the choice. "A man of fine
sense" is, indeed, a character of great dignity; and the ladies have always
been advised to prefer this to every other, as it includes a capacity to bestow
"that refined, exalted, and permanent felicity, which alone is worthy of a
rational being." But I think it probable, that this advice, however specious,
has been often given for no other reason, than because to give it flattered the
vanity of the writer, who fondly believed he was drawing his own character and
exciting the envy and admiration of his readers. This advice, however, the
ladies universally affect to approve, and probably for a similar reason; since
every one imagines, that to hold intellectual excellence in high estimation, is
to demonstrate that she possesses it.

As he that would persuade, should be scrupulously careful not to offend, I
will not insinuate that there are any ladies, by whom the peculiar beauties of
an exalted understanding cannot be discerned; and who have not, therefore, a
capacity for half the pleasure which it can bestow. And yet I think there is
another excellence which is much more essential to conjugal felicity, GOOD
NATURE.

I know that GOOD NATURE has, like SOCRATES, been ridiculed in the habit of
FOLLY; and that FOLLY has been dignified by the name of GOOD NATURE. But by
GOOD NATURE, I do not mean that flexible imbecility of mind which complies with
every request, and inclines a man at once to accompany an acquaintance to a
brothel at the expense of his health, and to keep an equipage for a wife at the
expense of his estate. Persons of this disposition have seldom more benevolence
than fortitude, and frequently perpetrate deliberate cruelty.

In true GOOD NATURE, there is neither the acrimony of spleen, nor the
sullenness of malice; it is neither clamorous nor fretful, neither easy to be
offended, nor impatient to revenge; it is a tender sensibility, a participation
of the pains and pleasures of others; and is, therefore, a forcible and
constant motive, to communicate happiness and alleviate misery.

As human nature is, from whatever cause, in a state of great imperfection, it
is surely to be desired, that a person whom it is most our interest to please,
should not see more of this imperfection than we do ourselves.

I shall perhaps be told, that "a man of sense can never use a woman ill." The
latter part of this proposition is a phrase of very extensive and various
signification: whether a man of sense "can use a woman ill," I will not
inquire; but I shall endeavor to show, that he may make her extremely wretched.

Persons of keen penetration and great delicacy of sentiment, as they must
necessarily be more frequently offended than others, so, as a punishment for
the offense, they can inflict more exquisite pain, because they can wound with
more poignant reproach: and by him, whom GOOD NATURE does not restrain from
retaliating the pain that he feels, the offense, whether voluntary or not, will
always be thus punished.

If this punishment is suffered with silence, confusion, and tears, it is
possible that the tyrant may relent; but this, like the remorse of a murderer,
is too late: the dread of incurring the same anguish by a like fault, will
substitute for the smile of cheerfulness, that sunshine of beauty, the glooms
of doubt, solicitude, and anxiety: the offense will notwithstanding be again
repeated; the punishment, the distress, and the remorse, will again return;
because error is involuntary, and anger is not restrained. If the reproach is
retorted, and, whether it was deserved, becomes the subject of debate, the
consequences are yet more dreadful: after a vain attempt to show an
incongruity, which can no more be perceived than sounds by the deaf, the
husband will be insulted for causeless and capricious displeasure, and the wife
for folly, perverseness, and obstinacy. In these circumstances, what will
become of "the refined, the exalted, and the permanent felicity, which alone is
worthy of reasonable beings, and which elevated genius only can bestow?"

That this conduct is by a man of sense known to be wrong, I am content to
allow: but it must also be granted, that the discernment of wrong is not always
a propensity to right; and that if pain was never inflicted, but when it was
known to produce salutary effects, mankind would be much more happy than they
are.

GOOD NATURE, therefore, if intellectual excellence cannot atone for the want
of it, must be admitted as the highest personal merit. If, without it, wisdom
is not kind; without it, folly must be brutal. Let it, therefore, be once more
repeated, "The quality most essential to conjugal felicity, is GOOD NATURE."
And surely, whatever accidental difference there may happen to be in the
conceptions or judgment of a husband and wife, if neither can give pain or
pleasure without feeling it themselves, it is easy to perceive, which sensation
they will concur to produce.

It may now be expected, that I should give some general rules, by which the
ladies may discover the disposition of those, by whom they are addressed: but
it is extremely difficult, to detect malevolence amidst the assiduities of
courtship, and to distinguish the man under that almost inscrutable disguise
the lover. GOOD NATURE, however, is not indicated by the fulsome fawning of a
perpetual grin, the loud laughter which almost anticipates the jest, or the
constant echo of every sentiment; neither is it safe to trust the appearance of
profuse liberality, or busy officiousness. Let it rather be remarked, how the
lover is affected by incidents, in which the lady is not concerned; what is his
behavior to his immediate dependants, and whether they approach him with a
slavish timidity, or with the cheerful reverence of voluntary servitude. Is he
ever merry at the expense of another; or does he ever attempt thus to excite
mirth in his mistress? Does he mention the absent with candor, and behave to
those who are present with a manly complacency? By a diligent attendance to
these circumstances, perhaps a probable judgment may be formed of his character.

To conclude with a general remark; GOOD NATURE is not of less importance to
ourselves, than to others. The morose and petulant first feel the anguish that
they give: reproach, revilings, and invective, are but the overflowings of
their own infelicity, and are constantly again forced back upon their source.
Sweetness of temper is not, indeed, an acquired but a natural excellence; and
therefore, to recommend it to those who have it not, may be deemed rather an
insult than advice. But let that which in happier natures is instinct, in these
be reason; let them pursue the same conduct, impelled by a nobler motive. As
the sourness of the crab enhances the value of the graft, so that which on its
parent plant is GOOD NATURE, will on a less kindly stock be improved into
VIRTUE. No action by which others receive pleasure or pain, is indifferent: the
sacred rule, "Do that to others which ye would that others should do to you,"
extends to every deed; and "every word shall be brought into judgment."

Number V.
-- Aspera
Nigris aequora ventis
Emirabitur insolens,
Qui nunc te fruitur credulus aurea
Qui semper vacuam, semper amabilem
Sperat, nescius aurae
Fallacit!
HOR. How often shall the unpracticed youth
Of altered gods and injured truth,
With tears, alas! complain?
How soon behold with wondering eyes
The black'ning winds tempestuous rise,
And scowl along the main?
While by his easy faith betrayed,
He now enjoys thee, golden maid,
Thus amiable and kind;
He fondly hopes that you shall prove
Thus ever vacant to his love,
Nor heeds the faithless wind.
FRANCIS.
THE ladies, to whom I lately addressed some thoughts upon the choice of a
husband, I shall now consider as married: and as I am very far from thinking,
that they may now sit down in negligent security, and remit at once their
assi^uity and circumspection, I shall warn them of some opinions of which this
conduct is the consequence, detect some errors by which the general intention
of good nature may be disappointed, and endeavor to put them upon their guard
against some propensities by which it may be overborne.

It is now necessary to remind them, that the passion which is supposed to
animate the lover, the passion which is represented by flames and darts, which
swells the bosom with perpetual rapture, and neither changes its object nor
loses its ardour, exists only in poetry and romance. The real passion which wit
and folly have thus concurred to disguise, is subject to disgust and satiety,
is excited by novelty, and frequently extinguished by possession.

But there is an esteem which is meliorated by love, and a love that is
elevated by esteem; a kind of mixed affection peculiar to mankind, as beings
compounded of instinct and reason, or, in other words, of body and mind. This
is that species of affection, upon which the supreme or peculiar happiness of
marriage depends, and which can scarce be preserved without a constant
attention and perpetual efforts.

As love without esteem, is volatile and capricious; esteem without love, is
languid and cold. I am afraid that many men, whose wives have possessed their
esteem, have yet lavished their fortune and their fondness upon a mistress; and
that the love of others, however ardent, has been quickly alienated, because it
was not dignified and supported by esteem.

Though good nature does indeed participate the pains and the pleasures of
others, and may, therefore, be considered as a constant and forcible motive to
communicate happiness and alleviate misery; yet it is at best but the imperfect
excellence of imperfect beings, whose immediate gratifications are often
selfish, and such as folly or vice render incompatible with the true happiness
of the individual, and of each other.

As there is not, perhaps, upon earth any couple, whose natural dispositions
and relish of life are so perfectly similar, as that their wills constantly
coincide; so it must sometimes happen, that the immediate pleasure of indulging
opposite inclinations, will be greater than a participation of that pleasure,
which would arise to the other, if this indulgence should be forborne: but as
to forbear this indulgence can never fail to conciliate esteem, it should
always be considered as a means of happiness, and rather as an advantage than a
loss; especially if it be true, that the indulgence itself, in these
circumstances, never gives the pleasure that it promises.

Mrs. CHARLOTTE SPRIGHTLY, the wife of a young merchant, was dressing for an
assembly a few nights ago, when her husband came in. "My dear CHARLOTTE," says
he, "I am sorry that you are going out tonight* for my cousin George is just
arrived from the East Indies: I have invited him to sup; and as he has never
seen you, I promised him your company." "Nay, dear HARRY," replied the lady,
"do not ask me to stay at home tonight; you know I am fond of dancing; and now
my fancy is set upon going, I am sure you will not disappoint me." Mr.
SPRIGHTLY, who was truly good-natured, would not urge her to stay; for to stay
with apparent reluctance, would not have gratified his wish. She perceived that
he was secretly displeased; however, away she went. But as she had not less
goodnature than her husband, she suffered so much pain by reflecting on the
pain she had given him, that she often wished herself at home. Thus she
offended the delicacy of his affection, by preferring a dance to the quiet of
his mind; and forfeited part of the esteem, which was due to that very
goodnature by which she lost the enjoyment of the night.

In this instance, the pain inflicted upon the husband was accidental to the
private gratification proposed by the wife. But there is a passion very
different both from malice and rage, to the gratification of which, the pain of
another is sometimes essentially necessary. This passion, which though its
effects are often directly opposite to goodnature, is yet perhaps predominant
in every breast and indulged at whatever risque, is VANITY.

To a gratification of vanity, at the expense of reciprocal esteem, the wife is
certainly under much stronger temptation than the husband: and I warn the
ladies against it, not only with more zeal, but with greater hope of success;
because those only who have superior natural abilities, or have received
uncommon advantages from education, have it in their power.

Successfully to rally a wife, confers no honor upon a husband; the attempt is
regarded rather as an insult than a contest; it is exulting in a masculine
strength to which she makes no pretensions, and brandishing weapons which she
is not supposed to have skill to wield.

For the same reasons, to confute or to ridicule a husband with an apparent
superiority of knowledge or of wit, affords all the parade of triumph to a
wife; it is to be strong where weakness is no reproach, and to conquer when it
would not have been dishonorable to fly. But these circumstances, which
increase the force of the temptation, will be found to afford proportionate
motives to resist it; whatever adds to the glory of the victor, adds equally to
the dishonor of the vanquished; and that which can exalt a wife only by
degrading a husband, will appear upon the whole not to be worth the
acquisition, even though it could be made without changing fondness to
resentment, or provoking jealousy by an implication of contempt. If the ladies
do not perceive the force of this argument, I earnestly request that they would
for once trust implicitly to my judgment; a request which, however
extraordinary, is not unreasonable; because in this instance the very vanity
which hides truth from them, must necessarily discover it to me.

But if goodnature is sufficiently vigorous to secur^ the esteem of reason, it
may yet be too negligent to gra^ify the delicacy of love: it must, therefore,
not only be steady, but watchful and assiduous; beauty must suffer no
diminution by inelegance, but every charm must contribute to keep the heart
which it contributed to win; whatever would have been concealed as a defect
from the lover, must with yet greater diligence be concealed from the husband.
The most intimate and tender familiarity, cannot surely be supposed to exclude
decorum; and there is a delicacy in every mind which is disgusted at the breach
of it, though every mind is not sufficiently attentive to avoid giving an
offense which it has often received.

I shall conclude this paper, as I did my last on the same subject, with a
general remark. As they who possess less than they expected cannot be happy; to
expatiate in chimerical prospects of felicity is to insure the anguish of
disappointment, and to lose the power of enjoying whatever may be possessed.
Let not youth, therefore, imagine, that with all the advantages of nature and
education, marriage will be a constant reciprocation of delight, over which
externals will have little influence, and which time will rather change than
destroy. There is no perpetual source of delight but HOPE: so imperfect is the
utmost temporal happiness, that to possess it all, is to lose it. We enjoy that
which is before us; but when nothing more is possible, all that is attained is
insipid. Such is the condition of this life: but let us not, therefore, think
it of no value; for to be placed in this life, is to be a candidate for a
BETTER.

Number VI.
Scorn me not, Chloe; me, whose faith well tried,
Long years approve, and honest passions guide:
My spotless soul no foul affections move,
But chaste simplicity, and modest love:
Nor I, like shallow fops, from fair to fair
Roving at random, faithless passion swear.
But thou alone shall be my constant care.
OVID TRANSL.
ALMOST every man is, or has been, or at least thinks that he is or has been, a
Lover. I have lately taken a survey of the numerous tribe of Enamoratos; and,
after having observed the various shapes they wear, think I may safely
pronounce, that though all profess to have been in love, there are very few,
who are really capable of it.

It is a maxim of Rochefoucault, that 'many men would never have been in love,
if they had never heard of love.' The justice of this remark is equal to its
shrewdness. The ridiculous prate of a family has frequently great influence on
young minds, who learn to love, as they do every thing else, by imitation.
Young creatures, almost mere children, have been consumed with this second-hand
flame.

That vast heap of volumes, filled with love, and sufficient in number to make
a library, are great inflamers, and seldom fail to produce that kind of passion
described by Rochefoucault. The young student reads of the emotions of love,
till he imagines, that he feels them throbbing and fluttering in his little
breast; as valetudinarians study the history of a disease, till they fancy
themselves affected with every symptom of it. For this reason I am always sorry
to see any of this trash in the hands of young people; and I am obliged to
consider many romances and novels as no better than bawds, or arrant pimps.

Platonism, which dotes on the mind alone of its mistress, and would fain see
her naked soul divested of its material encumbrances, is in these days very
scarce; and there is another class, infinitely more numerous, whom we may
justly distinguish by the title of Epicureans. The principles of this sect are
diametrically opposite to those of the Platonics. They think no more of the
soul of their mistress than a Mussulman, but are in raptures with her person. A
lover of this sort is in perpetual ecstacies: his passion is so violent, that
he even scorches you with his flame; and he runs over the perfections of his
mistress in the same style that a jockey praises his horse: 'Such limbs! such
eyes! such a neck and breast! such -- oh, she is a rare piece!' Their ideas go
no farther than mere external accomplishments; and as their wounds may be said
to be only skin-deep, we cannot allow their breasts to be smitten with love,
though perhaps they may rankle with a much grosser passion. Yet it must be
owned, that nothing is more common, than for gentlemen of this cast to be
involved in what is called a love-match: but then it is owing to the same cause
with the marriage of Sir John Brute, who says -- 'I married my wife because I
wanted to lie with her, and she would not let me.'

Other gentlemen, of a gay disposition and warm constitution, who go in the
catalogue for Lovers, are adorers of almost every woman they see. The flame of
love is as easily kindled in them, as the sparks are struck out of a flint; and
it also expires as soon. A lover of this sort dances one day with a lady at a
ball, and loses his heart to her in a minuet; the next, another carries it off
in the Mall; and the next day perhaps he goes out of town, and lodges it in the
possession of all the country beauties successively, till at last he brings it
back to town with him, and presents it to the first woman he meets. This class
is very numerous; but ought by no means to hold a place among the tribe of true
Lovers, since a gentleman, who is thus in love with every body, may fairly be
said not to be in love at all.

Love is universally allowed to be whimsical; and, if whim be the essence of
love, none can be accounted truer Lovers than those who admire their mistress
for some particular charm, which enchains them, though it would singly never
captivate any body else. Some gentlemen have been won by a pair of fine arms;
others have been held fast by an even white set of teeth; and I know a very
good scholar, who was ensnared by a set of golden tresses, because it was the
taste of the ancients, and the true classical hair. Those ladies, whose lovers
are such piecemeal admirers, are in perpetual danger of losing them. A rash,
or a pimple may abate their affection. All those, the object of whose adoration
is merely a pretty face, or a fine person, are in the power of the like
accidents; and the small pox has occasioned many a poor lady the loss of her
beauty and her lover at the same time.

But, after all these spurious Enamoratos, there are some few, whose passion is
sincere and well founded. True genuine Love is always built upon esteem: not
that I would mean, that a man can reason and argue himself into love; but that
a constant intercourse with an amiable woman will lead him into a contemplation
of her excellent qualities, which will insensibly win his heart, before he is
himself aware of it, and beget those hopes and fears, which are the natural
attendants on a true passion.

Love has been described ten thousand times: but that I may be sure that the
little picture I would draw of it is taken from nature, I will conclude this
paper with the story of honest Will Easy and his amiable Wife.

Will Easy and Miss -- became very early acquainted; and, from being familiarly
intimate with the whole family, Will might almost be said to live there. Will
and the lady were both universally allowed to have sense, and their frequent
conversations together gave them undoubted proofs of the goodness of each
other's disposition. They delighted in the company, and admired the perfections
of each other, and gave a thousand little indications of a growing passion, not
unobserved by others, even whilst it was yet unknown and unsuspected by
themselves. However, after some time, Will, by mutual agreement, demanded the
lady of her father in marriage. But, alas! 'the course of true love never yet
run smooth: the ill-judged ambition of a parent induced the father, out of mere
love to his daughter, to refuse her hand to the only man in the world with whom
she could live happily, because he imagined, that he might, as the phrase is,
do better for her. But love, grounded on just principles, is not easily shaken;
and, as it appeared that their mutual passion had taken too deep root ever to
be extirpated, the father at last, reluctantly, half consented to their union.
They enjoy a genteel competency; and Will, by his integrity and abilities, is
an honor to a learned profession, and a blessing to his wife; whose greatest
praise is, that her virtues deserve such a husband. She is pleased with having
left 'dress to dutchesses;' he considers her happiness as his main interest;
and their example every day gives fresh conviction to the father, that where
two persons of strong sense and good hearts conceive a reciprocal affection for
each other, their passion is genuine and lasting, and their union is perhaps
the truest state of happiness under the sun.

Number VII.
Officious couplers wantonly engage
Virtue with Vice, brisk Youth with frozen Age:
Behold them groan beneath the iron yoke,
Hail the dear mischief, and enjoy the joke.
HORACE TRANSL.
THOUGH I shall not as yet vouchsafe to let the reader so far into my secrets,
as to inform him, whether I am married or single, it may not be amiss to
acquaint him, that, supposing I still remain a bachelor, it has not been the
fault of my friends or relations. On the contrary, as soon as I was what they
call settled in the world, they were so assiduous in looking out a wife for me,
that nothing was required on my part but immediately to fall in love with the
lady they had pitched upon; and could I have complied with their several
choices, I should have been married at the same time to a tall and a short, a
plump and a slender, a young and an old woman; one with a great deal of money,
and another with none at all: each of whom was severally recommended by them as
the properest person in the world for me.

I know not how it happens, but it is notorious, that most people take a
pleasure in making matches; either thinking matrimony to be a state of bliss,
into which they would charitably call all their friends and acquaintances; or
perhaps struggling in the toils, they are desirous of drawing others into the
net that ensnared them. Many ma^ches have been brought about between two
persons, absolute strangers to each other, through this kind mediation of
friends, who are always ready to take upon them the office of an honorable go
between.

As we cann^t insure happiness to our friends, at the same time that we help
them to husbands and wives, one would imagine, that few would care to run the
hazard of bestowing misery, where they meant a kindness. I know a good-natured
lady, who has officiously brought upon herself the ill will and the curses of
many of her dearest and most intimate friends on that very account. She has a
sister, for whom she has provided a most excellent husband, who has shown his
affection for her by spending her whole fortune upon his mistresses: another
near relation, having by her means, snatched up a rich widow, the bridegroom
was arrested for her debts within a week after marriage: and it cost her a
whole twelvemonth to bring two doting lovers of her acquaintance together, who
parted beds before the honey-moon was expired.

But if our friends will thus condescend to be matchmakers from a spirit of
benevolence, and for our own advantage only; there are others, who have taken
up the profession from less disinterested motives; who bring beauty and fortune
to market, and traffic in all the accomplishments that can make the married
state happy. I have known many droll accidents happen from the mistakes of
these mercenary persons; and remember one in particular, which I shall here set
down for the entertainment of my read^.

A careful old gentleman came to town in order to marry his son, and was
recommended by one of these couplers to a twenty thousand pounder. He
accordingly put on his best wig, best beaver, and gold-buttoned coat, and went
to pay his respects to the lady's mother. He told her, that he had not the
pleasure of being known to her; but as his son's quiet depended upon it, he had
taken the liberty of waiting on her: in short, he immediately broke the matter
to her, and informed her, that his boy had seen her daughter at church, and was
violently in love with her; concluding, that he would do very handsomely for
the lad, and would make it worth her while to have him. The old lady thanked
him for the honor he intended her family; but she supposed, to be sure, as he
appeared to be a prudent and sensible gentleman, he would expect a fortune
answerable. 'Say nothing of that, say nothing of that,' interrupted the Don: 'I
have heard -- but if it was less, it should not break any squares between us.'
-- 'Pray, Sir, how much does the world say?' replied the lady. 'Why, Madam, I
suppose she has not less than twenty thousand pounds.' -- 'Not so much, Sir,'
said the old lady very gravely. -- 'Well, Madam, I suppose then it may be
nineteen, or -- or -- only eighteen thousand pounds.' -- ' Not so much, Sir.'
-- 'Well, well, perhaps not: but -- if it was only seventeen thousand.' -- 'No,
Sir.' -- 'Or sixteen.' -- 'No.' -- 'Or (we must make allowances) perhaps but
fifteen thousand.' -- 'Not so much, Sir.' Here ensued a profound silence for
near a minute; when the old gentleman, rubbing his forehead -- 'Well, Madam, we
must come to some conclusion. Pray, is it less than fourteen thousand? How much
more is it than twelve thousand?' -- 'Less, Sir.' -- 'More than ten thousand?'
-- 'Not so much, Sir.' -- 'Not so much, Madam?' -- 'Not so much.' -- 'Why, if
it is lodged in the funds, consider, Madam, interest is low, very low: but as
the boy loves her, trifles shall not part us. Has she got eight thousand
pounds?' -- 'Not so much, Sir.' -- 'Why then, Madam, perhaps the young lady's
fortune may not be above six -- or five thousand pounds.' -- 'NOTHING LIKE IT,
SIR.' At these words the old gentleman started from his chair, and running out
of the room -- 'Your servant, your servant: my son is a fool; and the fellow,
who recommended me to you is a blockhead, and knows nothing of business.'

Number VIII.
Rage in her eyes, distraction in her mien,
Her breast indignant swells with jealous spleen.
HORACE.
I AM sensible that Jealousy is not the predominant passion among the ladies of
America; and I would hope that few of them have occasion to doubt the constancy
of their husbands. But as some solitary individuals may suffer it to rankle in
their bosoms, and this work is devoted to universal improvement, to check every
vice, and to encourage every virtue relating to the married state; as this
passion is the source of much domestic wretchedness, and banishes every
pleasure; I have thought it proper to devote a paper to this subject. Its aim
is, to eradicate this baneful evil from every breast, which may have
imprudently fostered it. I shall accordingly present to the reader's view a
humourous epistle* which is happily calculated to exhibit it in a ridiculous
light; and which, by a change of sex, may be pointed at any gentleman, who may
cherish an unfounded jealousy for the virtuous friend of his bosom.

SIR,
WE are told, that in Spain it is the custom for husbands never to let their
wives go abroad without a watchful old woman to attend them; and in Turkey it
is the fashion to lock up their mistresses under the guard of a trusty eunuch:
but I never knew that in any country the men were put under the same
restrictions. Alas! Sir, my wife is to me a very Duenna: she is as careful of
me, as the Keisler Aga, or Chief Eunuch, is of the Grand Seignior's favorite
Sultana: and whether she believes, that I am in love with every woman, or that
every woman is in love with me, she will never trust me out of her sight; but
sticks as close to me, as if she really was, without a figure, bone of my bone,
and flesh of my flesh. I am never suffered to stir abroad without her, lest I
should go astray; and at home she follows me up and down the house, like a
child in leading strings: nay, if I do but step out of the room on any ordinary
occasion, she is so afraid I should give her the slip, that she always screams
after me, 'My dear, you are not going out;' though, for better security, she
generally locks up my hat and cane, together with her own gloves and cloak,
that one may not stir out without the other.

I cannot flatter myself, that I am handsomer or better made than other men:
nor has she, in my eyes at least, fewer charms than other women; and yet she is
so very doubtful of my constancy, that I cannot speak, or even pay the
compliment of my hat, to any young lady, though in public, without giving new
alarms to her jealousy. Such an one, she is sure from her flaunting airs, is a
kept madam; another is no better than she should be; and she saw another tip me
the wink, or give me a nod, as a mark of some private assignation between us. A
nun, Sir, might as soon force her way into a convent of monks, as any young
woman get admittance into our house: she has therefore affronted all her
acquaintances of her own sex, that are not, or might not have been, the
grandmothers of many generations; and is at home to nobody but maiden ladies in
the bloom of threescore, and beauties of the early part of this century.

She trusted me one evening out of doors to share an entertainment abroad with
some male friends; but we had scarcely dispatched the first course, before word
was brought, that my boy was come with a lanthorn to light me home. I sent him
back with orders to call in an hour; when presently after the maid was
dispatched, with notice that my dear was gone to bed very ill, and wanted me
directly. I was preparing to obey the summons; when, to our great surprise, the
sick lady herself bolted into the room, complained of my cruel heart, and fell
into a fit, from which she did not recover, till the coach had set us down at
our own house.

Whilst my wife is thus cautious, that I should not be led astray even by my
own sex when abroad, she takes particular care, that I may not stumble on
temptation at home. It was some time after our marriage, before she could find
maids for her purpose. One was too pert an h^ssy; another went too fine;
another was an impudent forward young baggage. At present our household is made
up of a set of beautiful monsters. My lady's own waiting woman has a most
inviting hump back, and is so charmingly paralytic, that she shakes all over,
like a Chinese figure; the house-maid squints most delightfully with one
solitary eye, which weeps continually for the loss of its fellow; and the cook,
beside a most captivating red face and protuberant waist, has a most graceful
hobble in her gait, occasioned by one leg being shorter than the other.

I need not tell you, that I must never write a letter, but my wife must see
the contents, before it is done up; and that I never dare to open one, till she
has broken the seal, or read it, till she has first run it over. Every rap at
the door from the post-man makes her tremble; and I have known her ready to
burst with spleen at seeing a superscription, written in a fair Italian hand,
though perhaps it only comes from my aunt in the country.

About a month ago she found a mysterious paper in my coat pocket, which
awakened all her mistrust. This suspicious manuscript was drawn up in
hieroglyphics; which, as she could not interpret, she immediately concluded to
be a billetdoux from some nasty creature, whom I secretly maintained in a
corner of the town; and that we corresponded together, in cipher. This terrible
paper, Sir, was in truth no other than a bill from my blacksmith in the
country, who, never having learnt to write, expressed his meaning by characters
of his own invention. Thus, if he had mended a spade, he charged it to my
account, by drawing* as well as he could, the figure of a spade, and adding at
a little distance six perpendicular lines, to signify six pence; or, if he had
repaired a plough, he sketched out that also in the same kind of rough draught,
and annexed to it four curve lines, to denote four shillings. This matter I
explained to my wife as fully as possible, but very little to her satisfaction.
It is absolutely impossible to quiet her suspicions: she is perpetually
reproaching me with my private trull, nay, upbraids me on this account before
strangers; and it was but last week, that she put me to inconceivable confusion
before a whole room of company, by telling them, that I was in love with a
blacksmith.

Jealousy, Sir, it is said, is a sign of love. It may be so: but it is a
species of love, which is attended with all the malevolent properties of hate:
nay, I will venture to say, that many a wife hates her husband most heartily,
without causing him half that uneasiness, which my loving consort's suspicious
temper creates to me. Her jealous whims disturb me the more, because I am
naturally of an even mind and calm disposition: and one of the chief blessings
I promised myself in matrimony was, to enjoy the sweets of domestic
tranquillity. I loved my wife passionately; but I must own, that these
perpetual attacks upon my peace make me regard her with less and less
tenderness every day; and, though there is not a woman in the world that I
would prefer to my wife, yet I am apt to think, that such violent suspicions,
without a cause, have often created real matter for jealousy.

I am, Sir, your humble servant, etc.


Number IX.
The House so neat, so nice within,
It Is pity we should enter in.
TERENCE TRANSL.
DECENCY and health require a due attention to cleanliness. They who widely
deviate from its laws, cannot engage our pleased attention. We shun those
persons, or dwellings, which present to the eye a prospect more disgusting,
(because the effect of a culpable inattention, and indicative of want of
delicacy,) than the incurable deformities of nature.

Neatness and cleanliness are necessary ornaments of the female sex; and the
Wife can hardly expect to inspire her husband with a constant attachment to her
person and house, if, by her neglect, they generally exhibit a squalid and
disfigured aspect. I believe, that the ladies of the UNITED STATES are not
generally deficient in their attention to either. But they will permit me to
remind them, that they are exposed to the danger of injuring the purity and
sweetness of their dispositions, by an excess of attention to the latter. It is
at least possible, that an anxious solicitude to avoid every appearance of soil
in their furniture and rooms, may produce an irritability of temper, even
toward the friend of their bosom, or their smiling offspring, when they
undesignedly trespass a little on the rigid laws of neatness. They will not
condemn me as an advocate for uncleanliness, when I say, that an angry
countenance or expressions of severity are far more disgusting than any stain,
which disappears before the applying hand of industry; and that it is of
greater moment, to secure the approbation of a husband and the affections of
their happy children, than to enjoy the applause of a momentary visitant, for
exhibiting the tokens of a nice attention to the dress of their apartments. To
impress the idea still more forcibly on those few, who may cherish the fault,
which we wish to eradicate; to restore and perpetuate domestic tranquillity,
that bright jewel of the married life; I subjoin the following letter from a
correspondent.

SIR,
I AM married to a lady of a very nice and delicate disposition, who is cried
up by all the good women of her acquaintance, for being the Neatest Body in her
house they ever knew.

It must be confessed, that a due regard to neatness and cleanliness is as
necessary to be observed in our habitations as our persons: yet I do not like
to have my house rendered useless to me under the pretense of keeping it clean.

For my own part, I cannot see the difference between having an house, that is
always dirty, and an house that is always to be cleaned. I could very willingly
compound to be washed out of my home once in the week: but my wife is so very
notable, that the same cleansing work must be repeated every day in the week.
All the morning long I am sure to be entertained with the domestic concert of
scrubbing the floors, scouring the irons, and beating the carpets; and I am
constantly hunted from room to room, whilst one is to be dusted, another
dry-rubbed, another washed, and another run over with a dry mop. Thus, indeed,
I may be said to live in continual dirtiness, that my house may be clean; for,
during these nice operations, every apartment is stowed with soap, brick-dust,
sand, scrubbing-brushes, hair-brooms, rag-mops, and dish-clouts.

You may suppose, that the greatest care is taken to prevent the least speck of
dirt from soiling the floors. For this reason all that come to our house
(beside the ceremony of scraping at the door) are obliged to rub their shoes
for half an hour on a large ragged mat at the entrance; and then they must
straddle their way along several less mats, ranged at due distances from each
other in the passage, and (like boys at play) come into the room with an hop, a
step, and a jump. The like caution is used by all the family. I myself am
scarce allowed to stir a step without slippers; my wife creeps on tip-toe up
and down stairs; the maidservants are continually stumping below in clogs or
pattens; and the footman is obliged to sneak about the house barefooted, as if
he came with a sly design to steal something.

This extraordinary solicitude in my wife for the cleanliness of her rooms, and
the care and preservation of her furniture, makes my house entirely useless,
and takes away all that ease and familiarity, which is the chief comfort of
one's own home. I must drink out of an earthen mug, though a great quantity of
plate is constantly displayed on the side-board; whilst all the furniture,
except when we have company, is done up in paper, as if the family, to whom it
belongs, were gone into the country. In a word, Sir, any thing that is decent
and cleanly is too good to be used, for fear it should be dirtied; and I live
with every convenience at hand, without the power of enjoying one of them. I
have elegant apartments, but am almost afraid to enter them; I have plate,
china, and the most genteel furniture, but must not use them; which is as
ridiculous an absurdity, and almost as great an hardship, as if I had hands
without the power of moving them; the organs of sight, smell, taste, without
being suffered to exert them; and feet without being permitted to walk. Thus,
Sir, this extravagant passion for cleanliness keeps the family in a perpetual
state of muck and dirt; and, whilst we are surrounded with all necessaries,
subjects us to every inconvenience. But what makes it still a greater grievance
is, that it has been the ridiculous cause of many other misfortunes. I have
sometimes created her anger by littering the room with throwing my garters on a
chair, or hanging my peruke on one of the gilt sconces. Having once unluckily
spilt a bottle of ink on one of the best carpets, she was irreconcilable for a
month; and I had scarcely brought her to temper again, when I most
unfortunately run against the footman, who was entering with the dinner, and
threw down a leg of pork and pease-pudding on the parlour floor. This
superabundant neatness did once also very nearly occasion my death; for whilst
I lay ill of a fever, my delicate wife, thinking it would refresh me, ordered
my bedchamber to be mopped: and the same scrupulous nicety was also the mean
of our losing a very considerable addition to our fortune.

A rich old uncle, on whom we had great dependence, came to town last summer on
purpose to pay us a visit: but, though he had rode above fifty miles that day,
he was obliged to stand in the passage till his boots were pulled off, for fear
of soiling the Turkey-carpet. After supper the old gentleman, as was his
constant practice, desired to have his pipe: but this, to be sure, could by no
means be allowed, as the filthy stench of the tobacco would never be gotten out
of the furniture again; and it was with much ado that my wife would even suffer
him to go and smoke in the kitchen. We had no room to lodge him in, except a
garret with bare walls; because the Chints bedchamber was, indeed, too nice
for a dirty country squire. These slights very much chagrined my good uncle:
but he had not been with us above a day or two, before my wife and he came to
an open quarrel on the following occasion. It happened, that he had brought a
favorite pointer with him, who at his first coming was immediately locked up
in the coal-hole: but the dog, having found means to escape, had crept slyly up
stairs, and had very calmly stretched himself out upon a crimson damask sofa.
My wife not only sentenced him to the discipline of the whip, but insisted upon
having the criminal hanged up afterward; when the master interposing in his
behalf, it produced such high words between them, that my uncle ordered his
horse, and swore he would never darken our doors again, as long as he breathed.
He went home, and about two months after died: but as he could not forgive the
ill treatment which both he and his dog had met with at our house, he had
altered his will, which before he had made entirely in our favor.

I am, Sir, your humble servant, PETER PLAINALL.


Number X.
In amore haec omnia insunt vitia: injuriae,
Suspiciones, inimicitiae, induciae,
Bellum, pax rursum. --
TER. EU^. All these inconveniences are incident to love; reproaches,
jealousies, quarrels, reconcilements, war, and then peace.


THE marquis of HALLIFAX, in his "advice to a daughter," has instructed a wife
how to behave herself toward a false, an intemperate, a choleric, a sullen, a
covetous or a silly husband, but has not spoken one word of a jealous husband.

Jealousy is that pain which a man feels from the apprehension that he is not
equally beloved by the person whom he entirely loves. Now, because our inward
passions and inclinations can never make themselves visible, it is impossible
for a jealous man to be thoroughly cured of his suspicions. His thoughts hang
at best in a state of doubtfulness and uncertainty; and are never capable of
receiving any satisfaction on the advantageous side; so that his inquiries are
most successful when they discover nothing: his pleasure arises from his
disappointments, and his life is spent in pursuit of a secret that destroys his
happiness if he chance to find it.

An ardent love is always a strong ingredient in this passion; for the same
affection which stirs up the jealous man's desires, and gives the party beloved
so beautiful a figure in his imagination, makes him believe she kindles the
same passion in others, and appears as amiable to all beholders. And as
jealousy thus arises from an extraordinary love, it is of so delicate a nature,
that it scorns to take up with any thing less than an equal return of love. Not
the warmest expressions of affection, the softest and most tender hypocrisy,
are able to give any satisfaction, where we are not persuaded that the
affection is real, and the satisfaction mutual: for the jealous man wishes
himself a kind of deity to the person he loves; he would be the only pleasure
of her senses, the employment of her thoughts; and is angry at every thing she
admires, or takes delight in, besides himself.

PHAEDRIA's request to his mistress, upon his leaving her for three days, is
inimitably beautiful and natural.

Cum milite isto praesens, absens ut si es:
Dies no^tesque me ames; me desideres;
Me somnies; me expectes; de me cogites;
Me speres; me te oblectes; mecum tota sis:
Meus fac sis postremo animus, quando ego sum tuus.
TER. Eun. Act. 1. "When you are in company with that soldier, behave as if you
were absent; but continue to love me by day and by night: want me; dream of me;
expect me; think of me; wish for me; delight in me; be wholly with me; in
short, be my very soul, as I am yours."

The jealous man's disease is of so malignant a nature, that it converts all it
takes into its own nourishment. A cool behavior sets him on the rack, and is
interpreted as an instance of aversion or indifference; a fond one raises his
suspicions, and looks too much like dissimulation and artifice. If the person
he loves be cheerful, her thoughts must be employed on another; and if sad, she
is certainly thinking on himself. In short, there is no word or gesture so
insignificant but it gives him new hints, feeds his suspicions, and furnishes
him with fresh matters of discovery: so that if we consider the effects of this
passion, one would rather think it proceeded from an inveterate hatred than an
excessive love; for certainly none can meet with more disquietude and
uneasiness than a suspected wife, if we except the jealous husband.

But the great unhappiness of this passion is, that it naturally tends to
alienate the affection which it is so solicitous to engross; and that for these
two reasons, because it lays too great a constraint on the words and actions of
the suspected person, and at the same time shows you have no honorable opinion
of her; both of which are strong motives to aversion.

Nor is this the worst effect of jealousy; for it often draws after it a more
fatal train of consequences, and makes the person you suspect, guilty of the
very crimes you are so much afraid of. It is very natural for such who are
treated ill and upbraided falsely, to find out an intimate friend that will
hear their complaints, condole their sufferings, and endeavor to so the and
assuage their secret resentments. Besides, jealousy puts a woman often in mind
of an ill thing that she would not otherwise perhaps have thought of, and fills
her imagination with such an unlucky idea, as in time grows familiar, excites
desire, and loses all the shame and horror which might at first attend it. Nor
is it a wonder if she who suffers wrongfully in a man's opinion of her, and has
therefore nothing to forfeit in his esteem, resolves to give him reason for his
suspicions, and to enjoy the pleasure of the crime, since she must undergo the
ignominy. Such probably were the considerations that directed the wise man in
his advice to a husband; "Be not jealous over the wife of thy bosom; and teach
her not an evil lesson against thyself." ECCLUS.

And here, among the other torments which this passion produces, we may usually
observe that none are greater mourners than jealous men, when the person who
provoked their jealousy is taken from them. Then it is that their love breaks
out furiously, and throws off all the mixtures of suspicion which choked and
smothered it before. The beautiful parts of the character rise uppermost in the
jealous husband's memory, and upbraid him with the ill usage of so divine a
creature as was once in his possession; whilst all the little imperfections,
that were before so uneasy to him, wear off from his remembrance, and show
themselves no more.

We may see by what has been said, that jealousy takes the deepest root in men
of amorous dispositions, and of these we may find three kinds who are most
overrun with it.

The first are those who are conscious to themselves of an infirmity, whether
it be weakness, old age, deformity, ignorance, or the like. These men are so
well acquainted with the unamiable part of themselves, that they have not the
confidence to think they are really beloved; and are so distrustful of their
own merits, that all fondness toward them puts them out of countenance, and
looks like a jest upon their persons. They grow suspicious on their first
looking in a glass, and are stung with jealousy at the sight of a wrinkle. A
handsome fellow immediately alarms them, and every thing that looks young or
gay turns their thoughts upon their wives.

A second sort of men, who are most liable to this passion, are those of
cunning, wary, and distrustful tempers. It is a fault very justly found in
histories composed by politicians, that they leave nothing to chance or humor,
but are still deriving every action from some plot and contrivance, for drawing
up a perpetual scheme of causes and events, and preserving a constant
correspondence between the camp and the council table. And thus it happens in
the affairs of love with men of too refined a thought. They put a construction
on a look, and find out a design in a smile; they give new senses and
significations to words and actions, and are ever tormenting themselves with
fancies of their own raising. They generally act in a disguise themselves, and
therefore mistake all outward shows and appearances for hypocrisy in others: so
that I believe no men see less of the truth and reality of things than these
great refiners upon incidents, who are so wonderfully subtle and over-wife in
their conceptions.

Now what these men fancy they know of women by reflection, your lewd and
vicious men believe they have learned by experience. They have seen the poor
husband so misled by tricks and artifices, and in the midst of his inquiries so
lost and bewildered in a crooked intrigue, that they still suspect an
under-plot in every female action; and especially where they see any
resemblance in the behavior of two persons, are apt to fancy it proceeds from
the same design in both. These men therefore bear hard upon the suspected
party, pursue her close through all her turnings and windings, and are too well
acquainted with the chase, to be flung off by any false steps or doubles;
besides, their acquaintance and conversation has lain wholly among the vicious
part of womankind, and therefore it is no wonder they censure all alike, and
look upon the whole sex as a species of impostors. But if, notwithstanding
their private experience, they can get over these prejudices, and entertain a
favorable opinion of some WOMEN; yet their own loose desires will stir up new
suspicions from another side, and make them believe all MEN subject to the same
inclinations with themselves.

After this frightful account of jealousy, and the persons who are most subject
to it, it will be but fair to show by what means the passion may be best
allayed, and those who are possessed with it set at ease. Other faults indeed
are not under the wife's jurisdiction, and should, if possible, escape her
observation; but jealousy calls upon her particularly for its cure, and
deserves all her art and application in the attempt; besides, she has this for
her encouragement, that her endeavors will be always pleasing, and that she
will still find the affection of her husband rising toward her, in proportion
as his doubts and suspicions vanish; for, as we have seen all along, there is
so great a mixture of love in jealousy, as is well worth the separating.

Number XI.
Credula res amor est.
OVID. MET. The man who loves is easy of belief.
ANON.
HAVING in my last paper discovered the nature of jealousy, and pointed out the
persons who are most subject to it, I must here apply myself to those ladies
who desire to live well with a jealous husband, and to ease his mind of its
unjust suspicions.

The first rule I shall propose to be observed, is, that you never seem to
dislike in another what the jealous man is himself guilty of, or to admire any
thing in which he himself does not excel. A jealous man is very quick in his
applications; he knows how to find a double edge in an invective, and to draw a
satire on himself out of a panegyric on another. He does not trouble himself to
consider the person, but to direct the character; and is secretly pleased or
confounded as he finds more or less of himself in it. The commendation of any
thing in another stirs up his jealousy, as it shows you have a value for others
besides himself; but the commendation of that which he himself wants, inflames
him more, as it shows that in some respects you prefer others before him.
Jealousy is admirably described in this view by HORACE in his ode to LYDIA.

Quum tu, Lydia, Telephi
Cervicem roscam, and cerea Telephi
Laudas brachia, vae meum
Fervens difficili bile tumet jecur:
Tunc nec men's mihi, nec color
Certa sede manet: humor et in genas
Furtim labitur, argu^ns
Quam lentis penitus macerer ignibus.
When TELEPHUS his youthful charms,
His rosy neck, and winding arms,
With endless rapture you recite,
And in the pleasing name delight;
My heart, inflamed by jealous heats,
With numberless resentments beats;
From my pale cheek the color flies,
And all the man within me dies:
By turns my hidden grief appears
In rising sighs and falling tears,
That show too well the warm desires,
The silent, slow, consuming fires,
Which on my inmost vitals prey,
And melt my very soul away.
ADDISON. The jealous man is not indeed angry if you dislike another; but if
you find those faults which are to be found in his own character, you discover
not only your dislike of another, but of himself. In short, he is so desirous
of engrossing all your love, that he is grieved at the want of any charm, which
he believes has power to raise it; and if he finds by your censures on others,
that he is not so agreeable in your opinion as he might be, he naturally
concludes you could love him better if he had other qualifications, and that by
consequence your affection does not rise so high as he thinks it ought. If
therefore his temper be grave or sullen, you must not be too much pleased with
a jest, or transported with any thing that is gay and diverting. If his beauty
be none of the best, you must be a professed admirer of prudence, or any other
quality he is master of, or at least vain enough to think he is.

In the next place, you must be sure to be free and open in your conversation
with him, and to let in light upon your actions to unravel all your designs,
and discover every secret, however trifling or indifferent. A jealous husband
has a particular aversion to winks and whispers, and if he does not see to the
bottom of every thing, will be sure to go beyond it in his fears and
suspicions. He will always expect to be your chief confident, and where he
finds himself kept out of a secret, will believe there is more in it than there
should be. And here it is of great concern, that you preserve the character of
your sincerity uniform and of a piece; for if he once finds a false gloss put
upon any single action, he quickly suspects all the rest; his working
imagination immediately takes a false hint, and runs off with it into several
remote consequences, till he has proved very ingenious in working out his own
misery.

If both these methods fail, the best way will be to let him see you are much
cast down and afflicted for the ill opinion he entertains of you, and the
disquietudes he himself suffers for your sake. There are many who take a kind
of barbarous pleasure in the jealousy of those who love them, that insult over
an aching heart, and triumph in the charms which are able to excite so much
uneasiness.

Ardeat ipsa licet, tormentis gaudet amantis.
JUV. Though equal pains her peace of mind destroy,
A lover's torments give her spiteful joy.
But these often carry the humor so far, till their affected coldness and
indifference quite kills all the fondness of a lover, and are then sure to meet
in their turn with all the contempt and scorn that is due to so insolent a
behavior. On the contrary, it is very probable a melancholy dejected carriage,
the usual effect of injured innocence, may soften the jealous husband into
pity, make him sensible of the wrong he does you, and work out of his mind all
those fears and suspicions that make you both unhappy. At least it will have
this good effect, that he will keep his jealousy to himself, and repine in
private; either because he is sensible it is a weakness, and will therefore
hide it from your knowledge, or because he will be apt to fear some ill effect
it may produce, in cooling your love toward him, or diverting it to another.

There is still another secret that can never fail, if you can once get it
believed, and which is often practiced by women of greater cunning than virtue:
this is to change sides for a while with the jealous man, and to turn his own
passion upon himself; to take some occasion of growing jealous of him, and to
follow the example he himself has set you. This counterfeited jealousy will
bring him a great deal of pleasure, if he thinks it real; for he knows
experimentally how much love goes along with this passion, and will, besides,
feel something like the satisfaction of revenge, in seeing you undergo all his
tortures. But this, indeed, is an artifice so difficult, and at the same time
so disingenuous, that it ought never to be put in practice, but by such as have
skill enough to cover the deceit, and innocence to render it excusable.

I shall conclude this essay with the story of HEROD and MARIAMNE, as I have
collected it out of JOSEPHUS; which may serve almost as an example to whatever
can be said on this subject.

MARIAMNE had all the charms that beauty, birth, wit and youth could give a
woman, and HEROD all the love that such charms are able to raise in a warm and
amorous disposition. In the midst of all this his fondness for MARIAMNE, he put
her brother to death, as he did her father not many years after. The barbarity
of the action was represented to MARK ANTONY, who immediately summoned HEROD
into Egypt, to answer to the crime that was there laid to his charge. HEROD
attributed the summons to ANTONY'S desire of MARIAMNE, whom, therefore, before
his departure, he gave into the custody of his uncle JOSEPH, with private
orders to put her to death, if any such violence was offered to himself. This
JOSEPH was much delighted with MARIAMNE's conversation, and endeavored, with
all his art and rhetoric, to set out the excess of HEROD's passion for her; but
when he found her still cold and incredulous, he inconsiderately told her, as a
certain instance of her lord's affection, the private orders he had left behind
him; which plainly showed, according to JOSEPH's interpretation, that he could
neither live nor die without her. This barbarous instance of a wild
unreasonable passion quite put out for a time those little remains of affection
she had for her lord. Her thoughts were so wholly taken up with the cruelty of
his orders, that she could not consider the kindness that produced them, and
therefore represented him in her imagination, rather under the frightful idea
of a murderer than a lover. HEROD was at length acquitted and dismissed by MARK
ANTONY, when his soul was all in flames for his MARIAMNE; but before their
meeting, he was not a little alarmed at the report he had heard of his uncle's
conversation and familiarity with her in his absence. This, therefore, was the
first discourse he entertained her with, in which she found it no easy matter
to quiet his suspicions. But at last he appeared so well satisfied of her
innocence, that from reproaches and wranglings he fell to tears and embraces.
Both of them wept very tenderly at their reconciliation, and HEROD poured out
his whole soul to her in the warmest protestations of love and constancy; when
amidst all his sighs and languishings she asked him, whether the private orders
he left with his uncle JOSEPH were an instance of such an inflamed affection.
The jealous king was immediately roused at so unexpected a question, and
concluded his uncle must have been too familiar with her, before he would have
discovered such a secret. In short, he put his uncle to death, and very
difficulty prevailed on himself to spare MARIAMNE.

After this he was forced on a second journey into Egypt, when he committed his
lady to the care of SOHEMUS, with the same private orders he had before given
his uncle, if any mischief befell himself. In the mean time, MARIAMNE so won
upon SONEMUS by her presents and obliging conversation, that she drew all the
secret from him, with which HEROD had entrusted him; so that after his return,
when he flew to her with all the transports of joy and love, she received him
coldly with sighs and tears, and all the marks of indifference and aversion.
This reception so stirred up his indignation, that he had certainly slain her
with his own hands, had not he feared he himself should have become the greater
sufferer by it. It was not long after this, when he had another violent return
of love upon him: MARIAMNE was therefore sent for to him, whom he endeavored
to soften and reconcile with all possible conjugal caresses and endearments;
but she declined his embraces, and answered all his fondness with bitter
invectives for the death of her father and her brother. This behavior so
incensed HEROD, that he very hardly refrained from striking her; when in the
heat of their quarrel, there came in a witness, suborned by some of MARIAMNE's
enemies, who accused her to the king of a design to poison him. HEROD was now
prepared to hear any thing to her prejudice, and immediately ordered her
servant to be stretched upon the rack; who, in the extremity of his tortures,
confessed, that his mistress's aversion to the king arose from something
SOHEMUS had told her; but as for any design of poisoning, he utterly disowned
the least knowledge of it. This confession quickly proved fatal to SOHEMUS, who
now lay under the same suspicions and sentence that JOSEPH had suffered before
him on the like occasion. Nor would HEROD rest here, but accused her with great
vehemence of a design upon his life, and by his authority with the judges, had
her publicly condemned and executed. HEROD soon after her death grew
melancholy and dejected; he retired from the public administration of affairs
into a solitary forest, and there abandoned himself to all the black
considerations, which naturally arise from a passion made up of love, remorse,
pity and despair. He used to rave for his MARIAMNE, and to call upon her in his
distracted fits; and in all probability would soon have followed her, had not
his thoughts been seasonably called off from so sad an object by public storms,
which, at that time, very nearly threatened him.

Number XII.
By titles dazzled, or by wealth misled,
Minds ill-agreeing shame the nuptial bed;
The fair obnoxious to a sire's command
When forced without her heart to yield her hand,
Beholds the guilty priest with weeping eyes,
Like IPHIGENIA dressed for sacrifice.
Or grant a pair by mutual vows combined,
And CUPID's torch with that of HYMEN joined;
Desire that blindly courts the married state
Is far unable to support the weight;
The fabric tottering on its scanty base
Sinks on the ruins of a beauteous face.
Or, beauty, though it lasts, in time may cloy,
Or, that capricious foe to mortal joy,
That nameless something may its taste destroy.
But where the judgment is allowed its part,
And the clear head directs the beating heart,
The god of love attends the matchless pair,
For choice and merit fix the rover there.
JEFFREYS.
THE many misfortunes arising to interrupt the joys and destroy the peace of
conjugal felicity, generally proceed from our not duly weighing beforehand, in
what the comforts and conveniences of matrimony consist. In order to secure,
as far as human prudence is capable, happiness in a wedded state, it is first
to be mutually considered, whether the mind of the party we are about to engage
with in this important affair, is formed on the principles of virtue; without
which the duties of conjugal affection and friendship can never long subsist.

2dly, That riches are not to be looked upon as the only incitement to such an
engagement; because, when wealth is merely the motive, lasting felicity is not
to be expected.

3dly, That the charms of a good face, without the beauties of that better
part, the mind, should not bewitch us so far, as to entail misery and
disquietudes as long as life endures; which is too frequently the case, when
appetite is fated.

4thly, It should be the mutual resolution of those, who are about to enter
into that state, or are already engaged in it, to confine themselves, according
to their station in life, to such sort of pleasures only, which their
circumstances will admit of, and which are consistent with the duty of
reasonable and virtuous beings. A contrary behavior will be attended with
dreadful consequences, whereas the conduct abovementioned will lead us to real
happiness. The following story may serve to illustrate the truth of what is
here advanced.

EUGENIO was a young gentleman, from the nature of his education addicted to
gaiety and expense; which he supported by the assistance of good sense and a
plentiful fortune, without injuring his reputation or estate. Having no family
of his own, he made a visit to a friend, with a design of passing the summer
with him in the country. SOPHRONIA happened to be there at the same time, by
the invitation of the lady of the house, with whom she had always been
^ducated. Her person was nothing remarkable, but a sweet disposition and a good
natural understanding made her conversation agreeable. Upon his first arrival,
EUGENIO was too well bred not to show a particular civility to one so much
respected by the family; and SOPHRONIA knew how to return it by a suitable
behavior. They had not been long acquainted, before the sprightliness of his
conversation, and the amiable innocence of hers, begot a mutual desire of
rendering themselves agreeable to each other. EUGENIO's education had been too
ingenuous to harbor a wish that was dishonorable; and SOPHRONIA willingly
encouraged a virtuous inclination, that would be so much for her advantage. She
knew he possessed no ill qualities, and thought he would easily be weaned from
his love of show and expense, by a more settled way of life. But his desire to
live splendidly got the better of his passion: he would not throw himself away
upon one, who had but three thousand pounds for her portion; so determined to
return immediately to London, and obliterate his fondness by the diversions of
the town.

THEANA came up about the same time, to spend the winter with her aunt. She was
the only daughter of a gentleman of fortune, by whose death she was lately come
into the possession of above fifteen thousand pounds. She was determined never
to marry a man, who could not support her in the magnificence that such a
fortune might expect; and for that reason only had refused EUPHORBUS, a young
gentleman bred up to a profession, in which his natural abilities, joined to a
steady application, promised him the greatest success. They had long been
acquainted, and so perfectly agreeable to each other, that EUPHORBUS had just
reason to hope he should prevail over her desire of grandeur, which was her
only foible. But that passion was predominant: she was afraid it should be said
she had acted imprudently, and that she should not be able to withstand the
reflections of the world, for having only one footman behind a chariot and
pair, when she might have had half a dozen powdered valets attending her coach
and six.

Upon her coming to London, EUGENIO made his addresses to her among the rest;
and as his fortune enabled him to make a suitable settlement, preliminaries
were soon agreed on. Before they had been ten times together, the lawyers were
bribed not to be dilatory. Several thousands were expended in plate and jewels.
The gay livery and gilded car proclaimed them the happiest couple of the
season. But they soon found that happiness did not consist in show. Little
contrarieties of temper were the causes of continual differences; which, in
less than two years, arose to such a height, that they were, in a manner,
parted. To avoid the uneasiness of home, EUGENIO publicly indulged himself in
his amors; and THEANA was only more private. His money was thrown away at
hazard; hers as religiously devoted to quadrille. He was regardless of the
education of his sons, because he was not sure they were his own; she
instructed her daughters in nothing but cards and romances.

But it is time to make some inquiry after the other two. The next winter after
her disappointment, SOPHRONIA came to London with her female friend. EUPHORBUS
accidentally fell into her company. Frequent meetings created an acquaintance;
that acquaintance increased gradually into a mutual esteem; which, as it was
not founded on interest, but a thorough knowledge of each other, they had good
reason to believe would continue. With this prospect they married. The
smallness of their fortune was compensated by tenderness and economy. The
desire of providing for his children made him double his application to his
profession; and she was in the mean time as agreeably entertained in taking
care of their education. He was daily adding to their fortune, she to their
virtue. In the decline of life they retired to a country house and estate,
which his profession and her economy had enabled them to buy of EUGENIO, whose
extravagance and ill management had obliged him to sell part of his estate, as
soon as a booby son was old enough to be bribed to cut off the entail: there,
in the words of AGAMEMNON, They know a passion still more deeply charming
Than fever'd youth ever felt; and that is love,
By long experience mellow'd into friendship.


Thus are EUPHORBUS and SOPHRONIA, by a marriage founded on good sense,
possessed of happiness, riches, and reputation, which EUGENIO and THEANA have
lost by the contrary means.

Number XIII.
(...)
(...)
(...)
EURIP. This is the chief felicity of life,
That concord smile on the connubial bed;
But now it is hatred all --

MANY writers seem to have admitted, as an incontested principle, that
"marriage is generally unhappy:" but I know not whether it becomes a man who
professes to think for himself, and forms his opinions from his own
observations, to follow the crowd implicitly, and receive maxims without
recalling them to new examination, especially when they comprise so great a
complication, and include such variety of circumstances. As I have an equal
right with others to give my opinion of the objects about me, and a better
title to determine concerning that state which I have tried, than many who talk
of it without experience, I am unwilling to be restrained by mere authority
from advancing, what, I believe, an accurate view of the world will confirm,
that marriage is not commonly unhappy, otherwise than as life is unhappy; and
that most of those who complain of connubial miseries, have as much
satisfaction as their nature would have admitted, or their conduct procured in
any other condition.

It is, indeed, common to hear both sexes repine at their condition, relate the
happiness of their earlier years, blame the folly and rashness of their own
choice, and warn those whom they see coming into the world against the same
precipitance and infatuation. But it is to be remembered, that the days which
they so much wish to call back, are the days not only of celibacy, but of
youth, the days of novelty and improvement, of ardour and of hope, of health
and vigor of body, of gaiety and lightness of heart. It is not easy to unite
life with any circumstances in which youth will not be delightful; and I am
afraid that whether married, or unmarried, we shall find the vesture of
terrestrial existence more heavy and cumbrous, the longer it is worn.

That both censure themselves for the indiscretion of their choice, is not a
sufficient proof that they have chosen ill, since we see the same discontent at
every other part of life which we cannot change. Converse with almost any man,
grown old in a profession, and you will find him regretting that he did not
enter into some way of life, to which he too late finds his genius better
adapted, or in which he discovers that wealth and honor are more easily
attained. The merchant, says Horace, envies the soldier, and the soldier
recounts the felicity of the merchant; the lawyer, when his clients harass him,
calls out for the quiet of the countryman; and the countryman, when business
calls him to town, exclaims that there is no happiness but in public life.
Every man recounts the miseries of his own station, and always thinks those of
any other less, because he has not felt them. Thus the married praise the ease
and freedom of a single life, and the single fly to marriage from the weariness
of solitude. From all our observations we may collect with certainty, that
misery is the lot of man, but cannot discover in what particular state it will
find most alleviations; or whether all external appendages are not, as we use
them well or ill, the causes either of pain or pleasure.

Whoever feels great pain naturally hopes for ease from change of posture; he
changes it, and finds himself equally tormented: and of the same kind are the
expedients by which we endeavor to obviate or elude those uneasinesses to
which mortality will always be subject. It is, however, not likely that the
marriage state is eminently miserable, since we see such numbers, whom the
death of their partners has set free from it, entering it again.

Wives and husbands are, indeed, too frequently complaining of each other; and
there would be reason for imagining that in numerous instances there was
perverseness, or oppression, beyond human sufferance, did we not know how
readily some minds burst out into reproaches and lamentations, and how
naturally every animal revenges his pain upon those who happen to be near,
without any nice examination of its cause. We are always willing to fancy
ourselves within a little of happiness, and when, with repeated efforts, we
cannot reach it, persuade ourselves that it is intercepted by an ill-paired
mate, since, if we could find any other obstacle, it would be our own fault
that it was not removed.

Anatomists have often remarked, that though our diseases are sufficiently
numerous and severe, yet when we inquire into the structure of the body, the
tenderness of some parts, the minuteness of others, and the immense
multiplicity of animal motions that must concur to the healthful and vigorous
exercise of all our powers, there appears reason to wonder rather that we are
preserved so long, than that we perish so soon, and that our frame subsists for
a single day, or hour, without disorder, rather than that it should be broken
or obstructed by violence of accidents, or length of time.

The same reflection rises in my mind, when I observe the manner in which
marriage is sometimes contracted. When I see the avaricious and crafty taking
companions to their tables and their beds, without any inquiry but after farms
and money; or the giddy and thoughtless uniting for life to those whom they
have only seen by the light of tapers at a ball; when parents make contracts
for their children, without inquiring after their consent; when some marry for
heirs to disappoint their brothers, and others throw themselves into the arms
of those whom they do not love, because they have found themselves rejected
where they were more solicitous to please; when some marry because their
servants cheat them, some because they squander their own money, some because
their houses are pestered with company, some because they will live like other
people, and some only because they are sick of themselves, I am not so much
inclined to wonder that marriage is sometimes unhappy, as that it appears
generally so little loaded with calamity; and cannot but conclude, that society
has something in itself eminently agreeable to human nature, when I find its
pleasures so great, that even the ill choice of a companion can hardly
overbalance them.

By the ancient custom of the Muscovites, the men and women never saw each
other, till they were united beyond the power of parting. It may be suspected
that by this method many unsuitable matches were produced, and many tempers
associated that were very little qualified to give pleasure to each other. Yet,
perhaps, among a people so little delicate, where the paucity of objects, and
the uniformity of life gave no opportunity for imagination to interpose its
objections, there was not so much danger of capricious dislike; and whilst they
felt neither cold nor hunger, they might live quietly together, without any
thought of the defects of one another.

Among us, whom knowledge has made nice and affluence wanton, there are,
indeed, more cautions requisite to secure tranquillity; and yet if we observe
the manner in which those converse, who have singled out each other for
marriage, we shall, perhaps, think that the Ruffians lost little by their
restraint. For the whole endeavor of both parties, during the time of
courtship, is to hinder themselves from being known, and to disguise their
natural temper and real desires, in hypocritical imitation, studied compliance,
and continued affectation. From the time that their love is avowed, neither
sees the other, but in a mask, and the cheat is managed often on both sides
with so much art, and discovered afterward with so much abruptness, that each
has reason to think there has been some transformation on the wedding-night,
and that by a strange imposture one has been courted, and another married.

All, therefore, who come with matrimonial complaints, concerning their
behavior in the time of courtship, are to be informed, that they are neither
to wonder nor repine, that a contract begun with fraud has ended in
disappointment.

Number XIV.
Hail w^dded love! --
Perpetual fountain of domestic bliss.
MILTON.
A RECENT and valuable Collection of Letters from a Father to his Son on
various topics, relative to literature, and the conduct of life, offers to my
readers a judicious and excellent Letter ON THE CHOICE OF A WIFE.
DEAR SON,
THERE is no species of advice, which seems to come with more peculiar
propriety from parents to children, than that which respects the marriage
state; for it is a matter, in which the first must have acquired some
experience, and the last cannot. At the same time, it is found to be that, in
which advice produces the least effect. For this, various causes may be
assigned; of which, no doubt, the principal is, that passion commonly takes
this affair under its management, and excludes reason from her share of the
deliberation. I am inclined to think, however, that the neglect, with which
admonitions on this head are treated, is not unfrequently owing to the manner
in which they are given, which is often too general, too formal, and with too
little accommodation to the feelings of young persons. If, in descanting a
little on this subject, I can avoid these errors, I flatter myself, you are
capable of bestowing some unforced attention to what an affectionate desire of
promoting your happiness, in so essential a point, may prompt.

The difference of opinion between sons and fathers in the matrimonial choice,
may be stated in a single position -- that the former have in their minds the
first month of marriage, the latter, the whole of its duration. Perhaps you
will, and with justice, deny, that this is the difference between us two, and
will assert, that you as well as I, in thinking of this connection, reflect on
its lasting consequences. So much the better! We are then agreed as to the mode
in which it is to be considered, and I have the advantage of you only in
experience and more extensive observation.

I need to say little as to the share, that personal charms ought to have in
fixing a choice of this kind. Whilst I readily admit, that it is desirable,
that the object, on which the eyes are most frequently to dwell for a whole
life, should be an agreeable one; you will probably as freely acknowledge, that
more than this is of too fanciful and fugitive a nature, to come into the
computation of permanent enjoyment. Perhaps in this matter I might look more
narrowly for you, than you would for yourself, and require a suitableness of
years and vigor of constitution, which might continue this advantage to a
period that you do not yet contemplate. But dropping this part of the subject,
let us proceed to consider the two main points, on which the happiness to be
expected from a female associate in life must depend -- her qualifications as a
companion, and as a helper.

Were you engaged to make a voyage round the world, on the condition of sharing
a cabin with an unknown messmate, how solicitous would you be, to discover his
character and disposition before you set sail! If, on inquiry, he should prove
to be a person of good sense and cultivated manners, and especially of a temper
inclined to please and be pleased, how fortunate would you think yourself! But
if, in addition to this, his tastes, studies, and opinions, should be found
conformable to yours, your satisfaction would be complete. You could not doubt,
that the circumstance, which brought you together, would lay the foundation of
an intimate and delightful friendship. On the other hand, if he were
represented, by those who thoroughly knew him, as weak, ignorant, obstinate and
quarrelsome, of manners and dispositions totally opposite to your own, you
would probably rather give up your project, than submit to live so many months
confined with such an associate.

Apply this comparison to the domestic companion of the voyage of life -- the
intimate of all hours -- the partaker of all fortunes -- the sharer in pain and
pleasure -- the mother and instructress of your offspring. Are you not struck
with a sense of the infinite consequence it must be of to you, what are the
qualities of the heart and understanding of one who stands in this relation;
and of the comparative insignificance of external charms and ornamental
accomplishments? But as it is scarcely probable, that all you would wish in
these particulars can be obtained, it is of importance to ascertain, which
qualities are the most essential, that you may make the best compromise in your
power. Now, tastes, manners, and opinions, being things not original, but
acquired, cannot be of so much consequence as the fundamental properties of
good sense, and good temper.

Possessed of these, a wife, who loves (...) husband, will fashion herself in
the others according to what she perceives to be his inclination; and if, after
all, a considerable diversity remain between them in such points, this is not
incompatible with domestic comfort. But sense and temper can never be dispensed
with in the companion for life: they form the basis on which the whole edifice
of happiness is to be raised. As both are absolutely essential, it is needless
to inquire which is so in the highest degree. Fortunately, they are oftener met
with together than separate; for the just and reasonable estimation of things
which true good sense inspires, almost necessarily produces that equanimity and
moderation of spirit, in which good temper properly consists. There is, indeed,
a kind of thoughtless good nature, which is not unfrequently coupled with
weakness of understanding; but having no power of self-direction, its
operations are capricious, and no reliance can be placed on it in promoting
solid felicity. When, however, this easy humor appears with the attractions of
youth and beauty, there is some danger lest even men of sense should overlook
the defects of a shallow capacity, especially if they have entertained the too
common notion, that women are no better than play things, designed rather for
the amusement of their lords and masters, than for the more serious purposes of
life. But no man ever married a fool without severely repenting it; for though
the pretty trifler may have served well enough for the hour of dalliance and
gaiety, yet when folly assumes the reins of domestic, and especially of
parental control, she will give a perpetual heart-ache to a considerate partner.

On the other hand, there are to be met with instances of considerable powers
of the understanding, combined with waywardness of temper, sufficient to
destroy all the ^^mfort of life. Malignity is sometimes joined with wit,
^^ghtiness and caprice with talents, sourness and suspicion ^^th sagacity, and
cold reserve with judgment. But all these being in themselves unamiable
qualities, it is less necessary to guard against the possessors of them. They
generally render even beauty unattractive; and no charm but that of fortune is
able to overcome the repugnance they excite. How much more fatal than even
folly they are to all domestic felicity, you have probably already seen enough
of the matrimonial state to judge.

Many of the qualities, which fit a woman for a companion, also adapt her for
the office of a helper; but many additional ones are requisite. The original
purpose for which this sex was created, is said, you know, to have been,
providing man with a help-mate; yet it is, perhaps, that notion of a wife which
least occupies the imagination in the season of courtship. Be assured, however,
that as an office for life, its importance stands extremely high to one, whose
situation does not place him above the want of such aid; and fitness for it
should make a leading consideration in his choice. Romantic ideas of domestic
felicity will infallibly in time give way to that true state of things which
will show, that a large part of it must arise from well-ordered affairs, and an
accumulation of petty comforts and conveniences. A clean and quiet fireside,
regular and agreeable meals, decent apparel, a house managed with order and
economy, ready for the reception of a friend or the accommodation of a
stranger, a skilful as well as affectionate nurse in time of sickness -- all
these things compose a very considerable part of what the nuptial state was
designed to afford us; and without them, no charms of person or understanding
will long continue to bestow delight. The arts of housewifery should be
regarded as professional to the woman who intends to become a wife; and to
select one for that station who is destitute of them, or disinclined to
exercise them, however otherwise accomplished, is as absurd, as it would be to
choose for your lawyer, or physician, a man who excelled in every thing rather
than in law, or physic.

Let me remark, too, that knowledge and good will are not the only requisites
for the office of a helper. It demands a certain energy both of body and mind
which is less frequently met with among the females of the present age than
might be wished. How muchsoever infirm and delicate health may interest the
feelings, it is certainly an undesirable attendant on a connection for life.
Nothing can be more contrary to the qualification of a help-mate, than a
condition which constantly requires that assistance which it never can impart.
It is, I am sure, the farthest thing from my intention, to harden your heart
against impressions of pity, or slacken those services of affectionate
kindness, by which you may soften the calamitous lot of the most amiable and
deserving of the species. But a matrimonial choice is a choice for your own
benefit, by which you are to obtain additional sources of happiness; and it
would be mere folly, in their stead voluntarily to take upon you new
encumbrances and distresses. Akin to an unnerved frame of body, is that
shrinking timidity of mind, and excessive nicety of feeling, which is too much
encouraged under the notion of female delicacy. That this is carried beyond all
reasonable bounds in modern education, can scarcely be doubted by one, who
considers what exertions of fortitude and self-command are continually required
in the course of female duty. One who views society closely, in its interior as
well as exterior, will know, that occasions of alarm, suffering and disgust,
come much more frequently in the way of women than of men. To them belong all
offices about the weak, the sick, and the dying. When the house becomes a scene
of wretchedness from any cause, the man often runs abroad, the woman must stay
at home, and face the worst. All this takes place in cultivated society, and in
classes of life raised above the common level. In the savage state, and in the
lower conditions, women are compelled to undergo even the most laborious, as
well as the most disagreeable tasks. If nature, then, has made them so weak in
temper and constitution as many suppose, she has not suited means to ends with
the foresight we generally discover in her plans.

I confess myself decidedly of the opinion of those, who would rather form the
two sexes to a resemblance of character, than contrast them. Virtue, wisdom,
presence of mind, patience, vigor, capacity, application, are not sexual
qualities; they belong to mankind -- to all who have duties to perform and
evils to endure. It is surely a most degrading idea of the female sex, that
they must owe their influence to trick and finesse, to counterfeit, or real
weakness. They are too essential to our happiness to need such arts; too much
of the pleasure and the business of the world depends upon them, to give reason
for apprehension, that we shall cease to join partnership with them. Let them
aim at excelling in the qualities peculiarly adapted to the parts they have to
act, and they may be excused from affected languor and coquetry. We shall not
think them less amiable for being our best helpers.

Having thus endeavored to give you just ideas of the principal requisites in
a wife, especially in a wife for one in your condition, I have done all that
lies within the compass of an adviser. From the influence of passion I cannot
guard you: I can only deprecate its power. It may be more to the purpose, to
dissuade you from hasty engagements, because in making them, a person of any
resolution is not to be regarded as merely passive. Though the head has lost
its rule over the heart, it may retain its command of the hand. And surely if
we are to pause before any action, it should be before one, on which "all the
color of remaining life" depends. Your reason must be convinced, that to form
a solid judgment of so many qualities as are requisite in the conjugal union,
is no affair of days and weeks, of casual visits and public exhibitions. Study
your object at home -- see her tried in her proper department. Let the progress
be, liking, approving, loving, and lastly, declaring; and may you, after the
experience of as many years as I have had, be as happily convinced, that a
choice so formed is not likely to deceive!

You may think it strange, that I have not touched on a consideration, which
generally takes the lead in parental estimates of matrimonial views -- that of
fortune. But I have been treating on the woman only, not on any thing
extraneous to her. Fortune acquired with a wife, is the same thing as fortune
got any other way. It has its value, and certainly no small one, in procuring
the desirable comforts of life; and to rush into a state, in which wants will
be greatly increased without a reasonable prospect of being able to supply
those wants, is an act, not merely of carelessness, but of downright folly. But
with respect to the sources, whence their supply is to be sought, that is a
particular inquiry to each individual; and I do not think so ill of your
prudence, as to apprehend that you will not give it all the attention its
importance demands. Another consideration, that of the family connexions formed
by marriage, is of a similar kind. Its great importance cannot be doubted; but
it is an affair to be determined on by the dictates of common prudence, just as
in forming those connexions after any other mode; though, indeed, in no other
can they be formed equally strong. One who is master of his deliberations, may
be trusted to decide these points, as well as any others that occur in the
practice of life. That your decisions may always show you to be possessed of a
due power of self-direction, is the earnest wish of

Your truly affectionate, etc.

Number XV.
How blessed the alliance where no interest rules,
The ba^e of bliss and perquisite of fools:
Where love its full unmingled joys displays,
And reason dictates while the heart obeys!

A Letter to a Lady on the Choice of a Husband.
MADAM,
YOU do me great honor in your application to me on this important occasion; I
shall therefore talk to you with the tenderness of a father, in gratitude for
your giving me the authority of one. You do not seem to make any great
distinction between your two lovers as to their persons; the whole question
lies upon their circumstances and behavior: If the one is less respectful
because he is rich, and the other more obsequious because he is not so, they
are in that point moved by the same principle, the consideration of fortune;
and you must place them in each other's circumstances, before you can judge of
their inclination. To avoid confusion in discussing this point, I will call the
richer man STREPHON, and the other FLORIO. If you believe FLORIO with
STREPHON's estate would behave himself as he does now, FLORIO is certainly your
man: but if you think STREPHON, were he in FLORIO's condition, would be as
obsequious as FLORIO is now, you ought for your own sake to choose STREPHON;
for where the men are equal, there is no doubt riches ought to be a reason for
preference. After this manner, I would have you abstract them from their
circumstances; for you are to take it for granted, that he who is very humble
only because he is poor, is the very same man in nature with him who is haughty
because he is rich.

When you have gone thu^ far, as to consider the figure they make toward you;
you will please, Madam, next to consider the appearance you make toward them.
If they are men of discernment, they can observe the motives of your heart; and
FLORIO can see when he is disregarded only upon account of fortune, which makes
you to him a mercenary creature: and you are still the same thing to STREPHON,
in taking him for his wealth only: you are therefore to consider whether you
had rather confer than receive an obligation.

The marriage life is always an insipid, a vexatious, or an happy condition.
The first is, when two people of no genius or taste for themselves meet
together, upon such a settlement as has been thought reasonable by parents and
conveyancers, from an exact valuation of the land and cash of both parties: in
this case the young lady's person is no more regarded than the house and
improvements in purchase of an estate; but she goes with her fortune, rather
than her fortune with her. These make up the crowd or vulgar of the rich, and
fill up the lumber of human race, without beneficence to those below them or
respect toward those above them; and lead a despicable, independent and
useless life, without sense of the laws of kindness, good nature, mutual
offices, and the elegant satisfactions which flow from reason and virtue.

The vexatious life arises from a conjunction of two people of quick taste and
resentment, put together for reasons well known to their friends, in which
especial care is taken to avoid (what they think the chief of evils) poverty,
and insure to them riches, with every evil besides. These good people live in a
constant constraint before company, and too great familiarity alone: when they
are within observation, they fret at each other's carriage and behavior; when
alone, they revile each other's person and conduct: in company they are in a
purgatory, when only together in an hell.

The happy marriage is where two persons meet and voluntarily make choice of
each other, without principally regarding or neglecting the circumstances of
fortune or beauty. These may still love in spite of adversity or sickness; the
former we may in some measure defend ourselves from; the other is the portion
of our very make. When you have a true notion of this sort of passion, your
humor of living great will vanish out of your imagination, and you will find
love has nothing to do with state. Solitude, with the person beloved, has a
pleasure beyond show or pomp. You are therefore to consider which of your
lovers will like you best undressed, which will bear with you most when out of
humor; and your way to this is to ask yourself, which you value most for his
own sake; and by that judge which gives the greater instances of his valuing
you for yourself only.

After you have expressed some sense of the humble approach of FLORIO, and a
little disdain at STREPHON's assurance in his address, you cry out, "What an
unexceptionable husband could I make out of both!" It would therefore,
methinks, be a good way to determine yourself: take him in whom what you like
is not transferable to another; for if you choose otherwise, there is no hopes
your husband will ever have what you liked in his rival: but intrinsic
qualities in one man may very probably purchase every thing that is
adventitious in another. In plainer terms; he whom you take for his personal
perfections, will sooner arrive at the gifts of fortune, than he whom you take
for the sake of his fortune attain to personal perfections. If STREPHON is not
as accomplished and agreeable as FLORIO, marriage to you will never make him
so: but marriage to you may make FLORIO as rich as STREPHON: therefore, to make
a sure purchase, employ fortune upon certainties, but do not sacrifice
certainties to fortune.

I am you most obedient, humble servant.

Number XVI.
May SHE, when time has sunk him into years,
Love her old man and cherish his white hairs;
Nor HE perceive her charms through age decay,
But think each happy sun his bridal day.
MART. EPIC. TRANSL.
LOVE is a term so very vague and indiscriminate, as it is generally applied,
that it would be extremely difficult to investigate its nature from its
effects, in any other case but that of marriage; as the modes, perhaps, of
feeling, or at least of expressing it, vary, according to the temper, manner,
or situation of each individual who either feels or feigns the passion. But
conjugal affection is by no means subject to such equivocal appearances; it is
tenderness heightened by passion, and strengthened by esteem; tending to
promote the happiness of its object here and hereafter.

Such an elevated state of happiness as must result from the affection I have
described, when mutual, must surely be the acme of human felicity. But, as the
point of perfection is that of declension also, it will require much pains,
(but they are pleasing ones,) to make the ever-turning wheel of sublunary bliss
keep steady to the summit it has reached, or, at least, to prevent its rolling
down the rugged precipice, where jealousy, disgust and grief have marked the
horrid road.

The disappointments of human life must ever be proportioned to the
extravagance of our expectations. Too great an ardour to be blessed, is
frequently the source of misery. A life of transport is not the lot of mortals.
Whilst we accept, we should chastise our joys, "lest whilst we clasp we kill
them."

That concord of souls which constitutes the happiness of marriage, like a full
concert, requires all the parts obliged to fill their several stations in
perfect time and place; for though the heart may lead the band, and set out in
perfect harmony, one jarring note destroys the rapturous strain, and turns the
whole to discord. For this reason I consider a parity of understanding and
temper as necessary toward forming an happy marriage.

But grant these circumstances all conjoin and make the union perfect, my fair
readers should remember, that satiety succeeds to rapture, as sure as night to
day. Be it your province, then, to keep your husband's heart from sinking into
the incurable disease of tasteless apathy. Do not rely too much upon your
personal charms, however great, to preserve the conquest they may have gained.
The kindness of your attention to the bent of his genius and inclinations will
awaken his regard; and gratitude will strengthen his affection, imperceptibly
even to himself.

Our first Parent justifies his fondness for Eve, to Raphael, upon this
principle:

"Neither her outside formed so fair, etc.
So much delights me, as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies, that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with love,
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of mind, or in us both one soul;
Harmony to behold in wedded pair,
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear."
To secure the affections of a husband already prepossessed in their favor;
let the ladies but exert the same talents, with the same desire of pleasing,
which they showed before marriage, and I venture to pronounce, that they will
succeed.

Every man ought to be the principal object of attention in his family; of
course he should feel himself happier at home than in any other place. It is,
doubtless, the great business of a woman's life, to render his home pleasing to
her husband; he will then delight in her society, and not seek abroad for alien
amusements. A husband may, possibly, in his daily excursions, see many women
whom he thinks handsomer than his wife; but it is generally her fault, if he
meet with one whom he thinks more amiable. A desire of pleasing very rarely
fails of its effect; but in a wife that desire must be managed with the nicest
delicacy; it should appear rather in the result, than in the design; "not
obvious, not obtrusive." These little attentions are the best supplement to our
great duties, and render the commerce of life delightful. Like an elegant
dessert, they complete the feast, and leave not a wish unsatisfied.

We have hitherto looked only on the pleasing side of the tapestry, and seen
Marriage in its most favorable light. Let us now turn the canvas, and take a
view of its defects.

Let us suppose, then, (what I think the worst of all situations,) an amiable
young woman possessing the tenderest affection for her husband, whilst he, from
the depravity and inconstancy of his nature, has withdrawn his love from her,
and perhaps bestowed it on some unworthy object, to whom he devotes his time
and fortune. In such a state of wretchedness, what line shall our neglected
wife pursue? The first step that I would recommend to her, is, that of entering
into a serious, strict, and impartial review of her own conduct, even to the
minutiae of her dress, and the expressions of her looks, from the first of her
acquaintance with her husband. If, after such examination, she cannot discover
any fault in her manners that might have given offense, or created disgust, let
her steadily pursue the same behavior she has hitherto practiced; for, if that
be totally free from error, it is impossible that any alteration can give an
additional efficacy to it. For to resent, or to retaliate, neither her duty,
nor her religion will permit.

"To carry smiles upon the face, when discontent sits brooding at the heart,"
is, I confess, one of the most difficult tasks that can possibly be imposed on
an ingenuous and feeling soul. But a thorough conviction that it is her
province to endeavor to recall the wanderer back, for his own happiness, as
well as hers, and a certainty that there are no other means of accomplishing so
desirable an end, will enable her to pursue this arduous undertaking, till
either her heart shall rejoice in its success, or, from reiterated
disappointments, become indifferent to the worthless object of its former
esteem and attention.

Granting the last to be the case, she has a right to expect the good opinion
of the world will attend her conduct: but a higher and more certain reward
awaits it; self-approbation, arising from a consciousness of having fulfilled
her duty, and an assurance of having essayed the only method that was likely to
insure success; for never yet was love recalled by lamentations, or
upbraidings. The first may sometimes, perhaps, create pity, but oftener begets
contempt; and the latter never did, nor can produce any passion but instant
rage, or cool determined hate.

Recollection may furnish to my fair Readers many instances, where patient
sufferings have been rewarded with returning love; but I think there is
scarcely one to be met with, where female violence has ever conquered male
outrage; or where dissipation and coquetry, though they may have alarmed the
pride, ever reclaimed the alienated affections of a husband.

True love, like true virtue, shrinks not on the first attack; it will bear
many shocks before it be entirely vanquished. As it contends not for victory,
but for the prize; it will not display itself in the vain arts of elocution,
but in the more powerful eloquence of action; it will leave nothing undone,
that can prove its sincerity; but it will not boast, even to its object, of
what it has done; much less will it vaunt its merits to any other confidant, or
complain to the world of the unkind return it has experienced.

There is such a variety of circumstances which may disturb the happiness of
the marriage state, that it is impossible to specify them all; but as a
virtuous woman will consider the loss of her husband's affection as the
greatest calamity that can befall her, her duty and prudence will, before the
evil happens, upon every occasion supply rules of conduct to herself; and the
reliance she will necessarily have upon the tenderness of his attachment to
her, joined to the sincerity of hers to him, will support her through every
difficulty, which accident, misfortune, or even imprudence, may have brought
upon them. She will say, with Prior's Emma, "Thy rise of fortune did I only wed,
From its decline determined to recede?
Did I but purpose to embark with thee,
On the smooth surface of a summer sea,
Whilst gentle zephyrs play in prosperous gales,
And Fortune's favor fills the swelling sails;
But would forsake the bark and make the shore,
When the winds whistle, and the tempests roar?
No, Henry, no! one sacred oath has tied
Our loves, one destiny our lives shall guide,
Nor wild, nor deep, our common way divide."


This is the natural language of conjugal affection, this the fulfilling of the
marriage vow, where self is lost in a still dearer object, where tenderness is
heightened by distress, and attachment cemented even by the tears of sorrow.
Such an union of souls may brave the power of Time; and I trust, that Death
itself shall not be able to destroy it.

Number XVII.
Good humor only teaches charms to last,
Still makes new conquests, and maintains the past.
This binds in ties more easy and more strong
The willing heart, and only holds it long.
POPE.
IT has been justly remarked, that a parity of temper is one of the principal
requisites in matrimonial happiness; and yet it is possible, that too great a
similarity of disposition may, in some cases, render both parties wretched. For
instance, if two persons of a gay and careless turn of mind should happen to be
united, both will think themselves entitled to pursue their joint, or separate
amusements, without being encumbered with any attention to domestic economy,
till even the necessary means for their support may be irretrievably lavished
away.

Again, should two persons of a saturnine complexion be joined in the
indissoluble bond of marriage, the natural gloominess of their dispositions
will be increased by each other's converse; melancholy will become habitual,
and care be heightened by despondency.

"Not minds of melancholy strain,
Still silent, or that still complain,
Can the dear bondage bless;
As well may heavenly concerts spring
From two old lutes with never a string,
Or none beside the bass.
"Nor can the soft enchantment hold
Two jarring souls of angry mould,
The rugged and the keen;
Sampson's young foxes might as well
In bands of cheerful wedlock dwell,
With firebrands tied between."
From these examples it is obvious, that a similitude of dispositions alone,
though a strong incentive to affection, will not always insure matrimonial
felicity. And yet I am perfectly convinced, that wherever there is any material
difference of sentiments, or manners, there never was, nor will be, a happy
marriage. We naturally admire those we love, and as naturally imitate what we
admire. The similarity that arises from conformity, and a desire to please, has
a superior charm to that which is m^ely complexional. To adopt the sentiments
of a person is the most delicate proof of approbation and esteem; and perhaps
the compliment is valued by our self love, in proportion to the sacrifice which
has been made of an opposite way of thinking.

That conformity of manners, as far as religion and reason will permit, is one
of the indispensable duties of a wife, will not, I believe, be denied by any
one. But there are ladies, who have an art of letting their condescension
appear too strongly in the act, as if submitting to the impositions of a
tyrant, rather than cheerfully fulfilling the obligation they had entered into
at the altar -- to love, honor, and obey.

The same words, or actions, expressed or performed in a gracious or ungracious
manner, may produce effects as different as Love, and Hate. I would, therefore,
recommend it to the candidates for happiness in the marriage state, to
sacrifice to the Graces, in their conjugal demeanor, as sincerely as they do at
their toilets; for good breeding is as necessary to the preservation of
domestic harmony, as it can possibly be to the general intercourse and commerce
of life.

SOLOMON, in his description of a virtuous woman, has furnished us with the
finest idea that ever was given, of a wife's address to her husband. "She
opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of kindness." And
surely there exists not a being, under the form of man, who could reject such
an address with scorn or insolence. Ladies should, however, take particular
care to time their conversation with their husbands, and neither idly obtrude
upon their serious hours of business, or retirement, nor hastily mistake that
reserve or gloom, which may arise from difficulties in their affairs, abroad,
for ill temper, or disgust, at home.

It is the duty of a wife, not only to regulate her own Temper toward her
husband, but also to pay such an attention to his, as may prevent it from ever
appearing in a disagreeable light. By studiously observing the proper seasons
for the different subjects, on which she may have occasion to address him, she
may, imperceptibly to him, and almost to herself, obtain the power of guiding
his concurrence, or denial.

A sensible and virtuous woman, pursuing such a line of conduct for the mutual
advantage of her hust and and family, without any selfish views, of which only
little minds are capable, comes nearest to the idea that mortals are taught to
conceive of a Guardian Angel, who, unseen, directs our doubtful choice to what
is best, and leads our erring steps into the paths of happiness and peace.

I have hitherto considered this great article of Temper only in one point of
view, merely as it relates to the colloquial intercourse between a wedded pair.
I come now to show, that its influence is universally extensive; and that it is
one of the main springs which guides, or deranges the human machine, through
every station and situation of life. An unmarried woman is very rarely said to
be ill tempered; and yet there are such prodigies in nature as young vixens,
who, however they may conceal their ill humor from their lovers and general
acquaintances, will surely betray it to their parents, inmates, and servants.
"A little lump leaveneth the whole," and a peevish maiden will infallibly make
a cross wife; for, when once a sourness of disposition becomes habitual, there
is no alkaline in nature sufficiently powerful to correct the heart-burnings
and bitterness of a dissatisfied Temper. A person so affected, like one
infected with the plague, necessarily spreads the contagion of discontent
around her. Her parents lament the badness of her disposition; her other
relations and connexions are sensible of aversion, instead of affection,
toward her; and her servants regret, that the irksomeness of servitude is
aggravated by receiving their subsistence from a tyrant, whom they can neither
please, respect, nor love.

As gravity, which is sometimes but another name for dullness, has been
frequently mistaken for wisdom, so is cheerfulness often accepted for good
humor. But that species of cheerfulness which we meet with in society, that
laughs in the eye, and lights up the countenance, generally proceeds, rather
from an ebullition of the spirits, than a designed and consistent exertion of
our powers to please; and is more frequently the result of a lively than a
placid disposition. As it flows from an accidental cause, its effects must
necessarily be precarious; it is, therefore, subject to causeless and sudden
dejection, to which habitual good humor is by no means liable.

Distinct as these two qualities are, they have yet one property common to
both, and at the same time different from what can be imputed to any other
happy endowment; which is, that they are most meritorious where they are least
natural. An idiot may be constitutionally good humoured, and a villain be
cheerful, from a glow of health or a flow of spirits; but that species of good
humor which is the result of sense, virtue, and gratitude to Providence, will
be uniform in its appearance, and consistent in its manners: it will not, like
an April day, lower and shine in the same moment; nor, like the flaming heats
of July, will the brightness of the meridian sun foretell the approaching
thunder; but clear, calm and undisturbed, shall it shine on even to its latest
hour.

Such a blessed state of mind must necessarily communicate the happiness it
feels to all around it. "Like the smooth stream, it reflects every object in
its just proportion, and in its fairest colors; whilst the turbulent and
ruffled spirit, like troubled waters, renders back the images of things
distorted and broken, and communicates to them all that disordered motion,
which arises solely from its own agitation. Dr. Blair.


This beautiful simile has a double claim to female attention; for rage,
jealousy, or any other ungentle passion, deform the fairest face almost as much
as they degrade the mind, and can "unsex the loveliest of the lovely kind, even
from the top to toe."

But there is a higher and stronger motive than I have yet mentioned for
"possessing our souls in gentleness," if we presume to call ourselves
Christians. Shall the disciple of a suffering Savior dare to resent with
furious outrage the real, or imaginary injuries she may receive? Or can she
kneel before the throne of mercy, and supplicate the GOD of peace and good will
to man, for pardon or protection, whilst her heart is agitated with a spirit of
malice or revenge toward a fellow creature, frail as her wretched self? This
were an insult upon piety, a mockery of devotion!

We are assured, that GOD rejects the proud, and that an humble and a contrite
heart is precious in his sight. Shall we then cast away the heartfelt
transport of thinking ourselves under the guidance and protection of an
Almighty Providence, to sacrifice to Moloch? and give away the birthright of
the redeemed, for the sad privilege of torturing ourselves? For Providence has
wisely ordained, that all the malevolent passions of the human breast should
prey upon their possessors. Peace never dwelt with envy, rage, or hate.

As marriage, among Christians, is of divine institution, all married persons
should consider a proper conduct toward each other, as the fulfilling of a
religious duty. To promote harmony, peace, order, and happiness in their
families, is the mutual and undoubted obligation both of man and wife. This
rule once established and reduced to practice, even libertines will own, that
marriage is the happiest state on earth; but when the fiends of discord, rage,
confusion, and misery, usurp the place of those dear household gods, their very
opposites, we must agree with Dr. Tillotson, and own, that such a state is but
"a less hell, in passage to the greater."

Be it your care then, my gentle and much interested Readers, to reverse this
sad idea, and by the mildness of your manners, and the sweetness of your
tempers, render the marriage state a less heaven, in passage to the greater.

Number XVIII.
IN the variety of courses which the generality of mankind pursue for the
attainment of happiness, it is not a little surprising, that so many of them
should be inattentive in one of the most material^points, that can possibly
insure it. The point I mean is, that union of the sexes, which, properly
concluded, is the foundation of felicity to individuals, and of security to the
public. Nature has given every parent the power of directing the inclinations
of their children, but allows of no unreasonable authority to force them; and
such as have a sensible concern for the happiness of their offspring should be
particularly careful, that a reciprocal passion subsisted between the parties,
before they consented to an inviolable union. The ill-directed tenderness of
parental affection has often been productive of the most unhappy consequences;
and many a father has made his children miserable for life, by an erroneous
solicitude for their welfare, and by making a provision for their happiness
which was not in the least essential, and for which they had not, in all
probability, any manner of occasion. I am led naturally to this subject by a
paper now lying before me, the contents of which I here present the reader.

SIR,
I AM the most miserable of men; and notwithstanding it might be more prudent
to conceal the cause of my affliction, I find an inclination to disclose it in
this public manner too strongly to be resisted. I am a young fellow of five and
twenty, neither deformed in my person, nor, I hope, unhappy in my temper: my
fortune is easy, my education liberal; and, I suppose, I am as well calculated
to pass in a crowd as the generality of my acquaintance.

About twelve months ago I fell passionately in love with a young lady, whose
beauty and merit entitled her to a rank much more exalted than I could raise
her to, though she was much my inferior in point of fortune. She was at that
time courted by a young gentleman in the law; and matters had actually gone so
far, that a day was appointed for the solemnization of the nuptials. All this I
was very well informed of; yet, impetuously hurried by the violence of my
passion, I disclosed it to the father. He was a man of the world -- my
circumstances were much better than his intended son-in-law's; and he paid a
less attention to the happiness, than he showed for the advancement of his
daughter. Why should I take up your time, Sir? Maria's match with her former
lover was immediately broken off; and the unhappy young lady, who never
presumed to disobey her father's commands, was torn from the man of her heart,
and married to one she could never love.

I was in hope, Sir, that a little time, and a tender behavior on my side, as
a man never loved more fondly than myself, would have utterly erased Mr.
Bridgegrove from the bosom of my wife, and placed me in his stead. But had I
not been besotted with my love, I might have easily known, that a laudable
impression upon the mind of a sensible woman is never to be eradicated: no, it
is utterly impossible. When a young raw girl, indeed, entertains something like
a regard for a man, without knowing the reason of her esteem, it is nothing but
a struggle of desire; or, more properly speaking, the wheyiness of inclination,
which, in a little time, she laughs at herself, and, as she grows in
understanding, easily skims off. But, where a woman of sense has placed her
affections on a man of merit, the passion is never to be erased; the more she
ponders on his worth, the more reason she has to love him; and she can never
cease to think of his perfections, till she is wholly divested of thought.

Unhappily for me, this was the case. Mr. Bridgegrove, possessed the whole
heart of Maria, and, in reality, deserved it: he is, perhaps, the most amiable
of men, and, poor fellow, loves her to distraction.

I have been now married ten months, and have, I flatter myself, expressed
every act of tenderness proper for the lover or the husband to no purpose. My
wife behaves with the utmost complaisance, is uncommonly solicitous to please;
but this conduct is the effect of her good sense, and not the consequence of
her love. The little endearing intercourses between husband and wife are
suffered, not enjoyed; if I complain of her coldness, she assumes an air more
gay, and affects to be pleased, though I see the starting tear just bursting
from her eye, and know the grief that rankles at her heart. Nay, the more I
caress, the more miserable she is made; and I see her generously lamenting that
she cannot place her heart upon the man who possesses her hand, and is not
utterly unworthy of her esteem. O! Sir, he must have no delicacy, no feeling,
that can bear a circumstance like this unmoved. How am I frequently torn to
madness with reflection, even when I have her fastened to my bosom, to think
her whole soul is at that very moment running on another man. In her sleep she
frequently throws one of her fine arms round my neck, and pronounces the name
of Bridgegrove in a manner that distracts me.

Our little boy, (for she is lately brought to bed) instead of a blessing, is
another source of anxiety to us both. I overheard her, yesterday morning,
weeping over the child, and crying -- 'My sweet boy, poor Bridgegrove should
have been your father.' -- Can any situation be so afflicting as mine? -- I
have made the most amiable of women forever wretched, and torn a worthy young
fellow from the mistress of his heart. I have brought all my sorrows on myself,
with the distressful consideration of having no right to complain. I deserve to
be miserable. The man, who would meanly hope to be happy in marriage, by
sacrificing the inclination of the woman he loves, and ungenerously loses every
regard to her wishes, whilst he endeavors to gratify his own, has no
pretension to felicity. Had I never obtained the possession of Maria, I should
not have been half so wretched as I am now: time, and another object would,
perhaps, have enabled me to bear her loss: -- but now, master of her person, to
find another in the possession of her heart, and to know, that there is one
whom she holds considerably dearer than myself, are considerations absolutely
insupportable. I cannot dwell any longer on the subject: I shall therefore
conclude with an advice to my own sex, never to marry a woman, whose heart they
know is engaged, nor to take a pitiful advantage of a father's authority in
opposition to her inclination. If she be a good woman, she can never forget her
first choice, and if she be bad, will inevitably bring shame and scandal on the
second.

I am, Sir, etc.


Number XIX.
THE subsequent letter from a female correspondent strongly marks her good
sense and virtue, exhibits a just estimation of female dignity, and merits the
particular attention of the young and inexperienced among my fair readers.
Conviction and reformation may possibly follow its perusal among some of my own
sex, who are guilty of addressing the vanity of women, to gain a compliance
with their infamous wishes.

"SIR,
"GREAT an opposition as there seems between vanity and meanness, yet, if we
take but ever so cursory a view of the world, we shall find them to be pretty
general companions, and scarcely meet a single instance, in which there can be
discovered any shadow of exception. Among my own sex particularly, Sir, vanity
is the parent of so many meannesses, that I am actually surprised, when we
endeavor to give ourselves the most consequence, that we never perceive how we
forfeit all the dignity we just before possessed; and in the ridiculous attempt
of arrogating our own importance, leave ourselves, in short, without any real
importance at all.

"This is never more the case, Sir, than when we listen to the solicitations of
your sex; and for the sake of a despicable compliment to our teeth or
complexion, overlook the unpardonable affront which it generally conveys, and
take no notice of the very poor opinion it insinuates, both for the purity of
our hearts, and the goodness of our understandings. We suffer the most
illiberal addresses to be paid us, if they are but softened with the words
Angel and Goddess; and admit a designing villain as often as he pleases into
our presence, though we know our ruin and disgrace are the only objects of his
pursuit, if he but praises the color of our hair, and tells us that we are
possessed of finer eyes than the rest of our acquaintances. In short, Sir, we
are willing a man should think there is a probability of our launching into
infamy and prostitution, for the sake of hearing our persons commended; and
perfectly reconciled, whilst he treats us on a footing with the handsomest
women he may know, to his thinking, that in time he shall number us with the
very worst.

"A woman, Sir, whenever she is told of her beauty with a grave face, should
first of all consider the purpose for which she may be addressed in this
manner, and reflect upon the motive which may actuate the person who professes
himself so sensible of her perfections. Nothing is more dangerous than to
suffer continued repetitions of this style; it gradually becomes more and more
pleasing to the ear; and there is, besides, too natural a promptitude in the
female mind to think favorably of those who seem to think passionately of us.
A language of this nature, therefore, should be highly alarming to our ears;
for many a woman, who thought herself impregnable, has, in a length of time,
grown so enamoured of her own praise, that she could not possibly exist without
the person who administered it, and has at last surrendered at discretion;
when, had she first of all capitulated on terms, she might have insisted on the
very best.

"Let us only reduce the general tendency of modern addresses into plain
English, and ask the most indiscreet of the sex, if they can, in their
conscience, discover them to be a jot better than this -- 'Madam, I look upon
you as a fool, and one whom I have a strong inclination to make a strumpet; for
which reason I intend to talk continually of your charms, and, by sacrificing
in that manner to your vanity, I have no doubt but, in a few days, I shall
bring you to an utter disregard of morality and virtue, to an absolute contempt
of all the laudable sentiments which you have been imbibing so many years, and
a total indifference for your own reputation, and the honor of your sex. As I
think your wickedness equal to your folly, I beg, when I mention the word
Beauty, that you will prefer the gratification of the man, who is your greatest
enemy, to the peace of those who are your unalterable friends; nor hesitate a
moment to break the heart of a parent that tenderly loves you, to please an
infamous scoundrel who labors for your everlasting disgrace. In short, Madam,
I expect, in return for a paltry compliment to your person, that you scruple
not to endure continual shame in this world, nor shrink at hazarding your
eternal happiness in the next; but run at once to plunge a dagger into the
breast of your father, and hurl an impious defiance at the very throne of your
GOD.'

"I had myself, Sir, lately two or three lovers, who kindly said very pretty
things to my person; and, would you believe it, that one of them was a married
man? -- This gentleman came one day with all the easy impudence in life, and,
with as much composure as if he had been really performing a meritorious
action, threw himself at my feet, and swore he could not live unless I pitied
him. Had I a dagger, I believe I should have stuck it in the villain's heart:
however, assuming all the anger that I possibly could, in a face not naturally
the most placid, I mentioned some thoughts of paying a visit to his wife, which
effectually banished him from my presence, without doing the smallest injury to
his health, or disturbing in the least the usual serenity of his temper.

"A gentleman of family and fortune next told me, that I was the most angelic
piece of flesh and blood he had ever beheld; and solicited, in good earnest,
that I would bless him with my favorable opinion; but I had no sooner talked
of some of the privileges which a Wife would naturally expect, than the truly
honorable lover sneaked instantly off, excusing himself on account of a treaty
then in agitation with Miss Betty Squander.

"What you men think of us, I know not; nor indeed can I conceive what we women
in general conceive of ourselves; but of this I am absolutely certain, that
whilst we continue so intolerably vain, we must be liable to an infinity of
meannesses; and that the surest way for any woman to be undone, and to lose all
chance of obtaining a virtuous worthy companion in the nuptial state, is to
think there is nobody comparable to herself."


Number XX.
-- Incedis per ignes
Suppositos cineri doloso.
HOR. With heedless feet on fires you go,
That hid in treacherous ashes glow.

THERE is a sentiment in Mr. Coleman's comedy of the Jealous Wife, with which I
am not a little pleased, as it is no less an indication of a benevolent heart
than a sound understanding. Harriot reproaching young Oakley on account of his
extraordinary attachment to the bottle; the lover, sensibly struck with the
justice of the reproof, exclaims, that "were all ladies alike attentive to the
morals of their admirers, a^rtine would be an uncommon character."

If we take but ever so slight a view of the sexes, we shall find the behavior
of the one to depend so entirely upon the opinion of the other, that was either
to set about a reformation, the amendment of both would be easily effected; and
those virtues would be immediately cultivated through the prevalence of
fashion, which neither the force of conviction, the dread of temporary
misfortune, nor the terrors of everlasting misery, are now sufficient to steal
upon our practice, even whilst they engage our veneration.

As the ladies in general are more affected by the prevalence of immorality
than the men, it often surprises me, that they do not endeavor to look those
vices out of countenance among our sex, which are so frequently fatal to their
own tranquillity. A man, through the establishment of custom, considers it as
infamous to marry a prostitute, to connect himself with a drunkard, or to pay
his addresses to a woman, whose lips are continually fraught with indecency or
execration. Though accustomed himself to the midnight excesses of the stew,
yet, when he fixes for life, he inquires into the character of his mistress,
and prosecutes his suit in proportion as she is eminent for her virtues.
Whereas the lady, though bred up all her life in the strictest delicacy, often
expresses no repugnance whatsoever to venture with the most public betrayer of
innocence, the most open enemy of mankind, and the most daring defier of his
GOD.

What, however, is most extraordinary on these occasions, is the facility with
which a father usually contracts his daughter to a libertine; as if, because
custom did not involve her in the infamy of his character, his habitual
prope^is^^y to vice must not necessarily endanger her happiness. For my own
part, I am shocked when I see a parent less regardful of a daughter's felicity
than attentive to the welfare of a son. Is there a father, who would persuade
his son into a marriage with a prostitute professed? I hope not. Why, then, is
his daughter so relentlessly sacrificed to a libertine? Is there not as much
danger for the one to be miserable with her husband, as the other to be
wretched with his wife? And since the natural claim to paternal indulgence is
equal between each, must it not be highly inequitable to treat the first with
such an excess of partiality?

I am insensibly led into this subject from a perusal of some sermons,
addressed to young women. In one of the Author's discourses, where female
virtue is the object of consideration, he gives so admirable a lesson to the
sex, on account of this unhappy approbation with which the very best women so
frequently honor a profligate lover, that I cannot but transcribe it for the
benefit of my amiable readers.

"HOW common is it to see young ladies, who pass for women of reputation,
admitting into their company in public places, and that with visible tokens of
civility and pleasure, men, notorious for herding with creatures of infamous
name! What a defiance to the laws of piety, prudence, character, decorum! what
an insult, in effect, to every man and woman of virtue in the world! what a
palpable encouragement to vice and dishonor! what a desperate pulling down, in
appearance, and with their own hands, of the only partition that divides them
from the most profligate of their sex! Between the bold, and the abandoned
woman there may still remain, notwithstanding such behavior, a distinction in
the world's eye; but we scruple not to declare, that religion, purity,
delicacy, make none.

"To return from this digression, if it be one, we will allow it possible to
put cases wherein no particular rules of discovery, no determinate modes of
judgment, will enable a young woman, by her own unassisted skill, to discern
the dangers that lie in her way. But can a young woman be justly excused, or
can she fairly excuse herself, if, where all is at stake, she calls not in the
joint aid of wise suspicion, friendly counsel, and grave experience, together
with prayers for GOD's protection more than ordinarily fervent?

"But, methinks, I hear some of you ask, with an air of earnest curiosity --
"Do not reformed rakes, then, make the best of husbands? -- I am sorry for the
question; I am doubly sorry, whenever it is started by a virtuous woman. I will
not wound the ear of modesty by drawing minutely the character of a rake; but
give me leave to answer your inquiry, by asking a question or two in my turn.

"In the first place, we will suppose a man of this character actually
reformed, so far as to treat the woman he marries with every mark of
tenderness, esteem, fidelity; and that he gives up forever his old companions,
at least as to any chosen intimacy, or preference of their company to hers. We
grant it possible; we rejoice when it happens. It is certainly the best
atonement that can be made for his former conduct. But now let me ask you, or
rather let me desire you to ask your own hearts, without any regard to the
opinions of the world, which is the most desirable on the score of sentiment,
on the score of that respect which you owe to yourselves, to your friends, to
your sex, to order, rectitude, and honor; the pure unexhausted affection of a
man, who has not by intemperance and debauchery corrupted his principles,
impaired his constitution, enslaved himself to appetite, submitted to share
with the vilest and meanest of mankind the mercenary embraces of harlots,
contributed to embolden guilt, to harden vice, to render the retreat from a
life of scandal and misery more hopeless; who never laid snares for beauty,
never betrayed the innocence that trusted him, never abandoned any fond
creature to want and despair, never hurt the reputation of a woman, never
disturbed the peace of families, or defied the laws of his country, or set at
naught the prohibition of his GOD; -- which, I say, is most desirable, the
affection of such a man, or that of him, who has probably done all this, who
has certainly done a great part of it, and who has nothing now to offer you,
but the shattered remains of his health, and of his heart? How any of you may
feel on this subject, I cannot say. But if, judging as a man, I believed, what
I have often heard, that the generality of women would prefer the latter, I
know not any thing that could sink them so low in my esteem.

"That he who has been formerly a rake may after all prove a tolerable good
husband, as the world goes, I have said already that I do not dispute. But I
would ask, in the next place, is this commonly to be expected? Is there no
danger, that such a man will be tempted, by the power of long habits, to return
to his old ways? or that the insatiable love of variety, which he has indulged
so freely, will some time or other lead him astray from the finest woman in the
world? Will not the very idea of restraint, which he could never brook whilst
single, make him only the more impatient of it when married? Will he have the
better opinion of his wife's virtue, that he has chiefly conversed with women
who had none, and with men among whom it was a favorite system, that the sex
are all alike? -- But it is a painful topic. Let the women who are so connected
make the best of their condition; and let us go on to something else."

Number XXI.
What is loose love? a wandering fire,
A transient fit of wild desire.
But Hymen's flames like stars unite
And burn forever one;
Chaste as cold CYNTHIA's virgin light,
Productive as the sun.
POPE.
THE Author of this Collection is happy to believe, that the sentiments of the
Essay contained in this Number are directed against a very small portion of the
sons of COLUMBIA. Few of us have imbibed, or professed to advocate, that
irrational prejudice against the matrimonial state which is prevalent among the
European votaries of pleasure. In the UNITED STATES, more just and honorable
ideas of the female sex, and of conjugal life, are probably cherished among all
ranks of the citizens, than in any other region of the globe.

But as there are a few of this class scattered among us, he would recommend to
their serious perusal the subsequent observations, highly momentous to their
personal happiness, and the preservation of social order; and he ardently
hopes, that they will not be read without producing an immediate conviction and
renunciation of their error, and restoring them to the path of virtue and peace.

"IT is a privilege with the greatest number of those people, who entertain a
high notion of their own wit, to rail forever at the only institution, upon
which the happiness of society is founded; and to pour out an incessant torrent
of ridicule upon poor matrimony, though they owe their own existence to the
establishment of that sacred ordinance. The motive, indeed, which the
generality of our libertines assign for this aversion from marriage is, that
the ri^e is a restraint upon all their other enjoyments; and that the moment a
man devotes himself to one woman, that moment he is obliged, not only to alter
the former tenor of his conduct, but to put up with every petulance of the
lady's temper, however unreasonable she may be in her requests, or however
arbitrary she may be in the exercise of her authority.

"For my own part, I have yet seen but few women who rule with an improper
authority over their husbands; nor can I entertain any high notions of the
man's understanding, who once makes it a doubt, whether or not he should be
able to maintain that connubial pre-eminence in his own family, which he
receives from the hand of reason, and the custom of his country. If he
possesses but a dawn of sense, the object of his choice will be such, as can
give him no cause to apprehend any turbulence of disposition; and if he
possesses but a dawn of spirit, he will always have it in his power to prevent
any disagreeable exertion of it, even in case he should be unhappily deceived.

The pleasantest argument of all, however, is the necessity which a married man
is under of forsaking all those enjoyments, which, whilst he was a bachelor,
created the principal part of his felicity. Yet, surely, if those enjoyments
are repugnant to reason, the sooner he forsakes them the better, since it never
can be too early a period to regain the paths of discretion and virtue; and if
they are not opposite to the dictates of prudence, he must be a very
pusillanimous fellow indeed, who could once dream of giving them up., In fact,
those men are always for finding fault with the poor women, who are conscious
of imperfections in themselves; whereas men of sense, being determined to
proceed upon a rational plan, are constantly desirous of doing justice to the
merit of the ladies, and never preposterously suppose, that they are destitute
either of benevolence or understanding.

"The general run of our libertines, though they are much too sensible, and
much too spirited to put up with any impropriety in the behavior of a worthy
woman, nevertheless submit with the greatest cheerfulness imaginable to any
treatment which a woman of the town thinks proper to give them, and bless their
stars with a kind of rapture, that they are not husbands. This is, in plain
English, they rejoice that they are not obliged by the laws of their country to
bear a merited reproach from the lips of a deserving wife, though the
narrowness of their minds, and the baseness of their spirits can induce them so
readily to put up with the most impudent airs of a despicable strumpet, and to
crouch with an infamous servility at her feet.

"Sam Squander is a melancholy proof of this assertion. Sam, at the age of
twenty, came into an affluent fortune, and launched into all the licentious
dissipations, which generally captivate young men of opulent circumstances.
Fearful that his pleasures, if folly and vice may be called pleasures, would be
manacled by the silken bands of wedlock, he declared himself an early enemy to
marriage; and has continued to a late hour, without even wishing to taste the
sweets of a domestic felicity. Yet, though averse from an honorable connection
with the sex, he could not exist without some feminine attachment.

"Attentive therefore to the mere gratifications of sense, he singled out a
favorite nymph of easy virtue, took her publicly to his house, and has
cohabited with her now above thirty years. A more ungovernable termagant
probably never lived; yet Sam is quite happy he is not married. She has more
than once been detected in an amor with his footman; but what of that? Sam put
up with it; she was not his wife. If she throws a glass at his head, which is
sometimes the case, or confines him within doors for a fortnight, it is no
matter. Sam is still happy, and laughs at any of his acquaintances who go home
at twelve o'clock, for fear of making their wives uneasy by a longer absence
from their families. One thing, indeed, makes him miserable. He has two sons by
this infamous woman, of whom he is passionately fond; and the reflection, that
his estate must go into another line for want of a legitimate offspring, is a
circumstance which renders him constantly unhappy, even in his fortunate state
of bachelorship: so that I believe, if the truth were known, Sam is secretly of
opinion with me, that a good wife is the first of all the human felicities; and
that the greatest of all fools is he, who puts up with the numberless vices of
a profligate woman, through a fear of meeting some natural imperfections in a
woman of intrinsic merit and character.

Number XXII.
Marriage is a sacred tie --
It ought not to be sported with*
MIDDLETON'S P^ENIX. REVEREND AND HONORABLE MATRIMONY!

PARODY on a Speech in CATO.
I CONTEMPLATE, with the mixed emotions of pleasure and awe, the period of
wedding. The moment approaches, in which two rational beings are to have their
union cemented by ties, indissoluble except by the stroke of death.

A pure friendship, a sincere affection are necessary preparatives for the
endearing relation. The reciprocal gift of the hand is indicative of a mutual
exchange of kindred souls, impelled to each other by virtuous love. If the love
be not virtuous; if mere personal beauty, worldly emolument, or the grosser
passions, excite to enter upon the connubial state, its bliss will be
transient, and vanity will be inscribed on the future prospects of life.

I have long cherished an exalted idea of the purity of the female mind, where
it has been polished and refined by a suitable education. I believe, that the
disposition of the softer sex toward their lovers is generally pure and
chaste. I am persuaded, that a virtuous woman offers a degree of violence to
the delicacy of her own feelings, by consenting to be the property, even of the
most meritorious husband. It must, then, be ungenerous to wound her modesty by
any indecencies of speech upon the occasion of her marriage. An innocent
hilarity may justly prevail among the company assembled at its celebration.
Every friendly bosom must beat with joy, at the idea of the enlargement of
human happiness. But double entendres and every species of loose language
should be invariably excluded, as offering an affront and a stain to one of the
most sacred institutions of society.

The subsequent history of the nuptials of a young gentleman of sentiment and
an amiable lady, as contained in that ingenious periodical work, THE BABBLER,
offers itself as a very instructive commentary on our subject; and I hope, that
it will have a salutary effect on the mind of every reader.

"MY favorite nephew. Harry had for some time conceived a passion for Miss
Cornelia Marchmont, whom I esteem as the abstract of every mental perfection,
and every personal accomplishment. He came to me, not long since, with an air
of the greatest transport, and informed me, that Miss Marchmont had blessed him
with the acknowledgement of a reciprocal esteem, and that I was the person,
whom she had pitched upon, to open a negotiation between the two families.

"As I do not know any young lady existing who possesses a greater share of my
esteem than Miss Marchmont, nor ever saw a person so immediately calculated to
make my nephew happy, I shook him cordially by the hand, wished him joy from
the bottom of my heart, and instantly set out to my sister, his mother.
Luckily, on my entrance, I found Mr. Marchmont, Cornelia's father, chatting
with her at the parlour fire; and, as he and I have been intimately acquainted
for many years, I opened the business of my errand without any ceremony, and
this the more especially, because I knew neither could have any reasonable
objection to the match. Every thing turned out as I expected; both were
rejoiced at the affection between the young people; and there being no mighty
matters to retard the celebration of the nuptials, I thought it best to make
short work of the affair, and accordingly fixed the wedding at an early day.
The proposition being approved by the parent of each, I retired to make Harry
happy with the intelligence; and in pursuance of the agreement, I saw him
blessed with one of the worthiest as well as sweetest girls in the universe.

As I look upon a wedding to be one of the most important calls which either of
the sexes have in their whole lives for the exertion of an extraordinary
delicacy, I was not a little attentive to the behavior of my two favorites;
and it gave me great pleasure to observe, upon the whole, that Harry's
behavior was manly, tender, and respectful, without deviating into that
fulsome disagreeable fondness, of which even men of the best sense are often
guilty, when they have just obtained the woman of their heart. As to Cornelia,
I never saw a young creature in her situation conduct herself with more
propriety: to all the dignity of conscious virtue, she joined all the ineffable
sweetness of an engaging timidity; and, though she seemed proud of the man,
whom she had just preferred to all the world, yet she had too much sensibility
not to feel some amiable terrors, at so awful an alteration in her
circumstances.

"After the performance of the ceremony, at which a large company was present,
Harry judiciously proposed an unremitting round of amusements, which entirely
employed the attention even of the most volatile, and prevented the circulation
of those indelicate ambiguities, with which occasions of this kind are
frequently disgraced. So that our mirth was, as it ought to be, mingled with
good sense and manners; and of course the harmony could be little liable to
interruption, whilst that harmony was regulated by reason and civility.

"I have been often shocked, at the solemnization of a marriage, to see the
ridiculous, I had almost said the profligate, levity with which people have
approached the altar of the Divine Being, and jested with one another at the
instant of supplicating a blessing from his hand.

"One would imagine, that if the friends of the married couple had even no
veneration for the Deity, they would at least have some little share of
politeness; and be actuated by a tender concern for the feelings of the lady,
if they felt no awe whatsoever in the presence of their GOD. A woman of any
sensibility, on her wedding, must naturally be in circumstances sufficiently
embarrassed, without hearing any illiberal pleasantries from the company to
enhance the difficulties of her situation. When she considers, that the
happiness or misery of her life materially depends upon the choice which she
has then made, she has cause enough for terror; and when she considers the
privilege which is shortly to be claimed by the object of that choice; when she
considers, that the delicate reserve, in which she has all her life been
brought up, is in an instant to be sacrificed to his inclination; I say, when
all these things are considered, nothing can be more insolent, or indeed more
cruel, than to aggravate her distress by the practice of any improper
jocularities.

"People, I am sensible, are strangely attached to old customs; but every
custom should be abolished, which is in the least repugnant to reason and
civility; on which account I flatter myself the reader will give a proper
attention to this subject, and correct the error of which I have here been
speaking, as far as he is able, in the circuit of his acquaintance."

Number XXIII.
Domus et placens uxor.
HOR. Thy House and pleasing Wife.

IT is much to be regretted, that so few married persons have their mutual
attachment strengthened, by the lapse of time and the intercourse of years.
Such instances, however, would not be rare, if those who sustain this intimate
relation aimed, through life, to please, and to cherish and display the gentle
virtues which adorn humanity. Beauty, youth, or riches, unaccompanied with
these virtues, have not the power of preventing those indecent sallies of the
mind, which, at certain unguarded seasons, too successfully display themselves,
to the extinction of the finer feelings of love and friendship.

The husband and the wife must endeavor to appear mutually amiable, with the
same sedulity, which they manifest to gain the esteem of others. Their
situation requires mutual condescensions, and a temper, which shall rise
superior to every passion or sentiment, hostile to conjugal union. They should
esteem themselves as friends embarked, in one common indissoluble interest, on
a sea liable to tempests; through which, however, their fragile bark, by mutual
unremitted attentions, may be safely conducted to the port of peace. Such
voyagers will assiduously divide and mitigate the labors and fatigues to which
adverse storms expose them, and enjoy, with innocent hilarity, and glowing
gratitude to Heaven, the gentler breezes, and enlivening prospects of their
passage.

We venerate, we readily applaud the hallowed affection of such mortals. We
prize their company and converse. Every benevolent bosom shares their bliss by
sympathy. The language of such congenial souls is more gladdening than the
softest strains of music to those, who have learnt to "rejoice with them that
rejoice." For readers of this generous class I have provided a rich sentimental
feast in an epistolary address, written by the celebrated Author of
Fitzosborne's Letters, and directed to his CLEORA, on the sixth anniversary of
their nuptials.

"THOUGH it was not possible for me to celebrate with you, as usual, that happy
anniversary which we have so many reasons to commemorate; yet I could not
suffer so joyful a festival to pass by me without a thousand tender
reflections. I took pleasure in tracing back that stream to its rise, which has
colored all my succeeding days with happiness; as my Cleora, perhaps, was at
that very instant running over in her own mind those many moments of calm
satisfaction, which she has derived from the same source.

"My heart was so entirely possessed with the sentiments which this occasion
suggested, that I found myself raised into a sort of poetical enthusiasm; and I
could not forbear expressing in verse, what I have often said in prose of the
dear author of my most valuable enjoyments. I had a view, in the composition,
to the harpsicord. It was in your favorite grove, which we have so often
traversed together, that I indulged myself in the following rhapsody.

ODE FOR MUSIC.
AIR I.
"Thrice has the circling earth, swift-pacing, run,
And thrice again, around the sun,
Since first the white-rob'd priest, with sacred band,
Sweet union! joined us hand in hand.
CHORUS.
"All Heaven, and every friendly power
Approved the vow, and blessed the hour.
RECITATIVE.
"What though in silence sacred Hymen trod,
Nor lyre proclaimed, nor garland crowned the god:
What though nor feast nor revel dance was there,
(Vain pomp of joy the happy well may spare!)
Yet Love unfeigned, and conscious Honor led
The spotless virgin to the bridal bed;
Rich, though despoiled of all her little store;
For who shall seize fair virtue's better dower?
AIR II.
"Blessed with sense, with temper blessed,
Wisdom over thy lips presides;
Virtue guards thy generous breast,
Kindness all thy actions guides.
AIR III.
"Every home-felt bliss is mine,
Every matron grace is thine;
Chaste deportment, artless mien,
Converse sweet, and heart serene.
"Sinks my soul with gloomy pain?
See, she smiles! -- it is joy again:
Swells a passion in my breast?
Hark, she speaks! and all is rest.
"Often as clouds my paths overspread,
(Doubtful where my steps should tread)
She, with judgment's steady ray,
Marks and smooths the better way.
CHORUS.
"Chief among ten thousand she,
Worthy, sacred Hymen! thee.
"Whilst such are the sentiments which I entertain of my Cleora, can I find
myself obliged to be thus distant from her, without the highest regret? The
truth, believe me, is; though both the company and the scene wherein I am
engaged are extremely agreeable, yet I find a vacancy in my happiness, which
none but you can fill up. Surely those who have recommended these little
separations as necessary to revive the languor of the married state, have ill
understood its most refined gratifications: THERE IS NO SATIETY IN THE MUTUAL
EXCHANGE OF TENDER OFFICES.

"There seems to have been a time, when a happiness of this kind was considered
as the highest glory, as well as the supreme bliss of human life. I remember,
when I was in Italy, to have seen several conjugal inscriptions upon the
sepulchral monuments of ancient Rome, which, instead of running out into a
pompous panegyric upon the virtues of the deceased, mentioned singly, as the
most significant of encomiums, how many years the parties had lived together in
full and uninterrupted harmony. The Romans, indeed, in this, as in many other
instances, afford the most remarkable examples; and it is an observation of one
of their writers, that, notwithstanding divorces might very easily be obtained
among them, their republic had subsisted many centuries before there was a
single instance of that privilege ever having been exerted.

Thus you see, my Cleora, however unfashionable I may appear in the present
generation, I might have been kept in countenance in a former, and by those
too, who had as much true gallantry and good sense as one usually meets with in
this. But affections which are founded in truth and nature stand not in need of
precedent to support them; and I esteem it my honor no less than my happiness,
that I am, etc."

To this epistle of the amiable Melmoth, I shall subjoin a short account, taken
from the Scots Magazine of 1768, of an attachment uncommonly tender, between
the Bishop of Lucon in France, who flourished about the middle of the present
century, and a Madame de Rouvraie. Though the laws of the Romish church forbad
their marriage, yet the history of their affection may be viewed as congenial
with the leading sentiments of this Number; and as presenting a bright pattern
of pure constant love to persons, who find no impediment to the most intimate
relation.

"THE bishopric of Lucon is near Rochfort, and one of those, which, being
distant from the metropolis, may be called a rich one, as, in proportion to the
revenue, all provision is so amazingly cheap. I take the liberty to mention
this as my reason why his Lordship was able to do such munificent acts in his
lifetime.

"From his taking the gown he had a sincere affection for Madame de Rouvraie,
who was of a very noble family, but one among the almost innumerable instances
in France, of high blood, without the proper means to support it.

"The Abbe Didoyard, though with no income at first, but what his genius and
abilities, joined to uncommon industry, could produce, ever supported her as a
gentlewoman. He taught music, to sing, to paint in crayons and watercolors,
beside giving lectures in the different sciences; and all to replenish the
purse of Madame de Rouvraie.

"He now obtained an advancement in the church; she of course advanced with
him: but he took care always to board her in such pious and regular families,
that envy itself (and that quickest of all, the envy of her own sex) never
could fix a stain on his or her character.

"By the various great offers, which she often refused, it is visible she
preferred the Abbe, and his celestial qualities, to all earthly ones; and she
would give it for a reason why she did not engage in that state, that there was
but one Didoyard in the world, and he was married to CHRIST. "Find me a second
not so engaged," said she, "and I will enter into matrimony with him
immediately."

His merits being now promulgated, he was made a chanoine of the cathedral
church of Anjers, capital of the province of Anjou; thence dean of Nantz,
whence he was removed to the bishopric of Lucon. Grown now independent, and
having early declared that he was an enemy to translations, he set himself down
quietly on this provision; and Madame de Rouvraie appeared with that rank and
luster her merits so well deserved.

"He built an elegant seat for her within a league of his palace, and fixed it
in the middle of a spacious park. No gardens were more elegant than those of
Mont-Carnel (for that was the name of the seat); and her grottos, her cascades,
her fountains were the topic of every conversation.

"His visits were always in open day, attended by chaplains and other safe
evidence; nor would he ever be alone with her, though in broad sunshine. By
such means he quenched every spark of malice, the moment it was struck with a
view to light up the flame of persecution. But their chief pleasure consisted
in mutual letters, many of which were published in Paris.

"Though these lovers were not separated like Eloisa and Abelard, yet may some
part of their distresses be imagined the same. He could not marry; she would
not, in spite of all his solicitations; having often declared to her in the
tenderest hours, that he could equally love and provide for her children, as if
they were his own; saying, "that was the end she was ordained for, and hoped
(when he was jocular) she would not depart without her errand."

"A few months before the unfortunate expedition to Rochfort, the Bishop died,
and many of the English officers, then prisoners, were witnesses of the
universal grief which spread all over that country, for the loss of the most
pious Christian, sincere friend, good pastor, and fine gentleman that ever
France, or any other country, has produced.

"In his cabinet was found this letter, which is offered as a sample of their
uncommonly affectionate ones.

"TO MADAME DE ROUVRAIE.
"NOT TO BE OPENED TILL AFTER MY DEATH.

"I BEG, Madame de Rouvraie, that in regard of the tender friendship, which has
subsisted so many years between us, even in the hour of my death, that you will
grant me my last desires. You will find -- actions in this cabinet: and, be
they more or less, when I die, the use for which I design them, is, (my debts
first paid) that you, Madame de Rouvraie, will accept of all the poor
remainder, as a proof, though a small one, of the last affection of my heart.
At the same time I request you not to grieve immoderately at the loss of the
sincerest friend that ever existed; and yet not worthy of a friend like you.

"No one knows of this bequest; and I beg it may ever remain concealed.

Yours, in the very hour of death, as he was through life, THE BISHOP OF LUCON."


As he had built her such an elegant retreat in the neighborhood, he showed
his tender respect for her, by desiring to be buried at a convent some hundred
miles from Lucon, where he had originally been a member; lest, being deposited
under the eyes of Madame de Rouvraie, it might awaken those feelings, which, by
his last letter, he seems to wish that she would feel no longer.

Yet such is the nature of grief, that there is an a^arice in hoarding it; for
in one of her private apartments she had the effigy of her dear departed lord
in wax; dressed as he was wont to be in life; and being like the layman at a
painters, the arms and legs were made to move; so that she could fix it in any
attitude, which she daily did, and retired from company at set hours, still to
live with the bishop of Lucon, though dead to all the world but his
affectionate MADAME DE ROUVRAIE.

Number XXIV.
Our thoughtless sex is caught by outward form,
And empty noise, and loves itself in man.
DRYDEN.
AMONG all those passions, to which the frailty and weakness of man subject
him, there is not any that extends such a boundless and despotic empire over
the whole species as that of Love. The meek, the mild, and the humble are
strangers to envy, anger, and ambition; but neither the malicious, the
choleric, or the proud can say, their hearts have been always free from the
power of love. This has subdued the exalted minds of the most aspiring tyrants,
and has melted the most sanguine complexion into an effeminate softness. An
undaunted hero has been known to tremble, when he approached the fair; and the
mighty Hercules let fall his club at a woman's feet. The scholar, the
statesman, and the soldier have all been lovers; and the most ignorant swain
has neglected both his flocks and pipe to woo Daphne or Sylvia.

But though love be a passion thus common to all, yet how widely do its
votaries differ in their manner of address! The pleasing enjoyment of the
admired object is what they all pursue; and yet few agree in the same methods
of obtaining their ends, or accomplishing their desires. Every lover has his
particular whim, and each resolves to follow his own way.

But of all the arts which have been practiced by the men on the other sex, I
have not observed any kind of address, which has been so generally successful
as flattery. Whether it be, that, by making a woman in love with herself, you
thereby engage her to love the person who makes her so; (as, who would not be
fond of the cause which produces so agreeable an effect?) or whether her
partiality and self-love does the more readily induce her to believe, that all
the praise given is really due to her merit; or whatever other reason may be
assigned for this weakness; I shall not now inquire. This, like a subtle
poison, insinuates itself almost into every female. Like a delicious cordial,
it meets with an acceptance and approbation too universal; whilst sincerity and
plain-dealing are treated as nauseous and disgustful physic.

It may perhaps be said, that we love the treason, and yet hate the traitor.
But she must be a woman of uncommon virtues and qualifications, who can so
nicely distinguish between the gift, and the giver, as to refuse the one, and
yet receive the other. Few of the sex think flattery a vice, and therefore they
cannot be persuaded to dislike a lover for being a courtier. Though they may be
conscious of some of their own imperfections, yet if their admirers be not
quick-sighted enough to discern them, they are willing to impute their
blindness to their love, nay, though some defects be grossly visible even to
the lover; yet if he will compliment his mistress with that which she really
wants, I dare appeal to the whole sex, whether, in many instances, such incense
or the offerer of it be one jot nearer the losing of their favor, and whether
they are not too generally delighted with both the delusion and the deceiver.
But if they really believe themselves as amiable as the flatterer represents
them, then, in point of gratitude they conclude themselves obliged to think
kindly of their benefactor. I shall conclude this paper with a story, which I
know to be fact.

Miss Witwou'd was a young gentlewoman of good extraction, and an handsome
fortune. She was exactly shaped, and very pretty. She dressed and danced
genteely, and sung sweetly. But notwithstanding these advantages, she had a
predominant attachment to the reputation of a wit. She fancied that she had as
much wit as she wanted, (though indeed she wanted more than ever she will have)
and this conceit made her fond of scribbling and showing her follies that way,
as taking great delight in applause.

My friend Meanwell is a gentleman of good sense and a sound judgment: he is a
professed enemy to flattery, and is of opinion, that to commend without just
grounds, is to rob the meritorious of that, which only of right belongs to
them. He says, a compliment is a modish lie; and declares, that he would not be
guilty of so much baseness as to cry up a beautiful fool for wit, not even in
her own hearing, though he were sure to have his falsehood rewarded by the
enjoyment of his mistress. Unmerited applause is to him an argument of want of
judgment, or of insincerity; and he resolves, that he will never attempt to
establish another's reputation at the expense of his own. With these honest
useless qualities he has made long but fruitless courtship to young Miss
Witwou'd.

Ned Courtly is a new but violent pretender to the same lady. Ned is a shallow
well-dressed coxcomb. He was bred genteely, and is of a graceful and confident
behavior, tempered with civility. The shallow thing can wait at a distance,
look at her, and then with a smile approach her, and say -- 'You are divinely
pretty.' He is also remarkably happy in particular discoveries; and whenever he
renews a visit to his mistress, she is sure to be presented with some
additional charm, which would forever have lain concealed, had not Ned most
luckily have explored it. Ned quickly perceived Miss Witwou'd's weak side, and
carefully watched all opportunities of making his advantage of it. Miss grows
enamoured of Ned's company, and begins to despise Meanwell as an unpolished
clown. She likes Ned as she likes her glass, and for the same reason, that it
always shows her her beauties; and she takes as much pleasure in hearing him,
injudiciously as he does it, give her also the beauties of her mind, as she
does to see the glass reflect those of her body. One evening, lately, Meanwell
had the honor of supping with her. The cloth being taken away, she delivered
him a copy of verses, which she said had been the product of her leisure hours,
and desired the opinion of so good a judge. My friend had the patience to read
them twice over, found nothing extraordinary in them, and smilingly returned
them with a silent bow. He was just about to speak his mind impartially, when
in came Ned Courtly. He perused and hummed them over in a seeming rapture;
looked at the lady, and then at the paper, for almost half an hour, in full
admiration; and then, with a better air than ever critic spoke, he pronounced,
that the author of those verses had Congreve's wit, and Waller's softness, and
that there was nothing so completely perfect in all their works.

The consequence was, Meanwell was discarded, because he would be rigidly
honest in trifles; and Ned made his mistress his wife, because, in spite of
nature, he allowed her to be a poetess; or perhaps very justly, because he
really thinks her so.

Number XXV.
TO my female readers, particularly to those who are just entering, or have
newly entered, into the conjugal state, I commend the perusal of a letter
addressed by a lady to her young friend, upon her marriage.

"I ADDRESS myself singly to you, my dear Gertrude, because the delicacy of
your present situation demands my serious attention, and calls up all my
tenderness.

"I am inexpressibly pleased, to find you have made choice of so worthy a man
as Mr. Fitzgerald and that your parents approve the object of your selection. I
think you have acted like a woman of sense and prudence, and I make no doubt,
but you will preserve the same propriety of conduct when a wife, as has
evidently characterized you whilst single. I admire that real delicacy, which
impelled you to give an immediate dismission to all those pretenders, who
solicited your hand without being able to influence your heart in their favor.
There cannot be a more despicable passion, than that insatiable thirst for
admiration, which leads a woman to encourage indiscriminately the forward
advances of every coxcomb, who shall pay her the incense of flattery; and to be
continually spreading her lures to attract adulation, however in her heart she
may despise the person who offers it.

"I am sensible my dear Gertrude will pardon me, if, anxious for her future
happiness, I venture to give her my advice and opinion for the preservation of
her felicity in the married state.

"It has often been remarked, that a heart is much easier gained than kept;
and, believe me, it is a very judicious observation. There requires more care,
attention, and solicitude, from the wife to the husband, than from the mistress
to the adoring lover. The lover being but seldom with you, sees you only in
part. It is natural to suppose, you would neither appear before him in a
slatternly dress, or with a peevish aspect. Your clothes will be always put on
with neatness, and your face dressed in smiles. On the contrary, the husband,
being always in your company, has an opportunity of discovering every little
defect or blemish in your person, manners, or disposition; and the chief study
of a wife should be, to guard against every thing that might create distaste,
or excite disgust.

"In the first place, let me recommend a most scrupulous regard to delicacy and
neatness. Many young women foolishly imagine, as soon as they are married, they
have a right to understand and laugh at an indelicate allusion. But from this
fault the native purity of your mind will, I am certain, preserve you; since
nothing but extreme ignorance or levity could lead any woman to listen, with
apparent pleasure, to an improper tale, o^ ill-timed jest. There are too many
men, yea, even among those who call themselves gentlemen, who will not scruple
to shock a woman's ears with conversation of this kind. But the look of marked
disapprobation and silent contempt, will never fail to silence them, unless
they are either brutes or fools; and to such there is no fear of your being
exposed.

The next thing is, neatness in your person and dress, and an equanimi^ of
temper, to be preserved toward your husband, and your servants. Nothing
degrades a gentlewoman more, than her suffering her temper to be so ^ar
ruffled, as to use improper language to her dependants; nor can any thing be
more disgusting to a man of sense, than to see his wife give way to sudden
starts of passion.

"To every friend and relation of your husband, show a polite a^tion, and
marked preference. Show him, that to be related to, or esteemed by him, is a
sufficient claim upon your regard. Whatever be his errors, confine the
knowledge of the to your own bosom; and endeavor, by the mildest per^sions, to
lead him to the path of rectitude. Discretion must direct you as to the ^per
season to offer your advice and opinions; since m^ in general are so tenacious
of their prerogative, that they start from every thing, which has the least
appearance of control or opposition. If he should be fond of company,
dissipation, and expensive amusements, ^e it your study to detach his mind from
those pursuits, by endeavoring to render his home delightful. Let your face be
ever arrayed in smiles at his approach; form a ^ciety of those he loves and
esteems most; exert your ^arious abilities to charm and entertain him; and
believe me, he who constantly meets cheerfulness and smiles at home, will
seldom wish to seek abroad for pleasure.

"Above all things never suffer any person to speak disrespectfully of him in
your presence; and guard your heart from the least approach of jealousy. Should
there even be occasion for suspicion, be careful no^ to let him see you have
discovered his dishonorable conduct, and never suffer ^y one, more especially
a man, to hear you complain.

"Avoid reproa^s. They, in general, increase rather than alleviate the ^ress.
If patient suffering and the mild remonstrance of an afflicted uncomplaining
spirit, will not work a reformation, reproach and discontent never will.

"You must not be above attending to his interest, so fa^ as may lead you to
inspect the expenses of your fami^* Let your own expenses be regulated by
prudence void of parsimony, and suffer not a passion for finery, and a (...) to
eclipse your acquaintances, prompt you to overstep y^ ^ncome, or deprive you of
the i^xpressi^ pleasure of relieving indigent merit.

"There is one more circumstance I must mention, although a thorough knowledge
of your disposition renders it almost unnecessary; yet I have seen so many
couples made inexpressibly miserable by it, that I cannot resist my inclination
to warn you of so dangerous a conduct. Never permit any man, however clothed
with the mask of friendship, to treat you with familiarity. There are many
freedoms, which to a girl may be perfectly innocent, and yet become crimes when
offered to, or ^ived by a married woman. A married woman should never ^er a man
to entertain her in a strain of gallantry. A pressure of the hand is an
^ffront, and an attempt (...) salute (except where the nearness of the relat^
authorizes ^h a liberty) is, and should be resented as an ^sult.

There is a decent gravity of manner that will at once excite admiration and
respect, and yet exclude all improper familiarity; nor can any thing be more
ridiculous, than to see the mistress of a family, perhaps the mother of four or
five children, affecting a giddy flirting carriage, that would be hardly
excusable in a girl of sixteen. It may, in some instances, proceed from an
innocent gaiety of heart; but it hardly ever fails of degenerating into ^vity
and imprudence; always lays a woman open to insult, of which she cannot
complain, because she evidently invited it; and too often ends in the total
loss of honor, happiness, and reputation. Be cheerful, condescending, and
polite to all; but let there ever be that dignity in your manner, which may
keep impertinent fools, or designing villains at a proper distance.

"Pardon the length of this epistle, and believe it proceeds from a friend who
loves you. Remember me affectionately to your dear sisters. Adieu. May every
blessing be your portion here and hereafter!

MENTORIA."

Number XXVI.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
"THE news that you were safe in bed, and mother to a daughter, my dear
Gertrude, does, believe me, give as much satisfaction to my heart, as any
sublunary pleasure possibly can. I cannot, therefore, resist the desire I now
feel of addressing you, in regard to this dear, this precious little charge,
with which it has pleased Heaven to entrust you. May it ever be impressed on
your mind, that the future happiness, or misery of this child depends greatly,
on the treatment she receives during her puerile years!

"Let not a too great fondness prompt you, by extreme indulgence, to enervate
the faculties of her soul, or pervert her disposition, and thus render her
totally unfit to bear the many inconveniences and crosses, she must
necessarily meet with in her passage through life. On the contrary, do not, by
an ill-judged severity, drive her to mean subterfuges, falsehoods and deceit,
through fear of your anger. Many an amiable girl has been totally ruined by
such treatment; it leads them to fear, but not love their parents; it prompts
them to make companions of their servants; and often ends in the perversion of
their principles.

"Teach her to fear to disoblige you; but let it be through fear of losing your
affection, not from the apprehension of punishment. Do not be too anxious to
have your child praised for an early progress in her education; a young mind
should not be loaded, it spoils the memory, and often occasions a dislike to
study in more advanced life; besides, children accustomed to hear themselves
commended, are apt to think themselves sufficiently wise and accomplished,
before their education is well b^gun.

"Do n^ encourage in her a love of finery, or suffer her to be told she is
handsome; they will both be very pernicious to her future tranquillity.

"There is one thing, which parents are very ^pt, not only to do themselves,
but to suffer their servants to do the same, that is, when any ^le master
visits at the house nearly of Mile's age, she is ^^ld, that he is her little
husband, and that she must hold up her head and behave like a woman, or she
will never be married. Thus is the idea of love and lovers introduced into her
little heart, before she is capable of understanding when the word means. This
is, to me, the most foolish conduct in the world, and nothing would offend me
so soon, as having such ridiculous things said to any child, in whose education
and future prospects I was at all concerned. Teach her the difference between
right and wrong; and convince her reason, by pointing out the real way to
promote her own happiness, and merit the regard and esteem of her friends.

"Do not introduce your girl too early into public circles, it will give her a
taste for dissipation. In proper time let her partake, in moderation, of all
the innocent amusements of the metropolis, so as to prevent the bad effects of
curiosity ungratified; but at the same time accustom her to find resources
within herself, which may, at all times, enable her to banish that monster
Ennui.

"Trust not the cultivation of her mental faculties, or the forming of her
moral character, to any one but yourself. As she advances toward womanhood,
make her your friend and companion: let the distance between mother and
daughter be forgotten; and, by treating her with a degree of confidence,
encourage her, to make your bosom the repository of all her secrets, and be
ready to apply to your better judgment to direct all her actions.

"I am certain, there would not be half the imprudencies committed by girls in
general, if they were not kept at such an awful distance by their mothers;
that, fearing either ridicule or reproof they dare not entrust them with their
little plans and disappointments. Relying, therefore, on the advice of some one
as inexperienced as themselves, or to the suggestions of their own simple
hearts, they involve themselves in troubles, which endanger their peace of
mind, and ruin their reputation: but so it will ever be, whilst mothers forget
they have ever been girls themselves, and make no allowance for the volatility
of youth, and the innocent impulses of a heart unburthened by the cares of the
world.

"There is yet another subject, which dwells still nearer my heart, the
necessity of giving your child a proper sense of the high advantages of early
piety. Example, my dear friend, must accompany and enforce your rational,
scriptural instructions, must teach her the true principles of the Christian
Religion. Let her see you in the act of devotion: let her curiosity be
awakened, and then, as you answer her questions, endeavor to lead her by
degrees to love, adore and worship the Almighty Giver of all good. Convince her
of her dependence on his bounty for food, raiment, and all the blessings of
life. Teach her to place her whole confidence in his mercy, to receive even the
smallest blessing with gratitude, and to bow under the heaviest affliction with
patience and humility.

"But above all things, mind that your example does not contradict your
precept. What confidence can a child place in the religion of its parent, when
the parent lives in direct opposition to the precepts of that religion?

"Our duty is plainly marked, and so easy, that, when we do not perform it, we
take more pains to court misery, than would suffice to make us truly happy.
What can be more easily comprehended, even by the meanest understanding! "Do
justly, love mercy, and walk humbly." "Love thy Creator above all things, and
thy neighbor as thyself." "Forgive, as you hope to be forgiven." And remember,
that "with the same measure you mete, the like shall be given you again."

"God preserve and bless you! May peace reign in your heart, and true piety
direct your actions! May you so pass through this transitory life, as not to
dread the approach of the messenger, who shall convey you to eternal rest!

"And when, at last, Death shall your frame destroy,
Die by some sudden ecstacy of joy;
Peaceful sleep out the sabbath of the tomb,
And wake to raptures in a life to come!"
Number XXVII.
-- Let us scan
The coward insults of that tyrant man.
Self-prais'd, and grasping at despotic power,
He looks on slavery as the female dower;
To nature's boon ascribes what force has given,
And usurpation deems the gift of Heaven.
ANON,
IT has often been a solid grief to me, when I have reflected on this glorious
nation, which is the scene of public happiness and liberty, that there are
still crowds of private tyrants, against whom there neither is any law in
being, nor can there be invented any by the wit of man. These cruel men are
ill-natured husbands.

SYLVIA was neither in fortune, birth or education below the gentleman whom she
has married. Her person, her age, and her character, are also such as he can
make no exception to. But so it is, that from the moment the marriage ceremony
was over, the obsequiousness of a lover was turned into the haughtiness of a
master. All the kind endearments which she uses to please him, are at best but
so many instances of her duty. This insolence takes away that secret
satisfaction, which does not only excite to virtue, but also rewards it. It
abates the fire of a free and generous love, and imbitters all the pleasures of
a social life.

An affliction of this sort is the greatest that can happen in human life; and
I know but one consolation in it (if that be a consolation) that the calamity
is a pretty general one. There is nothing so common as for men to enter into
marriage, without so much as expecting to be happy in it. They seem to propose
to themselves a few holidays in the beginning of it; after which they are to
return at best to the usual course of their life, and, for aught they know, to
constant misery and uneasiness. From this false sense of the state they are
going into, proceeds the immediate coldness and indifference, or hatred and
aversion, which attend ordinary marriages, or rather bargains to cohabit.

The humor of affecting a superior carriage, generally rises from a false
notion of the weakness of a female understanding in general, or an overweening
opinion that we have of our own: for when it proceeds from a natural ruggedness
and brutality of temper, it is altogether incorrigible, and not to be amended
by admonition. Sir FRANCIS BACON, as I remember, lays it down as a maxim, that
no marriage can be happy, in which the wife has no opinion of her husband's
wisdom; but without offense to so great an authority, I may venture to say,
that a sullen wise man is as bad as a good-natured fool. Knowledge, softened
with complacency and good breeding, will make a man equally beloved and
respected; but when joined with a severe, distant and unsociable temper, it
creates rather fear than love.

PLINY, one of the greatest as well as the most learned men, was also one of
the best husbands in the whole Roman empire. The following letters were written
by him to his wife CALPHURNIA, at a time when she was at a distance from him,
and are full of conjugal tenderness.

PLINY to CALPHURNIA.
NEVER was business more uneasy to me, than when it prevented me not only from
attending, but following you into Campania. As at all times, so particularly
now, I wish to be with you, that I may be a witness what progress you make in
the recovery of your strength, and how the tranquillity, the amusements, and
plenty of that charming country agrees with you. Were you in perfect health,
yet I could ill support your absence; for, even a moment's uncertainty of the
welfare of those we tenderly love, is a situation of mind infinitely painful:
but at present your sickness conspires with your absence to perplex me with a
thousand disquietudes. I fear every thing that can befall you, and, as is usual
with all under the same anxious apprehensions, suspect most, what I most dread.
Let me conjure you then to prevent my solicitude by writing to me every day,
and even twice a day: I shall be more easy, at least whilst I am reading your
letters; though all my fears will again return the moment I have perused them.
Farewell.

SECOND LETTER.
YOU kindly tell me, my absence very sensibly affects you, and that your only
consolation is in conversing with my works, which you frequently substitute in
my place by your side. How agreeable is it to me to know, that you thus wish
for my company, and support yourself under the want of it by these
consolations! In return, I entertain myself with reading over you^ letters
again and again, and am continually taking them up, as if I had but just then
received them; but alas! they only serve to make me more strongly regret your
absence; for, how amiable must her conversation be, whose letters have so many
charms! Let me receive them, however, as often as possible, notwithstanding
there is always some mixture of pain in the pleasure they afford me, as they
render me the more sensible of the loss I suffer, by my absence. Farewell.

THIRD LETTER.
IT is incredible how impatiently I wish for your return; such is the
tenderness of my affection for you, and so unaccustomed am I to a separation! I
lie awake the greatest part of the night thinking of you, and (to use a very
common, but very true expression) my feet carry me of their own accord to your
apartment, at those hours I used to visit you; but not finding you there, I
return with as much sorrow and disappointment as an excluded lover. The only
intermission my anxiety knows, is, when I am engaged at the bar, and in the
causes of my friends. Judge then how wretched must his life be, who finds no
repose but in business; no consolation but in a crowd. Farewell.

Number XXVIII.
-- Thisea pectora juncta fide.
OVID. TRIST. Breasts that with sympathising ardour glowed,
And holy friendship such as Theseus vowed.
ANON.
PROFANE wits, instead of correcting the vices of the age, do all they can to
inflame them. Marriage has been one of the common topics of ridicule in which
every stage-scribbler has found his account; for whenever there is an occasion
for a ^p, an impertinent jest upon matrimony is sure to raise it. A kind
husband has, in consequence, been looked upon as a clown; and a good wife as a
domestic animal, unfit for the company or conversation of the beau monde. In
short, separate beds, silent tables, and solitary homes, have been introduced,
more particularly in the European world, by your men of wit and pleasure of the
age.

As I always mean to stem the torrents of prejudice and vice, I shall take
particular care to put an honest father of a family in countenance, and
endeavor to remove all the evils out of that state of life, which is either
the most happy or the most miserable, in which a man can be placed. I have
shown in my last paper, that PLINY, who was a man of the greatest genius, as
well as of the first quality of his age, did not think it below him, to be a
kind husband, and to treat his wife as a friend, companion, and counselor. I
shall give the like instance of another, who was one of the most distinguished
characters in the Roman republic, and has written a whole book of letters to
his wife. They are full of that beautiful simplicity which is altogether
natural, and is the distinguishing character of the best ancient writers. The
author of whom I speak is CICERO; who, in the following passages I have taken
out of his letters, as translated by WILLIAM MELMOTH, Esquire. shows, that he did
not think it inconsistent with the po^^^^ness of his manners, or the greatness
of his wisdom, to stand upon record in his domestic character.

CICERO to TERENTIA, to my dearest TULLIA, and to my SON.
IF you do not hear from me so frequently as you might, it is because I can
neither write to you, nor read your letters, without falling into a greater
passion of tears than I am able to support: for though I am at all times indeed
completely miserable, yet I feel my misfortunes with a particular sensibility
upon those tender occasions. These letters were written during his exile by the
influence of his malignant adversary, CLODIUS.


Oh! that I had been more indifferent to life! Our days would then have been,
if not wholly unacquainted with sorrow, yet by no means thus wretched. -- Ah!
my dearest TERENTIA, if we are utterly and forever abandoned by those gods,
whom you have so religiously adored, and by those men, whom I have so
faithfully served; let me see you as soon as possible, that I may have the
satisfaction of breathing out my last departing sigh in your arms.

And now, my TERENTIA, thus wretched and ruined as I am, can I entreat you
under all that weight of pain and sorrow with which, I too well know, you are
oppressed, can I entreat you to be the partner and companion of my exile? But
must I then be left without you? I know not how to reconcile myself to that
hard condition; unless your presence at Rome may be a mean of forwarding my
return: if any hopes of that kind should indeed subsist. But should there, as I
sadly suspect, be absolutely none; come to me, I conjure you, if it be
possible* for never can I think myself completely ruined, whilst I shall enjoy
my TERENTIA's company. But how will my dearest daughter dispose of herself? A
question which you yourselves must consider: for as to my own part, I am
utterly at a loss what to advise. At all events, however, that dear unhappy
girl must not take any measure, that may injure her conjugal repose, or affect
her in the ^^^hion of the world. ^s for my son -- let me not at least be
deprived of the consolation of folding him forever in my arms. But I must lay
down my pen a few moments: my tears flow too fast to suffer me to proceed.

Let me conjure you to bear up under the pressure of our afflictions with as
much resolution as possible. Remember, that my days have all been honorable;
and that I now suffer, not for my crimes, but my virtues.

I entreat you to take all possible care of your health* and be assured, your
misfortunes more sensibly affect me than my own. Adieu, my TERENTIA, thou most
faithful and best of wives! Adieu. And thou my dearest daughter, together with
that other consolation of my life, my dear son, I bid you most tenderly,
Farewell.

II.
IMAGINE not, my TERENTIA, that I write longer letters to others than to
yourself: be assured at least, if ever I do, it is merely because those I
receive from them require a particular answer. The truth of it is, I am always
at a loss what to write: and as there is nothing in the present dejection of my
mind, that I perform with greater reluctance in general; so I never attempt it
with regard to you and my dearest daughter, that it does not cost me ^ ^^ood of
tears. For how can I think of you without being pierced with grief in the
reflection, that I have made those completely miserable, whom I ought, and
wished, to have rendered perfectly happy?

I have the satisfaction to find, what indeed I had reason to expect, that you
act with great spirit and tenderness in all my concern^. But I lament it should
be my cruel fate to expose you to so many calamities, whilst you are thus
generously endeavoring to ease the weight of mine. Be assured it was with the
utmost grief I read the account which PUBLIUS sent me, of the opprobrious
manner in which you were dragged from the temple of VESTA. Sad reverse indeed!
That thou, the dearest object of my fond desires, that my TERENTIA, to whom
such numbers were wont to look up for relief, should be herself a spectacle of
the most affecting distress! and that I, who have saved so many others from
ruin, should have ruined both myself and my family by my own indiscretion!

If you have any affection for me, let not your anxiety upon my account, injure
your health; which alas! is already too much impaired. Believe me, you are the
perpetual subject of my waking and sleeping thoughts; and as I know the
assiduity you exert in my behalf, I have a thousand fears, lest your strength
should not be equal to so continued a fatigue.

III.
I RECEIVED three letters from you by the hands of ARISTOCRITUS, and have wept
over them till they are almost defaced with my tears. Ah! my TERENTIA, I am
worn out with grief: nor do my own personal misfortunes more severely torture
my mind, than those with which you and my children are oppressed. Unhappy
indeed, as you are, I am still infinitely more so; as our common afflictions
are attended with this aggravating circumstance, that they are justly to be
imputed to my imprudence alone. Yes, my TERENTIA, I blush to reflect, that I
did not exert that spirit I ought, for the sake of so excellent a wife, and
such amiable children. -- I am perfectly sensible of those good offices, which
PISO exerts toward us with so uncommon a zeal. Heaven grant I may live to
enjoy with you and our children, the common happiness of so valuable a
relation! In answer to your tender proposal of accompanying me in my exile; I
rather choose you should continue in Rome; as I am sensible it is upon you,
that the principal burden of my affairs must rest. If your generous
negociations should succeed; my return will prevent the necessity of that
journey: if otherwise -- But I need not add the rest.

Take care of your health, I conjure you; assuring yourself, that you are, as
you ever have been, the object of my fondest wishes. Farewell, my dear TERENTIA!
I see you so strongly before me, whilst I am writing, that I am utterly spent
with the tears I have shed. Once more, Farewell.

Number XXIX.
-- Ut ameris, amabilis esto.
OVID. In order to be loved, be lovely.
ANON.
JUNO, says HOMER, seeing her JUPITER seated on the top of mount IDA, and
knowing that he had conceived an aversion from her, began to study how she
should regain his affections, and make herself amiable to him. With this
thought she immediately retired into her chamber, where she bathed herself in
ambrosia, which gave her person all its beauty, and diffused so divine an
odor, as refreshed all nature, and sweetened both heaven and earth. She let
her immortal tresses flow in the most graceful manner, and took a particular
care to dress herself in several ornaments, which the poet describes at length,
and which the goddess chose out as the most proper to set off her person to the
best advantage. In the next place, she made a visit to VENUS, the deity who
presides over love, and begged of her, as a particular favor, that she would
lend her for a while those charms, with which she subdued the hearts both of
gods and men. For, says the goddess, I would make use of them to reconcile the
two deities, who took care of me in my infancy, and who at present are at so
great a variance, that they are estranged from each other's bed. VENUS was
proud of an opportunity of obliging so great a goddess, and therefore made her
a present of the Cestus which she used to wear about her own waist, with advice
to hide it in her bosom, till she had accomplished her intention. This Cestus
was a tine parti-colored girdle, which, as HOMER tells us, had all the
attractions of the sex wrought into it. The four principal figures in the
embroidery were love, desire, fondness of speech, and conversation, filled with
that sweetness and complacency which, says the poet, insensibly steal away the
hearts of the wisest men.

In this was every art and every charm
To win the wisest and the coldest warm;
Fond love, the gentle vow, the gay desire,
The kind deceit, the still reviving fire,
Persuasive speech, and more persuasive sighs,
Silence that speaks, and eloquence of eyes.
POPE. JUNO after having made these necessary preparations, came as by accident
into the presence of JUPITER, who is said to have been as much inflamed with
her beauty, as wh^^ he first stole to her embraces without the consent of their
parents. JUNO, to cover her real thoughts, told him as she had told VENUS, that
she was going to make a visit to OCEANUS and TETHYS. He prevailed on her to
stay with him, protesting to her, that she appeared more amiable in his eye
than ever any mortal, goddess, or even herself had appeared to him till that
day. The poet then represents him in so great an ardour, that (without going up
to the house which had been built by the hands of VULCAN, according to JUNO's
direction) he threw a golden cloud over their heads, as they sat upon the top
of mount IDA, while the earth beneath them sprung up in lotuses, saffrons,
hyacinths, and a bed of the softest flowers for their repose.

This translation of one of the finest passages in HOMER, may suggest abundance
of instruction to a woman, who has a mind to preserve or recall the affection of
her husband. The care of the person and the dress, with the particular
blandishments woven in the Cestus, are so plainly recommended by this fable,
and so indispensably necessary in every female, who desires to please, that
they need no farther explanation. The discretion likewise in covering all
matrimonial quarrels from the knowledge of others, is taught in the pretended
visit to TETHYS, in the speech where JUNO addresses herself to VENUS; as the
chaste and prudent management of a wife's charms is intimated by the same
pretense for her appearing before JUPITER, and by the concealment of the Cestus
in her bosom.

I shall leave this tale to the consideration of such good housewives who are
never well dressed but when they are abroad, and think it necessary to appear
more agreeable to all men living than their husbands: as also to those prudent
ladies, who, to avoid the appearance of being overfond, entertain their
husbands with indifference, aversion, sullen silence or exasperating language.

Number XXX.
Capricious, wanton, bold, and brutal lust;
Is meanly selfish; when resisted, cruel;
And, like the blast of pestilential winds,
Taints the sweet bloom of nature's fairest forms:
But love, like odorous Zephyr's grateful breath,
Repays the flower that sweetness which it borrows.
Uninjuring, uninjur'd lovers move
In their own sphere of happiness content,
By mutual truth avoiding mutual blame.
DALTON.
THE imposition of honest names and words upon improper subjects, has made so
regular a confusion among us, that we are apt to sit down with our errors, well
enough satisfied with the methods we are fallen into, without attempting to
deliver ourselves from the tyranny under which we are reduced by such
innovations. Of all the laudable motives of human life, none has suffered so
much in this kind as love; under which revered name, a brutal desire called
lust is frequently concealed and admitted; though they differ as much as a
matron from a prostitute, or a companion from a buffoon.

The figures which the ancient mythologists and poets put upon love and lust in
their writings, are very instructive. Love is a beauteous blind child, adorned
with a quiver and a bow, which he plays with and shoots around him, without
design or direction; to intimate to us, that the person beloved has no
intention to give us the anxieties we meet with; but that the beauties of a
worthy object are like the charms of a lovely infant: they cannot but attract
your concern and fondness, though the child so regarded is as insensible of the
value you put upon it, as it is that it deserves your benevolence. On the other
side, the sages figured lust in the form of a satyr; of shape part human, part
bestial; to signify, that the followers of it prostitute the reason of a man to
pursue the appetites of a beast. This satyr is made to haunt the paths and
coverts of the wood nymphs and shepherdesses, to lurk on the banks of rivulets,
and watch the purling streams (as the resorts of retired virgins) to show, that
lawless desire tends chiefly to prey upon innocence; and has something so
unnatural in it, that it hates its own make, and shuns the object it loved, as
soon as it has made it like itself. Love therefore is a child, that complains
and bewails its inability to help itself, and weeps for assistance, without an
immediate reflection or knowledge of the food it wants; lust a watchful thief,
which seizes its prey, and lays snares for its own relief; and its principal
object being innocence, it never robs but it murders at the same time.

From this idea of a Cupid and a satyr, we may settle our notion of these
different desires, and accordingly rank their followers. ASPASIA must therefore
be allowed to be the first of the beauteous order of love, whose unaffected
freedom and conscious innocence give her the attendance of the graces in all
her actions. That awful distance which we bear toward her in all our thoughts
of her, and that cheerful familiarity with which we approach her, are certain
instances of her being the true object of love. In this accomplished lady love
is the constant effect, because it is never the design. Yet, though her mien
carries much more invitation than command, to behold her is an immediate check
to loose behavior; and to love her is a liberal education: for, it being the
nature of all to love to create an imitation of the beloved person in the
lover, a regard for ASPASIA naturally produces decency of manners, and good
conduct of life in her admirers. If therefore the giggling LEUCIPPE could but
see her train of fops assembled, and ASPASIA move by them, she would be
mortified at the veneration with which she is beheld even by LEUCIPPE's own
unthinking equipage, whose passions have long ago taken leave of their
understandings.

As charity is esteemed a conjunction of the good qualities necessary to a
virtuous man, so love is the happy composition of all the accomplishments that
make a fine gentl^ (...). The motive of a man's life is seen in all his
actions: and such as have the beauteous boy for their inspirer, have a
simplicity of behavior, and a certain evenness of desire, which burns like the
lamp of life in their bosoms; while they who are instigated by the satyr are
ever tortured by jealousies of the object of their wishes, often desire what
they scorn, and as often consciously and knowingly embrace where they are
mutually indifferent.

AMANDA, the wife of FLORIO, lives in the continual enjoyment of new instances
of her husband's friendship, and sees it the end of all his ambition to make
her life one series of pleasure and satisfaction; and AMANDA's relish of the
goods of life is all that makes them pleasing to FLORIO: they behave themselves
to each other, when present, with a certain apparent benevolence, which
transports above rapture; and they think of each other in absence, with a
confidence unknown to the highest friendship: their satisfactions are doubled,
their sorrows lessened by participation.

He does not understand either vice or virtue who will not allow, that life
without the rules of morality, is a wayward uneasy being, with snatches only of
pleasure; but under the regulation of virtue, a reasonable and uniform habit of
enjoyment. There is in a play of old HAYWOOD, a speech at the end of an act,
which touches this point with much spirit. He makes a married man, upon some
endearing occasion, look at his spouse with an air of fondness, and fall into
the following reflection on his condition.

O marriage! happiest, easiest, safest state!
Let debauchees and drunkards scorn thy rights,
Who, in their nauseous draughts and lusts, profane
Both thee, and Heaven by whom thou were ordained.
How can the savage call it loss of freedom,
Thus to converse with, thus to gaze on
A faithful, beauteous friend?
Blush not, my fair one, that thy love applauds thee,
Nor be it painful to my wedded wife
That my full heart overflows in praise of thee.
Thou art by law, by interest, passion mine;
Passion and reason join in love of thee.
Thus, through a world of calumny and fraud
We pass both unreproach'd, both undeceived;
Whilst in each other's interest and happiness
We without art all faculties employ,
And all our senses without guilt enjoy.
Number XXXI.
When souls that should agree to will the same,
To have one common object of their wishes,
Look different ways, regardless of each other,
Ah! what a train of wretchedness ensues!
ROW.
THE felicity of the connubial state essentially depends upon mutual harmony
and sentimental attachment. The uninterrupted flow of virtuous affection will
contribute inconceivably more to the promotion of this great object, than every
other consideration. The hymeneal bonds are, or ought to be, bonds of pure
inviolable friendship. In proportion to the inviolability of this friendship
will be the enjoyment of those, who are linked in these bonds.

Yet such is the imperfection of man, and of the relations which he sustains;
such the vanity inscribed on the fairest prospects of life; that this sentiment
is not invariably cherished or allowed its due force by many, who, in their
general deportment, exhibit mutual esteem. Trifles will sometimes preponderate
in the scale against every argument which reason suggests, and impede the happy
intercourse of kindred souls. Contentions arise at an unguarded moment, upon
some very slender occasion. A diversity of opinion in an affair, which in the
season of calm recollection each would treat as unworthy of a serious
consideration, will imprint a frown on the face, usually adorned with smiles,
and force the language of discordance from the lips, that lately uttered the
softest notes of love. Even in these happy climes, situated at a due distance
from the vicious polluting examples with which the OLD WORLD abounds, and where
the marriage state is generally the state of friendship and purity; a caution
against the violation of its harmonious laws is too often requisite. The
Compiler of this work has little occasion to complain of flagrant breaches of
the most sacred engagements. But he fears, that the representation of a
correspondent, whom he shall now introduce to his readers, may be adopted, with
a little variation, by too many of his countrymen and countrywomen. He believes
it to be happily adapted to accomplish a radical cure of the evil, of which he
complains. He indulges the hope, that it will confirm the union of those, whose
bark is wafted only by gentle breezes along the stream of life; and that it
will apprize the inconsiderate voyagers of the dangers of their course; urge
them to avoid every SCYLLA and CHARYBDIS in their passage; and teach them to
aim with a single undiverted eye, at the haven of peace.

SIR,
YOU must know, that I am married to one of the most agreeable women in the
world, have an unabating passion for my wife, and every reason to imagine her
sentiments are equally tender for me: there is nothing of consequence but what
we continually study to oblige each other in; yet, at the same time, there are
a thousand little trifles in which we are always sure to disagree, and which
are not only an endless source of disquiet to ourselves, but of uneasiness to
our whole family.

Last night, for instance, Sir, after supper, I acquainted Nancy that a
vintner, who owed me a hundred pounds for some Lisbon, (for you must know I am
a wine-merchant) had failed, and that there was little probability of expecting
two and sixpence from the sale of all his effects. I furthermore informed her,
that I was much to blame in the affair, and that I had trusted this man
contrary to the advice of an intimate friend, who was perfectly conversant with
his circumstances. My wife, instead of reprehending me for indiscretion, as the
generality of her sex would have done in the same case, made use of every
argument in her power to dissipate my chagrin; told me, the most careful were
unable now and then to avoid an error, and bid me console myself under my loss,
by thanking Providence that I had not been a sufferer in double the sum. I was
greatly charmed with this disposition in Mrs. Mountain, and expressed my
sensibility of it in a manner with which she seemed exceedingly pleased.

After all this, would you imagine, Sir, that a most trivial circumstance
should make us part beds for that night? My favorite liquor is a glass of
punch, and it happens to be my wife's too: making a little as we were alone, I
unluckily squeezed the pulp of the lemon into the bowl; upon which she
immediately exclaimed, with some warmth -- 'Lord, my dear, you have spoiled the
punch!' 'No, my love,' replied I, 'the pulp gives it a fine flavor; and
besides, you know I am very fond of it.' 'Ay, but,' says she, 'you are sensible
I cannot abide it.' 'Then, my dear,' returned I, 'it is an easy matter to avoid
putting any into your glass.' 'Lord! Mr. Mountain, I have spoken to you a
thousand times about this very circumstance; I believe in my conscience, you do
it on purpose to give me disgust.'

Here, Sir, we began a contest; severity produced severity, till at last I
ordered a bed to be made for myself; and poor Nancy retired to her own with her
eyes swimming in tears.

For the whole night neither of us (for I judge of her by myself) had a single
wink of sleep; we tumbled and tossed, canvassed the matter fifty ways in our
minds, and at last concluded, that we were both in the wrong. Yet,
notwithstanding all this, when we met at breakfast, but an hour ago, neither of
us would condescend to speak first; we affected a resentment of countenance
that was utterly foreign to our hearts, and endeavored to keep up the
appearance of an unremitting anger, when we both of us longed to be reconciled,
and had the most passionate inclination to be pleased. Breakfast was over
before we exchanged a syllable. When the servant had left the room, I prepared
to go out, and had just got to the parlour-door, when poor Nancy, unable to
hold it out any longer, cried, in a tone of irresistible softness, 'And will
you go out without speaking a word?' Here our whole ridiculous quarrel was at
an end: I turned to her with all the fondness I could possibly assume, and held
her in my arms for some moments; whilst she, returning the fervor of the
embrace, burst into a flood of tears.

It is inconceivable to think, Sir, how contemptible these little differences
have made us in the eyes of our own servants. Whenever they see us cool toward
one another, they titter and laugh, and say the poor things will soon kiss and
make it up again. It was no longer ago than last week, that I overheard my
rascal of a coachman tell one of his fellow servants, that his master and
mistress were nothing better than an overgrown boy and girl, and that he
fancied a little of his horsewhip would be of great service to both of them.

It is very odd, Sir, that people who really love one another and are not
wholly destitute of understanding, should give way to such resentment in the
merest trifles, who, in the most important circumstances of life, are above
feeling the smallest resentment, or entertaining the minutest disesteem. Many
is the time, Sir, I have found fault with my wife for stirring the fire, when
her spending fifty pounds has not given me the least uneasiness; and many a
time has she fallen out with me, if, in cutting up a fowl, I happened to splash
ever so small a drop of gravy on the table-cloth, though she has felt no
discomposure in life, if I spoiled a rich silk, or dirted a fine head-dress.
This morning, however, we have agreed, as a mean of keeping ourselves from
passions of this nature for the future, to send you the foregoing account; and
if it should turn out any way serviceable to others, as I hope it will, I shall
have a double reason to sign myself your most humble servant,

ROBERT MOUNTAIN.


I shall conclude this number with an apposite and instructive dialogue between
a gentleman in advanced life, and a venerable widow, which broke off a match on
the very day in which it had been determined. It is contained in a letter of
Dr. GOLDSMITH's Chinese Philosopher.

"AT dinner (the season of the nuptials between his son and the niece of his
friend) every thing seemed to run on with good humor, harmony, and
satisfaction. My friend sat next his mistress, helped her plate, chimed her
glass, and jogging her knees and elbow, he whispered something arch in her ear,
on which she patted his cheek; never was antiquated passion so harmless and
amusing, as between this reverend couple.

The second course was now called for; and among a variety of other dishes, a
fine turkey was placed before the widow. My friend begged his mistress to help
him to a part of the turkey. The widow, pleased with an opportunity of showing
her skill in carving, (an art upon which it seems she piqued herself) began to
cut it up by first taking off the leg. 'Madam,' cries my friend, 'if I might be
permitted to advise, 'I would begin by cutting off the wing, and then the leg
will come off more easily.' -- 'Sir,' replies the widow, 'give me leave to
understand cutting up a fowl; I always begin with the leg.' -- 'Yes, Madam,'
replies the lover; 'but if the wing be the most convenient manner, I would
begin with the wing.' -- 'Sir,' interrupts the lady, 'when you have fowls of
your own, begin with the wing, if you please; but give me leave to take off the
leg; I hope I am not to be taught at this time of day.' -- 'Madam,' interrupts
he, we are never too old to be instructed.' -- 'Old, Sir!' interrupts the
other, 'who is old, Sir? When I die of age, I know of some that will quake for
fear; if the leg does not come off, take the turkey to yourself.' -- 'Madam,'
replied my friend, 'I do not care a farthing whether the leg or the wing comes
off; if you are for the leg first, why, you shall have the argument, even
though it be as I say.' -- 'As for the matter of that,' cries the widow, 'I do
not care a sig, whether you are for the leg off or on; and, friend, for the
future, keep your distance.' -- 'O,' replied the other, 'that is easily done,
it is only removing to the other end of the table; and so, Madam, your most
obedient humble servant.'

Number XXII.
Hae sunt jucundi causa, cibusque maii.
OVID. Trifles sometimes will love create,
Or turn that love to keenest hate.
ANON.
IT is very commonly observed, that the most smart pangs which we meet with are
in the beginning of wedlock, which proceed from ignorance of each other's
humor, and want of prudence to make allowances for a change from the most
careful respect to the most unbounded familiarity. Hence it arises, that
trifles are commonly occasions of the greatest anxiety; for contradiction being
a thing wholly unusual between a new married couple, the smallest instance of
it is taken for the highest injury; and it very seldom happens that the man is
slow enough in assuming the character of an husband, or the woman quick enough
in condescending to that of a wife. It immediately follows, that they think
they have all the time of their courtship been talking in masks to each other,
and therefore begin to act like disappointed people. PHILANDER finds DELIA
ill-natured and impertinent, and DELIA PHILANDER surly and inconstant.

I have known a fond couple quarrel in the very honey moon, about cutting up a
tart: nay, I could name two, who, after having had seven children, fell out and
parted beds upon the boiling of a leg of mutton. My very next neighbors have
not spoken to one another these three days, because they differed in their
opinions, whether the clock should stand by the window or over the chimney.

Those indeed who begin this course of life without jars at their setting out
arrive within a few months at a pitch of benevolence and affection, of which
the most perfect friendship is but a faint resemblance. As in the unfortunate
marriage, the most minute and indifferent things are objects of the sharpest
resentment; so in a happy one, they are occasions of the most exquisite
satisfaction. For what does not oblige in one we love? what does not offend in
those we dislike? For these reasons I take it for a rule, that in marriage, the
chief business is to acquire a prepossession in favor of each other. They
should consider one another's words and actions with a secret indulgence: there
should be always an inward fondness pleading for each other, such as may add
new beauties to every thing that is excellent, give charms to what is
indifferent, and cover every thing that is defective. For want of this kind
propensity and bias of mind, the married pair often take things ill of each
other, which no one else would notice in either of them.

At the same time, that I may do justice to this excellent institution, I must
own there are unspeakable pleasures which are as little considered in the
computation of the advantages of marriages, as others are in the usual survey
that is made of its misfortunes.

LOVEMORE and his wife live together in the happy possession of each other's
hearts, and by that mean have no indifferent moments, but their whole life is
one continued scene of delight. Their passion for each other communicates a
certain satisfaction, like that which they themselves are in, to all that
approach them. When she enters the place where he is, you see a pleasure which
he cannot conceal, nor he nor any one else describe. In so consummate an
affection, the very presence of the person beloved, has the effect of the most
agreeable conversation. Whether they have matter to talk of or not, they enjoy
the pleasures of society, and at the same time the freedom of solitude. Their
ordinary life is to be preferred to the happiest moments of other lovers. In a
word, they have each of them great merit, live in the esteem of all who know
them, and seem but to comply with the opinions of their friends in the just
value they have for each other.

Number XXXIII.
AMONG the many advantages arising from cultivated sentiment, one of the first
and most truly valuable, is that delicate complacency of mind, which leads us
to consult the feelings of those with whom we live, by showing a disposition to
gratify them as far as in our power, and by avoiding whatever has a contrary
tendency. They must, indeed, have attended little to what passes in the world,
who do not know the importance of this disposition; who have not observed, that
the want of it often poisons the domestic happiness of families, whose felicity
every other circumstance concurs to promote. Among the letters lately received
from my correspondents, are two, which, as they afford a lively picture of the
bad consequences resulting from the neglect of this complacency, I shall here
lay before my readers.

SIR,
MY father was a merchant of some eminence, who gave me a good education, and a
fortune of several thousand pounds. With these advantages, a tolerable person,
and I think not an unamiable temper, I was not long arrived at womanhood,
before I found myself possessed of many admirers. Among others was Mr. Gold, a
gentleman of a very respectable character, who had some connections in trade
with my father. To him, being a young man of a good figure, and of very open
and obliging manners, I soon gave the preference; and we were accordingly
married with the universal approbation of my friends.

We have now lived together above three years, and I have brought him two boys
and a girl, all very fine children. I go little abroad, attend to nothing so
much as the economy of our family, am as obliging as possible to all my
husband's friends, and study in every particular to be a kind and dutiful wife.
Mr. Gold's reputation and success in business daily increases, and he is, in
the main, a kind and attentive husband; yet I find him so particular in his
temper, and so often out of humor about trifles, that, in spite of all those
comfortable circumstances, I am perfectly unhappy.

At one time he finds fault with the dishes at table; at another, with the
choice of my maidservants; sometimes he is displeased with the trimming of my
gown, sometimse with the shape of my cloak, or the figure of my headdress; and
should I chance to give an opinion on any subject which is not perfectly to his
mind, he probably looks out of humor at the time, and he is sure to chide me
about it when we are by ourselves.

It is of no consequence, whether I have been right or wrong in any of these
particulars. If I say a word in defense of my choice or opinion, it is sure to
make matters worse, and I am only called a fool for my pains; or, if I express
my wonder that he should give himself uneasiness about such trifles, he
answers, sullenly, that, to be sure, every thing is a trifle, in which I choose
to disoblige him.

In a word, Mr. Gold will allow me to have no mind but his: and, unless I can
see with his eyes, hear with his ears, and taste with his palate, (none of
which I can very easily bring myself to do, as you must know all of them are
somewhat particular,) I see no prospect of our situation changing for the
better; and what makes our present one doubly provoking is, that, but for this
unfortunate weakness, Mr. Gold, who is, in other respects, a very worthy man,
would make one of the best of husbands.

Pray tell me, Sir, what I should do in this situation; or take your own way of
letting my husband see his weakness, the reformation of which would be the
greatest of all earthly blessings to

Yours, etc. SUSANNA GOLD.


I was thinking how I should answer this letter, or in what way I could be
useful to my correspondent, when I received the following, addressed to me; the
insertion of which is, I believe, the best reply I can make to it.

SIR,
I WAS bred a merchant; by my success in trade I am now in affluent
circumstances, and I have reason to think, that I am so with an unblemished
character.

Some years ago I married the daughter of a respectable citizen, who brought a
comfortable addition to my fortune; and, as she had been virtuously educated,
and seemed cheerful and good-tempered; as I was myself naturally of a domestic
turn, and resolved to make a good husband, I thought we bade fair for being
happy in each other.

But, though I must do my spouse the justice to say, that she is discreet and
prudent, attentive to the affairs of her family, a careful and fond mother to
her children, and, in many respects, an affectionate and dutiful wife; yet one
foible in her temper destroys the effect of all these good qualities. She is so
much attached to her own opinions in every trifle, so impatient of
contradiction in them, and withal so ready to dispute mine, that, if I
disapprove of her taste or sentiments, in any one particular, or seem
dissatisfied, when she disapproves of my taste or sentiments, it is the certain
source of a quarrel; and, whilst we perfectly agree as to our general plan of
life, and every essential circumstance of our domestic economy, this silly
fancy that I must eat, dress, think, and speak, precisely as she would have me,
whilst she will not accommodate herself to me in the most trifling of these
particulars, gives me perpetual uneasiness. So that, with almost every thing I
could wish, a genteel income, a good reputation, promising children, and a
virtuous wife, whom I sincerely esteem, I have the mortification to find myself
absolutely unhappy.

I am sure, this foible of my poor wife will appear to you, Sir, in its proper
light; your making it appear so to her, may be the mean of alleviating our
mutual distress; for, to tell you the truth, I believe she is almost as great a
sufferer as I am. I hope you will gratify me in this desire; by doing so, you
may be of general service, and will particularly oblige

Your constant reader, and Obedient humble servant, NATHANIEL GOLD.


On comparing these two letters, it is evident that, from the want of that
complacency mentioned in the beginning of this paper, the very sensibility of
temper, and strength of affection, which, under its influence, would have made
this good couple happy, has had a quite contrary effect. The source of the
disquiet they complain of, is nothing else than the want of that respect for
the taste, feelings, and opinions of each other, which constitutes the
disposition I have recommended above, and which, so far from being inconsistent
with a reasonable desire of reforming each other in these particulars, is the
most probable mean of accomplishing it.

Nor is the case of Mr. and Mrs. Gold singular in this respect. Domestic
quarrels generally originate from the want of this pliancy of disposition,
which people seem, very absurdly, to suppose may be dispensed with in trifles.
I have known a man, who would have parted with half his estate to serve a
friend, to whom he would not have yielded a hair's breadth in an argument. But
the smaller virtues must be attended to as well as the greater; the manners as
well as the duties of life. They form a sort of Pocket-Coin, which, though it
does not enter into great and important transactions, is absolutely necessary
for common and ordinary intercourse.

Number XXXIV.
THE mutual complaints of Mr. and Mrs. Gold, which have been communicated in my
last paper, together with some complaints of similar family distresses, which I
have received from other correspondents, often remind me of the happy effects,
which my friends Horatio and Emilia have experienced from an opposite temper
and conduct.

Horatio, though he obtained a very liberal education, lived till the age of
twenty-five almost entirely in the country. The small fortune which he
inherited from his father being about this time increased by his succeeding to
a distant relation; he married the young and beautiful Emilia. He had become
warmly attached to her, not so much on account of her beauty, as from an
expression of a sweet, though lively temper, which marked her countenance.
This, when admitted to a more intimate acquaintance, in some visits which he
paid to the capital, he found to be justified by her conversation and manners.

Emilia's father was addicted to pleasure and expense, and her mother, though
more accomplished, of a similar disposition. In their family she had been
accustomed to a life of more than ordinary gaiety.

Though Horatio felt, in all its extent, that passion which is not very
favorable to a just estimation of character, yet these circumstances had not
escaped his notice. He failed not to observe, that Emilia had acquired a
stronger attachment to the pleasures of a town life, than was either right in
itself, or agreeable to that preference for domestic society, and the quiet of
a country life, which he had always felt, and which he still wished to gratify.

However, instead of acquainting Emilia with his taste in these particulars, he
judged it better to let her enjoy that style of life to which she had been
accustomed, not doubting, from the natural good sense and sweetness of her
disposition, that her own taste might be gradually corrected, and that as his
should, from time to time, fall under her observation, it might contribute to
the change.

He took up, therefore, his residence in town; and though Emilia went into
company, and frequented public places more than he could wish, yet he complied
with her inclination in these instances, partook of her amusements when he was
not necessarily engaged, and, when he did so, carefully avoided betraying that
indifference or disgust which he often felt.

Whilst Horatio, however, gave way to the taste of Emilia, he never lost the
inclination, nor neglected the means of reforming it.

Amidst the gaiety to which she had been accustomed, Emilia had early formed a
taste for the elegant writers of the present age; and the same sensibility and
delicacy of mind, which led her to admire them, made her no less sensible of
the beauties of a polished and refined conversation. It was this, which had
first gained the affections of Horatio; it was to this he trusted for effecting
the reformation he desired.

He was very assiduous, therefore, to cultivate and encourage this literary
taste in Emilia. He frequently took occasion to turn the conversation to
subjects of literature, and to dwell on the beauties, or mention the striking
passages of this or that author; and would often engage Emilia in a fine poem,
an affecting tragedy, or an interesting novel, when, but for that circumstance,
she would have been exhausting her spirits at a ball, or wasting the night at
cards.

Nor was he less studious in forming her taste for company than for books.
Though he had never aimed at an extensive acquaintance, Horatio enjoyed the
friendship of several persons of both sexes endued with those elegant manners,
and that delicate and cultivated understanding, which render conversation at
once agreeable and instructive.

Of these friends he frequently formed parties at his house. Emilia, who had
the same disposition to oblige, which she on all occasions experienced from
him, was happy to indulge his inclinations in this particular; and, as she was
well qualified for bearing a part in their conversation, which had charms of
which her mind was highly sensible, these parties gradually became more and
more agreeable to her.

In this manner her books, the conversation of select companies, and the care
of her children, which soon became a most endearing office to her tender and
feeling heart, furnished her with a variety of domestic occupations. As these
gradually led her to go less into mixed company and public amusements, she
began to lose her habitual relish for them. As she easily observed how
agreeable this change was to the taste of Horatio, that circumstance gave her
mind more and more a domestic turn.

The same delicacy, from which he at first gave way to her taste for company
and public amusements, made him avoid showing that preference, which he
entertained for a country life.

For some time he was entirely silent on the subject. Though he now and then
made excursions to the country, yet it was only occasionally upon necessary
business. Emilia could not but observe, that the manner in which he passed his
time there, in adding to the beauties of his place, and in an easy intercourse
with a few neighbors, was highly agreeable to him. Yet he never expressed an
inclination of fixing his general residence in the country, or even of her
accompanying him in his occasional visit at Rosedale. His visits became,
however, gradually more frequent; and, as they generally continued for some
weeks, those little absences gave a sort of pain to Emilia, to whom no society
was now so agreeable as that of Horatio. She became, therefore, desirous of
accompanying him to the country.

Their first visits were short, and at considerable intervals; but as he
omitted no means of rendering them agreeable to her, she seldom left it without
regret, and was often the first to propose their return. At length Emilia, who
now observed, that her husband was no where so happy as in the country, and had
herself come to feel the same predilection for the calm cheerfulness and
innocent amusements of a country life, took occasion to acquaint him with this
change in her sentiments, and to express the same inclination which, she was
persuaded, he entertained* of abandoning a town life, and fixing their constant
residence at Rosedale.

A proposal so agreeable to him was readily complied with; and they have ever
since passed their time in that delightful retreat, occupied with the education
of their children, the improvement of their place, and the society of a few
friends; equally happy in themselves, and beloved by all around them. Thus has
Horatio, the gentleness of whose mind is equal to the strength of his
understanding, by a prudent as well as delicate complacency, gradually effected
that change, which an opposite conduct might have failed to produce, and which,
at the same time, would probably have been the source of mutual chagrin, and
rendered both him and his wife unhappy.

Nor was the reformation solely on her part. By leading him to partake in
company and amusements, she became the mean of correcting the natural reserve
of his manner: and as the example of his plain though animated conversation led
her to moderate the vivacity and sprightliness of hers, which sometimes
approached toward levity; so her vivacity communicated an agreeable gaiety and
cheerfulness to the discourse of Horatio.

If, in the above account, I have pointed out more strongly the effects of
complacency in Horatio than in Emilia, it ought to be remembered, that this
virtue is much more rarely seen in the one sex than in the other. A certain
pride, which always requires much discipline, and often the rod of
disappointment and adversity, to subdue, attends the firmness of men, and makes
it, generally, much more difficult for them to acquire this complacency of
temper.

If men truly possess that superiority of understanding over women, which some
of them seem to suppose, surely this use of it is equally ungenerous and
imprudent. They would, I imagine, show that superiority much more effectually,
in endeavoring to imitate the amiable gentleness of the female character, and
to acquire, from a sense of its propriety, a virtue, for which, it must be
allowed, that the other sex is more indebted to their original constitution.

If women, as we sometimes allege, are too apt to connect the idea of pride,
and hardness of manners, with that of knowledge and ability, and, on that
account, often show a preference to more superficial accomplishments; the men,
who value themselves for knowledge and abilities, ought to look into their own
conduct for the cause. Imitating then the behavior of Horatio, they should aim
to show, that a man's feelings need not be the less delicate for being under
the direction of a sound judgment; and that he, who best knows the female
character, and will put the highest value on its excellence, is also the most
likely to make allowance for a difference of taste, and to bear with those
little weaknesses, with which he knows all human excellence to be often
accompanied.

Number XXXV.
IT has been observed, that the world is generally just in the opinions which
it forms of the characters of the different persons, who appear on the stage of
life; that few have been held high in the estimation of the public, who have
not deserved it; and that instances as rarely occur of its censure misapplied,
as of its applause misplaced. But though this remark, it must be allowed, is
true in the general, yet experience teaches that it cannot be admitted without
exceptions; and that the truly virtuous and deserving, particularly in the
private walks of life, may often pass unnoticed, whilst the less worthy may
become the objects of favor.

Cleora was married at an early period of life. Gaily educated, and thoughtless
in disposition, she was incapable of any strong attachment. She married
Lothario, because he was a man of the ton, dressed well, kept good company, and
professed himself her humble admirer. He married her, because she was reckoned
pretty, danced well, was a toast, and was as much in the fashion as he was. As
they went together without affection, so neither of them allowed their love to
be troublesome to the other. Pleasure, dissipation, show, was the taste of
both. Lothario was sometimes at home, and in his wife's company; but then it
was only in a crowd, and amidst a variety of guests. Abroad they sometimes met
at dinner and supper parties; but as frequently their parties were not the
same, and their amusements lay in different quarters.

Such a life of dissipation could not be supported without great expense.
Though Lothario was possessed of a considerable land-estate, yet when he
succeeded to it, it was much encumbered with debt; and that debt was now
greatly increased by his own extravagance. Every year made a new bond or
mortgage necessary.

Cleora knew all this; but she allowed it not to make any impression on her
mind. It was too serious a subject, to be suffered to intrude itself in the
midst of her enjoyments. The mother of a numerous family, she is equally
inattentive with Lothario, to giving them proper habits and impressions. The
boys neglecting every useful branch of study, by a strange combination are both
beaux and blackguards. At public places they are reckoned fashionable, whilst,
at the same time, in their private amusements, they value themselves on their
coarseness and intemperance. The daughters are now come to the age of women;
but Cleora has no other object as to them, than to increase their fondness for
public places and late hours: devoted to these herself, she makes her daughters
the pretext for her own indulgencies.

Thus Cleora, if she were to think, if she were to stop her course of
dissipation for a moment, would see bankruptcy at hand, and her children, if
not herself and husband, reduced to want; her children brought up without
education, and initiated in nothing but the ways of idleness and folly. With
all this, Cleora retains a good character in the world: her cheerfulness, her
gaiety, make her a favorite wherever she goes. "'It Is a pity," it is sometimes
said, "that her husband was not more attentive to her and her children; but it
is not her fault. She is indeed to be commended for submitting with so much
ease to her fate; one would never discover that she was married to Lothario."
Such is the general character which Cleora bears; and if any one expresses a
hint to the contrary, it is considered as the remark of a person willing to be
censorious.

How shall I contrast with Cleora the conduct of Aurelia? She also married
young, before she had learned to feel and judge for herself, and at a time when
she was entirely given up to the direction and disposal of her parents. It has
unfortunately been the fate of some of the best of women, to become the wives
of men in many respects their inferiors, both in understanding and in
character. Amidst the chances of life, the intricacies of situation, or from
the deception of minds whose very virtues betray their caution, this will
sometimes happen.

Cleanthes, the husband of Aurelia, is of a character very similar to that of
Cleora's husband, Lothario, and on many accounts an unfortunate match for
Aurelia. But Cleanthes being reputed to be a man of fortune, possessing a good
address, and believed to be possessed of good nature, it was the fate of
Aurelia to be joined to him for life. Those habits of thoughtlessness and
extravagance, however, which Cleanthes had acquired before marriage, never
forsook him: he even became indifferent and negligent of Aurelia, and a fine
family of children which she brought him. Intemperate in his pleasures, and
inordinate in his expense, he plunged headlong into every fashionable folly,
into every species of dissipation. Aurelia felt much anguish at this conduct of
her husband. She endeavored, by every gentle method in her power, to reclaim
him, and to gain his mind to virtue and domestic enjoyment. All her efforts
proved ineffectual. Cleanthes was not yet, however, so lost as not to feel, at
times, the reproaches of his conscience; but, instead of aiming to remove, he
tried to avoid them. In this situation, Aurelia was like another conscience:
the reflection on her quiet and gentle virtues was like a mirror, that did but
show him his own ugliness; and, frightened at the sight, he only thought how to
escape it. Thus abandoned by himself, thus having forsaken Aurelia, and every
better feeling, he has gone more and more headlong into vice -- intemperance
has become his companion, and expense much beyond his income has attended it.

What a situation for Aurelia! With a mind fitted for every domestic enjoyment,
she sees her husband a prey to folly and extravagance, ruining his fortune, and
dead to every proper sentiment. One only comfort remains -- the pleasure she
receives from her children. Her only son, who promises to be all a parent could
wish, has been placed at a distant academy; and a rich uncle, who has no
children of his own, has adopted him as his son. Her three daughters live with
herself, and her great object is, to educate and instruct them; and in this she
is well rewarded, by the appearance of their promising virtues, and the display
of their opening talents.

With all these amiable parts of Aurelia's conduct, justice is not done her in
the opinion of the world. Her virtues are unknown, or pass unnoticed. It is
frequently said, that "Cleanthes is a good fellow -- Pity he had not a wife of
a less grave disposition, more suited to his taste. If he had, he might have
been less expensive, and his pleasures been more fixed at home." It was but the
other evening, that, making a course of visits, I called at a house, where I
found Cleora engaged in deep play, and her eldest daughter sitting by her,
attending to the game. At that moment Lothario happened to come into the room.
He drew a chair near some ladies at another table, and gave a nod of
indifference to his daughter. "La! Sir," said Miss, "we did not look for you;
we thought you were at Mr. --." Her mother gave one look behind; asked her
partner, if she had not held the king; and then desired her to set up two by
honors and the odd trick.

The same evening I called at the house of Cleanthes. Him I found abroad, but
Aurelia was at home. I was shown into the room, where she was, seated with her
three girls around her. On the table lay several books, among which were the
Spectator, the Man of Feeling, and the Theater of Education. She herself was
busy with her needle; and her two youngest girls were occupied in the same
manner, under her direction. The eldest was employed in reading. When I entered
the room, one of the girls took me by the hand, and kindly welcomed me. "I
thought, however," said she, with a most expressive look, "it had been papa; my
mamma expected him." A tear started into Aurelia's eye. She soon, however,
resumed her cheerfulness; and I remained for a considerable time in this
domestic party, receiving a pleasure, which I cannot describe, in the
conversation of Aurelia, the amiableness and propriety of her conduct, her
behavior to her children, and theirs to her.

When I came home, I could not help reflecting on the different characters of
Aurelia and Cleora, placed in situations not dissimilar; one drawing from her
very want of feeling and of duty, the suffrage of the world! the other, from
the very exercise of the most disinterested virtue, suffering its neglect, and
incurring its censure! Yet with all her afflictions and all her sorrows, who
would not rather wish to be the suffering and virtuous Aurelia, than the gay
and thoughtless Cleora? The one may enjoy the dissipation of the world, and the
good liking of its votaries; but the other must possess that approbation from
her own mind, which infinitely surpasses all the external enjoyments, which the
world is able to bestow.

Number XXXVI.
Bonus est fugienda aspicere alieno in malo.
PUB. SY^. It is a good thing to learn caution by
The misfortunes of others. --

SIR,
IN the perusal of history, or of the more limited pictures which biography
presents to us, there is no reader who does not take a warm interest in every
thing that regards a truly deserving character; who does not feel a sensible
pleasure in those instances where the benevolent purposes of such a person have
been attended with success, or his virtuous actions followed by reward. This
approbation paid to virtue is a tribute of the heart, which is given with ease,
which is bestowed even with pleasure. But in life itself, it is unhappily
found, that virtue has not the same concomitant approbation.

This contrast of opinions is never so perceptible, as when, on the death of a
person, who was well known to us, we compare the idea we formed of his
character when alive, with that which we now entertain of him. His excellencies
and defects are now more impartially estimated. On the former, the memory
dwells with peculiar sati^faction, and indulges a melancholy pleasure, in
bestowing its tribute of approbation. On the latter, we kindly throw the veil
of charitable alleviation: we reflect on our own imbecility; we find apologies
for another in the weakness of our own nature, and impute the error of the
individual to the imperfection of the species.

But above all, should it happen, that the person thus removed by death was
one, who had approved himself our friend, and whose kind affections we had
repeatedly experienced; the difference we now perceive in our estimate of such
a character, is apt to strike the mind with the most forcible conviction of our
own unworthiness. Memory is industrious to torment us with numberless instances
of merit we have overlooked, of kindness we have not returned, of services
repaid with cold neglect. The injury we have done is aggravated by the
reflection, that it cannot be repaired; for he whose life was perhaps
embittered by our ingratitude, is now insensible to our contrition.

Ah, Sir! the man who now writes to you bears witness himself to the misery of
that feeling, which he describes. He, who now addresses you, was once blessed
with the affection of the best, the most amiable of women. When I married my
Maria, engaged to her by that esteem, which an acquaintance almost from infancy
had produced, I knew not half her worth. The situation in which she was now
placed, brought to my view many points of excellence, which before were
undiscovered. Must I own to my shame, that the possession of this treasure
diminished its value? Fool that I was! I knew not my own happiness, till I had
forever lost it. Six years were the short period of our union. Would to Heaven
that term were yet to live again! I loved Maria. Severely as I am now disposed
to review my past conduct, I cannot reproach myself with a failure in
affection. But what human being could have been insensible to loveliness, to
worth, to tenderness like hers! Poor was that affection, which often preferred
the most trivial selfish gratification to her wishes or requests; and of small
value was that regard, which a sudden gust of passion could, at times, entirely
obliterate.

It was my character, Sir, as that of many, to see the path of duty and
propriety, but to have the weakness to be forever deviating from it. Educated
in a respectable sphere of life, but possessing a narrow income, which with
strict economy was barely sufficient to maintain with decency, that station
which we occupied, it was the care of my Maria to superintend herself the
minutest article of our domestic concerns, and thus to retrench a variety of
the ordinary expenses of a family, from her own perfect skill in every useful
accomplishment of her sex. Though fond of society, and formed to shine in it;
though not insensible to admiration; (and what woman with her graces of person
could have been insensible to it?) though possessing the becoming pride of
appearing among her equals with equal advantages of dress and ornament; she
sparingly indulged in gratifications, which ill accorded with our limited
fortune. She weighed with admirable discretion the greater against the less
duties of life, and made no scruple to sacrifice the one, when they interfered
ever so little with the performances of the other.

Shall I own, that to me, thoughtless, extravagant and vain, the conduct of
this excellent woman appeared oftener to merit blame than approbation!
Regardless of consequences, and careless of the future whilst I enjoyed the
present, I censured that moderation, which was a continual reproach to my own
profuseness. Incapable of imitating her example, I denied that it was
meritorious; and what in her was real magnanimity, I, with equal weakness and
ingratitude, attributed to poorness of spirit. How shall I describe to you,
Sir, her mild and gentle demeanor, the patience with which she bore the most
unmerited reproofs, the tender solicitude and endearing efforts which she used,
to wean me from those ruinous indulgencies, to which vanity or appetite was
continually prompting me! Too often were these efforts repaid by me with
splenetic indifference, or checked at once by sarcasm or by anger.

It is but a poor alleviation of the anguish I feel from these reflections, to
remember, that, even whilst my Maria lived, the esteem which I sincerely felt
for her virtues, the affection which I really bore her, and the sense I had of
her tenderness, wrung my heart at times with the deepest remorse, and prompted
me to atone for my injustice, by the warmest expressions of kindness and
regard. Many a time, Sir, in those tranquil moments, when no wayward
inclination or peevish humor overpowered my better feelings, have I firmly
resolved, that my future conduct should make ample reparation for the offenses
of the past. Nor were these resolutions altogether fruitless; for whilst under
the influence of this salutary conviction of my errors, I have so far amended
them as to feel for a time a genuine relish for calm and domestic happiness.
But how short the dawning of amendment! A new temptation presented itself, and
my weak resolution yielded to the force of returning passion. With my former
errors I resumed the despicable pride of justifying them, and every deviation
from duty was aggravated by harshness and ill humor.

Ever offending, and ever purposing to atone for my offenses, I have now
irretrievably lost the opportunity. That best of women is now no more. I have
received her latest breath, and heard her last supplication, which was a prayer
to Heaven to pour its blessings on the most unworthy of men.

Here let me end this letter. -- No words can express the feelings, which these
reflections convey to the breast of

LUCILIUS.

Number XXXVII.
THAT logic, ethics, physics, and metaphysics, should be exalted to the dignity
of arts or sciences, excites no surprise; but that the art of managing a house
and family should be placed on a level with them, appears rather wonderful. Yet
it is certain that Economics were taught as a scholastic science by the ancient
philosophers; and there still remains a very curious book, in which Xenophon
has recorded the doctrines of Socrates on the subject of economy. At first
sight one is apt to imagine, that philosophy has departed from her province,
when she enters on domestic management; and that it would be ridiculous to send
a housekeeper to Socrates for the improvement of good housewifery; yet it must
be confessed, that there is in the work of Xenophon nothing of impertinence,
but a great deal of good sense most elegantly expressed.

Notwithstanding the air of superiority which is assumed by logic, physics, and
metaphysics, yet, considering the influence on human happiness, the greatest
value should be placed on economics; for the others, as they are treated in the
schools, are little more than speculations, and have but a very limited
influence either on the regulation or the enjoyment of life. But the true pater
familias, or master of a family, is one of the most respectable characters in
society; and the science which directs his conduct, or reforms his mistakes, is
entitled to peculiar esteem.

Much of the misery which prevails in the world, is justly to be imputed to the
want of economy. But the word, economy, is usually misunderstood. It is
confined in its meaning to parsimony, though it undoubtedly comprehends every
thing which relates to the conduct of a family. Frugality is indeed a very
considerable part of it; but not the whole. It is the judicious government of a
little community inhabiting one house, and usually allied by all the soft bands
of affinity and consanguinity. The person who executes such a government,
should be eminently, furnished with prudence and benevolence.

The rage for fashionable levities, which has pervaded even the lower ranks, is
singularly adverse to the knowledge and the virtues which domestic life
demands. Dress occupies the greater part both of the time and attention of
many; and the consequence is, too often, ruin in polite life, bankruptcy in the
commercial, and misery and disgrace to all.

It might be attended with great advantage to the community, and to the
happiness of particular persons, if some part of the time and attention
bestowed on the ornamental parts of education, were transferred to those arts,
which teach the prudent management of domestic concerns. The care of children
in the age of infancy requires considerable skill as well as tenderness; and
how should she know how to enter upon it, whose whole time has been spent in
learning the polite accomplishments, which, though they add much to
gracefulness, make no pretensions to utility? She must be guided entirely by
servants, nurses, and medical practitioners; but surely it would be safer and
pleasanter to possess such a skill, as should prevent her from lying entirely
at the mercy of ignorance, vanity, officiousness, and presumption.

As to music, which some ladies spend so much time in learning, it is well
known that they seldom practice it, when they have entered into the married
state. Many other feminine accomplishments there are, which cease to attract
attention, when once their possessors are engaged in the care of a family. It
is therefore probable, that the time consumed in the acquisition of things,
which are confessedly of no use to them, might be employed in acquiring such
knowledge as would enable them to contribute greatly to the happiness of the
man, to whom they should give their hands and hearts, and of the children which
might be the pledges of their conjugal love.

I by no means refer them to Xenophon or Socrates for instruction in domestic
management. Their own parents should communicate the result of their experience
and observation on the subject. Above all, they should inspire them with a love
of home, and the pleasures and virtues of an affectionate family association.
Some men, who appear to be insensible to female charms, allege in excuse for
their not soliciting some lady in marriage, that such are the expensive
manners, dress, and amusements of the fashionable part of the sex, so little
their skill in conducting a family, and such their ignorance of economy, that
to be married is often to be ruined even in the midst of affluence. The
viciousness of too many among the sex enables vicious men to gratify their
desires at a small expense. Few are willing to incur the danger of dissipating
their fortunes in supporting a woman, who can contribute nothing to the
alleviation of their cares by domestic prudence and discreet economy.

In every view it appears most clearly, that nothing would contribute more to
the happiness of females, and indeed of men and families in general, than a
cultivation of that unostentatious knowledge, which is in hourly request, and
without which there can be little permanent security in the most exalted ^ank,
and most abundant affluence. Socrates judged wisely, therefore, in ranking
economics among the most useful and honorable of the arts and sciences.

Number XXXVIII.
-- In the marriage state the world must own,
Divided happiness was never known.
CI^BER:
A letter to a very good-natured lady, that is married to a very ill-natured
man.
I HAVE now and then observed, my dearest cousin, (through all your cares and
endeavors to conceal it) that there are some few rufflings that happen between
you and your husband; and which, I fear, must make some moments pass with more
uneasiness to you, than a woman of so much goodness deserves. The friendship
that has subsisted so long between our families, and the great affection I have
for you, make this give me more pain than it may perhaps give even to yourself;
for I know the steadiness of your mind, and the prudence you have in
alleviating every thing that would disturb a less settled temper; and make some
wives fly out into violences, that would render them ridiculous as well as
wretched. But as an indifferent stander-by may see more than the best gamester,
when engaged deep in a difficult party, I shall venture to give you some of my
sentiments, in hopes that they may still more awaken your own, or at least be
improved by your reflections upon them.

It were to be wished, that all married people would lay this down for their
first and great principle; that they can never be happy in themselves, unless
they are well with their partners. Their connexions, views, and interests are
naturally so united, that the one cannot be happy, if the other is miserable.
In so strict an union, if you are not well with one another, what can you do to
avoid being miserable? You must either be perpetually hunting after reasons to
fly from your own house; or else you must sit jarring together, like a couple
of bad instruments that are almost always out of tune.

The most necessary thing then for a married woman, to make herself happy, is
to endeavor to please her husband; and one comfort is, that the very
endeavoring to please, goes a great way toward obtaining its end. Complacency
as naturally begets kindness, as a disobliging behavior does aversion.

It Is not enough to avoid doing or saying any thing that you know would be
disagreeable to your husband; but one should be inclined to do or say every
thing that is likely to be agreeable to him. A woman that thoroughly considers
this, and puts it in practice, can scarcely ever fail of making both her
husband and herself happy.

One considerable help and advantage that you have toward this, is the being
so thoroughly acquainted with one another's tempers and inclinations. There is
a good deal of opportunity for this (if your match was not huddled up with that
haste which some people are in, for settling the most important step in their
whole lives) during the time of courtship; and usually much more after: these
two lights are so very different, that between them you may see into the whole
character of a man, how far he is ready to submit, and how far to domineer.
With a proper observation, you may come, in time, to discover every bent of his
temper, and to open all the more hidden folds of his heart. Now, when one is
well aware of every thing that may displease, it is easy to avoid it; and, when
one knows what is pleasing, scarcely any thing can be wanting but the will to
please.

I would particularly desire you to look on nothing, that may displease, as a
trifle. However unimportant the thing may be in itself, the displeasing and
disagreeing is a serious evil; and married people differ much oftener about
trifles than about things of weight. Let either husbands or wives recollect a
little, and I fear they will find what I say to be more true than they might at
first imagine it to have been.

The best way for a married woman to carry her point often, is to yield
sometimes. Yielding in a married woman, is as useful as flying is to an
unmarried one; for both of these methods most naturally obtain what they seem
to avoid. And if a woman has any vanity (as every human creature has more or
less of it in their composition) I think that passion might be gratified this
way, as well as any other; for, to get the better of one's self is, at least,
as glorious as to get the better of any other person whatever; and you would,
besides, have the inward satisfaction of considering, that, in all such cases,
you do not yield out of cowardice, but prudence; and that you enjoyed the
superiority of knowing what you ought to do, much better than the obstinate
man, who seems outwardly to have carried his point, when in reality you have
carried yours.

I do not mean by this, to set you on a life of artifice and dissimulation. I
rather think that such methods as these, and such a scheme of pleasing, would,
in time, grow pleasing to yourself; and that it would be the most likely of
any, either to introduce or increase a real mutual love and good will between
you and your husband -- But how, my dear cousin, have I thus forgotten myself,
for a page or two together! and whilst I am writing to you, have really written
a letter for the world. For you, I dare say, have no occasion for my rules; and
have thought over every thing that I have said long before I set pen to paper.
You will, however, forgive one who wishes you as well as he does himself; and
who would most extremely rejoice to see that serenity of mind, which all the
world thinks to be in you, and all those virtues and excellencies which I know
to be in you, unruffled by any disturbances, and cleared even from every little
cloud that may hang over them. I need not tell you how much and how truly I am

Your affectionate kinsman and humble servant.

Number XXXIX.
Felices ter, et amplius,
Quos irrupta tenet copula; nec malis
Divulsus querimoniis,
Suprema citius solvet amor die.
HOR. Ode 13. Lib. 1. Happy, thrice happy they, whose friendships prove
One constant scene of unmolested love;
Whose hearts, right-tempered, feel no various turns,
No coolness chills them and no madness burns;
But, free from anger, doubts and jealous fear,
Die as they live, united and sincere.
ORRERY.
FAMILY divisions frequently spring from very immaterial accidents, which
gather strength by repetition, till they are augmented in so formidable a
manner, as to sweep before them all the domestic virtues, and abolish all the
amiable tenderness, for which woman was originally intended by the Divine
Creator. I have been a frequent spectator of such scenes of infelicity. Where I
was in most expectation of finding the celestial seeds of connubial happiness
flourishing in exquisite beauty, there have I been the most disappointed.
Instead of beholding a paradise, I have found nothing but a garden of noxious
weeds; which occasions me to make the following observations: for these may be
useful to society, as, by holding up the mirror of inadvertency, they may
affright her with her own deformity.

Lorenzo and Violetta have been married upwards of three years: they were
equally matched, both in respect of fortune and age; the one being sufficient
for the purchase, and the other for the enjoyment of the pleasures of life. For
some time, after the celebration of their nuptials, they entertained a
reciprocal affection. She was all fondness, he all indulgence. But their
intimacy, instead of increasing, diminished their mutual regard. Her beauty,
the more it was familiar to his eye, grew the less attractive to his heart; and
his conversation grew less engaging, the more she partook of the natural levity
of her sex. He renewed his Bacchanalian acquaintance, she found more pleasure
in discharging her visits than her domestic offices: in fine, both became
disintentionally indifferent; their meals were irregular, their conversation
little; till at last, their affection seemed to be dwindled away to nothing but
a ceremonious complaisance.

Nature was soon more predominant than the ties of gentility or the rules of
decency. Their tempers were perpetually bursting from the formality of reserve:
trivial accidents gave alternate uneasiness to one or the other; which were
productive of such disputes as often terminated in a shyness for two or three
days together. Though they were both so far estranged from the lambent flame of
love, yet their disagreement frequently exhibited a conviction of their
honesty, by a reconciliation which just served to blow up the dormant embers of
affection; though still they were continually manifesting the difference of
their tempers. They were both hastily passionate; he was sometimes ill-natured,
whilst she was too apt to conceive what he never intended. They were both
sensible of their folly, yet they still persisted in their obstinacy; if he
spoke warm, she reddened with the glow of anger; if he was desirous of
tranquillity, she grew turbulent. The vanity of pedigree and the ostentation of
fortune were often bandied backwards and forwards; this ushered in indecency
from him, and left her abandoned to a misguided passion.

Reiterated quarrels aggravated their imprudence: he frequently swore, she
railed, and blows ensued. She felt the effects of his violence, he bore the
marks of her fury. When their passion abated, she sat pensively venting the
gushing sorrows from her eyes; he grew mollified, and after innumerable
caresses, re-composed her agitated spirits. The quarrel renewed their
tenderness; they gently upbraided themselves, confessed their folly, resolved
to oppose the excursions of passion, and for some time lived with all the
appearance of a durable felicity. But when passion has once got the head,
reason vainly attempts to guide the rein. Though Lorenzo and Violetta, on the
repetition of every quarrel, became sensible of their smothered affection, yet
they never endeavored to light up the extinguished lamp of HYMEN. They
continued their intemperate sa^es, and were at last so habituated to such an
ignomi^ (...) ^ustom, as to give an unbounded loose to their passion (...)
company, till they are now become the derision of all their acquaintances.

As I have a regard for Lorenzo, I have taken an opportunity of expatiating
with him upon his scandalous indiscretion; he acknowledges his imprudence,
professes the strongest affection for his wife, and solemnly avows his fidelity
to the nuptial bed. Violetta is also sensible of her erroneous behavior,
esteems her husband, and wears the throne of chastity on her brow. They are
equally conscious of their fault, are equally sorry for it, and seem equally
desirous of correcting it; but they are so absolutely devoted to the storms of
passion, as to be equally incapable of executing those salutary resolutions,
which they are thoroughly sensible can alone give pleasure to the bridal bed,
happiness to the prime of life, and comfort to the declension of age.

What a melancholy reflection is this! That two persons, once united by the
silken band of love, should so disown its empire, for the gratification of some
ridiculous humor, is most astonishing! that two persons, who could so easily
enjoy the beatitudes of life, should so voluntarily banish themselves from the
flowery road of happiness, is amazing! but their conduct serves only to evince
this golden maxim, "That reason is the best gift of nature;" for without her
sacred influence, monarchs in their palaces are less happy than peasants in
their cottages.

Number XL.
-- It Is a fault
That men, not guided by the track of reason,
But heat and wantonness of blood, run giddy
To seal such weighty covenants.
SHIRLEY 's Constant Maid.
AS the attainment of happiness is the grand spring of human action, I have
been often surprised at that inattention, so apparent in the generality of
mankind, to the most important concern in their lives, the choice of a wife; a
choice, on which not only their present welfare, but even their everlasting
felicity may depend. Indeed, if we may judge from the slight regard paid to an
object of so much moment, we may suppose it commonly understood to be a trivial
point, in which little or no reflection is requisite; or that fortune and
beauty were in themselves whatever was essential to the happiness of the
conjugal state. But let those, who, in the ardour of unreflecting youth, form
such gay visions of splendid enjoyments, and everlasting passion, consider, --
that there are requisites of a nobler kind, without which, when it may be too
late, they may find themselves involved in irretrievable ruin.

What melancholy histories have been recorded, where manly virtue has been
united to a fortune and to misery; blooming loveliness sacrificed at the shrine
of avarice; or unthinking youth, smitten by exterior charms alone, instead of
the attracting graces of modesty, sentiment, and discretion, has become a
voluntary victim to insipid, if not to meretricious beauty! I would not be
understood, however, as though I apprehended, that beauty and fortune are of no
estimation. The former, when united to piety, virtue, and good sense, can be
flighted by those only who are devoid of any ideas of whatever is lovely and
excellent in nature; and fortune, or at least a competence, is absolutely
necessary, since without it the highest degree of virtue, and the most
enchanting graces, will be insufficient to insure happiness in the conjugal
union: "Let reason teach what passion fain would hide,
That Hymen's bands by prudence should be tied.
Venus in vain the wedded pair would crown,
If angry fortune on their union frown:
Soon will the flattering dream of bliss be over,
And cloyed imagination cheat no more;
Then waking to the sense of lasting pain,
With mutual tears the nuptial couch they stain;
And that fond love, which should afford relief,
Does but increase the anguish of their grief;
Whilst both could easier their own sorrows bear,
Than the sad knowledge of each other's care."
LYTTLETON.

Certainly no prudent person ought to engage in the married state without a
sufficiency of means for a comfortable subsistence. That lover cannot regard
his mistress with virtuous passion, who would involve her in all the possible
consequences of reciprocal poverty. True love never forgets the happiness of
its object; for when this ceases to be regarded, it is not the generous
tenderness of love, but the unthinking wildness of passion.

These observations, however, cannot obviate the just complaints, which may be
made against those matches, in which beauty, or fortune only are regarded
"Beauty," says Lord Kaimes, "is a dangerous property, tending to corrupt the
mind of a wife, though it soon loses its influence over the husband. A figure
agreeable and engaging, which inspires affection without the ebriety of love,
is a much safer choice. The graces lose not their influence like beauty. At the
end of thirty years, a virtuous woman, who makes an agreeable companion, charms
her husband perhaps more than at first. The comparison of love to fire holds
good in one respect, that the fiercer it burns, the sooner it is extinguished."

It is unquestionably true, that happiness in the married state depends not on
riches, nor on beauty, but on virtue, good sense, and sweetness of temper. A
young man who has himself a sufficient fortune, should not always look for an
equivalent of that kind in the object of his love. "Who can find a virtuous
woman," says Solomon, "for her price is far above rubies?" The important object
of his inquiry is, not whether she has riches, but whether she possesses those
qualifications, which naturally form the amiable wife and the exemplary mother?
In like manner, would a parent conduct his daughter to a wise and judicous
choice of a husband, he will not so much recommend the necessity of a fortune,
as of virtuous conduct, good temper, discretion, regularity, and industry. With
these, a husband, if he be of a reputable profession, may improve the fortune
of his wife, and render it of much greater advantage to each other, than the
most ample equivalent in money, with the reverse of these qualities.

On the contrary, where interest pervades the bosom, and is the sole motive to
union, what can more naturally be expected than unhappy matches? Without a
certain congeniality of sentiment, independent of the adventitious
circumstances of beauty, or fortune, the connubial state is the very opposite
of a heaven. Home becomes disagreeable, where there is a diversity of taste,
temper, and wishes; or where those mental resources are wanting which invite to
conversation, and render it delightful and endearing. The scenes of
wretchedness, inseparable from such a state, must be obvious to every mind.

We turn with pleasure to the exquisite happiness, which is the result of a
virtuous choice. Home is then delightful, and every moment is replete with
satisfaction.

But without dwelling longer on this charming theme, permit me to ask, Who
would sacrifice the enjoyment of such felicity, for wealth? -- What weakness of
mind does it betray, to forfeit "the matchless joys of virtuous love," for the
ideal pleasures of affluence!

Number XLI.
OF all the pleasures that endear human life, there are none more worthy the
attention of a rational creature, than those that flow from the mutual return
of conjugal love. Our great poet MILTON, after he has described the nuptial
bower of ADAM and EVE in Paradise, thus calls upon that blissful state.

Hail, wedded love! mysterious law, true source.
Of human offspring, sole propriety
In Paradise, of all things common else.
By thee adulterous lust was driven from men,
Among the bestial herds to range; by thee
(Founded in reason, loyal, just and pure)
Relations dear, and all the charities
Of father, son and brother first were known.
-- Perpetual fountain of domestic bliss! --
Here love his golden shafts employs; here lights
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings.
In this scene the looser passions of youth are consolidated into a settled
affection: for the lawful object of love unites every care in itself; and makes
even those thoughts that were painful before, become delightful. When two minds
are thus engaged by the ties of reciprocal sincerity, each alternately receives
and communicates a transport, that is inconceivable to all but those that are
in this situation: from hence arises that heart-ennobling solicitude for one
another's welfare, that tender sympathy that alleviates affliction, and that
participated pleasure which heightens prosperity and joy itself. This is a full
completion of the blessings of humanity! for if reason and society are the
characteristics, which distinguish us from other animals, an excellence in
these two great privileges of man, which centres in wedlock, must raise us in
happiness above the rest of our species. It is here that the noblest passions,
of which the human soul is susceptible, join together, virtuous love and
friendship; the one supplying it with a constant rapture, and the other
regulating it by the rules of reason. I would not be understood to be speaking
here of those unnatural and disproportionable matches that are daily made upon
worldly views, where interest or lust are the only motives; I mean that such
only enjoy the blessing, who are conducted by HYMEN through his own realms of
innocence and sincerity.

A gentleman who is very happy in a beautiful friend, and is a kind of
enthusiast for the married state, told me the following story of an Italian
pair, who were famous for their unalterable constancy and affection. There
lived at Genoa a young nobleman named MARINI, who had a large estate in the
island of Corsica, whither he went every five or six years to regulate his
affairs. At the age of five and twenty he was married to a beautiful lady, the
daughter of a Venetian senator, named MONIMIA, who had refused the greatest
matches in Italy, to prefer the fortunate MARINI. As their marriage was founded
upon a mutual esteem, their passion increased instead of diminishing by
enjoyment, till they became an example of conjugal duty to all who knew them.
They had lived many years in this uninterrupted state of felicity, when MARINI
was obliged to make a voyage to Corsica, which was then disturbed by a
rebellious insurrection, in order to secure his patrimony, by encouraging his
dependants to stand firm in the defense of their country. But the greatest
affliction, and which absorbed all the rest, was his being necessitated to part
for a while from MONIMIA, who, being then far advanced in a state of pregnancy,
was unable to go with him as usual. When the fatal time of separation was come,
they embraced with the utmost grief, and the warmest prayers to Heaven for one
another's safety. As soon as this afflicting scene was over, MARINI embarked,
and having a fair wind, arrived safe at Bastia in a few hours. The success of
the rebels being stopped, and the affairs of the island a little settled again,
our lover began to prepare for his return to Genoa; but as he was walking one
day by the harbor where the ships of burden lay, he heard two sailors, who
were just arrived, talking of the death of a Genoese nobleman's wife then
absent from the republic. This casual circumstance greatly alarmed him, and
excited his curiosity to listen farther to their conversation, when, after a
little pause, he heard one of them mention the name of his dear MONIMIA. At
these words, his surprise and affliction were so great, that he had not power
to follow the mariners to satisfy his doubt, but instantly swooned away, and
when he recovered, found himself surrounded by his own servants lamenting over
him. At the same time that this happened to MARINI, something of the same
nature equally distressed MONIMIA; for an imperfect account came to Genoa by
the captain of a Venetian vessel, that a gentleman named MARINI had been
surprised near Bastia by a remaining party of rebels, and that he and all his
attendants were killed by them. These two accounts involved our unfortunate
pair in the greatest distress; they immediately took shipping in order to be
convinced of what they so much dreaded to know; the one for Corsica, the other
for Genoa. They were both sailed, when a violent storm arose, which drove their
vessels upon a little island in the Mediterranean. MARINI's ship landed first,
where, whilst the rest of the crew were refreshing themselves, the inconsolable
widower, as he thought himself, wandered with one servant only into a little
wood, that was near the seashore, to give a loose to his immoderate grief. Soon
after the Genoese ship landed too, and the same motive led MONIMIA with one of
her maids to the wood where her husband was, lamenting his unfortunate
condition. They had not been long there, before they heard each other's
complaint, and drew nearer mutually to see, if there was any wretch living
equally miserable with themselves. But how great was the astonishment of both,
when they met in a little path and saw each other! the immoderate joy was such,
and the transition from one extreme to the other so instantaneous, that all the
power they had was to fall into each other's arms, where they expired in a few
minutes after. Their bodies were conveyed to Italy, and were interred with all
the solemnity and magnificence due to their quality and eminent virtues.

Number XLII.
The temple of HYMEN. A VISION.
A FEW days ago I had an account of the marriage of a friend. When occurrences
of this nature make an impression upon the mind, it is insensibly betrayed into
little animadversions upon them. This was my c^e in an extraordinary manner:
for having mused some time on this incident, I fell into an easy slumber, when
fancy reassumed the subject, and sallied out in the following excursion.

Methought I was in an instant placed on the boundaries of a spacious plain; in
the center of which was presented to the eye a large temple consecrated to
HYMEN, the god of marriage. At a small distance from me I observed a giddy
crowd of both sexes, who were making toward the building, in order to
celebrate the ceremony of the god. There was shuffled in among them a demon,
whose form was so peculiar, and whose sway with the multitude so universal,
that I shall give my reader a particular description of him. It seems the name
of this fury was LUST; in the upper part of his body he carried the likeness of
a human figure, from the middle downwards he bore the resemblance of a goat,
his eyes were turgid, sparkling and inflamed, his complexion was very
irregular, attended with the most sudden transitions from a sanguine red to a
livid paleness, and a tremor frequently seized every member. Close followed him
DISTASTE with a sickly countenance, and supercilious eye; and REMORSE with his
hat flapped over his face, and a worm gnawing his vitals. I was much shocked at
these monstrous appearances, and the more so, to observe how readily my fellow
creatures gave in to the impious suggestions of the demon. But my surprise was
somewhat abated on a nearer approach; for I took notice that his breath was of
such a malignant nature, that all those who rashly advance^ within its
influence, were presently intoxicated and deprived of their reason.

I was in such a consternation at this discovery, that I hesitated for a while,
whether I should enter into conversation with the blithe adventurers
beforementioned. In the midst of my suspense there came toward us a grave old
gentleman of a steady and composed aspect, whose name was DELIBERATION. He was
one of the principal agents belonging to the temple, and so high in the god's
esteem, that HYMEN was very rarely known to give his benediction at the
conclusion of the ceremony to any couple, who were not ushered into his
presence by this venerable officer. Upon his joining the company (to the
majority of which I found he was a perfect stranger) there was expressed an
universal uneasiness and discontent; and many of them industriously avoided all
conversation with him. But it was very remarkable that all those who thus
imprudently turned their backs on this valuable monitor, in their return from
the temple, were seized by one or both of the melancholy attendants of the fury.

At my entrance into the building I observed the deity marching at a small
distance toward it. The first in the procession was LOVE, in the form of a
CUPID, who was continually practicing a thousand little arts and graces, to
draw upon him the smiles of the god; and by the tender regards which HYMEN cast
upon the child, I found he was a very great favorite.

The god followed next, holding in his hand a flaming torch, which shone the
brighter, the longer it burned; he approached us, supported by VIRTUE, a lady
of the most engaging form that I ever beheld. She was clothed in a white
refulgent garment, and her head was encircled with glory.

The next attendant was BEAUTY, arrayed in the most gorgeous apparel, and full
of herself, even to distraction. She was handed along by YOUTH, a gay
stripling, wearing a chaplet of flowers on his head and wings on his shoulders.

Then appeared WEALTH, in the figure of an old man meanly attired: his eyes
were the eyes of a hawk, and his fingers curved and pointed inwards, like the
talons of raven; he was noisy, impudent and presuming.

The retinue was closed by FANCY, ever varying her features and dress; and what
was very extraordinary, methought she charmed in all.

The deity, immediately after his entrance into the temple, ascended his
throne; and sat with his head gently reclined on VIRTUE'S bosom. LOVE and
BEAUTY took their station on the right hand: and on the left were disposed
WEALTH and FANCY.

The god quickly proceeded to the celebration of the nuptial ^ites; but there
was such a confused sound of sighs and laughter, that I could not give the
attention which was requisite, in order to present my reader with the several
circumstances that occurred: only I took notice, that many of the matches were
so very unequal, that the god yoked them with reluctance, and but half
consented to his own institution.

After the ceremony was over, silence was proclaimed in court, for HYMEN was
determined to decide a contest, which had been of long standing, between the
personages that attended the altar. Upon this declaration, the whole multitude
divided, and according to the particular impulses of their passions, took the
party of the several competitors. The young had ranged themselves on the right
hand of the throne, whilst others of more advanced years had posted themselves
behind the disputants on the left.

LOVE began with entering his complaint against WEALTH, setting forth that his
antagonist had seduced large numbers to his sentiments; that, as to himself,
his interest very visibly declined every day, to the great prejudice of that
state, in which the gods had designed him the preeminence. While he was
pursuing his arguments with great warmth, POVERTY stepped forth from amidst the
crowd, and stared the young plaintiff full in the face, who was so frightened
at his sorrowful countenance, that he fluttered his pinions in order for
flight: when WEALTH, rising up, addressed the judge with showing the necessity
of his presence to make the married state replete with happiness, as it was
originally intended by its institutor; together with many other arguments,
which, if they had been delivered with the same modesty as force, could not
have failed of creating a multitude of converts to his side. This his speech
was followed with a thunder of applause from the company behind. Upon which
incident the old man beg^n to triumph, and to reinforce his discourses when
through the violence of his emotions, his garment flew open, and betrayed to
view CARES in the form of vultures hanging at his breast. Hereupon LOVE stood
up, and would fain have reassumed his cause. But HYMEN, who well knew that the
presence of both was of the utmost importance in the performance of his
institution; and impartially weighing what was urged by each of them, put an
end to the contention, by proposing the union of their families, which was
immediately acceded to. No sooner were their hands joined, as the signal of
their consenting to the god's proposal, but LOVE immediately lighted up new
smiles in his face, and appeared infinitely more charming than before. But the
most surprising change was wrought in the old man; his talons fell off in
scales from his fingers, his eyes lost all their former fierceness, and the
harsh lineaments of his countenance were at once softened into all the
sweetness of humanity. LOVE approached him, and gently stroking his bosom,
stilled the hissing of the serpents, and assuaged the severity of his pain.
This dispute being amicably adjusted, BEAUTY next advanced, and, after playing
over many airs of affection, put on a languishing look, and lisped out a
mournful accusation also against WEALTH, intimating his usurpation over her,
and the like. Scarcely had she uttered three sentences, before there made up to
her a grisly wight, whose hair was covered with a hoary frost, his face plowed
with furrows, and down his cheeks distilled a scalding rheum. When the young
^ady thus saw AGE limping toward her, she appeared in all the agonies of
thought; the roses fell from her cheeks, and she sunk down into a swoon. HYMEN
understanding the temper of the girl, that she was proud and imperious, fond of
government, and yet incapable of directing, divested her of a large share of
power, by disposing of her frontier towns to FANCY, who now acts with unlimited
authority; nor admits any to pay their addresses to the gay virgin, without a
prior interview with herself.

The remainder of my dream being a confused number of ideas, without order or
arrangement, I shall forbear to insert, in mercy to my reader.

Number XLIII.
The most abandoned prostitutes are they,
Who not to love but avarice fall a prey:
Nor aught avails the specious name of wife;
A maid so wedded is a whore for life.
LYTTLETON.
A letter to a young lady, on her going to be married to a rich old man.
YOU tell me, CLEORA, th^^ you are like to ^e teazed by your friends into a
^^^^ch with AVARUS, who has been hitherto your aversion. Consider, all your
happiness is at stake upon this important point. Will you then be influenced by
persuasion, or the false glare of outward show, to sacrifice all the
substantial enjoyments of life? Romantic notions of love are what you and I
have disclaimed: yet there should be a sufficient stock of the belle passion to
balance all those little anxieties which naturally arise in that state: your
good sense will never suffer your affections to run cou^ter to your judgment:
virtue and honor, and all the manly qualifications only will attract your
heart. Suppose AVARUS divested of all his riches, would you debate a moment
whether you would accept of him for an husband? It is plain then, that from his
wealth you propose your happiness; but can a gay equipage, or splendid
apartments compensate the want of good sense or good nature? O CLEORA! you are
not to be told, that inward peace of mind is the true and only source of
happiness: the good things of this world may improve and extend it, but are too
weak to lay the foundation of it. This is supposing AVARUS would make you
mistress of all his fortune; but a man of his turn, and in the decline of life,
will be afraid of furnishing you with arms against himself.

Let us consider this affair in another light, and see whether it is not a sort
of prostitution to marry the man you disapprove for the sake of his fortune? I
know y^^ startle at the word; but how is she, who, to support herself
impressing want, gives up her person to the first that will pay for it, more
criminal than she, who with an easy fortune gives herself up to the man she
secretly detests, for the sake of enjoying more than she wants? You will not
find it the least of your uneasiness to ^uit the diversions of life for the
company of one so disproportionate to you in ^ge and temper, who neither knows
^or can relish ^alf your merit. Further, AVARUS will carry you to his house as
his purchase; for he must be sensible he can have no property in you but what
he has paid for.

Study well your man. Where there is love; the duties of a wife are easy; where
interest is the only motive, they are little better than slavery. The
infirmities of (...) age increase with years: tenderness, obedience and
observancy are especially required of an old man's wife; and frequently
attended with jealousy.

Arm yourself then against all persuasions to a ma^ch that has nothing to
recommend it, but that in point of fortune it is more than you could expect.
Never doubt but you will live to be happy in a man, who shall have good sense
to know your worth, generosity to reward it, and a fortune and inclination to
make you perfectly easy.

The woman who has a competency of her own, makes but an ill compliment to
herself, when she changes her condition for superfluities, if she has not
superior or stronger motives. It is neither just nor honest to marry where
there can be no love.

I am your faithful friend, ESTIPHANIA.

Number XLIV.
Candida perpetuo reside concordia lecto,
Tamque pori semper sit Venus aequa jugo.
Diligat ipsa senem quondum, sed et ipsa marito
Tum quoque cum fuerit, non videatur anus.
MART. Their nuptial bed may smiling concord dress,
And VENUS still the happy union bless!
Wrinkled with age, may mutual love and truth
To their dim eyes recall the bloom of youth.
F. LEWIS.
WHEN you read of the marriage of your correspondents HYMENAEUS and TRANQUILLA,
we trust you will join your wishes to those of their other friends, for the
happy event of an union in which caprice and selfishness had so little part.

There is at least this reason why we should be less deceived in our connubial
hopes than many others who enter into the same state, that we have allowed
ourselves to form no unreasonable expectations, nor vitiated our fancies in the
soft hours of courtship, with visions of felicity which human power cannot
bestow, or of perfection which human virtue cannot attain. That impartiality
with which we always endeavored to inspect the manners of those with whom we
conversed, has not been so much overpowered by our passion, but that we have
discovered some faults and weaknesses in each other; and joined our hands in
conviction, that as there are some advantages to be enjoyed in marriage, there
are some inconveniences likewise to be endured, and that, together with
confederate intellects and auxiliar virtues, we must find different opinions
and opposite inclinations.

We did not pass the weeks of courtship like those who consider themselves as
taking the last draught of pleasure, and therefore resolve not to quit the bowl
without a surfeit; or who know themselves about to set happiness to hazard, and
endeavor to lose their sense of danger in the ebriety of perpetual amusement,
and whirl round the gulf before they sink.

We rejoice in the reflection, that we have stores of novelty yet unexhausted,
which may be opened when repletion shall call for change; and gratifications
yet untasted, by which life, when it shall become vapid or bitter, may be
restored to its former sweetness and sprightliness, and again irritate the
appetite, and again sparkle in the cup.

Our life will, perhaps, be less tasteless than that of those whom the despotic
authority or avarice of parents unites almost without their consent in their
early years, when they have accumulated no fund of reflection, nor collected
any materials for mutual entertainment. Such we have often seen rising in the
morning to cards, and retiring in the afternoon to dose; whose happiness was
celebrated by their neighbors, because they happened to grow rich by avarice,
and to be kept quiet by insensibility, and agreed to eat and sleep together.

We have both mingled with the world, and are therefore no strangers to the
faults and virtues, the designs and competitions, the hopes and fears of our
cotemporaries. We have both amused our leisure with books, and can therefore
recount the events of former times, or cite the dictates of ancient wisdom.
Every occurrence furnishes us with some hint which one or the other can
improve; and if it should happen that both memory and imagination fail us, we
can retire to no idle or unimproving solitude.

Though our characters, beheld at a distance, exhibit this general resemblance,
yet a nearer inspection discovers such a dissimilitude of our habitudes and
sentiments, as leaves each some peculiar advantages, and affords that
"concordia discors," that suitable disagreement, which is always necessary to
intellectual harmony. There may be a total diversity of ideas which admits no
participation of the same delight; and there may likewise be such a conformity
of notions, as leaves neither any thing to add to the decisions of the other.
With such contrariety there can be no peace, with such similarity there can be
no pleasure. Our reasonings, though often formed upon different views,
terminate generally in the same conclusion. Our thoughts like rivulets issuing
from distant springs, each impregnated in its course with various mixtures, and
tinged by infusions unknown to the other, yet at last easily unite into one
stream, and purify themselves by the gentle effervescence of contrary qualities.

These benefits we receive in a greater degree as we converse without reserve,
because we have nothing to conceal. We have no debts to be paid by
imperceptible deductions from our avowed expenses, no habits to be indulged by
the private connivance of a favored servant, no private interviews with needy
relations, no intelligence with spies placed upon each other. We considered
marriage as the most solemn league of perpetual friendship, a state from which
artifice and concealment are to be banished forever, and in which every act of
dissimulation is a breach of faith.

The impetuous vivacity of youth, and that ardour of desire which the first
sight of pleasure naturally produces, has long ^eased to hurry us into
irregularity and vehemence, and experience has shown us that gratifications are
too valuable to be sacrificed to complaisance. We have long thought it
convenient to rest from the fatigue of pleasure, and now only continue that
course of life into which we had before entered, confirmed in our choice by
mutual approbation, supported in our resolution by mutual encouragement, and
assisted in our efforts by mutual exhortation.

Such, Sir, is our prospect of life; a prospect which, as it is beheld with
more attention, seems to open more extensive happiness, and spreads by degrees
into the boundless regions of eternity. But if all our prudence has been vain,
if we are doomed to give another instance of the uncertainty of human
discernment, we shall comfort ourselves amidst our disappointments, that we
were not betrayed but by such delusions as caution could not escape, since we
sought happiness only in the arms of virtue. We are,

SIR, Your humble servants, HYMENAEUS, TRANQUILLA.

Number XLV.
Marriage, or wrong or rightly understood,
Is the worst evil or the greatest good.
ANON.
WHEN a marriage is completed, that takes rise from good sense, inclination and
equality of age, dignity and fortune, the joy is diffused through every branch
of the family. The parents, the relations, the friends, taste the sweet effects
of the happy union, and the whole scene is a representation of heaven as near
as the state of mortality can come up to it; but when we turn our eyes toward
the other side of matrimony, toward the black, the melancholy, and the
tempestuous part of it, the objects are too hideous to be looked at, and the
subject too dismal to be delinea^ed.

Those who lay aside the vain desire of wealth, equipage and honors, and make
virtue the main article in their treaty of marriage, take the most proper
methods to secure mutual felicity, and are generally blessed with unenvied and
unprecarious ^oys. Too few indeed are the instances of domestic happiness; and
many persons of fashion think they answer all the purposes of matrimony, if
they can be well bred enough to keep conjugal discord within the cold decencies
of a malicious civility.

I am perfectly convinced that nothing hinders the constant agreement of
persons in the conjugal state but vanity, a secret inclination to insist upon
what they think their dignity of merit, and an inward expectation of such an
over measure of deference and regard, as answers to their extravagant false
scale, and which nobody can pay, because nobody but themselves can tell exactly
to what pitch it amounts.

It cannot be conceived by those who are involved in libertine pursuits, the
sweet satisfactions that must arise from the union of two persons, who have
left all the world, to procure delight for each other by all the methods which
reason, urged by duty, forwarded by passion, can intimate to the heart. Such a
pair give charms to virtue, and make pleasant the ways of innocence. A
deviation from the rules of such a commerce would be courting pain; for such a
life is as much to be preferred to any thing that can be communicated by
^^iminal satisfactions, to speak of it in the mildest terms, ^s sobriety and
elegant conversation are (...) intemperance and rioting.

He is a very unhappy man who does not reserve the most pure and kind
affections of his heart for the marriage bed* he will otherwise be reduced to
this melancholy circumstance, that he gave his mistress that kind of affection
which was proper for his wife, and has not for his wife either that, or the
usual tenderness which men bestow upon their mistresses.

Married persons are both more warm in their love, and more hearty in their
hatred, than any others whatsoever. Mutual favors and obligations, which may
be supposed to be greater here than in any other state, naturally beget an
intense affection in generous minds. As, on the contrary, persons who have
bestowed such favors have a particular bitterness in their resentments, when
they think themselves ill treated by those of whom they have deserved so much.

IF MARRIED PEOPLE RECEIVED EVERY TOKEN OF REGARD, AND ALL THOSE OFFICES WHICH
ARE NECESSARY TO MUTUAL HAPPINESS, AS FAVORS, NOT AS DUTIES, AND APPEARED
GRATEFUL INSTEAD OF SILENTLY CONTENTED, IT WOULD PRESERVE THE DESIRE OF
OBLIGING, AND GIVE A SPIRIT TO EVERY DUTY.

It perhaps requires more virtues to make a good husband or wife, than to
finish the most shining character whatever.

Discretion seems absolutely necessary; and accordingly we find that the best
husbands have been most famous for their wisdom. HOMER, who has drawn a perfect
pattern of a prudent man, to render it the more complete, has celebrated him
for the just returns of fidelity and truth to his PENELOPE; insomuch that he
refused the caresses of a goddess for her sake; and, to use the expression of a
pagan author, "Vetulam suam praetulit immortalitati," his old woman was dearer
to him than immortality.

Virtue is the next necessary qualification for this domestic character, as it
naturally produces constancy and mutual esteem. Thus BRUTUS and PORTIA were
more remarkable for virtue and affection than any others of the age in which
they lived.

Good nature is a third necessary ingredient in a marriage state, without which
it would inevitably sour on many occasions. When greatness of mind is joined
with this amiable quality, it attracts the admiration and esteem of all who
behold it. Thus CAESAR, not more remarkable for his fortune and valor than for
his humanity, stole into the hearts of the Roman people, when breaking through
the custom, he pronounced an oration at the funeral of his first wife.

Good nature is insufficient, unless it be steady and uniform, and accompanied
with an evenness of temper, which is above all things to be preserved in this
friendship contracted for life. A man must be easy within himself, before he
can be so to others. SOCRATES and MARCUS AURELIUS are instances of men, who by
the strength of philosophy having entirely composed their minds and regulated
their passions, are celebrated for good husbands, notwithstanding the first was
yoked with XANTIPPE, and the other with FAUSTINIA.

IF THE WEDDED PAIR WOULD BUT HABITUATE THEMSELVES FOR THE FIRST YEAR TO BEAR
WITH ONE ANOTHER'S FAULTS, THE DIFFICULTY WOULD BE PRETTY WELL CONQUERED. This
mutual sweetness of temper and complacency was finely recommended in the
nuptial ceremonies among the heathens, who, when they sacrificed to JUNO at
that solemnity, always tore out the gall from the entrails of the victim, and
cast it behind the altar.

Number XLVI.
If you would have the nuptial union last,
Let virtue be the band which ties it fast.
ROW.
THOSE who would live happily in the marriage state should never enter into it
without loving and being beloved, and should render this love genuine and
durable by founding it on virtue. If it has no object but beauty, a graceful
air, or the bloom of youth, it will be as frail as th^se fleeting advantages,
and like them too will soon vanish; but if it is fixed by the perfections of
the mind, it will then stand the test of time.

A marriage contracted without tenderness is a kind of rape; for to possess,
when the mind does not consent, is to violate the law of nature. The gifts of
HYMEN ought only to be dispensed by the hands of LOVE; and whoever receives
them from another is no better than an usurper.

Vicious habits, capricious humors, and opposite opinions disturb the best
established love. Thus a niggardly avaricious husband will conceive a disgust
for that wife, who thinking more nobly, imagines she ought to regulate her
expenses by their joint income. On the contrary, a prodigal will despise his
wife merely for being a good economist.

Marriage is the highest state of friendship: if happy, it lessens our cares by
dividing them, at the same time that it doubles our satisfactions by mutual
participation. It is a state which ought not to be entered into with
indifference on either side.

In unequal marriages, those frequently incur censure who more happily yoked
might be entitled to praise.

Husbands and wives, who live together in a good understanding, give to
strangers an almost u^erring proof of the goodness of their hearts.

When we choose our companions for life, if we hope to keep both them and
ourselves in good humor to the last stage of it, we must be extremely careful
in the choice we make, as well as the conduct on our own part. When the persons
to whom we join ourselves can stand an examination and bear the scrutiny, when
they mend upon our acquaintance with them, and discover new beauties the more
we search into their characters, our love will naturally rise in proportion to
the knowledge of their perfections.

But because there are very few possessed of such accomplishments of body and
mind, we ought to look after those qualifications both in ourselves and others
which are indispensably necessary toward this happy union, and which are in
the power of every one to acquire, or at least to cultivate and improve. These,
in my opinion, are cheerfulness and constancy. A cheerful temper joined with
innocence, will make beauty attractive, knowledge delightful, and wit good
natured. It will lighten sickness, poverty, and affliction; convert ignorance
into an amiable simplicity, and render deformity itself agreeable.

Constancy is natural to persons of even tempers and uniform dispositions; and
may be acquired by those of the greatest fickleness, violence, and passion, who
consider seriously the terms of union upon which they came together; the mutual
interest in which they are engaged, with all the motives that ought to incite
their tenderness and compassion toward those who have their dependence upon
them, and are embarked with them for life in the same state of happiness or
misery.

Constancy, when it grows in the mind upon considerations of this nature,
becomes a moral virtue, and a kind of good nature that is not subject to any
change of health, age, fortune, or any of those accidents which are apt to
unsettle the best dispositions, that are founded rather in constitution than in
reason. Where such a constancy as this is wanting, the most inflamed passion
may fall away into coldness and indifference, and the most melting tenderness
degenerate into hatred and aversion.

In order to acquire the right of demanding love, endeavor to deserve it:
after an union of twenty years be as attentive to please, and as careful to
avoid offense, as if you were now endeavoring to inspire that passion: for
there is as great an advantage in keeping a heart, as in first conquering it. I
dare answer for the happiness of that union, where love, honor, and a mutual
condescension perpetually reign; but the tie will be greatly weakened by the
want of any of these three requisites; and if the first be wanting, it will be
totally destroyed.

Agathocles and Calista are completely happy, because they are both the friends
of virtue. They love each other on this account; their love therefore will last
as long as their virtue, and the continuance of that is secured by their union;
for nothing can secure our perseverance in the paths of wisdom so effectually,
as having a beloved and loving example before us. Their felicity can never be
disturbed but by those disasters and misfortunes, from which their mutual
tenderness cannot shelter them. But supposing that these should fall to their
share, they would then only partake of the common lot of mankind. Those who
have never tasted the delights of love are equally exposed to disappointment,
and the lover is at least a gainer with respect to those pleasures, which are
of great account in the estimation of the value of life. Add to this, that love
tends to diminish the sense of their misfortunes; it has the peculiar virtue of
rendering the sufferings of two well-paired hearts less acute, and their
delights more exquisite. It would seem as if by communicating their distresses,
each felt but half their weight, whilst, on the contrary, their satisfactions
are increased by participation. As a squadron of horse is conquered with more
difficulty in proportion to its closeness, so the happy pair resist the attacks
of trouble and adversity with so much more strength, as they are more firmly
united.

Number XLVII.
As women owe a duty, so do men;
Men must be like the branch and bark of trees,
Which does defend them from tempestuous rage,
Cloth them in winter, tender them in age;
Or as ewes' love unto their eanlings lives,
So should be husbands' custom to their wives.
WILKINS's Miseries of Enforced Marriage.
HOW monstrous is the brutal figure some husbands make, who, when lovers, were
the poorest and most abject of slaves! When they should be defenders, they are
tyrants; and when it is reasonable for them to be provoked, they are stupidly
submissive. How contemptible is their unmanly weakness! a morose and restless
peevishness makes up the behavior they expect to charm by. They contract a
surly sour habit from the disappointments they meet with in life; and instead
of softening the edge of affliction toward the woman who is bound to share
their sufferings, they double them on their head, from whom, in honor and
conscience they ought to ward off sorrow by a noble sweetness and endearing
tenderness in their whole behavior.

Particular circumstances, and cast of temper, must teach a man the probability
of mighty uneasinesses in the marriage state (for some there are,
unquestionably, whose very dispositions are strangely averse to conjugal
friendship:) but no one, I believe, is by his own natural complexion prompted
to teaze and torment another, for no reason but being nearly allied to him; and
can there be any thing more base, or serve to sink a man so much below his own
distinguishing characteristic reason, than returning evil for good in so open a
manner, as that of treating a helpless creature with unkindness, who has so
good an opinion of him, as to believe what he said relating to one of the
greatest concerns of life, by delivering her happiness in this world to his
care and protection? Must not that man be abandoned even to all manner of
humanity, who can deceive a woman with appearances of affection and kindness,
for no other end but to torment her with more ease and authority? Is any thing
more unlike a gentleman, than when his honor is engaged for the performing his
promises, because nothing but that can oblige him to it, to become afterward
false to his word, and be alone the occasion of miseries to one whose happiness
he but lately pretended was dearer to him than his own? Ought such a one to be
trusted in his common affairs? or treated but as one whose honesty consisted
only in his incapacity of being otherwise?

There is one cause of this usage no less absurd than common, which takes place
among the more unthinking men, and that is the desire to appear to their
friends free and at liberty, without those trammels they have so much
ridiculed. To avoid this, they fly into the other extreme, and grow tyrants
that they may seem masters. Because an uncontrollable command of their actions
is a certain sign of entire dominion, they will not so much as recede from the
government even in one muscle of their faces. A kind look, they believe, would
be fawning, and a civil answer yielding the superiority. To this we must
attribute an austerity they betray in every action: what but this can put a man
out of humor in his wife's company, though he is so distinguishedly pleasant
every where else? The bitterness of his replies, and the severity of his frowns
to the tenderest of wives, clearly demonstrate, that an ill-grounded fear of
being thought too submissive, is at the bottom of this (as I am willing to call
it) affected moroseness: but if it be such, put on only to convince his
acquaintance of his entire dominion, let him take care of the consequence,
which will be certain and worse than the present evil: his seeming indifference
will by degrees grow into real contempt, and if it does not wholly alienate the
affections of his wife forever from him, make both him and her more miserable
than if it really did so.

However inconsistent it may appear, to be thought a well-bred person has no
small share in this clownish behavior: but if this sort of husbands would be
convinced, that to be civil at least is not beneath the character of a
gentleman; nor that even tender affection toward one who would make it
reciprocal, betrays any softness of effeminacy that the most masculine
disposition need be ashamed of; would they be satisfied of the generosity of
voluntary civility, and the greatness of soul that is conspicuous in
benevolence without immediate obligations; the married condition would be a far
more easy and comfortable one than it generally is. The husband would be no
where so well satisfied as in his own house, nor the wife so pleasant as in the
company of her husband. A desire of being agreeable in the lover, would be
increased in the husband; and the mistress would be more amiable by becoming
the wife. In short, men in general would be much better humoured than they are,
did they not so frequently exercise the worst turns of their temper where they
ought to exert the best.

It is wonderful to observe how easily men get into a habit of being least
agreeable where they are most obliged to be so. Some men are so unmerciful as
to move jealousy in their wives, and not care whether they are so or not; they
are ever out of humor in their company, but the pleasantest men in the world
every where else; the greatest slovens at home, but the most exactly dressed in
all other places. I would recommend to such men a more regular behavior than
to give the most exquisite torments to those who love them; nay, whose torment
would be abated if they did not love them.

Amabilis is one who practices all the parts of a fine gentleman in the duty of
a husband: when he was a bachelor, much business made him negligent in his
habit, but now there is no young lover so nice in the care of his person. One
who asked him why he was so long washing his mouth, and so delicate in the
choice and wearing of his linen, was answered, "Because there is a woman of
merit obliged to receive me kindly, and I think it incumbent on me to make her
inclination go along with her duty."

If a man would give himself leave to think, he would not be so unreasonable as
to expect debauchery and innocence could live in commerce together; or hope
that flesh and blood is capable of so strict an alliance, as that a fine woman
must go on to improve herself, till she is as good as an angel, only to
preserve a fidelity to a brute and a satyr.

Tom Whiffle married a wife by the command of his father, because the match was
on some particular accounts convenient to the family affairs. The lady was then
very young, and as her choice was not in the least consulted, she did not think
much about it. She knew that her new husband was not the object of her love,
but did not immediately know how much he deserved to be hated. As her education
had been carefully virtuous and her principles untainted, she considered
assiduously the merits of her spouse, and endeavored to find something amiable
in a man, to whom virtue did not permit her to be any longer indifferent. She
mistook, so great was her simplicity and inexperience, the transports of the
first enjoyment for the pledges of mutual tenderness and future happiness. He
begins very soon to consider her as an encumbrance, and is easily disgusted at
her person, which novelty at first only recommended; and from thence begins to
quarrel with her fondness and esteem for him, because they take from him all
pretense of hating her. She is frightened and alarmed at so strange and
unreasonable a sourness of temper; she is loath to believe or understand it; but
his inhumanity grows too plain to be mistaken any longer. She contents herself,
however, in the midst of her distresses, with the consciousness of her own
virtue; a sublime and noble satisfaction! She is grieved for her husband, but
does not hate him; she is less seen abroad and less visited at home; applies
herself to the concerns of her family, and a stricter guard over her actions;
still meets her husband even with a smile, and suffers herself to be hourly
insulted by the follies which he brings home with him, without breaking out
into the justest rage and reproaches. With what words can I sufficiently
applaud such charming discretion, or how exclaim against the ill-discerning
world, who are silent in her praise, whilst they extol the husband as the
mirror of modern gallantry and the perfect model of a fine gentleman!

I doubt not but the frequent reflections upon marriage and innocent love, with
which the theater has long abounded, have been the great cause of corrupt
sentiments in this respect. It is not every youth that can behold the fine
gentleman of the comedy represented with a peculiar good grace, leading a loose
and profligate life, and condemning virtuous affection as insipid, and not be
secretly emulous of what appears so amiable to a whole audience. These gay
pictures make lasting impressions on the imaginations of youth; and are hardly
to be erased in riper years, unless a commerce between virtuous and innocent
lovers be painted with the same advantage, and in as lively colors, by the
most masterly hands.

Number XLVIII.
Blessed is the maid, and worthy to be blessed,
Whose soul entire, by whom she loves possessed,
Feels every vanity in fondness lost,
And asks no power but that of pleasing most:
Hers is the bliss in just return to prove
The honest warmth of undissembled love:
For her, inconstant man might cease to range,
And gratitude forbid desire to change.
LYTTLETON.
A WOMAN's first care ought to be to win the heart of her husband, and the
second to preserve it. She should study his character, taste, and defects, and
conform to his will in all reasonable things. If she should be under a
necessity of thinking and acting different from him, let her not too violently
oppose his inclination, but seem at first to fall in with his sentiments, and
then mildly demonstrate to him, that his resolutions are liable to some
inconveniences, giving at the same time a few hints of other means to satisfy
them: in short, let her, if possible, make him fix on those very means, that he
may think he follows his own will whilst he is directed by hers.

This conduct seldom fails of being attended with success, and yet most women
neglect it: for being accustomed to the affiduity and complaisance of a man
during his courtship, they persuade themselves, that the quality of a husband
will lessen nothing of that attention so flattering to their self-love. They
affect, in the very beginning of their union, to observe no other rule for
their actions but their whims and caprices, of which they would make their
husbands the slaves, in order to preserve a sovereignty, which they have too
often pushed even to despotism.

A good wife is the greatest blessing and the most valuable possession that
Heaven, in this life, can bestow: she makes the cares of the world sit easy,
and adds a sweetness to its pleasures: she is a man's best companion in
prosperity, and his only friend in adversity; the carefullest preserver of his
health, and the kindest attendant on his sickness; a faithful adviser in
distress, a comforter in affliction, and a prudent manager of all his domestic
affairs.

The principal views of a good wife in adorning her person, should be to
preserve her husband's affection and to do credit to his choice.

A married woman should not be desirous of attracting the eyes of any man, but
those of her husband.

If a woman would have the world respect her husband, she must set the example
herself. Whilst the wife gives the least room to suspect that she despises her
husband, she will find that she subjects herself to double contempt, if he
resents it not; and if he does, how can she be happy? If they differ, she will
be apt to make bystanders judges over her. They perhaps may remember when she
is willing to forget, and her fame will be the sport of those beneath her, as
well in understanding as in degree.

There is scarce a family in this busy talking town, whose most secret affairs
are not perfectly known; nay, though it be ever so improper that they should be
so. The wife is too often at the bottom; she entrusts some bosom friend, not
remembering that the breach of confidence is as much in that, as if she had
revealed it to a thousand: and it is from this dear friend a thousand know it. A
prudent woman will be upon her guard in the strictest manner against these
confidences, remembering that the most important of all concerns, the esteem
and good opinion of her husband, depend upon her silence; and that nothing of
all this is upon her whom she is entrusting, nothing more than an insignificant
promise to an indifferent person.

To a full mind there is no relief like the having a bosom friend, to whom it
may in safety unload its inmost weight. Where is the husband to look for this
friend, if not in his wife? And why should she rob him of the advantage? Why
will she give him an occasion, for this may be the event, to seek friendship
and fidelity in some other breast? These little points the moralists have
disregarded, as trivial and below their consideration; yet trivial as they are,
it is on them that all the color of our lives depends. Those who despise
trifles, find themselves often undone by them.

A good wife will not content herself that her conduct is unblameable, she will
endeavor to make it meritorious; and will lay a claim to the gratitude as well
as the acknowledgments of the husband's heart, and to the applause as well as
the approbation of her own.

It is common for the dread of one extreme to drive people of weak minds upon
the opposite. There is not any part of the conduct of a wife so essential as
this. The point to be aimed at by her is the middle state between neglect and
impertinence; the one is not more mischievous than the other is tiresome.

Happy is the man who meets a wise that is not stupidly silent, nor always
prattling nonsense; whose mind is enriched with all useful knowledge, and who
has a taste for polite literature. A woman thus accomplished will be always
drawing sentences and maxims of virtue from the most judicious authors. She
will be mistress of herself in all changes of fortune, neither blown up in
prosperity, nor broken with adversity. She will be a cheerful and good-humoured
friend, and an agreeable companion for life. Whatever company he is engaged in,
he will long to be at home, and retire with delight from the society of men
into the bosom of one who is dear, so knowing, and so amiable: he will waste
with pleasure whole days and nights in her company, and be ever finding out new
beauties in her conversation: she will keep his mind in perpetual serenity,
restrain its mirth from being dissolute, and prevent its melancholy from being
painful.

Number XLIX.
Think not, the husband gained, that all is done,
The prize of happiness must still be won;
And often the careless find it to their cost,
The lover in the husband may be lost:
The graces might alone his heart allure,
They and the virtues meeting must secure.
Let even your prudence wear the pleasing dress
Of care for him and anxious tenderness.
From kind concern about his weal or woe,
Let each domestic duty seem to flow.
Endearing thus the common acts of life,
The mistress still shall charm him in the wife.
LYTTLETON 's Advice to a Lady.
AMONG the duties between the husband and the wife, the first is affection. The
preserving this is the most essential of all concerns; for this being the band
of all the union, on this depends the happiness that shall attend it; and that
will not only be lost by the neglect of it, but will be more and more complete
in proportion as the attention to this concern is more and more inviolable.

The love which marriage authorizes, and which it should inspire, is not a
flight of idle fancy, wild, irregular, and uncertain: it must be firm, perfect,
and inviolable; it must be the fruit of consideration as well as of
imagination; and it must be known as a virtue as well as a compliance.

The writers on morality have said among their cautions against disquiet in the
married life, that the husband and wife should never be both angry together,
that when one is out of temper the other should be silent: but this is talking
in the general; it is right, it is wise, and it was perhaps as much as a
recluse locked up in his study could arrive to know; but those who live among
the world are acquainted with a thousand delicacies unknown to those remote
observers. There is a manner in doing things in which almost as much virtue
consists as in the doing them; and it is not sufficient that people are told
what they are to do, unless they are informed in what way they are to do it.

It is impossible that a man can love the person whom he does not esteem; at
least that love which a wife is to expect from the husband cannot subsist
without it. The first testimony he usually gives of his esteem is the considing
in her, and revealing to her all his secrets. This is done in confidence, and
the trust ought never to be violated; although he says nothing, he means it
should be so; and he may pardon, but never can forget the violation of it.

Those who love truly have but one heart between them; their thoughts, their
cares, their concerns are in common; confidence is the natural offspring of
affection, and he who loves tenderly can keep no secret.

It would be hard to say, perhaps, whether more families have had their peace
disturbed by the unaffectionate reserve in the husband, or by the idle talking
of the wife; whether more have been sacrifices to the not intrusting of a
secret, or to the divulging of it; but this is certain, that the offense on the
one part is less than on the other, and that the one may be with reason
pardoned and respected afterward, but the other cannot.

There is no occasion of so much reputation to a woman, be her quality what it
will, so great, as the saying that her family is regular and well governed: and
let me add, that there is no fortune so moderate that will not serve to make an
appearance, nor is there any so great as to support a just appearance ^^ng
without it. The peculiar instructions on such a head as this, can only be
suited to the peculiar circumstances of the persons to whom they are addressed:
nay, and the caution is more strict only to those peculiarities of temper and
disposition, under which both are to enjoy those circumstances.

Those who are not easy at home, will never taste enjoyment any where else. To
be easy is to be regular; let a good wife set out with a principle of never
neglecting any thing at the time when it is proper to consider it, and she will
never be perplexed and prevented with the multiplicity of concerns. These
things offer singly and they are easily dispatched; it is the neglecting them
that accumulates them; and while she looks on a confused number, without
knowing which to begin with, she lets alone all.

Nothing is so common as for people to be plundered by their servants. Of all
things that are easy to be gone through at first, accounts of this kind are the
easiest; of all others, when they are neglected, they become the most confused,
displeasing, and impracticable. You recollect the circumstances when a thing is
recent, but you forget them after the time is elapsed. You expect the expense
of a few days in articles that you remember; you are astonished at the sum when
you have forgotten the things it concerns: but this is not all; your servants
will soon perceive whether you inspect their accounts, and whether you do it
regularly; they will know all the profit that may be made of your
forgetfulness, and will not part with any portion of the advantage. I do not
pretend to say that all the care in the world can prevent them from imposing on
you, but you cannot suffer much while you take the caution of examining them
often; whereas, if they see you remiss, they will undoubtedly succeed in their
attempts to defraud you.

What makes a remissness in this article the more unpardonable, is that there
is nothing so easy. Parts and talents are required in many scenes of life, but
this is in the power of every one, and yet almost all neglect it. Method and
order will render things, even disagreeable in their nature, easy and pleasant.
Employment not only gives pleasure to the moments devoted to it, but gives a
relish for those which succeed.

Number L.
The point to which our sweetest passions move,
Is to be truly loved, and fondly love.
This is the charm that smooths the troubled breast,
Friend to our health, and author of our rest;
This bids each gloomy vexing passion fly,
And tunes each jarring string to harmony.
LYTTLETON.
MATRIMONY ought to be considered as the most important step a man can take in
private life, as it is that upon which his fortune, his credit and his peace
must depend. A happy marriage is the source of every kind of felicity, and on
the other hand an unhappy marriage is of all others the greatest misfortune. A
man who lives cheerfully in his family, who loves and is beloved by his wife,
who sees his children with the fondness of a parent, and conducts his domestic
affairs with the wisdom of a legislator, beholds a well regulated state in his
own house, of which himself is the head. But where discord and dissension
reign, where economy is wanting, and union is no more, the husband and the wife
are alike unhappy; their private follies soon become public, their errors are
the prattle of the day, and their miscarriages the topic of every conversation.
An evil more grievous than this neither is in the power of chance, nor can be
feigned by imagination.

In the choice of a wife, a man ought to consult his reason always, and never
his passions; not that I mean to exclude love, or more properly affection,
without which it is impossible that any marriage should be happy; but I would
have this tenderness arise from reflection and not from accident; for beauty,
that commonly gives rise to hasty inclination, is a very small ingredient among
the numerous qualities that enter into the composition of a good wife. Among
these I reckon modesty in countenance and carriage, a great fund of good sense,
a sweetness of temper, equally removed from giddiness and languor, a sincere
disposition to make the happiness of her husband her principal study, the
management of her family her constant business, and the education of her
children her constant delight.

A young woman of a good family, commonly speaking, appears what she ought to
be; and therefore to know what she really is, is an affair that requires time
and attention; every thing is to be considered, her looks, her constitution,
her dress, in a word the most trivial of her actions are to be scanned, in
order to form a right idea of her mind. To facilitate this discovery two points
are to be observed; the first is, the character of the parents, and the next,
the lady's education. Example of every kind is a powerful thing, but that of
parents is much more so: if a father or mother are full of pride, vanity, or
fondness for pleasure, if they are remarkable for inconstancy of mind or
corruption of manners, it must be an admirable genius indeed that can enable a
young woman to escape the infection. Education is also a thing of very great
consequence, and what cannot be looked after with too much caution. To read, to
write, to sing, to dance, and to work a little with the needle, is the common
road of female education. What wonder then that a person thus brought up,
should be so unfit for the conversation of a man of sense, for the partner of
his joys and cares, or to share with him in the government of his family?

But these remarks are to be made in time: to enter into such inquiries, and to
make a right use of them, with regard to her inclinations, a great deal of
reason and good sense are requisite: yet after all, perfection is not to be
expected; she has the most of it who has the fewest faults. These two are to be
inquired after before marriage, that they may be borne with patience
afterward. In respect of these, a man must judge for himself, according to the
qualities of his own mind, and that degree of command which he has over his own
passions. Instead of this delay, this caution, most people rush hastily into
the state, and discover none of its inconveniences, till they are forced to it
by experience: then they grow uneasy, fretful, impatient, and give a loose to
their resentment; they are perpetually reproving, chiding, and giving marks of
their displeasure. Such methods seldom are, indeed hardly can be, attended with
success; they forget that mildness, indulgence, and complaisance, though they
are virtues that make no great show, are virtues nevertheless, and peculiarly
necessary to the marriage state, which is seldom happier than where both
parties strictly adhere to decency and decorum.

There are however a number of unhappy marriages in which the parties have no
share, but are mere victims to the folly of their parents. The bargain perhaps
was struck before they saw each other. What an indignity is this to human
nature! The first consideration in such cases is the fortune, and in this a few
thousands, more or less, bring people together or keep them asunder. Whilst
parents love money so much, they ought not to wonder if after marriage their
children love one another so little. But so it is that luxury has obtained an
universal empire, and money is thought necessary to maintain it. Yet this too
is a mistake, for luxury is a gulf that will swallow the riches of Peru. But
suppose it was not so, is not a middle state, with honor, credit, and peace,
better than immense riches with disorder, discord, and disquiet? Will money
cure the maladies either of body or mind, or is it possible to enjoy riches if
peace be wanting? Let a woman bring ever so great a fortune, if she bring ill
humors too, she will make a man miserable; and if she is extravagant, she will
make him poor. These are things we see every day, but we never find a day to
consider them.

It is this luxury, this vanity, this divinity which all the world adores, that
exacts from a new married couple the most senseless offerings. To keep up a
foolish custom, people are made unhappy for their lives. This divinity is
ingenious in seducing; she bestows upon these offerings the specious names of
decency, generosity, marks of love and respect for the fair bride: but I, who
make no secret of my impiety toward this goddess, say plainly, that they are
highly extravagant. The superfluous expenses, and luxury in general, frequently
hinder persons of both sexes from entering into a state which nature inspires,
reason demands, and religion authorizes.

Number LI.
SIR,
THAT distress finds some consolation from revealing its misfortunes, is a
trite observation, which perhaps is in no instance more strongly felt, than
where we have ourselves to blame for our calamities. There is something in
making a confession, though but on paper, (even if it should never be
communicated to any one) which unloads the mind of a weight, that bears it down
in secret; and though it cannot pluck the thorn from memory, has certainly the
effect of blunting its poignancy. Suffer me then, Sir, to tell you, or to write
as if I were telling you, how unhappy I am, and by what means I have become so.

I was left by my father at the age of thirteen, the eldest of two daughters,
under the charge of one of the best and most indulgent of mothers. Our
circumstances were affluent, our society respectable, and our education, from
its very commencement, had been attended to with care, and provided for with
the utmost liberality. No instruction was neglected, no accomplishment
unattended to. In attaining these, my sister was not quite so fortunate as I.
Born, as I have often been told, with uncommon quickness of parts, I found no
difficulty of mastering the studies that were taught me, or of acquiring the
embellishments it was wished I should acquire. My sister was often deficient in
the one, and awkward at the other. She possessed, however, a sound, plain
understanding, and an excellent temper. My superiority never excited envy in
her, and I think never vanity in me. We loved each other most sincerely; and
after some years had blunted the grief, which my mother felt for her husband's
death, there were, I believe, few happier families than ours.

Though our affections were cordial, however, our dispositions were very
different. My sister was content to think as other people thought, and to feel
as other people felt; she rarely ventured to speculate in opinion, or to soar
in fancy. I was often tempted to reject, if not to despise, the common opinions
of mankind, and to create to myself a warm, and, I am afraid, a visionary
picture of happiness, arising from a highly refined sensibility. My mother was
at pains to combat these enthusiastic ideas, and to represent the danger of
indulging in them. From a desire, perhaps, of overcoming that tendency toward
them which she perceived in me, her discourse, when we were alone, almost
constantly turned on this subject. As she always allowed us the liberty of
argument with her, I stood up in those conversations the warm defender of my
own maxims, in contradiction to those prudent ones which she recommended. Hers,
I am persuaded, admitted of better reasoning; but my cause gave greater room
for eloquence. All my little talents were exerted in the contest: and I have
often since thought, that my mother had from nature a bent to my side of the
question, which all her wisdom and experience had not been able to overcome;
that though she constantly applauded the prudent system of my sister, she was
in truth rather partial to mine, and vain of that ability, with which I
defended it. However that might be, I myself always rose from the dispute more
and more convinced of the justness of my own opinions, and proud of that
superiority, which I thought they conferred on me.

We had not long attained a marriageable age, when we found ourselves
surrounded with those, whom the world terms admirers. Our mother's benevolence
and sweetness of temper inclined her to society, and we were too innocent for
prudery. We had therefore a number of visitors of the other sex, many of whom
were so particular in their attentions, that women who wished to boast of
conquests, would have called them lovers. With us they did not always assume
that title; my sister was too prudent, and I was too nice, easily to believe a
man a lover.

Among those, however, were two gentlemen, whose attachment was declared to me
in terms too strong to be misunderstood. Florio's person was universally
allowed to be handsome; many, of whom I was one, thought it elegant. With
external accomplishments his education had furnished him, his manner was easy
and unembarrassed; some called it assuming, I thought it natural. His
conversation was full of the language of sensibility; in my idea it spoke a
mind replete with sensibility itself. Other people sometimes suspected him of
shallowness and affectation; I praised him for avoiding the pedantry of
knowledge, and the rusticity of men proud of its acquirements.

Alcander was the only son of a particular friend of my mother, and therefore
on a very intimate footing in our family. My mother, with whom he was a
favorite, discovered in him a great fund of good sense and of useful
knowledge. I was struck with the inelegance of his appearance and address, and
the want of refinement in his sentiments and conversation. His goodness and
candor were often the topics of my mother's commendation; I remarked his want
of discernment, and the coldness of his attachments and aversions. My mother
often repeated her own eulogiums of Alcander, and the criticisms of the world
on Florio; I always heard her with a determined opposition of sentiment, and
therefore rose from the conversation more averse from the first, and more
attached to the latter. Alcander, after persisting for some time under a very
marked disinclination to him, gave up the pursuit; but as he still continued
his visits to the family, particularly during any occasional absence of mine,
he transferred by degrees his affections to my sister. When he had ceased to be
my lover, I was willing to be very much his friend. My mother had always shown
her partiality in his favor; my sister was won by his virtues, and, after some
time, became his wife.

Florio's suit to me was opposed by my mother with rather more vehemence than
was natural to her. She often insisted on the infatuation, as she called it, of
that deception I was under with regard to him; a deception, of which, she
predicted, I should one day be convinced. Her opposition, however, though it
overruled my conduct, never overcame my attachment. I would not be his without
the consent of my mother; but my affection it was not in her power to shake.
Her love for me overcame her resolution; and at last she gave, however
unwillingly, my hand to Florio.

I was now the happiest of women. The scenes of conjugal tenderness and
domestic happiness, which I had often pictured, I thought now realized in the
possession of a man, who, I had taught myself to believe, was to love me
forever, and was himself every thing I ought to love; and I often looked with a
degree of pity on the situation of my sister, whose happiness (for she called
it happiness) with Alcander was of a kind so inferior to mine.

How long this lasted I cannot exactly say. I fear I begun to be unhappy, long
before I could allow mys^ to believe it. I have often wept alone at the
coldness and neglect of Florio, when, on meeting him, a few words of seeming
tenderness and affection, made me again reproach my doubts of his love, and
think my own situation the most enviable of any. Alas! he drove me from this
last strong hold, in which my affection for him had entrenched itself. It is
now three years, since he has treated me in such a manner, as to leave me no
apology for his treatment. During the last, my mother's death has dep^^^ed me
of one of the few comforts I had left. From my mother I carefully concealed my
distress; but I believe in vain. She lived to guess at my misery; and I fear
her sense of it added to the pressure of that disease, which brought her to her
grave.

After the loss of my husband's love, it is little to talk of my disappointment
in his talents and a^complishments. It was long, however, before I allowed
myself to see defects, which less penetration than I have been flattered with
possessing, had long before discovered. My mother had often, before our
marriage, expressed her surprise, that one of my abilities should be so
deceived as not to see his inferiority. I believe, that it is by these
abilities, that the deception is aided. They are able to form a picture, to
which more ordinary minds are unequal; and in the weakness of their rash
attachment they find the likeness where they wish to find it. --

I was interrupted by my sister. Why are her looks so serene? and why does she
tell me, how much mine are altered? I am too proud to allow a witness to my
distresses; and from her, of all womankind, I would conceal them. This
dissimulation is due to my pride, perhaps to my duty; yet if you knew, Sir,
what it is to smile in public, to seem to be happy, with such feelings as mine;
-- to act contentment all day long, and to retire at night, to my lonely
pillow, with the anguish my heart has treasured up all the while! -- But the
subject overpowers me. -- Farewell.

CONSTANTIA.

Number LII.
To give society its highest taste,
Well-ordered home man's best delight to make,
And by submissive wisdom, modest skill,
With every gentle, care-eluding art
To raise the virtues, animate the bliss,
And sweeten all the toils of human life;
This be the female dignity and praise!
THOMSON.
AS women cannot be useful in the same way as the men are, by building, for
instance, ploughing, gardening, and other manual arts, and by the employments
of active and public life, there are services more adapted to their softer and
more delicate constitutions.

These services are no other than a discreet economy within doors, elegant
conversation, tender friendship, decent behavior, education of children, and
the like.

Therefore to execute these well, must be the business and duty of woman; and
what is her duty, must be her ornament and happiness.

A moderate skill in arithmetic has saved many estates; and it is the proper
business of the woman to be prudent and careful in laying out what the men
acquire by industry and study, or their painful employments in public life: and
this cannot be done without keeping regular accounts.

As it is the business and particular interest of women to excel in
conversation, and in the amiable decencies of life, and to delight and polish
the men by their softness and delicacy in speaking as well as acting, they can
hardly show those talents to such advantage, except they have a taste for the
beauty as well as propriety of their mother tongue.

Speaking gracefully is of more consequence to the women than they are aware:
since the better and most sensible part of our sex are apter to be caught by
the ear than by the eyes; and since speech is one of the best instruments of
female power, by which they calm the storms of passion, and charm our rude
natures into a softer kind of humanity.

Dignity and gravity are the peculiar excellencies of the men, and befitting
their character, as they are formed for public life, and a sphere of action
which requires greatness of mind, strength and firmness of resolution, a cooler
strain of passion, and more intense application of thought; whereas decency is
the proper characteristic and charm of a woman, as suited to that softer
economy and more private life for which she was destined. This consists in a
certain elegant propriety and delicacy of manner, so well suited to the
character of her in whom it prevails, and so discreetly adapted to persons,
times and places, as to reflect a full image of female softness and modesty.
Some of its principal features are a mildness of nature, which is prone to
please and yield to others, and arrogates to itself nothing that is not due to
it; a modest reserve, which guards against an affected shyness on the one hand,
and indecent liberties on the other; an elegant tenderness, which is disposed
to compassion and is sensible to friendship, yet is guided by judgment in its
measure and the choice of its objects; an high sense of decorum, which teaches
her in every circumstance what to grant and what to refuse, when to speak and
when to be silent, to maintain the respect due to the sex without pride or
disdain, and court the esteem of others without artifice or ostentation; not
feigning passions she has not, nor indiscreetly discovering or artfully
disguising those she has, much less boasting an insensibility to which she is a
stranger; and above all, a quick feeling of every thing that is fair,
honorable, humane, and faithful, with an irreconcilable aversion from whatever
is unbecoming the honor and dignity of woman. Such are the charms of decency.

How shocking it appears to see women forward in conversation, vain and
arrogant, rough and boisterous in their behavior, or else artificial and full
of disguise! but whenever we discover a levity and wantonness, then we look
upon them in the very worst light, as stripped of that natural armor which at
once protects and adorns them.

SPHRONILLA is a medley of noise and nonsense, light as air, and as subject to
storms too; a perfect virago in her gait and behavior, always in a flutter,
eternally prattling, soon fond, yet soon disgusted, and plays the tyrant every
where with all the insolence of beauty, heightened by a fortune which she
thinks places her above censure; covetous of praise, yet indifferent who
bestows it; often a slattern in dress; regardless in company of the
distinctions of persons and things; and can sacrifice any decency of life to
her pleasure or pique.

But what a different creature, and how lovely is the modest CLORINDA! Tenderly
sensible of her own dignity and character, yet always willing to attend and to
do justice to the merit of others; frank without being forward, and cautious
rather then reserved; apt to distrust her own opinion, but most ready to listen
to that of others; better pleased to hear than speak, but when she opens her
mouth, calm and gentle as the breath of evening; susceptible of the most tender
sentiments, yet sedate and steady in governing them; insinuating, but without
the least artifice; a strict observer of the minutest decorums of life, that
have the least connection with virtue and female delicacy, joining the
discretion of the matron to the modesty of the virgin.

What a different figure do these ladies make in the opinion of the world, and
how differently are they received! The one draws the eyes and observation of
all upon her, but it is in order to censure and expose her the more
effectually. Most people are afraid of her, and shun her as they would do a
hurricane or a viper. Those who do not dread, despise and laugh at her. Her
noise and fortune make her heard, where her sentiments would gain neither
attention nor respect: none esteem her; those who profess it do it only to
herself, or for some private views. The men hate a creature who affects to be
so like themselves; and the women despise her, because she is so unlike what a
woman ought to be. How different is the treatment of the other! The most
sensible of both sexes flock around her, and eagerly court her acquaintance;
wherever she makes her appearance, she spreads joy and good humor; whenever
she opens her mouth she is heard with the most profound attention; the beau
monde want to establish their own character by keeping her company, and their
reputation for sense by being of the same opinion with her; for her taste is
esteemed a standard, and her manners a model to the rest of her sex. Therefore
they are forced to admire those qualities they cannot imitate, and willingly
confess that superiority which is tempered with so much modesty and mildness.

A strict modesty and decorum of behavior is the distinguishing charm of
female virtue, a quality so essential to the sex, that we always expect to find
it; and which, where it is wanting, can be compensated by no charms of nature
or art; it is equally admired by the loose and the sober part of our sex; it
extenuates many failings, and places every good quality in the most alluring
light. And though our passion may, yet our esteem never can be captivated, much
less secured without it.

Number LIII.
O! source of every social tie,
United wish, and mutual joy!
What various joys on one attend,
As son, as father, brother, husband, friend!
Whether his hoary sire he spies
While thousand grateful thoughts arise,
Or meets his spouse's fonder eye,
Or views his smiling progeny;
What tender passions take their turns!
What home-felt raptures move!
His heart now melts, now leaps, now burnt,
With reverence, hope, and love.
POPE.
WHEN man arrives to a certain age, he becomes sensible of a peculiar sympathy
and tenderness toward the other sex; the charms of beauty engage his
attention, and call forth new and softer dispositions than he has yet felt. The
many amiable qualities exhibited by a fair outside, or by the mild allurement
of female manners, or which the prejudiced spectator without much reason
supposes those to include, with several other circumstances, both natural and
accidental, point his view and affection to a particular object, and of course
contract that general rambling regard, which was lost and useless among the
undistinguished crowd, into a peculiar and permanent attachment to one woman,
which ordinarily terminates in the most important, venerable, and delightful
connection in life.

The state of the brute creation is very different from that of human
creatures: the former are clothed and generally armed by their structure,
easily find what is necessary to their subsistence, and soon attain their
vigor and maturity; so that they need the care and aid of their parents but a
short while: and therefore we see that nature has assigned to them vagrant and
transient amors. The connection being purely natural, and formed merely for
propagating and rearing their offspring, no sooner is that end answered, than
the connection dissolves of course. But the human race are of a more tender and
defenseless constitution: their infancy and nonage continue longer; they
advance slowly to strength of body, and maturity of reason; they need constant
attention, and a long series of cares and labors, to train them up to decency,
virtue, and the various arts of life. Nature has therefore provided them with
the most affectionate and anxious tutors, to aid their weakness, to supply
their wants, and to accomplish them in those necessary arts; even their own
parents, on whom she has devolved this mighty charge, rendered agreeable by the
most alluring and powerful of all ties, parental affection. But unless both
concur in this grateful task, and continue their joint labors, till they have
reared up and planted out their young colony, it must become a prey to every
rude invader, and the purpose of nature, in the original union of the human
pair, must be defeated. Therefore our structure as well as condition is an
evident indication, that the human sexes are destined for a more intimate, for
a moral and lasting union. It appears likewise, that the principal end of
marriage is not to propagate and nurse up an offspring, but to educate and form
MINDS for the great duties, and extensive destinations of life. Society must be
supplied from this original nursery with useful members, and its fairest
ornaments and supports. But how shall the young plants be guarded against the
inclemencies of the air and seasons, cultivated and raised to maturity, if men,
like brutes, indulge to vagrant and promiscuous amors?

The mind is apt to be dissipated in its views, and its acts of friendship and
humanity; unless the former be directed to a particular object, and the latter
employed in a particular province. When men once give way to this dissipation,
there is no stopping their career; they grow insensible to moral attractions,
and by obstructing or impairing the decent and regular exercise of the tender
and generous feelings of the human heart, they in time become unqualified for,
or averse from, the forming a moral union of souls, which is the cement of
society and the source of the purest domestic joys: whereas a rational,
undepraved LOVE, and its fair companion, MARRIAGE, collect a man's views, guide
his heart to its proper object, and by confining his affection to that object,
do really enlarge its influence and use. Besides, it is but too evident from
the conduct of mankind, that the common ties of humanity are too feeble to
engage and interest the passions of the generality, in the affairs of society.
The connexions of neighborhood, acquaintance, and general intercourse, are too
wide a field of action for many; and those of a public or community are so for
more; and in which they "either care not, or know not how," to exert
themselves. Therefore nature, ever wise and benevolent, by implanting that
strong sympathy, which reigns between the individuals of each sex, and by
urging them to form a particular moral connection, the spring of many domestic
endearments, has measured out to each pair a particular sphere of action,
proportioned to their views, and adapted to their respective capacities.
Besides, by interesting them deeply in the concerns of their own little circle,
she has connected them more closely with society, which is composed of
particular families, and bound them down to their good behavior, in that
particular community to which they belong. This moral connection is marriage,
and this sphere of action is a family.

The minds of both sexes are as much formed one for the other, by a temperament
peculiar to each, as their persons. The strength, firmness, courage, gravity
and dignity of the man, tally to the softness, delicacy, tenderness of passion,
elegance of taste, and decency of conversation, of the woman. The male mind is
formed to defend, deliberate, foresee, contrive and advise; the female one to
confide, imagine, apprehend, comply and execute: therefore the proper
temperament of these different sexes of minds, makes a fine moral union; and
the well-proportioned opposition of different or contrary qualities, like a due
mixture of discords in a composition of music, swells the harmony of society
more, than if they were all unisons to each other. And this union of moral
sexes, if we may express it so, is evidently more conducive to the improvement
of each, than if they lived apart: for the man not only protects and advises,
but communicates vigor and resolution to the woman. She in her turn softens,
refines and polishes him: in her society he finds repose from action and care;
in her friendship, the ferment into which his passions were wrought by the
hurry and distraction of public life, subsides and settles into a calm; and a
thousand nameless graces and decencies, that flow from her words and actions,
form him for a more mild and elegant deportment. His conversation and example,
on the other hand, enlarge her views, raise her sentiments, sustain her
resolutions, and free her from a thousand f^ars and inquietudes, to which her
more feeble constitution subjects her.

Of the conjugal alliance the following are the natural laws. First, Mutual
fidelity to the marriage bed. Disloyalty defeats the very end of marriage,
dissolves the natural cement of the relation, weakens the moral tie, the chief
strength of which lies in the reciprocation of affection, and, by making the
offspring uncertain, diminishes the care and attachment necessary to their
education.

2. A conspiration of counsels and endeavors to promote the common interest of
the family, and to educate their common offspring. In order to observe these
laws, it is necessary to cultivate, both before and during the marriage state,
the strictest decency and chastity of manners, and a just sense of what becomes
their respective characters.

3. The union must be inviolable and for life. The nature of friendship, and
particularly of this species of it, the education of their offspring, and the
order of society and of successions, which would otherwise be extremely
perplexed, do all seem to require it. To preserve this union, and render the
matrimonial state more harmonious and comfortable, a mutual esteem and
tenderness, a mutual deference and forbearance, a communication of advice,
assistance and authority are absolutely necessary. IF EITHER PARTY KEEP WITHIN
THEIR PROPER DEPARTMENTS, THERE NEED BE NO DISPUTES ABOUT POWER OR SUPERIORITY,
AND THERE WILL BE NONE: THEY HAVE NO OPPOSITE, NO SEPARATE INTERESTS, AND
THEREFORE THERE CAN BE NO JUST GROUND FOR OPPOSITION OF CONDUCT.

Number LIVE.
Delightful task! to rear the tender thought,
To teach the fair idea how to shoot;
To breathe the enlivening spirit, and to fix
The generous purpose in the glowing breast.
THOMSON.
THE connection of parents with their children, is a natural consequence of the
matrimonial connection; and the duties which they owe them, result as naturally
from that connection. The feeble state of children, subject to so many wants and
dangers, requires their incessant care and attention; their ignorant and
uncultivated minds demand their continual instruction and culture. Had human
creatures come into the world with the the full strength of men, and the
weakness of reason and vehemence of passions which prevail in children, they
would have been too strong, or too stubborn, to have submitted to the
government and instruction of their parents. But, as they were designed for a
progression in knowledge and virtue, it was proper that the growth of their
bodies should keep pace with that of their minds, lest the purposes of that
progression should have been defeated. Among other admirable purposes which
this gradual expansion of their outward as well as inward structure serves,
this is one, that it affords ample scope to the exercise of many tender and
generous affections, which fill up the domestic life with a beautiful variety
of duties and enjoyments: and are of course a noble discipline of the heart,
and an hardy kind of education for the more honorable and important duties of
public life.

The above mentioned weak and ignorant state of children, seems plainly to
invest their parents with such authority and power as is necessary to their
support, protection, and education; but that authority and power can be
construed to extend no farther than is necessary to answer those ends, and to
last no longer than that weakness and ignorance continue: therefore the
foundation or reason of the authority and power ceasing, they cease of course.
Whatever power or authority then it may be necessary or lawful for parents to
exercise, during the nonage of their children; to assume or usurp the same
when they have attained the maturity or full exercise of their strength and
reason, would be tyrannical and unjust. From hence it is evident, that parents
have no right to punish the persons of their children more severely than the
nature of their wardship requires; much less to invade their lives, to encroach
upon their liberty, or transfer them as their property to any master
whatsoever. But if any parent should be so unjust and inhuman, as to consider
and treat them like his other goods and chattels, surely, whenever they dare,
they may resist; and whenever they can, shake off that inhuman and unnatural
yoke, and be free with that liberty, with which GOD and nature invested them.

The first class of duties which parents owe their children respect their
natural life, and these comprehend protection, nurture, provision, introducing
them into the world in a manner suitable to their rank and fortune, and the
like.

The second order of duties regards the intellectual and moral life of their
children, or their education in such arts and accomplishments as are necessary
to qualify them for performing the duties they owe to themselves, and to
others. As this was found to be the principal design of the matrimonial
alliance, so the fulfilling that design is the most important and dignified of
all the parental duties. In order therefore to fit the child for acting his
part wisely and worthily as a man, as a citizen, and a creature of GOD, both
parents ought to combine their joint wisdom, authority, and power, and each
apart to em^loy those talents which are the peculiar excellency and ornament of
their respective sex. The father ought to lay out and superintend their
education, the mother to execute and manage the detail of which she is c^^able.
The former should direct the manly exertion of the intelle^l and moral powers
of his child: his imagination and the manner of those exertions are the
peculiar province of the latter. The former should advise, protect, command;
and by his experience, masculine vigor, and that superior authority which is
commonly ascribed to his sex, brace and strengthen his pupil for active life,
for gravity, integrity, and firmness in suffering; the business of the latter
is to bend and soften her male pupil by the charms of her conversation, and the
softness and decency of her manners, for social life, for politeness of taste,
and the elegant decorums and enjoyments of humanity; and to improve and refine
the tenderness and modesty of her female pupil, and form her to all those mild
domestic virtues, which are the peculiar characteristics and ornaments of her
sex.

To conduct the opening minds of their sweet charge through the several periods
of their progress, to assist them in each period in throwing out the latent
seeds of reason and ingenuity, and in gaining fresh accessions of light and
virtue; and at length, with all these advantages, to produce the young
adventurers upon the great theater of human life, to act their several parts in
the sight of their friends, of society, and mankind! How gloriously does Heaven
reward the task, when the parents behold those dear images and representatives
of themselves, inheriting their virtues as well as fortunes, sustaining their
respective characters gracefully and worthily, and giving them the agreeable
prospect of transmitting their name, with growing honor and advantage, to a
race yet unborn! With pleasure I annex in a note a few lines, written by a much
valued friend, and addressed, during absence, to ONE OF THE MOST AMIABLE OF HER
SEX. As they are the spontaneous effusions of the finer affectionate feelings
attending the conjugal and parental relations, they are offered as naturally
connected with the important and pleasing subjects of the two last numbers.

"Ye flying winds, go, tell the Nymph most dear
To my fond heart, ye saw the rising tear,
Whilst her loved image pressed on Fancy's eye,
And her sweet prattling babes were smiling by:
Dencea and George, with all their opening charms,
And playful Mira, circled in her arms.
Angels, who watch over human bliss, draw near,
Make her and her dear babes your constant care!
Ye skies, whose favors nourish every clime,
Strew thick your flowers over all their path in time!
And HE, whose gifts in streams eternal run,
Bless their whole life with one unclouded sun!
Give to each day, each night, each hour to roll,
With every joy that charms the human soul,
Inspired with blissful Hope -- that never dies;
Bright Hope forever pointing to the skies."



Number LV.
Be these wise laws your study and delight;
Read them by day, and meditate by night.

CONJUGAL PRECEPTS. Translated from PLUTARCH.
THE ancients always placed together the statues of VENUS and MERCURY, to
signify that the pleasures of matrimony consisted chiefly in sweetness of
conversation: they joined also the GRACES and SEDULA, the goddess of eloquence,
to intimate that the married couple were to act only by persuasion, and to
forbear the impetuosities of tyranny and contention.

It very much behooves those who are newly married, to avoid the first occasions
of discord and dissension: they should consider, that vessels when just made,
are liable to be bruised and thrown out of shape by slight accidents; but when
once settled and hardened by time, they will endure the severest shocks.

Those who rather choose to be the mistresses of senseless cuckolds, than the
obedient wives of discreet and sober husbands, resemble those persons who
choose rather to follow the directions of a purblind and ignorant guide, than
of one that sees clearly and knows every step of the way. They will not believe
that PASIPHAE, the consort of a prince, could ever be enamoured of a bull; and
yet they abandon the society of their own husbands, men of wisdom, temperance
and gravity, and fly to the embraces of riot and debauchery.

Some men, when they are about to ride, being unable through infirmity, or
unwilling through laziness, to mount into their saddles, teach their horses to
fall upon their knees, and receive their riders in that posture. In like
manner, there are some men, who, having married young ladies, not less
considerable for their birth than their fortune, take little care to improve
the advantages of such a splendid conjunction, but endeavor to degrade their
wives to the condition of slaves, and glory in domestic tyranny. But it is more
becoming a man to use the reins of government with the same regard to the
quality and dignity of the woman, as to the stature of the horse.

A woman ought to display the charms of her virtue, and the sweetness of her
disposition, in her husband's presence; but to retire, in his absence, to
silence and reservedness at home.

If kissing and caressing in the sight of others, be so unseemly (as it really
is) how much more indecent is it to rail and scold at each other in the company
of strangers? If lawful familiarity between man and wife is not to be allowed
but in their retirements, can the bitter interchanges of inconsiderate passion
be thought an entertainment, proper for an audience no way concerned in them?

HELEN was covetous, PARIS luxurious; on the contrary, ULYSSES was prudent,
PENELOPE chaste: happy therefore were the nuptials of the latter, but those of
the former brought a series of miseries both upon the Trojans and the Greeks.

King PHILIP was so passionately fond of a fair Thessalian lady, that his queen
OLYMPIAS suspected she used some private arts of fascination; and therefore
endeavored to get the supposed sorceress into her power. But when she had
viewed her well, examined her beauty, beheld the graces of her deportment, and
found by her discourse that she was a person of noble descent and education;
hence vain suspicions, hence vainer calumnies, said she to her, for I find that
the charms you make use of are in your own power: certainly therefore a lawful
wife surpasses the common qualifications for obtaining happiness, when without
the advantages of her wealth, her person or her birth, she makes it her whole
study to win her husband's affections by her virtue and sweetness of
disposition.

That is ornament which adorns; and that adorns a woman which renders her most
deserving: an honor conferred upon her, not by the luster of gold or emeralds
or diamonds, but by the real embellishments of gravity, discretion, humility
and modesty.

Women who honor and submit to their husbands, procure honor and respect to
themselves; but when they strive to get the mastery, they become a reproach not
only to themselves, but to those who are so ignominiously hen-pecked. However,
it behooves an husband to control his wife, not as a master does his vassal, but
as the soul governs the body, with the gentle hand of mutual friendship and
reciprocal affection. For as the soul commands the body, without being subject
to its pleasures and inordinate desires; in like manner a man should so
exercise his authority over his wife, as to soften it with complaisance and
kind requital for her affectionate submission.

An husband should bear a greater respect to his wife, than to all other women
in the world; for the nuptial chamber ought to be a school of honor and
chastity, not of incontinency and wantonness. He who allows himself to taste
those pleasures, which he denies his wife, acts like a man who would enjoin his
wife to oppose those enemies to which he has already surrendered.

Prudent wives, when their husbands rant and foam in the heat of passion,
should not exasperate them by opposition, but check their own loquacity: if
indeed they grumble out their discontents in a sulky humor, they may then try
by soothing language and persuasive arguments to calm their passions, and
rectify their errors.

Sallies of passionate anger and keen reproaches should be banished from the
household of the nuptial dwelling. Though a certain kind of austerity becomes
the mistress of a family, yet it should be like the sharpness of wine,
profitable and delightful; not like that of aloes, biting and ungrateful to the
palate.

As the husband ought to sympathize in the joys and sorrows of the wife, so it
is equally the duty of the wife to be sensible of the pleasures and anxieties
of the husband; for, as knots are fastened by knitting the bows of a thread
together, so the ligaments of conjugal society may be strengthened by the
mutual interchange of kindness and affection. Community of possessions is
chiefly requisite among married couples, who should endeavor to mix and
incorporate their purchases and disbursements into one substance, neither of
them pretending to claim a right to particular expenses, but counting all
inseparably peculiar to both.

As a looking glass, though set in a frame of gold, enriched with the most
sparkling gems, is entirely useless, if it does not give back the exact
similitude of the image it receives; so a wealthy portion ceases to be
profitable, if the conditions, the temper, the humor of the wife, are not
conformable to the natural disposition of the husband, and if he does not see
the virtues of his own mind represented in hers.

PLATO, when he observed the moroseness of XENOCRATES, who was otherwise a
person of great virtue and integrity, admonished him to sacrifice to the
graces. In like manner, I am of opinion, that it behooves a woman of moderation
to implore the assistance of the graces in her behavior toward her husband,
in order to make their society reciprocally harmonious, and to preserve her
from being waspishly proud from an extravagant opinion of her fidelity and
virtue.

It becomes not a frugal woman, to be negligent of a decent neatness; nor out
of an awful respect to her husband, to refrain from complacency in
conversation. As the rigid disposition renders her honesty irksome, so her
housewifery becomes unpleasing by sluttishness.

PHIDIAS made the statue of VENUS at ELIS with one foot upon a tortoise, to
signify two great duties of a virtuous woman, viz. to stay at home, and be
silent.

The orator GORGIAS in a full assembly of the Grecians, who resorted from all
parts to the olympic games, exhorting them to live in peace, unity and concord
with each other; MELANTHIAS cried out, This man, who pretends to give us advice
and preaches in public nothing but the love of union, is not able in his own
family to keep his wife and his maid from being together perpetually by the
ears, and yet there are only three persons in the house. GORGIAS, it seems, had
a kindness for his servant which made her mistress jealous. It therefore
behooves that man to keep his family in exquisite order, who will undertake to
regulate the conduct of his friends or the public.

Number LVI.
Wealth and power, what are you worth,
To pleasure if you give not birth?
COB^.
HEAVEN bestowed upon man the finer feelings of the soul, with a view to
augment his happiness, and to render his situation in life the more pleasant;
yet, in consequence of those erroneous notions which resinements in society
engender, these very feelings are the cause of the greatest distresses, to
which human nature is subjected. To such a weak and fallible creature as man,
the sympathetic endearments arising from reciprocal affections are necessary,
before his mind can experience the highest degree of gratification, of which it
is susceptible. In times of distress, he seeks for some sympathetic bosom, that
shall take pleasure in administering the balm of comfort; and when the heart
exults with joy, it feels a dreary want, until it can find some one, who will
participate with him in that peculiar bliss. Every emotion of the heart proves,
that man was not made to be alone; and that, if ever he hopes to attain to
happiness, it can never be found in solitude, far less in the company of those,
whose dispositions, desires, and modes of thinking, are not of a nature
congenial to his own.

These are truths that will readily be admitted by every one, who is young and
unhackneyed in the ways of men; but as age approaches, these sympathetic
affections seem to subside: the pleasures of social intercourse diminish; and
the love of wealth and power acquire dominion in their stead. Aged persons in
general, greedy of power, and callous to the impulses of kindness, imagine that
wealth or grandeur alone are sufficient to gratify every desire of the soul.
Forgetting their own rule for judging whilst young, they wish to deprive others
of the same privilege they valued once so highly themselves; and thus are led
to dictate, with the most inflexible authority, to their children as to the
choice of a companion for life; the most momentous transaction in which any man
can ever be engaged.

Nor is this propensity confined to one country, or to one set of people on the
globe; but it extends its influence, to a greater or less degree, to all
nations that can assume to themselves the proud name of civilized. Among such
people, laws have ever been contrived, which, by a stern inflexibility,
overpower the voice of nature, and make man submit to her imperious decrees.
The following affecting story evinces the truth of these remarks -- would to
Heaven it were in the regions of despotism alone, that such transactions were
to be found! But in despotic and in free governments, the same cruel principle
will be found to prevail. Even in Britain, which boasts of the happiness her
people are permitted to enjoy, the same tyrannical law (according to Dr.
Anderson) i^ this respect prevails, as in that despotic state, where the
transaction I am about to relate, took place. Such a law (thanks to GOD) does
not yet exist in this truly free and happy country, where no unnatural obstacle
impedes the intercourse of kindred souls. Yet the recital may be an occasion of
self-congratulation to my American readers, and confirm the hostility of the
public mind against any future attempt at infringing the rights of the two
sexes. What follows is a literal translation of a letter from Rome, which
appeared as an article of intelligence in the Mercurio de Espana for the month
of December, 1786.

"IN this capital (Rome) we have just now witnessed an event, which has drawn
tears from every body here. It is five years since a young gentleman of the
family of Amedei, married an amiable and virtuous young woman he loved, but
whose birth was not equal to his. At the end of one year, they had a daughter
as the fruit of their love; but this tender union was, in a short time, cruelly
disturbed by the parents and relations of the gentleman, who exclaimed against
his marriage as clandestine, and obtained against the unhappy young man an
order of the Pope, by virtue of which they tore him from the arms of his
spouse, and conducted him a prisoner to the castle of St. Angelo. A process was
immediately instituted for annulling the marriage. The gentleman tried every
means possible, to prove that his marriage was valid, and to make it be
ratified; his wife went also with her daughter in her arms, and threw herself
at the feet of her judges; but in vai^. A sentence was at last pronounced,
annulling the marriage, obliging the mother, that inconsolable wife, to write
to her husband with her own hand, the fatal news of their eternal separation.
Oppressed with the most cruel despair, she thus wrote to him: "I find myself
under the cruel necessity of renouncing those sweet and sacred bands, which
till now have held our hearts firmly united; but I resign myself with less
repugnance, from the consideration, that it will be the means of terminating
that long and severe captivity, which you have suffered for my sake. Live free,
DEAR HUSBAND, (this, alas! is the last time that my lips will pronounce so
sweet a name) O live! take comfort; and, if it be possible, live happy, far
from me. Since you love the mother, remember the daughter which she has given
to you, and take care of her, when you know that I no longer exist; for the
grief, which this separation causes to me, is so bitter, so penetrating, and
absorbs in such a manner the faculties of my soul, that I want strength to
resist it. Very soon shall I cease to live; may my death satiate the inhumanity
of our cruel persecutors* GOD bless you. Farewell! Farewell! -- forever!"

Four days afterward, that unhappy and tender wife died in horrible
convulsions; and her death set the gentleman at liberty, whose despair has not
yet been calmed.

Number LVII.
SIR,
FROM your indulgence to the female sex, I am encouraged to hope, that you will
not refuse this epistle a place in your work.

You must know, Sir, that, with a tolerable person, a very good fortune, and
lovers in abundance, I have a particular humor to live and die a maid. This
way of thinking, I protest, does not arise from disappointed love; but, on the
contrary, from my never having seen any one man, who has been possessed of
those accomplishments, which I think necessary for an husband.

I proceed now to give you a description of one, whom, notwithstanding my
present humor, I would willingly marry, and reward with a fortune of ten
thousand pounds. To silence the pretensions of those, who may suppose, that I
am easily to be carried off, here follows the description of the only man in
the world that I will consent to marry; and whom I shall beg leave to entitle.

THE MAID'S HUSBAND.
HE must have a person graceful and engaging. The features of his face must be
regular; and, though regular, agreeable; which as yet I hardly remember to have
seen, having generally observed, that where nature is most exact, she is least
engaging* His eyes must be lively, sparkling, and affecting; and over the whole
face there must be a clear complexion, health, cheerfulness, and sensibility.
His stature must be inclining to the tall; his motion easy and genteel, free
from the short pert trip of the affected beau, or the haughty tragic step of
the most solemn fop. His behavior serious, but natural; neither too open, nor
too reserved. His look, his laugh, his speech, and his whole manner must be
just without affectation, and free without levity.

Thus much for his person. I now come to the endowments of his mind; without
which, grace, beauty, and agreeableness must avail him nothing. His genius must
be fanciful; his knowledge extensive. Men, as well as books, must have been his
study. Learning, freedom, and gallantry must be so blended in him, as to make
him always the improving friend, the gay companion, and the entertaining lover.
In conversation he must say nothing with study, nor yet any thing at random.
His thoughts must flow from him naturally, yet not without that delicacy of
expression, which is necessary to give them a genteel turn. To the talents of
his mind let me add (if I may be allowed the distinction) the qualities of his
soul. He must be generous without prodigality; humane without weakness; just
without severity; and fond without folly. To his wife he must be endearing; to
his children affectionate; to his friends warm; and to mankind benevolent.
Nature and reason must join their powers, and to the openness of the heart add
the virtue of economy; making him careful without avarice, and giving him a
kind of unconcernedness without negligence. With love he must have respect; and
by a continued compliance always win upon the inclination. He must take care to
retain his conquest by the means he gained it, and eternally look and speak
with the same desires and affections, though with greater freedom.

It has been observed by experienced people, that the soul contracts a sort of
blindness by loving; but the man I am speaking of must derive his sentiments
from reason; and the passion, which in others is looked on as the mark of
folly, be in him the true effect of judgment.

To these qualities I must add that charm, which is to be considered before all
the rest, though hard to be met with in this libertine age, Religion. He must
be devout without superstition, and pious without melancholy: far from that
infirmity, which makes men uncharitable bigots, infusing into their hearts a
morose contempt of the world, and an antipathy even to its innocent pleasures.
He must not be such a lover of society as to mix with the assemblies of knaves
and blockheads, nor yet of an opinion that he ough^ to retire from mankind to
seek GOD in the horror of solitude: on the contrary, he must think that the
ALMIGHTY is to be found among men, where his goodness is most active, and his
providence most employed. There it is that Religion must enlighten, and reason
regulate his conduct, both in the cares of salvation, and the duties of life.

With such a man, a woman must enjoy those pleasures in marriage, which none
but fools would ridicule. Her husband would be always the same, and always
pleasing. Other wives are glad, if they can now and then find with their
husbands one agreeable hour; but with this a disagreeable minute will be
impossible. On whatever occasions we should see or speak to each other, it must
be with mutual pleasure, and assured satisfaction.

Now, Sir, let your dressing, scribbling, handsome young fellows, whether of
town or country, of the law, of trade, or of whatever honorable vocation, who
would be glad of a woman of five and twenty, not disagreeable in her person,
and with ten thousand pounds in her pocket, read this character; and if any of
them will assert and prove it to belong to himself, my heart, hand, and fortune
are at his service. But I believe, Sir, that, instead of a man, I have been
describing a monster of the imagination; a thing that neither is, was, nor ever
will be: I am therefore resigned to my condition; and can think, without
repining, of dying a maid, (and I hope an old one) since I am not to expect a
husband to the wishes of, Sir, your humble servant and correspondent,

A. B.


Though I doubt not but my fair correspondent is thoroughly deserving of the
husband she knows so well how to describe, yet I could wish, for her own sake,
as well as for the sake of some happy man, that she had added a qualifying
postscript to her letter, signifying, that she was willing to make some little
abatement in her demands. When gentlemen build houses, it is usual with them
either to give up convenience for a prospect, or prospect for convenience. In
this manner should a lady act in the choice of an husband. If she sets her
heart upon a Face, she must have no dislike to a coxcomb; or if she falls in
love with a Mind, a sloven should appear charming; for the odds are against
her, that the handsome man is the one, and the man of knowledge the other.

Exclusive of myself, I know of no such character as the lady has described:
nor dare I say a word of my own person and accomplishments, being unfortunately
near seventy, and a married man. It has also been hinted to me, (for I scorn to
deceive any body) that I have a small stoop in my gait, and that I am not quite
so well-bred upon all occasions as a young lady might expect me to be.

But before I take leave of my ingenious correspondent, I promise her to give
notice of the first Maid's Husband that falls within my knowledge; and if she
pleases to signify where and when she will be waited upon by any such
gentleman, her commands shall be executed with the nicest punctuality. Or, if
the lady does not choose to appear personally for the first time, she may send
any other proper lady of her acquaintance to the place appointed.

Number LVIII.
(...),
(...).
EURIPIDES. That love alone, which virtue's laws control,
Deserves reception in the human soul.

THE two following relations (one of them of ancient, the other of modern date)
afford an instructive example in each sex, and in the opposite extremes of
life, of virtue triumphing over strong temptation. They powerfully recommend
that purity of disposition, that superiority to vicious allurement, which
commands universal respect; and without which the gay and inexperienced seek in
vain for happiness from unhallowed gratifications.

The instance of the Roman General will show young men, how great a conqueror
appears in governing that little empire, man. And, whilst it tends to repress
every wanton appetite, it may serve to inspire those chaste and respectful
sentiments toward the female sex, which alone will insure the sweets of
"friendship" with woman, "softened into love."

The story of AMANDA will confirm my female readers in their resolution to
guard their virtue with more than vestal constancy; and will exhibit poverty,
with an unstained soul, as infinitely preferable to the most splendid
allurements of vice. It will discover the additional charms, reflected upon the
person of the virtuous fair, even in the eye of the man of pleasure, whilst she
rejects his solicitations. It may convince unprincipled men, of the baseness
and cruelty of stabbing the peace of humble or depressed families, by alluring
from the path of honor their hitherto innocent children; or may prove a
stronger security to such against their golden snares.

1. SCIPIO the younger, when only twenty-four years of age, was appointed by
the Roman Republic to the command of the army against the Spaniards. His wisdom
and valor would have done honor to the most experienced general. Determined
to strike an important blow, he formed a design of besieging Carthagena, then
the capital of the Carthaginian empire in Spain. His measures were so
judiciously concerted, and with so much courage and intrepidity pursued, both
by sea and land, that notwithstanding a bold and vigorous defense, the capital
was taken by storm. The plunder was immense. Ten thousand freemen were made
prisoners; and above three hundred more, of both sexes, were received as
hostages. One of the latter, a very ancient lady of rank, the wife of
Mandonius, watching her opportunity, came out of the crowd, and, throwing
herself at the conqueror's feet, conjured him, with tears in her eyes, to
recommend to those who had the ladies in their keeping, to have regard to their
sex and birth.

SCIPIO, who did not understand her meaning at first, assured her, that he had
given orders that they should not want for any thing. But the lady replied,
"These conveniences are not what affect us. In the condition to which fortune
has reduced us, with what ought we not to be contented! I have many other
apprehensions, when I consider, on one side, the licentiousness of war; and, on
the other, the youth and beauty of the princesses which you see here before us;
for as for me, my age protects me from all fear in this respect." She had with
her the daughters of Indibilis, and several other ladies of high rank, all in
the flower of youth, who considered her as their mother.

SCIPIO then comprehending what the subject of her fear was, "My own glory,
(says he) and that of the Roman people, are concerned in not suffering, that
virtue, which ought always to be respected wherever we find it, should be
exposed in my camp to a treatment unworthy of it. But you give me a new motive
for being more st^ in my care of it, in the virtuous solicitude you show in
thinking only of the preservation of your honor, in the midst of so many other
objects of fear."

After this conversation, he committed the care of the ladies to some officers
of experienced prudence, strictly commanding, that they should treat them with
all the respect they could pay to the mothers, wives, and daughters of their
allies and particular friends.

It was not long before SCIPIO's integrity and virtue were put to the trial.
Being retired in his camp, some of his officers brought him a young virgin of
such exquisite beauty, that she drew upon her the eyes and admiration of every
body. The young conqueror started from his seat with confusion and surprise;
and, like one thunderstruck, seemed to be robbed of that presence of mind and
self-possession so necessary in a general, and for which SCIPIO was remarkably
famous. In a few moments, having rallied his straggling spirits, he inquired of
the beautiful captive, in the most civil and polite manner, concerning her
country, birth, and connexions; and, finding that she was contracted to a
Celtiberian prince named ALLUCIUS, he ordered both him and the captive's
parents to be sent for.

The Spanish prince no sooner appeared in his presence, than, even before he
spoke to the father and mother, he took him aside; and to remove the anxiety he
might be in on account of the young lady, he addressed him in these words: "You
and I are young, which admits of my speaking to you with more liberty. Those
who brought me your future spouse, assured me, at the same time, that you loved
her with extreme tenderness: and her beauty left me no room to doubt it. Upon
which reflecting, that if, like you, I had though on making an engagement, and
were not wholly engrossed with the affairs of my country, I should desire, that
so honorable and legitimate a passion should find favor; I think myself happy
in the present conjuncture to do you this service. Though the fortune of war
has made me your master, I desire to be your friend. Here is your wife: take
her, and may the gods bless you with her. One thing, however, I would have you
be fully assured of, that she has been amongst us, as she would have been in
the house of her father and mother. FAR BE IT FROM SCIPIO TO PURCHASE A LOOSE
AND MOMENTARY PLEASURE AT THE EXPENSE OF VIRTUE, HONOR, AND THE HAPPINESS OF
AN HONEST MAN. No: I have kept her for you, in order to make you a present
worthy of you and of me. The only gratitude I require of you for this
inestimable gift is, that you would be a friend to the Roman people."

ALLUCIUS's heart was too full to make him any answer: but throwing himself at
the general's feet, he wept aloud. The captive fell into the same posture; and
remained so, till the father burst out into the following words: "Oh! divine
SCIPIO! the gods have given you more than human virtue! Oh! glorious leader!
Oh! wondrous youth! does not that obliged virgin give you, whilst she prays to
the gods for your prosperity, rapture above all the transports you could have
reaped from the possession of her injured person?" The relations of the young
lady had brought with them a very considerable sum for her ransom: but, when
they saw that she was restored to them in so generous and godlike a manner,
they entreated the conqueror, with great earnestness, to accept that sum as a
present; and declared, by his complying, that new favor would complete their
joy and gratitude. SCIPIO, not being able to resist such warm and earnest
solicitations, told them that he accepted the gift, and ordered it to be laid
at his feet: then addressing himself to ALLUCIUS, "I add," says he, "to the
portion which you are to receive from your father-in-law this sum; which I
desire you to accept as a marriage-present."

If we consider, that SCIPIO was at this time in the prime of life, unmarried,
and under no restraint, we cannot but acknowledge, that the conquest he made of
himself was far more glorious than that of the Carthaginian empire: and though
his treatment of this captive prince was not more delicate and generous than
what might justly be expected from a person endowed with reason and reflection;
yet, considering how few there are in his circumstances who would have acted as
he did, we cannot but applaud his conduct, and propose him as a suitable
example to future ages.

Nor was his virtue unrewarded. The young prince, charmed with the liberality
and politeness of SCIPIO, went into his country, to publish the praises of so
generous a victor. He cried out, in the transports of his gratitude, "That
there was come into Spain a young hero like the gods; who conquered all things
less by the force of his arms, than the charms of his virtue and the greatness
of his beneficence." Upon this report all Celtiberia submitted to the Romans;
and ALLUCIUS returned in a shout to SCIPIO, at the head of fourteen hundred
chosen horse, to facilitate his future conquests. To render the marks of his
gratitude still more durable, ALLUCIUS caused the action we have just related
to be engraven on a silver shield, which he presented to SCIPIO; a present
infinitely more estimable and glorious than all his treasures and triumphs.
This buckler, which SCIPIO carried with him when he returned to Rome, was lost,
in passing the Rhone, with part of the baggage. It continued in that river till
the year 1665, when some fishermen found it. It was lately in the royal cabinet
of France.

2. AN eminent citizen, who had lived in good fashion and credit, was, by a
train of accidents, and by an unavoidable perplexity in his affairs, reduced to
a low condition. There is a modesty usually attending faultless poverty, which
made him rather choose to reduce his manner of living to his present
circumstances, than solicit his friends, in order to support the show of an
estate when the substance was gone. His wife, who was a woman of sense and
virtue, behaved herself on this occasion with uncommon decency, and never
appeared so amiable in his eyes as now. Instead of upbraiding him with the
ample fortune she had brought, or the many great offers she had refused for his
sake, she redoubled all the instances of her affection, whilst her husband was
continually pouring out his heart to her in complaints, that he had ruined the
best woman in the world. He sometimes came home at a time when she did not
expect him, and surprised her in tears, which she endeavored to conceal, and
always put on an air of cheerfulness to receive him. To lessen their expense,
their eldest daughter (whom I shall call Amanda) was sent into the country to
the house of an honest farmer, who had married a servant of the family. This
young woman was apprehensive of the ruin which was approaching, and had
privately engaged a friend in the neighborhood to give her an account of what
passed from time to time in her father's affairs. Amanda was in the bloom of
her youth and beauty, when the lo^d of the manor, who often called in at the
farmer's house as he followed his country sports, fell passionately in love
with her. He was a man of great generosity, but from a loose education had
contracted a hearty aversion to marriage. He therefore entertained a design
upon Amanda's virtue, which at present he thought fit to keep private. The
innocent creature, who never suspected his intentions, was pleased with his
person; and, having observed his growing passion for her, hoped, by so
advantageous a match, she might quickly be in a capacity of supporting her
impoverished relations. One day, as he called to see her, he found her in tears
over a letter she had just received from her friend, which gave an account that
her father had lately been stripped of every thing by an execution. The lover,
who, with some difficulty, found out the cause of her grief, took this occasion
to make her a proposal. It is impossible to express Amanda's confusion, when
she found his pretensions were not honorable. She was now deserted of all her
hopes, and had no power to speak; but, rushing from him in the utmost
disturbance, locked herself up in her chamber. He immediately dispatched a
messenger to her father with the following letter: SIR,
I HAVE heard of your misfortune, and have offered your daughter, if she will
live with me, to settle on her four hundred pounds a year, and to lay down the
sum for which you are now distressed. I will be so ingenuous as to tell you,
that I do not intend marriage: but if you are wise you will use your authority
with her not to be too nice, when she has an opportunity of saving you and your
family, and of making herself happy.

I am, etc. --




This letter came to the hands of Amanda's mother; she opened and read it with
the greatest surprise and concern. She did not think it proper to explain
herself to the messenger, but, desiring him to call again the next morning, she
wrote to her daughter as follows: DEAREST CHILD,
YOUR father and I have just now received a letter from a gentleman who
pretends love to you, with a proposal that insults our misfortunes, and would
throw us into a lower degree of misery than any thing which is come upon us.
How could this barbarous man think that the tenderest of parents would be
tempted to supply their want by giving up the best of children to infamy and
ruin? It is a mean and cruel artifice to make this proposal, at a time when he
thinks our necessities must compel us to any thing; but we will not eat the
bread of shame; and therefore we charge thee not to think of us, but to avoid
the snare which is laid for thy virtue. Beware of pitying us: it is not so bad
as you have perhaps been told. All things will yet be well, and I shall write
my child better news.

I have been interrupted. I know not how I was moved to say things would mend.
As I was going on, I was started by the noise of one that knocked at the door,
and has brought us an unexpected supply of a debt which had long been owing.
Oh! I will now tell thee all. It is some days I have lived almost without
support, having conveyed what little money I could raise to your poor father --
Thou will weep to think where he is, yet be assured he will soon be at liberty.
That cruel letter would have broke his heart, but I have concealed it from him.
I have no companion at present, besides little Fanny, who stands watching my
looks as I write, and is crying for her sister: she says she is sure you are
not well, having discovered that my present trouble is about you. But do not
think I would thus repeat my sorrows to grieve thee: no, it is to entreat thee
not to make them in supportable, by adding what would be worse than all. Let us
bear cheerfully an affliction which we have not brought on ourselves, and
remember there is a power who can better deliver us out of it, than by the loss
of thy innocence. Heaven preserve my dear child.

Thy affectionate Mother, --




The messenger, notwithstanding he promised to deliver this letter to Amanda,
carried it first to his master, who he imagined would be glad to have an
opportunity of giving it into her hands himself. His master was impatient to
know the success of his proposal, and therefore broke open the letter privately
to see the contents. He was not a little moved at so true a picture of virtue
in distress; but at the same time was infinitely surprised to find his offers
rejected. However, he resolved not to suppress the letter, but carefully sealed
it up again, and carried it to Amanda. All his endeavors to see her were in
vain, till she was assured he brought a letter from her mother. He would not
part with it but upon conditions that she should read it without leaving the
room. While she was perusing it, he fixed his eyes on her face with the deepest
attention: her concern gave a new softness to her beauty, and when she burst
into tears, he could no longer refrain from bearing a part in her sorrow, and
telling her that he too had read the letter, and was resolved to make
reparation for having been the occasion of it. My reader will not be displeased
to see the second epistle which he now wrote to Amanda's mother.

MADAM,
I AM full of shame, and will never forgive myself, if I have not your pardon
for what I lately wrote. It was far from my intention to add trouble to the
afflicted; nor could any thing, but my being a stranger to you, have betrayed
me into a fault, for which, if I live, I shall endeavor to make you amends as
a son. You cannot be unhappy while Amanda is your daughter; nor shall be, if
any thing can prevent it which is in the power of, Madam,

Your most obedient, humble servant, --


This letter he sent by his steward, and soon after went up to town himself, to
complete the generous act he had now resolved on. By his friendship and
assistance Amanda's father was quickly in a condition of retrieving his
perplexed affairs. To conclude, he married Amanda, and enjoyed the double
satisfaction of having restored a worthy family to their former prosperity, and
of making himself happy by an alliance to their virtues.

Number LIX.
Those awful words, "till Death do part!"
May well alarm the youthful heart:
No after thought when once a wise*
The dye is cast, and cast for life:
Yet thousands venture every day,
As some base passion leads the way.
Pert Sylvia talks of wedlock scenes,
Though hardly entered on her teens,
Smiles on her w^ining spark, and hears
The sugared speech with raptured ears;
Impatient of a parent's rule,
She leaves her sire, and weds a fool.
Want enters at the guardless door,
And love is fled, to come no more.
DR. COTTON'S VISIONS.
I HAVE reserved, till toward the close of this work, a subject which claims
the fixed and dispassionate consideration of the younger and inexperienced part
of my female readers, especially of young heiresses, whose number rises in
proportion to the population and wealth of these STATES. A paternal solicitude
for their most precious interests prompts me as their MENTOR to whisper in
their ear some momentous cautions, confirmed to my view by melancholy facts,
and on which the all of their future life may depend. The observations which
follow, may perhaps be received with less prejudice, when I assure them, that
their MENTOR is a MINERVA, concealed beneath the form of the AMERICAN
SPECTATOR, and does but echo the language of an estimable member of their own
sex.

OF all the ensnaring passions to which our hearts are apt to give way, the
passion of LOVE is one of the most dangerous, and therefore ought to be
carefully guarded against; as on the prudent choice we make depends the
happiness or misery of our future lives. To form an engagement at a very early
age, is to run a very great hazard of meeting a disappointment. To carry on a
clandestine acquaintance with any one, however superior in birth or fortune, is
to degrade our character, and to render our virtue suspected. If any man makes
professions of love to a young woman, and endeavors to prevail upon her to
conceal it from her parents, she may depend upon his professions not being
sincere, and that he has some bad design, which he fears the eye of experience
will discover, and by so doing defeat his dishonorable purpose. If the
inclinations are mutual, and situations equal, secrecy cannot be necessary; if,
on the contrary, any impediments to an union appear, sufficient to prevent its
being brought about with the mutual consent of friends, it can answer no other
purpose than to entail misery on the youthful parties, by continuing a
connection which must end in disappointment and wretchedness. Never then, my
fair readers, listen to the secret tale: attend not to the delusive flatterer,
who would by his insinuating address prevail upon you to sacrifice your duty to
the gratification of his love, vanity or designs: and be assured, the man who
would wish you to be a disobedient daughter, has not the proper value for you
which he pretends. And what reason has such an one to suppose that the woman,
who would give up her first of moral duties, would not as easily be prevailed
upon to depart from every other? At least he would have just reason to suspect,
that an undutiful and ungrateful daughter would never make an obedient and
faithful wife.

To see the ill effects of forming imprudent connexions, we need not look far
into the world: and it is not to be doubted, but many unhappy marriages owe
their greatest miseries to the unguarded conduct of the parties, previous to
their being united. For, however the lover may flatter, and pretend to admire
the frankness and generosity of his mistress, for complying with any improper
requests; however grateful he may appear, for her running the hazard of
disobliging her parents or friends, she may depend on being afterward
reproached by the husband, for the very conduct which was praised by the lover.
Too often the source of matrimonial discord originates from this cause. Then
will their own hearts, in the utmost bitterness of anguish, more keenly feel
these reproaches; because their conscience will inform them they are but too
justly deserved.

Until you, my fair readers, know a little of the world, dare not to listen to
the tongue of the flatterer. Be not desirous of being thought to have made
captives, lest you yourselves become the slave; guard your heart with caution
against the delusive voice of Love; nor suffer your affections to be engaged,
till you are convinced the object of your choice is worthy to possess the
undivided heart of a prudent and virtuous young woman. If you should by chance
meet with an agreeable youth, who you think will captivate your heart, in spite
of your utmost endeavors to detain the unguarded fugitive; if you are not well
convinced, by the honor of his conduct, you have been as arrant a thief as
your lover, banish him forever from your misguided imagination. It is easy to
conquer a disease in its beginning; but if we permit it to gain strength,
before we attempt its cure, the best advice and most powerful remedies may fail
to effect its removal.

It is an unfortunate and a mistaken notion, which many young people cherish,
that if they marry the first object of their tender affection, they must be
happy. -- Alas! happiness depends on so many concurrent circumstances, that,
believe me, the utmost prudence will not at all times secure the prize. The
passion of Love must be reciprocal, or it cannot produce happiness; and, even
then, modesty, good sense, sensibility, and judgment, are requisite on both
sides, to insure it for any length of time. Friends must give their unreluctant
consent, and circumstances must be easy, to render the married life a scene of
harmony and contentment: for, however the ridiculous and romantic notions, to
be found in many of our modern novels, may serve to mislead the mind, and
involve it in a labyrinth of error, be assured, love and poverty seldom agree;
nor are scenes of fashionable dissipation more congenial to Love. A competence
is as necessary to our happiness as virtue and prudence to our peace of mind,
when we retire into ourselves, in order to examine our own hearts. How often
have we known the fond lover, who fled with such eagerness to Gretna-Green, to
secure the prize he pretended to adore, soon after his return, prove a
careless, unkind, and inconstant husband; whilst his equally misguided and
imprudent companion ^as, in the strictest sense of the word, proved herself a
modern wife!

Many sad tragedies has Love produced in the world from many different and sad
causes. The following story will more strikingly illustrate my present subject
than any farther arguments which I could use. May it have its due weight, and
the miseries occasioned by the errors of the parties prevent any one from
daring to follow their examples!

HARRIET Darnly was the daughter of a reputable mercer, who lived in London,
and who had a numerous family. Unfortunately for Harriet, who was a very
lovely, but a very vain and weak girl, she had two thousand pounds left her by
an uncle, which was to be hers when she arrived to the age of twenty-one. Mr.
Darnly had, at the time this legacy was left Harriet, an apprentice, of the
name of Henley. This young man, who had every advantage of figure to captivate,
was tired of the drudgery of the shop, and heartily weary of confinement. He
had long wished to purchase a commission in the army. Harriet beheld Edward
Henley, unknown to her parents, with tender partiality, and had given every
encouragement to his hopes. The attentions which his vanity more than his
affection had led him to pay her, unhappily obtained her love. She would take
every opportunity of sitting in the shop, and gave him every reason to suppose
that an offer of his heart would not be unacceptable.

No sooner was it known that Harriet's uncle had left her so considerable a
legacy, than he took the earliest opportunity of making a declaration of his
passion. The unguarded fair one too easily discovered to her artful lover the
progress he had already made in gaining her affections; and knowing that Mr.
Darnly had with too much reason been offended with his careless inattention to
business, prevailed upon the unhappy girl not to disclose to any one the
conquest she had made, till, by the regularity and steadiness of his future
conduct, he had effected a perfect reconciliation with her father, and
persuaded his own to make proper proposals.

Engaged in a clandestine acquaintance with one equally gay as worthless,
Harriet was led from one step of imprudence to another, and granted her lover
such frequent interviews, that to marry was become absolutely necessary. To
Gretna-Green they went: the lady wanted only a few weeks of being of age. As
soon as she was so, her profligate husband demanded her fortune, bought a
commission, and, when he had spent what remained, by his regiment being ordered
abroad, left his wife and child, which, at his departure, was only two months
old, to all the horrors of unprotected misery and threatening poverty.

Mr. Darnly, at the interposition of some friends, was, with some difficulty,
prevailed upon to permit his once darling daughter to return to her paternal
home, and to receive her with some degree of affection; but as neither he, nor
her mother, could ever bring themselves entirely to forget the deceit she
practiced with them to her own undoing, and as her brothers and sisters now
looked upon her with an eye of jealous envy, she is frequently obliged to bear
reproaches, which her own heart, conscious of having but too well deserved
them, knows not how to support. -- Whilst she sees her sisters easy, gay and
happy, her brothers cheerful and content, she feels the misery of her own
situation with redoubled anguish, and when she looks on her little girl, often
trembles lest she, like herself, should fall a victim to her own imprudence.

The worthless cause of her having strayed from the paths of prudence, and
disregarded the calls of duty, lives abroad, on the income of that fortune
which was given to make her happy, and never had the humanity to send her a
single line, or to make any inquiries after the poor victim of his baseness.

Be warned, fair daughters of innocence, by the wretched Harriet. Attempt not
to deceive your parents. Let her example prevail upon you to believe, the most
flattering appearances may conceal depravity, and that the protestations of a
clandestine lover are seldom meant but to betray.

Number LX.
What whispers must the beauty bear!
What hourly nonsense haunts her ear!
Wherever her eyes dispense their charms,
Impertinence around her swarms.
Did not the tender nonsense strike,
Contempt and scorn might look dislike;
Forbidding airs might thin the place;
The slightest flap a fly can chase.
In beauty faults conspicuous grow;
The smallest speck is seen on snow.
GA^.
BEAUTY is a captivating, but fading flower, which often leads its youthful
possessors into many dangers, many distresses. Happy is it for those who are
distinguished for their outward charms, that they are sheltered under the
parental roof! Happy for them that the watchful eye regards them with rigid
circumspection. Few, in the early periods of life, are insensible to flattery,
or deaf to the voice of adulation. Beware of the flatterer: be not deceived by
fair speeches. Be assured, the man who wishes to render you vain of your
outward charms, has a mean opinion of your sense and mental qualifications.
Remember, too, that a young girl, vain of her beauty, and whose chief study and
employment is the decoration of her person, is a most contemptible character;
and that the more you are distinguished for the charms of your face and the
graces of your form, the more you are exposed to censure and to danger. The
rose is torn from its parent stem in all its pride of beauty; the jessamine is
scarcely permitted to blossom before it is plucked, and no sooner are their
beauties faded, than the merciless hand which was eager to obtain them throws
them away with contempt; whilst the primrose, the humble violet, the lily of
the valley, and the snow-drop, less exposed to observation, escape unhurt, and
uninjured by the spoiler's hand.

Learn, fair daughters of Beauty, from the lily to court the friendly shade;
and from the primrose be convinced, that your best security may be found in
retirement. If you wish to be admired, be seldom seen; and if you are desirous
of having a sincere lover in your train, let virtue, modesty and sweetness be
the only lures you make use of to ensnare. You may then, perhaps, by your good
qualities, retain the heart which was at first a captive to your beauties; and
when time has robbed you of the graces and the innocent cheerfulness of youth,
secure a sincere and tender friend to console you in the hours of affliction,
and watch over you when deprived of those charms that first made him solicitous
to obtain your love.

Repine not, my young readers, though your virtues be concealed in a homely
form. If you have secured the virtues of the mind, you need not envy others the
beauties of the face. And ye, who are decorated with every outward grace, be
not vain of such fading externals; but tremble, lest they should tempt the
designing to lead you into error.

Had you less beauteous been, you would known less care;
Ladies are happiest moderately fair.
ETHEREGE. Neglect not, then, in the giddy hours of youth, to make your mind a
fit companion for the most lovely form. Personal charms may please for a
moment; but the more lasting beauties of an improved understanding and
intelligent mind can never tire. We are soon weary of looking at a picture,
though executed in the most masterly style: and the woman who has only beauty
to recommend her, has but little chance of meeting a lover who will not grow
indifferent to a mere portrait, particularly when its colors are faded by the
subduing hand of time. Then it is that modesty and sweetness of temper are to
be particularly observed; and the loss of beauty will not be regretted even by
the man they first made your captive.

See lovely fair, you blushing rose:
All hail the beauty as it blows.
Vain of her charms, she courts the sun,
And soon her gaudy race is run.
Observe, in yonder pensive dale,
The white-rob'd lily of the vale,
Pure enablem of the spotless maid,
Adorned with flowers that cannot fade.
Virtue, bright ornament of youth,
Sincerity, unblushing truth:
Through all life's seasons these will please,
In all life's sto^ms secure heart's ease.
Number LXI.
Cum prostrata sopore
Urget membra quies, et men's sine pondere luait.
PETRARCH. While sleep oppresses the tired limbs, the mind
Plays without weight, and wantons unconfined.

A LIVELY imagination is, if I may use Shakespeare's expression, great Nature's
second course; for, not content to have enjoyed the intellectual pleasures
immediately arising from the beauty of external objects, or the transient
scenes of life, it frequently, when they have vanished and disappeared, makes
fond excursions after them again; and even in our sleep, it will occasionally
recall the objects of our waking reflection, and from thence receive livelier
sensations, than were perhaps occasioned by the first impression. Though there
are many fantastic circumstances in these night-thoughts, if I may be so
allowed to call our dreams, yet on these occasions, we sometimes find ourselves
presented with agreeable visions, and, amidst the wildest vagaries of fancy, we
can often trace something like just reasoning, and a real picture of life. As I
take this to have been the case with me a few nights since, I shall make no
apology for presenting my readers with my dream.

I found myself, on a sudden, near a large intricate wood, which I had the
curiosity to enter. A whimsical band of hope and fear, joy and grief, pain and
pleasure hovered over our heads. Tender anguish, soft desire, pleasing agony,
were all intermixed, and in their motley livery formed a many colored group.
Cupid made violent work with his darts and flames, and nothing was to be heard
but tinkling rills, falling fountains, and lovesick sighs, by which the aspen
leaves were perpetually kept in rustling tremor. The god of love had by him a
prodigious quantity of arrows, differently feathered, according to the various
effects, of which they were to be productive. This circumstance called to my
mind a beautiful passage in a poem by Doctor Parnell.

And every dart can boast a kind,
Which suits each proper turn of mind.
From the towering eagle's plume
The generous hearts accept their doom.
Shot by the peacock's painted eye
The vain and airy lovers die.
For careful dames and frugal men
The shafts are speckled by the hen.
The pyes and parrots deck the darts,
When prattling wins the panting hearts.
When from the voice the passions spring,
The warbling finch affords a wing:
Together, by the sparrow stung,
Down fall the wanton and the young;
And fledged by geese the weapons fly,
When others love they know not why.
It was not unpleasant to observe the variety of impressions that were
occasioned in both sexes by this strange flight of arrows. Men I perceived in
close pursuit of blooming virgins, merely from the impulse of vanity; and I saw
several nymphs running with the utmost precipitation, from their lovers; though
by their manner of looking back, and the rustling they made in the trees, there
was room for conjecture that they did not desire entirely to escape.

Pleasing as the sensations of love are, I could observe that very unhappy
effects were often the consequences. Many there were whose mien spoke a
dejection of spirits, and they were frequently driven to such extremes, that
they laid violent hands on their own lives. As I traveled on, I saw several
hanging on boughs of trees; and on the waters, which were swelled with tears,
and ruffled with sighs, floated many a pallid corpse; in their countenances I
could plainly see the traces of that sickly luxury of thought, which is so apt
to settle into a fixed despair.

From this scene of distress, I turned away as soon as possible; and was
relieved from my uneasiness, by the sight of a few, who seemed to be happy in
their passion; whose hearts felt a mutual warmth, and whose eyes were
brightened into gladness. They walked arm in arm down the flowery meads,
interchanging mutual glances of affection; though ever and anon succeeded
anger, suspicion, open war, and peace again. In the center of the wood, stood a
temple sacred to Virtue, where all, who were desirous of leading a life of
happiness, were directed to bend their course, in order there to be united
together in bands of chaste affection. I was sorry to find that some of the
ladies had not resolution to persevere in this path: whether it was owing to
loose desires of seducing temptation, I cannot decide; certain it is, they
tired in their journey, and stepped aside with their paramours to sequestered
bowers; whence they were afterward discarded into the thorny parts of the
wood, for the remainder of their days; but even of these, a few there were,
who, after their digression, still found means to be introduced into the
temple; whither they were however pursued by an old hag, called Scandal, who
never yet has been known to let them entirely efface the remembrance of their
error.

The ladies who kept on a due course, never failed to lead the men in captivity
after them to the temple, whence, after a short ceremony, they were dismissed
in pairs, to commence the road of life. Three different paths were opened to
their choice, and a guide stood at each entrance to receive them. The first was
of a cold dispassionate temper, who took every thing alike, and his name was
Indifference. The second had eyes of a greenish cast, and he seemed to loathe
the food, which he notwithstanding eagerly followed; this personage was called
Jealousy. And the third, by an openness of countenance, a strong expression of
quick sensibility and cordial affection, was known to be Friendship. Too many
gave themselves up to Indifference, and instantly an inattention to each
other's wants succeeded in their breasts; the men betook themselves to midnight
shouts and revelry, and the fair to parties of tea, and routs, by which means
every spark of love was soon extinguished, and the gratification of their own
separate inclinations was their only study.

The walks of Jealousy were craggy, dangerous, and steep, full of thorns,
briars, and brambles. In the heart, where before gladness and joy revelled
secure, arose anxiety, distrust, and perturbation of spirit. The distempered
fancy started at scenes of its own creation, and, in a fit of madness, hurried
many a tortured wretch down the precipice of fate, or let fall its vengeance on
its neighbor. What was observable in this part was, that though sometimes
there were the appearances, the real footsteps of guilt could no where be
discovered.

The very small number under the guidance of Friendship enjoyed a pure
heartfelt tranquillity; and the fierce desire and impatient wish, which had
formerly actuated their minds, having now subsided, a steady and uniform flame
succeeded, not unlike the mild refreshing air of a placid evening, after the
fervor of an hot summer's day. Glad sum rose over their heads, and kindly
nights lulled them in each other's arms. A smiling race grew up around them,
and the culture of their young and tender minds afforded a pleasing employment;
they journeyed on through life, blessed with the sunshine of the soul, till, at
length, the easy dissolution of Nature put a period to all human felicity.

Here I could not help exclaiming with the poet; O grant me thus to live, and
thus to die!
Who sprung from kings, shall know less joy than I.


The whole scene appeared so completely happy, that I began to feel some
approaches toward envy; which so discomposed my spirits, that I was instantly
awaked, and the ideal prospect vanished into air.

Number LXII.
CONJUGAL AND DOMESTIC HAPPINESS.
I WONDER, said Leander to Eugenio, why the matrimonial and domestic state,
which is so necessary to the support of human beings, and to which the sexes
are so naturally and so strongly inclined, should prove the source of so much
dissatisfaction and unhappiness. Why is it, my friend, that a union so
endearing as that between husband and wife, and a circle so connected and
interesting as that of a family, should nevertheless fail of producing its
desirable and designed effects, and, with all its promising ingredients of
happiness, should be able to make so few of those happy, who form and compose
it?

The fault, said Eugenio, is not in the original institution, nor in the state
itself, but in the parties who enter into it. This world, indeed, is not the
residence of felicity; and man is too imperfect and depraved to find in any
state a felicity that is uninterrupted and permanent. But some pleasures,
rational and manly pleasures, there are in every condition of life, and in
every relation. In the matrimonial and parental connection, provision is made,
by our benevolent Creator, for enjoyments more numerous, and more refined, than
in any other; and it is human folly and perverseness alone which blights and
diminish^s them.

Be so good then, said Leander, as to favor me with your directions and advice
in this affair; to point out the errors to be shunned, and the steps to be
taken, that whenever I rise to the conjugal and patriarchal dignity, I may not
sink in perpetual gloom and wretchedness.

The grand secret of happiness in any state we have the choice of, replied
Eugenio, is to enter it with deliberation, with a wise selection of associates,
with a resolution to perform the duties of it, to do our part to lighten the
evils of it, and on the whole to make the best of it. Was the nuptial and
domestic state entered into with such precautions and intentions, it would be
found, as our Supreme Parent designed it, and as the state itself is fitted to
be, a most desirable, dignified and delightful state, productive of more
rational and sentimental satisfactions than any other. To enter without
judgment or forethought into the most important connection; to choose at random,
or as fancy or passion shall dictate, a partner for life, a bosom friend and
companion, is by no means setting out wisely, or laying a sure foundation for
happiness. And should such as set out in this manner, drag their existence
painfully along, and find the garland of matrimony, so hastily gathered,
entwined with nettles as well as roses, and even with serpents among the
flowers, they will have no reason to condemn the state, but their own
imprudence.

Where there is a necessary union of persons, of cares and of interests, there
a union of hearts and affections is indispensable. This shows that the exercise
of judgment and deliberation is requisite to matrimonial and domestic
happiness. For a congeniality of nature, a similarity of taste, and a
cordiality of affection, which are all essential ingredients in the composition
of nuptial felicity, are too delicate flowers to bloom on every bush, or to be
gathered by an undistinguishing hand. As a serene satisfaction results from the
steady performance of duty and the constant exercise of mutual tenderness, so
negligence, coldness and unfaithfulness, will inevitably incur blame and
produce uneasiness. Vain therefore is the hope of conjugal and domestic
endearment, or tranquillity, where there is the want of conjugal or domestic
affection and duty.

That there is a necessary intermixture of troubles with joys in the domestic
life, is readily acknowledged: And so there is in every condition. But it is
the part of manly wisdom to palliate the evils which cannot be cured; it is the
part of patience to bear without complaining the evils which cannot be
palliated; and it is the part of religion to annihilate smaller evils, and to
turn every evil into a good. With such dispositions, qualifications and aids as
these, husbands and wives, parents and children, will be happy in one another,
and constitute a happy family. Let a man then who is setting out in life, and
wishes to lay a foundation for domestic peace and enjoyment, choose a partner
who will be likely to harmonize with him in all the laudable pursuits of his
station, and in all the joys and sorrows of which his honest and feeling heart
may be sensible, and let him form the resolution which a renowned Israelitish
general and statesman formed of old, and every one will allow that he makes a
hopeful beginning.

For my part, I cannot figure to myself a scene more pleasing among human
beings, than a family cemented by the endearing sympathies of nature, and
united still more strongly by the tenderness of a cultivated affection and
esteem, and all under the governing influence of prudence and religion. The
happy pair who are the heads of such a family, experience the most delightful
sensations in viewing the innocence and the improvements of their rising
offspring, and in contemplating their future usefulness and prosperity. And the
children of such a family, both loving and dutiful, enjoy the liveliest
satisfaction in seeing and making one another, and their parents, happy.

True indeed it is, that neither sympathy, nor union, nor innocence, nor
virtue, nor religion, will shield a family from the inroads of misfortune, from
the attacks of disease, or from the depredations of death. But a family, where
harmony prevails, tenderness endears, and religion presides, is in the best
preparation to receive, and in the best disposition to bear, the most painful
allotments.

Number LXIII.
Letter to a young Gentleman upon his Marriage.
MY DEAR SIR,
I RECEIVED the news of your marriage with infinite delight, and hope that the
sincerity with which I wish your happiness, may excuse the liberty I take, in
giving you a few rules, whereby more certainly to obtain it. I see you smile at
my wrong-headed kindness, and, reflecting on the charms of your bride, cry out
in a rapture, that you are happy enough without my rules. I know you are; but
after one of the forty years, which I hope you will pass pleasingly together,
are over, this letter may come in turn, and rules for felicity may not be found
unnecessary, however some of them may appear impracticable.

When your present violence of passion subsides, however, and a more cool and
tranquil affection takes its place, be not hasty to censure yourself as
indifferent, or to lament yourself as unhappy; you have lost that only which it
was impossible to retain, and it were graceless, amid the pleasures of a
prosperous summer, to regret the blossoms of a transient spring. Neither
unwarily condemn your bride's insipidity, till you have recollected, that no
object, however sublime, no sounds, however charming, can continue to transport
us with delight, when they no longer strike us with novelty. The skill to
renovate the powers of pleasing is said indeed to be possessed by some women in
an eminent degree, but the artifices of maturity are seldom seen to adorn the
innocence of youth; you have made your choice, and ought to approve it.

Satiety follows quick upon the heels of possession; and to be happy, we must
always have something in view. The person of your lady is already all your own,
and will not grow more pleasing in your eyes I doubt, though the rest of your
sex will think her handsomer for these dozen years. Turn therefore all your
attention to her mind, which will daily g^ow brighter by polishing. Study some
easy science together, and acquire a similarity of tastes, while you enjoy a
community of pleasures. You will, by this means, have many images in common,
and be freed from the necessity of separating, to find amusement; nothing is so
dangerous to wedded love, as the possibility of either being happy out of the
company of the other; endeavor therefore to cement the present intimacy on
every side; let your wife never be kept ignorant of your income, your expenses,
your friendships, or aversions; let her know your very faults, but make them
amiable by your virtues; consider all concealment as a breach of fidelity; let
her never have any thing to find out in your character, and remember, that,
from the moment one of the partners turns spy upon the other, they have
commenced a state of hostility.

Seek not for happiness in singularity; and dread a refinement of wisdom as a
deviation into folly. Listen not to those sages who advise you always to scorn
the counsel of a woman, and if you comply with her requests, pronounce you to
be wife-ridden.

With regard to expense, I can only observe, that the money laid out in the
purchase of distinction is seldom or ever profitably employed. We live in an
age, when splendid furniture and glittering equipage are grown too common, to
catch the notice of the meanest spectator, and for the greater ones, they only
regard our wasteful folly with silent contempt, or open indignation. This may
perhaps be a displeasing reflection, but the following consideration ought to
make amends. The age we live in pays, I think, peculiar attention to the higher
distinctions of wit, knowledge, and virtue, to which we may more safely, more
cheaply, and more honorably aspire.

I said, that the person of your lady would not grow more pleasing to you, but
pray let her never suspect that it grows less so: that a woman will pardon an
affront to her understanding much sooner than one to her person, is well known;
nor will any of us contradict the assertion. All our seize, all our are
arts employed to gain and keep the heart of man; and what mortification can
exceed the disappointment, if the end be not obtained! There is no reproof,
however pointed, no punishment, however severe, that a woman of spirit will not
prefer to neglect; and if she can endure it without complaint, it only proves,
that she mea^ (...) make herself amends by the attention of others, for the
slights of her husband. For this, and for every reason, it behooves a married
man not to let his politeness fail, though his ardour may abate, but to retain,
at least, that general civility toward his own lady, which he is so willing to
pay to every other, and not show a wife of eighteen or twenty years old, that
every man in company can treat her with more complaisance, than he, who so
often vowed to her eternal fondness.

It is not my opinion, that a young woman should be indulged in every wild wish
of her gay heart or giddy head, but contradiction may be softened by domestic
kindness, and quiet pleasures substituted in the place of noisy ones. Public
amusements, if they be not so expensive as is sometimes imagined, tend to
alienate the minds of married people from each other. A well-chosen society of
friends and acquaintance, more eminent for virtue and good sense, than for
gaiety and splendour, where the conversation of the day may afford comment for
the evening, seems the most rational pleasure this great town can afford.

The bane of married happiness among many city men has been, that, finding
themselves unfit for polite life, they transferred their vanity to their
ladies, dressed them up gaily, and sent them out gallanting, while the good man
was to regale with port wine or rum-punch, perhaps among mean companions, after
the compting-house was shut; this practice produced the ridicule thrown on them
in all our comedies and novels since commerce began to prosper. But now that I
am so near the subject, a word or two on jealousy may not be amiss; for though
not a failing of the present age's growth, yet the seeds of it are too
certainly sown in every warm bosom for us to neglect it as a fault of no
consequence. If you are ever tempted to be jealous, watch your wife narrowly,
but never teaze her: tell her your jealousy, but conceal your suspicion; let
her, in short, be satisfied that it is only your odd temper, and even
troublesome attachment, that makes you follow her; but let her not dream that
you ever doubted seriously of her virtue, even for a moment. If she is disposed
toward jealousy of you, let me beseech you to be always explicit with her, and
never mysterious: be above delighting in her pain, of all things, -- nor do
your business, nor pay your visits, with an air of concealment, when all you
are doing might as well be proclaimed perhaps in the parish vestry. But I will
hope better than this of your tenderness and of your virtue, and will release
you from a lecture you have so very little need of, unless your extreme youth,
and uncommon regard, will excuse it. And now, farewell; make my kindest
compliments to your wife, and be happy in proportion as happiness is wished
you, by, dear Sir, etc.

Number LXIV.
THE Tale which occupies this paper coincides with the original plan of
rendering the MATRIMONIAL PRECEPTOR various, and extensively beneficial. The
Author hopes, that it may lead affluent parents to determine, never to
sacrifice the feelings or the felicity of their children at the shrine of
avarice, or pride; and ever to prefer mental worth, in introducing them to the
matrimonial state. When a character like PLOMER has gained the heart of an
amiable young lady, who nobly prefers merit to fortune; may she find in those
who have the direction of her hand, a readiness to gratify her honorable
passion; and hear from their lips the generous accents of a HARTLEY, "YOUR
HAPPINESS IS OURS, AND WHATEVER GIVES JOY TO YOU IS TO US AN EQUAL BLESSING!"

THE MAID OF THE HAMLET. A TALE.
LAURA was one of the six daughters of Mr. Hartley, who resided in a small
village in the county of Hereford, on an estate which he inherited from his
ancestors. Laura was the eldest child; and from her birth had been the
favorite of a maiden aunt, who left the whole of her property to her infant
niece. The amount of the old lady's personal estate was very considerable; and
that of her real, formed an income of five hundred pounds a year. The residence
of this relative was at a small distance from the village; and, being
surrounded by a few scattered cottages, was denominated the Hamlet. Hence the
heir to her fortunes acquired the appellation of -- " The Maid of the Hamlet."

When Laura had attained her eighteenth year, she found herself surrounded by a
numerous levee of admirers: some of whom paid their court with a view of
sharing the establishment which her departed relative had provided her: others
were actuated by less interested motives; but none had effected the smallest
impression on her heart.

Among the circle of her acquaintance was admitted the only son of the curate
of the village: a youth of modest mien, and unassuming manners. Vincent Plomer
had a heart susceptible of the most tender sensations; can it then be wondered
at, that the united efforts of worth and beauty, which were eminently
conspicuous in the mind and person of the fair Laura, should kindle in his
breast the ardent flame of love? Such, indeed, were their effects on the humble
Vincent; yet dare he not reveal the secret of his fondness. With much concern,
his aged father saw the alteration which was daily making in his constitution:
frequently would he urge him to disclose the cause of the grief that preyed on
his mind, and drained from his cheek the bloom of health. Still he denied that
he was unhappy; and strove, by a forced cheerfulness, to convince his friends
of their mistake.

Vincent, during his residence at the University, among his numerous studies,
had made a considerable progress in the science of Music, of which he was
always passionately fond. He played on several instruments; but his favorite
one was the German-flute, his execution on which was exquisitely fine.

Laura, who was also much attached to music, would frequently importune Vincent
to play her some of the most favorite airs then in vogue; and the pleasure he
received in obeying the wishes of a woman whom he loved, was too great to be
resisted.

Calling accidentally in one of her evening walks at the parsonage, she
discovered Vincent in his study, sitting at a table with a pencil in his hand,
in the attitude of drawing. So attentive was he on the subject before him, that
he heard not the entrance of Laura; who, crossing the room with soft and wary
step, peeped over his shoulder, and beheld an admirable likeness of herself
nearly in a finished state.

The thought, which she had long cherished, that he entertained a fond regard
for the original, at this moment recurred to her mind with increased force; and
she concluded, that the concealment of his passion was the cause of his
declining health and dejected spirits. Retreating a few paces from his chair,
she saluted the attentive artist, who instantly rose; and, by his embarrassed
address, confirmed the suspicion she had imbibed.

To the eyes of Laura, the features of Vincent were more than usually pale and
languid. She intimated her thoughts of the visible decline there appeared in
his constitution; observed, that the alteration could only be attributed to
some hidden cause, which preyed on his mind; and lamented the error he
committed in denying his friends the privilege of partaking in his sorrows, and
administering to his griefs.

Vincent thanked her for the concern she expressed for his happiness; and
assured her that he should ever retain a due sense of the friendship and esteem
with which she honored him.

"Come, come, Vincent," said Laura, with a smile of bewitching sweetness, "make
me your confidante. I will not betray the trust, on my honor. Say, has not
some girl got possession of your heart? and is not love the source of your
uneasiness?"

Vincent sighed heavily; and, taking up his flute, played, in the most pathetic
manner -- "How sweet the love that meets return!"

His fair auditor listened with the most profound attention to the melancholy
cadence of this favorite air; and Vincent, casting a glance on the attentive
beauty, saw the tears of sensibility glistening in her lovely eyes. It was a
favorable omen. A beam of joy darted through his frame; the dawn of hope rose
in his lorn bosom; and though it did not remove, it in some measure dissipated,
the gloom of despair.

"What favored object, Madam," said Vincent, perceiving Laura deeply absorbed
in thought, "has the happiness to engage your attention?" The lucid drop still
trembled in her eye, and an involuntary sigh escaped her bosom. "Has my too
officious care," resumed the anxious youth, "to oblige the lovely Laura, waked
in her mind the remembrance of some painful incident? Does she in silence mourn
the pangs of unrequited love? It cannot be! Such worth, such beauty, the
coldest heart -- "

The unexpected entrance of his father checked the rapturous Vincent, and
barred the progress of a conversation which promised to be very interesting.

Mr. Plomer, after paying his respects to Laura, addressed himself to Vincent
-- who had taken the opportunity which his father's conversation with Miss
Hartley afforded, to recover himself from the embarrassment he self at this
sudden and unexpected interruption -- "I have just received a letter," said Mr.
Plomer, "from my college friend, who informs me, that he has obtained a curacy
for you some short distance from Cambridge. I therefore would have you, my son,
return to the University; and, at the ensuing ordination, receive the necessary
qualifications for accepting the office he has generously employed his interest
to procure."

"Your wishes, Sir," returned Vincent, "to me are absolute commands. Little
preparation," added he, "will be necessary for my journey: I will therefore
take my departure in the morning."

"In the morning, Sir?" with eagerness, asked Laura.

"No, Vincent!" said Mr. Plomer; "important as the business is, it requires not
the dispatch you propose. A few days will be necessary to take leave of your
friends, whose partiality and esteem ask a more liberal return than the time
you have fixed will enable you to pay."

Vincent bowed assent; and, after a short conversation, but ill supported on
the part of the young people, Laura rose to take her leave. Vincent solicited
permission to attend her home; and the pleasure which Laura experienced in his
company, would not permit her to decline his politeness.

The superior merits of Vincent -- abstracted from his personal
accomplishments, which, though not strictly meriting the proud distinction of
beauty, were particularly striking and engaging -- had long attracted the
attention of Miss Hartley; and if, on a strict examination of her heart, she
could acquit it of the charge of love, she certainly cherished a regard for
him, not very much differing in nature from that tender passion. It is true,
that she had, with becoming prudence, resisted the advances of the smiling
deity, and in a great measure suppressed the wishes of her heart, aware that
many obstacles would occur to prevent her union with the son of a poor and
humble curate.

Mr. Hartley, it must be observed, though possessed of many excellent
qualities, was a man of no little pride; and thought too much of his family
descent, which boasted some of the most distinguished characters in the annals
of history, either as statesmen, warriors, or eminent divines, to be easily
prevailed on to bestow his daughter on one whose only boast was intrinsic
merit. A poor and bootless recommendation in the present age of refined
sentiment!

But to return to our lovers -- for such, from this moment, the reader may
consider them -- slowly pacing a grove of firs, through which their road to the
hamlet lay; where we shall find them lost in deep reflection, and profound
silence, save when the half-smothered sigh from either breast forced its
painful passage. At length, the trembling youth, summoning all his courage,
ventured to address the thoughtful maid --

"A few short hours," said he, in a melancholy tone of voice, "and I shall no
more enjoy the converse of each social friend; nor -- what is bliss still
greater far than these -- with Laura stray through fields, where Summer spreads
her lovely blossoms to the wondering eye, and blushing Flora exhales her
balmy-sweets. Yet shall remembrance often dwell, enraptured, on each bliss
which, in these secluded shades, my bosom knew; and fancy, from the wreck of
time, revive each pleasing scene. But, chiefly, shall memory trace my Laura's
lovely form, and bring to f^nd imagination's eye those matchless charms and
that unrivalled worth, it boasts."

"And am I, Vincent, so dear to you? Will you, in absence, hold me in your
thoughts?" inquired the blushing maid.

"Come along, Jack!" said a rough voice, behind him. "This is she we are
looking for."

The astonished lovers turned, to learn from whence the threatening sounds
proceeded: and behold two men, with crapes over their faces, advancing toward
them.

As soon as the ruffians had reached the astonished pair, one of them seized
Vincent by the arm; and, pointing a pistol to his breast, menaced him with
instant death, if he dared to stir or speak. His companion, in the mean time,
laid hold of Laura; who, sinking from his grasp, fell lifeless to the ground.
The sight of the maid, whom he tenderly loved, in this perilous situation,
rouzed the indignant spirit of the astonished Vincent; and, snatching the
pistol which the villain pointed at his breast, he lodged its contents in his
body, and brought him to the ground. His companion, seeing him fall, hurried
from this scene of death; first discharging his pistol at Vincent, who
unfortunately received the ball in his left shoulder.

Vincent's whole attention was now directed to the fainting Laura, who soon
revived from this transitory state of death; and the first object that met her
returning senses was her gallant lover.

"Hasten with me, my dear Laura," said he, "from this scene of horror! Let us
seek your father's mansion, where only we shall be safe; for still I fear
danger surrounds us. This weapon," continued he, snatching a sword from the
fallen villain's side, who lay weltering in his blood, and heaving deadly
groans, "will be our sure defense, should the monster who has escaped, return
to execute his horrid purpose."

Without waiting her reply, he raised the trembling beauty from the ground, and
hurried her out of the grove. Fear lent them strength, and added swiftness to
their steps. Just as they had reached the lawn that fronted the house of Mr.
Hartley, the wounded lover found his strength exhausted; and, leaning on his
sword, said -- "I can no farther, Laura! Here must I lay me down, till my
wasted strength returns. A few short paces, and you will reach a place where
danger has no dwelling. Fly, then!" added he, throwing himself on the ground;
"and, ere too late, send me some friendly help."

The perturbed state of Laura's mind from the rude treatment of the ruffians,
had prevented her from discovering the situation of her deliverer; and, till
this moment, she was a stranger to his being wounded. Swift as the winged arrow
speeds its rapid flight, the lovely mourner bounded over the lawn; and, meeting
her father at the entrance of the house -- who, beholding from a window her
unusual haste, came to inquire the cause -- rushed into his arms; and, with
wildness in her looks, and a trembling voice, informed him of Vincent's
situation, and urged him to hasten to his assistance.

Mr. Hartley called his servants, and proceeded to the bottom of the lawn;
where they found the brave youth so faint, through loss of blood, as to be
totally incapable of speaking. With the assistance of his attendants, Mr.
Hartley conveyed him to his house; and, having laid him on a bed, dispatched a
messenger for the surgeon of the village. Every possible care was taken of the
unfortunate youth. The ball was extracted without much difficulty; and his
surrounding friends had the happiness to hear the surgeon pronounce his wound
remote from danger.

And now Mr. Hartley, having received the particulars of the accident which
occasioned the wound of his young friend, sent a servant to the parsonage,
desiring the presence of Mr. Plomer; while himself, attended by the surgeon and
a servant, directed his steps to the fatal spot, to learn from the fallen
ruffian, if yet alive, the cause of the outrage committed against his daughter,
and by whom he was engaged; for he suspected that he had been hired to effect
the diabolical purpose of some unknown villain.

They found the poor wretch in a state of insensibility; and, having conveyed
him to a neighboring cottage, administered some cordials to his relief. After
a length of time, he seemed to revive; but all he could articulate was, "Sir
William!" and shortly after expired.

These words, however, afforded sufficient information for Mr. Hartley to
conclude that they had been hired by Sir William Ayliffe, to secure the person
of his daughter, that by one efficient stroke of villainy he might revenge the
disappointment he had received from Laura's rejection of his hand: and this
conclusion seemed to be justified by Sir William's sudden flight from this part
of the country; which could only be attributed to the failure of his projected
scheme, and the fear of exemplary punishment.

For several weeks Vincent was closely confined to his bed; and his friends
experienced much anxiety at his situation. A variety of passions agitated his
mind, and retarded the progress of his recovery. The fair Laura, too, suffered
much from the state of uncertainty in which she was involved. The roses in her
cheek each day disclosed a fainter blush: her spirits forsook her; and her
anxious parents frequently discovered her in tears. Mr. Hartley readily divined
the cause of her uneasiness, and charged her with the partiality she bore the
humble Vincent. She sought not to elude the question, but frankly owned her
love.

"I confess," said Mr. Hartley, "I did expect you would have selected a man of
equal birth and fortune with yourself, to associate with in the marriage state.
One of greater merit, I am persuaded, you could not have chosen than our young
friend; and I cannot but think he well deserves your love. I have observed,"
continued he, "that an hopeless passion on his part is the chief, and, perhaps,
only obstacle to his recovery; and that a similar attachment on that of yours
is the source of your present uneasiness and declining health. It would,
indeed, be the very height of ingratitude in us, Laura, not to esteem that
valor, but for which you might at this moment have been deprived of life, and
I in fruitless grief mourned your loss. Go, then, my child," added he, "the
gladsome messenger of joy; remove from his mind the clouds of uncertainty; and
tell him you are his forever.

Laura instantly threw herself on her knees; and, snatching her father's hand,
carried it to her lips -- "And will you, will you, my dear father, make the
generous Vincent happy? Will you ease the fears that rack his tortured mind?
Oh, matchless condescension! How shall I repay such unbounded goodness!"

"Rise, my dear Laura," said Mr. Hartley, wiping from his eye the starting tear
of paternal love: "your happiness is mine; and whatever gives joy to you, is to
me an equal blessing."

The grateful Laura impatiently sought the chamber of her desponding lover; and
removed from his mind each fearful doubt, each lingering trace of wretchedness.

"Now each new day increasing strength bestows,
And his braced limbs the limping staff resign;
His humid lip with roseate luster glows;
His lucid eyes with wonted brightness shine."
The grateful pastor received the intelligence of Mr. Hartley's consent to the
union of his son with the wealthy Laura, with tears of joy. To see his only
child advanced to wealth and honor, raised from the painful state of low
dependence, to ease and affluence, blotted from his memory his former
sufferings; relieved him from the tender fears he entertained for his fate; and
warmed his soul with gratitude to the beneficent Ruler of the world. "Thus,"
said he, "when the angry tempest over the peopled globe has spent its rage, the
balmy gales of health succeed, and nature gathers new beauties from the storm."

A few weeks from the dawn of this promised scene of bliss, the venerable
curate joined the consenting hands of this virtuous pair. The happiness of
their friends was considerably augmented by the felicity in which they lived;
and the surrounding peasantry, who shared the benevolence of Vincent and Laura,
with ceaseless gratitude sung the praises of -- The Maid of the Hamlet.

Number LXV.
Domestic happiness, thou only bliss
Of Paradise that has survived the fall!
Though few now taste thee unimpair'd and pure,
Or tasting, long enjoy thee, too infirm,
Or too incautious to preserve thy sweets
Unmixt with drops of bitter, which neglect
Or temper sheds into thy crystal cup!
Thou art the nurse of virtue! In thine arms
She smiles, appearing, as in truth she is,
Heaven-born, and destined to the skies again.
COWPER. Explebo numerum, reddarque tenebris.
VIRG. -- The Number I Will complete,
Then to obscurity well-pleased retreat.

"DOMESTIC life, like all other external goods, is not necessarily and of
itself, but only in particular combinations and certain circumstances, a real
advantage and a source of actual felicity. Home is but too frequently rendered
the seat of tiresomeness and disgust; the scene of low and ungoverned passions;
the abode of vexation, of various dissensions, and of malicious petulance; not
seldom an actual place of torment. This is always more or less the case, where
wisdom and virtue are not admitted of the party, and do not animate its
businesses and pleasures. Where wisdom and virtue dwell, where intelligent and
good persons live together, there only dwell peace, satisfaction, and joy:
these alone render either a cottage or a palace the receptacle of pleasure; by
their means is any family, whether great or small, rendered capable of
happiness. For only the intelligent and good can tell, what solid happiness
implies; none but they have either the taste or sentiment proper for it. They
alone estimate things by their real value, and know how to enjoy, above all
things, what is real, and beautiful, and good; unesteemed and unknown as they
may be in the great world, and among such as are not disposed to the more
delicate sensations. To them, a word that overflows from the fullness of the
heart; a look that indicates the soul; an inconsiderable but harmless action;
an unimportant kindness, but performed from real affection; a calm and silent
sentiment of friendship; a free effusion of a person's reflections and feelings
into the bosom of his own family; is of more worth, than the reiterated
protestations of civility and regard, than all the flattering encomiums and
blandishments, than all the friendly miens and gestures, than all the splendid
entertainments, in which the glory and happiness of the generality of large
companies consist.

"Wherever domestic happiness is found, it shows us persons who are connected
together by real, intrinsic love and friendship, who live entirely by each
other, and who seek their happiness, their honor, and their force, in the
mutual union of their hearts. Only to persons of this description can and must
every thing be of importance which each has, says, does, and enjoys; how he is
inclined; and whatever befalls him. They alone know how to consider their mutual
advantages with unerring complacency, and observe the infirmities and failings
of each other without displeasure; to reprehend the deviations of a third with
inoffensive gentleness; understand the looks of each; and to prevent the wants
and wishes of all; mutually to comply with the designs of each other; to
harmonize with the feelings of the rest; and to rejoice heartily in all the
successes, even the most inconsiderable, that happen to each other. Wherever
frigidity of temper, untractableness, jealousy, and envy prevail, there no real
happiness is possible, in the narrow circle of daily intercourse.

"Domestic happiness gives scope to a taste for truth, for nature, for a noble
simplicity, and serene repose; in opposition to error and art, to studied and
forced pleasures, and the more ostentatious and poignant diversions. That pure
and generous taste alone can give any value to the joys of domestic life; and,
to such as understand and enjoy it, render all its concerns important, and
delightful as the sources of satisfaction and pleasure. For, in this case, they
arise, not so much from the object, as from the eye that beholds them, and the
heart that feels them; not so much from the importance of the transactions and
events themselves, as from the natural and spontaneous manner in which they
arise, and the pleasing interest taken in them. To persons of a sound judgment
and an uncorrupted heart, the cheerful countenance of the spouse, the lisping
of the infants, the mirthful sports of the children, the sight of reason in its
bud and in its blossom; to them the earnest curiosity of one, the innocent
vivacity of another, the growth and improvement of a third, the contentedness
of all, is a scene far preferable, with all its privacy and simplicity, to any
other, however intricately conducted, or splendidly performed. The silent and
placid existence, in a society of open affection, of unrestrained and
unobtrusive benevolence and love, is, to hearts that are able to melt, a kind
of existence which they would not exchange, for any of those that are so much
prized and envied by the multitude.

"What a happiness flows to such, more particularly, from the superintendence
of their tender offspring! The Deity has provided, that when the first
enchanting links of mutual affection and parental love have united us, we
should be more endeared to each other, by every instance of care and affection
in the education of our children. Nothing so effectually charms the mind into a
settled esteem, as concurrence in an employment, so beneficent, so delightful,
as the care or education of our own offspring. This is a work of so much
importance, and requiring so much time, that it contributes more than any thing
toward perpetuating our union. The necessary duties to one child, are
succeeded by the necessary duties to another; until we have transferred, as it
were, our whole souls into our offspring; passionately love each other again in
our several images or representatives; and live only to make ourselves happy,
through the happiness of our children. It is thus we may be said to be renewed;
or to be made young again. We view the progress of an infant mind, the sources
and growth of its affections, with more pleasure than is experie^^ed by itself.
We interest ourselves in those great passions which determine the events of
life; we forget our infirmities, we imagine ourselves in love again, because
our children are enamoured; and we become fathers and mothers a second time,
when they assume those happy denominations. Compare, if you can, the events of
what is called a life of pleasure, with such as these. And when nature is
decomposing; when infirmities or disorders menace dissolution -- you may see
the man, who has acted on the selfish and brutal principle of gratifying
himself at the expense of truth, honor, and the happiness of others, cursing a
world which detests or despises him; deserted by all, by the very instruments
of his pleasures, because universally disesteemed; and sinking into the grave
in ignominy or frantic wretchedness: whilst those men and women who have gone
hand in hand in the pleasing duties of life, will not only have a firm support
in honorable recollections; but will be led down its rugged declivity, by the
tenderest care of an affectionate offspring; and will consign themselves to
rest, like useful laborers, a little weary, but satisfied with the work of the
day."

CONCLUSION.
Apprehending an intimate connection, between the various views of conjugal and
domestic life depicted in these pages, and the happiness of MILLIONS, of the
rising and risen generations of COLUMBIA; I have complied, not without
hesitancy, with the call of my friends, to attempt the official duties of a
MATRIMONIAL SPECTATOR and PRECEPTOR, for the benefit of our COMMON DEAR
COUNTRY. To the patronage or censure of that COUNTRY the work is now submitted;
with a sincere desire, that it may rise to fame, or sink to obscurity, as her
impartial voice shall determine.

With an ardent wish for the intellectual improvement, and happy union of the
two sexes; I retire (as I have entered) incognito, from the scene.

I know not how to close this Work, and to take leave of my candid readers, or
(shall I say?) pupils, better, than by presenting them with the sentiments of a
gentleman of distinguished mental worth; who has long been one of the BRIGHTEST
PATTERNS OF CONJUGAL VIRTUE, in our NEW WORLD. They exhibit the grand basis of
a happy union; and a just estimate of the advantages and disadvantages of the
married state.

TO THE AMERICAN SPECTATOR.
SIR,
HAVING lived long; traveled much; seen matrimony in all its forms, and
stages; observation and experience have stamped this truth with infallible
certainty: -- A CONSTANT DESIRE TO MAKE OUR COMPANION HAPPY, IS THE SOUL OF
CONJUGAL FELICITY. This comprehends the essence of love, and applies to all
ages, all times, all circumstances; it is every thing. This constitutes the
balm, the flowers, all the sweets, and the sunshine of life. Where this is
wanting, there is form without spirit, shadow without substance, "sounding
brass, and tinkling cymbal."

If we blot ten thousand pages in giving rules and maxims, and reasoning about
it and about it, the quintessence of all is expressed in one line. This truth
is confirmed by the adage, "Love begets love;" which is founded in the
experience of ages, and sanctioned by the reason of all mankind.

Human nature is formed to feel, and to be influenced by its sensations. The
most perverse are affected, in some degree, by the kind attentions of others.
In this way only can the meek and innocent wife control the ferocious husband,
or reduce him to the path of virtue. Thus only can the unprotected domestic
reform or mollify the unruly passions of a tyrannical superior. Love,
benevolence is the divine instrument, by which the weak must govern the strong,
the virtuous the wicked. Its charms influence all minds; and the person, whom
it does not soften or reclaim, is lost forever. In any event, the good shall
not lose their reward: the conscious endeavor to make others wise, virtuous,
and happy, will instill its balm into the benevolent mind, and repay its labor
by the secret charm of self-approbation. Such is the constitution of the human
mind, by the beneficent appointment of HEAVEN.

With respect to the advantages, and disadvantages of the married state, they
merit our deliberate attention, ere we enter into it, to know where the balance
will fall.

There is a dark, and a bright side; or, in other words, some portion of shade
to every thing in human life. That which is most luminous on the whole, claims
our choice. In order to form a just estimate of the means of happiness, we must
study the constitution of nature, and of man; for no plan will succeed, which
is opposed by t^^ constitution. Taking this for the first principle, then
observe the subsequent diamond maxim, which is more precious than rubies.

"Let the best course of life your choice invite,
"And custom soon will turn it to delight."
What some call the dark side, or tax of matrimony, is, the cares, and expenses
of a family -- multiplying one's self into many marks for misfortune, sickness,
and death -- loss of liberty, by increasing one's ties -- hazard of ill-temper,
or want of excellence in the person with whom we form the indissoluble union;
and the like risk in offspring. All these certainly have their weight in the
scale: therefore, to act rationally, they must be outweighed by prospects of
happiness, before we make the experiment of the conjugal life.

As to cares and expenses, they increase the exertion of our faculties, and
thus more often enlarge, than diminish our pleasure. We were made for action,
not for indolence; and from pursuits, which have for their object the interest
of those we love, the most refined enjoyment results. This constitutes a
sublime portion of human felicity, without which life would be a barren
existence.

The second objection is unsupported by reason and experience; because without
such a multiplication of friends, we cannot increase our dearest delights. No
one objects to riches, because they add to his cares, and his chances for loss.
The absence of evil will not satisfy any one: all want positive good; and for
the enjoyment of it, we cheerfully take the risk of losing it.

As to loss of liberty by increasing one's ties; we always intend, and very
frequently gain by the loss. It is only an exchange, as in a pure republic; we
give part of our rights to the control of others, for the same power over their
rights. We cannot exist in society without an exchange of rights in some
degree: it is a mean of promoting individual and general happiness.

With respect to the fourth objection, it is to be remembered, that we cannot
take one step in life, which promises good, free from the possibility of evil.
If the chances be in favor of a pursuit, it is deemed wise. In this, as in
every other case, we reason, and follow where happiness seems to lie. When
persons arrive at the period of life for important action, and look around the
world for happiness; hazard and uncertainty attend every object, and darkness
rests on all things future. Their nature powerfully inclines them to pursuit.
Taking, then, reason and virtue for their guides, they should select those
objects, which afford the fairest probability of success. Hope, the cordial of
existence, animates the various pursuits through the whole journey of life, and
often strews with flowers the untrodden path. Marriage enlarges the field of
hope; it seems to insure a kind of immortality. In offspring our morning star
arises, before our evening sun declines. This prevents a total eclipse, and
enlightens our whole existence.

In fact, all the wants and wishes, the passions and sensibilities of humanity,
which constitute delight, find their object in the matrimonial circle.

When too we contemplate the brevity of life, and look forwards to that world,
whence no traveller returns; we may anticipate the enlargement, even of eternal
felicity, in seeing our posterity from age to age ascend, to people the realms
of light, and embrace us with seraphic love. This idea is natural, and there is
nothing in reason or revelation against the pleasing conclusion.

TO IMITATE THE PARENT OF THE UNIVERSE, BY COMMUNICATING FELICITY, GIVES BACK
THE MOST DIVINE PLEASURE, WHICH THE HUMAN MIND CAN FEEL; AND TO COMMUNICATE TO
THOSE WE LOVE, IS THE SUBLIME OF EXISTENCE. The mind rises in bliss, whilst it
dwells on the idea. The heart palpitates in an energy of rapture.

Happy Americans! whose free government, and fertile regions invite to
Marriage, and promise the full reward of love. Here the corrupt maxims of the
old world are little known. Here Love is the loan for love; and the pure
principle of personal esteem forms the union between the sexes. Here mutual
affection rises superior to fortune, and gives domestic felicity, unknown where
avarice, ambition, or vicious pleasure rule the heart.

Here Industry, crowned by the blessing of benignant Heaven, supplies the wants
of all; and the blooming youth are seen in every dwelling, smiling around their
parents, like blossoms on a fruitful tree. Health glows on the cheek, innocence
and contentment sparkle in the eye, and the voice of Nature tells the
traveller, "HAPPINESS DWELLS HERE."

THE END.

