LETTERS CONTAINING A SKETCH OF THE POLITICS OF FRANCE. FROM THE THIRTY-FIRST
OF MAY 1793, TILL THE TWENTY-EIGHTH OF JULY 1794, AND OF THE SCENES WHICH HAVE
PASSED IN THE Prisons of Paris.

BY HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY, WILLIAM YOUNG, THOMAS DOBSON, H. and
P. RICE, AND JOHN ORMROD. M,DCC,XCVI.

LETTER I.
Switzerland, September 1794. MY DEAR SIR,
AFTER so long a suspension of our correspondence, after a silence like that of
death, and a separation which for some time past seemed as final as if we had
been divided by the limits of that country from whose bourn no traveller
returns, with what grateful pleasure did I recognize your handwriting, with
what eagerness did I break the seal of your welcome letter, and with what
soothing emotions receive the tidings of your welfare, and the assurance of
your affection! Your letter was a talisman that served to conjure up a thousand
images of sorrows and of joys that are past, and which were obliterated by the
turbulent sensations of dismay and horror.

Perhaps it will not be uninteresting to you to receive from me a sketch of the
scenes which have passed in Paris since the second of June, an epoch to be for
ever deplored by the friends of liberty, which seated a vulgar and sanguinary
despot on the ruins of a throne, till the memorable 28th of July 1794, when
Liberty, bleeding with a thousand wounds, revived once more. If the picture I
send you of those extraordinary events be not well drawn, it is at least marked
with the characters of truth, since I have been the witness of the scenes I
describe, and have known personally all the principal actors. Those scenes,
connected in my mind with all the detail of domestic sorrow, with the feelings
of private sympathy, with the tears of mourning friendship, are impressed upon
my memory in characters that are indelible. They rise in sad succession like
the shades of Banquo's line, and pass along my shuddering recollection.

After having so long suffered without daring to utter a complaint, it will
relieve my oppressed spirits, to give you an account of our late situation;
and, in so doing, I shall feel the same sort of melancholy pleasure as the
mariner who paints the horrors of the tempest when he has reached the harbor,
and sheds a tender tear over his lost companions who have perished in the wreck
-- Ah! my dear friend, that overwhelming recollection fills my heart with
anguish which only they who have suffered can conceive. Those persons in whose
society I most delighted, in whose cultivated minds and enlightened
conversation I found the sole compensation for what I had lost in leaving my
country and my friends -- to see them torn from me for ever, to know the
precise moment in which they were dragged to execution, to feel -- but let me
turn a while from images of horror which I have considered but too deeply, and
which have cast a sadness over my mind that can never, never be dispelled.
Whenever they recur, a funereal veil seems to me to be spread over nature; and
neither the consciousness of present, nor the assurance of future safety,
neither the charms of society, nor all the graces, nor all the wonder of the
scenes I am now contemplating, can dissipate the gloom.

Not long after the reign of Robespierre began, all passports to leave the
country were refused, and the arrestation of the English residing in France was
decreed by the national convention; but the very next day the decree was
repealed on the representations of some French merchants, who showed its
impolicy. We therefore concluded that we had no such measures to fear in
future; and we heard from what we believed to be good anthority, that if any
decree passed with respect to the English, it would be that of their being
ordered to leave the republic. The political clouds in the mean time gathered
thick round the hemisphere: we heard rumors of severity and terror, which
seemed like those hollow noises that roll in the dark gulf of the vulcano, and
portend its dangerous eruptions: but no one could calculate how far the
threatened mischief would extend, and how wide a waste of ruin would desolate
the land. Already considerable numbers were imprisoned as suspected --
suspected! that indefinite word, which was tortured into every meaning of
injustice and oppression, and became what the French call the mot de
ralliement, the initiative term of captivity and death.

One evening when Bernardin St. Pierre, the author of the charming little novel
of Paul and Virginia, was drinking tea with me, and while I was listening to a
description he gave me of a small house which he had lately built in the center
of a beautiful island of the river that flows by Essonne, which he was employed
in decorating, and where he meant to realise some of the lovely scenes which
his fine imagination has pictured in the Mauritius, I was suddenly called away
from this fairy land by the appearance of a friend, who rushed into the room,
and with great agitation told us, that a decree had just passed in the national
convention, ordering all the English in France to be put into arrestation in
the space of four-and-twenty hours, and their property to be confiscated. We
passed the night without sleep, and the following day in anxiety and
perturbation not to be described, expecting every moment the commissaries of
the revolutionary committee and their guards, to put in force the mandates of
the convention. As the day advanced, our terror increased: in the evening we
received information that most of our English acquaintances were conducted to
prison. At length night came; and no commissaries appearing, we began to
flatter ourselves that, being a family of women, it was intended that we should
be spared; for the time was only now arrived when neither sex nor age gave any
claim to compassion. Overcome with fatigue and emotion, we went to bed with
some faint hopes of exemption from the general calamity of our countrymen.
These hopes were however but of short duration. At two in the morning we were
awakened by a loud knocking at the gate of the hotel, which we well knew to be
the fatal signal of our approaching captivity; and a few minutes after the bell
of our apartments was rung with violence. My sister and myself hurried on our
clothes and went with trembling steps to the antichamber, when we found two
commissaries of the revolutionary committee of our section, accompanied by a
guard, two of whom were placed at the outer door with their swords drawn, while
the rest entered the room. One of these constituted authorities held a paper in
his hand, which was a copy of the decree of the convention, and which he
offered to read to us; but we declined hearing it, and told him we were ready
to obey the law. Seeing us pale and trembling, he and his colleague endeavored
to comfort us; they begged us to compose ourselves; they repeated that our
arrestation was only part of a general political measure, and that innocence
had nothing to fear. -- Alas! innocence was no longer any plea for safety. They
took a proces-verbal of our names, ages, the country where we were born, the
length of time we had lived in France; and when this register was finished, we
were told that we must prepare to depart. We were each of us allowed to take as
much clean linen as we could tie up in a handkerchief, and which was all the
property which we could now call our own; the rest, in consequence of the
decree, being seized by the nation. Sometimes, under the pressure of a great
calamity, the most acute sensations are excited by little circumstances which
form a part of the whole, and serve in the retrospect of memory, like certain
points in a landscape, to call up the surrounding scenery: such is the feeling
with which I recall the moments when, having got out of our appartments, we
stood upon the staircase surrounded with guards, while the commissaries placed
the seals on our doors. The contrast between the prison where we were going to
be led, and that home which was now closed against us, perhaps for years,
filled my heart with a pang for which language has no utterance. Some of the
guards were disposed to treat us with rudeness; which the commissaries sternly
repressed, and ordering them to keep at some distance, made us lean on their
arms, for they saw we stood in need of support, in our way to the
committee-room. We found this place crowded with commissaries and soldiers,
some sleeping, some writing, and others amusing themselves with pleasantries of
a revolutionary nature, to which we listened trembling. Every half-hour a guard
entered, conducting English prisoners, among whom were no women but ourselves.
Here we passed the long night; and at eight in the morning our countrymen were
taken to the prison of the Madelonettes, while we were still detained at the
committee. We discovered afterward that this was owing to the humanity of the
commissaries who arrested us, and who sent to the municipality to know if we
might not be taken to the Luxembourg, where we should find good accommodations,
while at the Madelonettes' scarcely a bed could be procured. All that
compassion could dictate, all the lenity which it was in the power of these
commissaries to display without incurring ten years imprisonment, the penalty
annexed to leaving us at liberty, we experienced. Humanity from members of a
revolutionary committee! You will perhaps exclaim in the language of the Jews,
Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? It is certain, however, strange as it
may seem, that our two commissaries behaved toward us as if they remembered
that we were defenseless women in a land of strangers; that we were accused of
no crime except that of being born on the soil of England; and that, if we were
punished, we had only deserved it by trusting with too easy a belief in that
national faith which was now violated. By the way, when I tell you that we
experienced compassion from revolutionary committees, you will not suppose I
mean to assert that compassionate men formed the majority of their committees.
The greater part of mankind in all ages, even when accustomed to the most
elevated rank, have abused power: how then could it be hoped that unlimited
power would not be abused, which was confided to men who were for the most part
ignorant and unenlightened; men who, till that period, confined to their shops
and their manual occupations, were suddenly transported into splendid hotels,
with authority to unlock cabinets blazing with jewels, to seize upon heaps of
uncounted gold, and with a stroke of their pens to disperse as many warrants
for imprisonment, as caprice, envy, or mistaken zeal might prompt; who were
made arbiters of the liberty, property, and even lives of their
fellow-citizens: and who were incited, nay even compelled, to acts of violence
under the penalty of being branded with the guilt of modera^tism? When such was
the new-established system, when it required the most daring courage to be
humane, and when to be cruel was to be safe, can you wonder, that among the
revolutionary committees in general there was not as much pity to be found as
would fill the eye of a wren? After passing the whole day as we had done the
night, in the committee-room, orders arrived from the municipality to send us
to the former palace, now the prison of the Luxembourg, where we were attended
by two guards within each coach, while two walked on each side. What strange
sensations I felt as I passed through the streets of Paris, and ascended the
steps of the Luxembourg, a sad spectacle to the crowd! We were conducted to the
range of apartments above the former rooms of state, where we were received
with the utmost civility by the keeper of the prison, Benoit, a name which many
a wretch has blessed, for many a sorrow his compassion and gentleness have
softened. His heart was indeed but ill suited to his office; and often he
incurred the displeasure of those savages by whom he was employed, and who
wished their victims to feel the full extent of their calamity, unmitigated by
any detail of kindness, any attention to those little wants which this
benevolent person was anxious to remove, or those few comforts which he had the
power to bestow. The barbarians thought it not enough to load their victims
with iron, unless "it entered into their souls." But Benoit was not to be
intimidated into cruelty. Without deviating from his duty, he pursued his
steady course of humanity; and may the grateful benedictions of the unhappy
have ascended for him to heaven!

We had a good apartment allotted us, which a few weeks before had been
inhabited by Valaze, one of the deputies of the convention, who was now
transferred to the prison of the Conciergerie. Our apartment, with several
adjoining, had soon after the event of the 31st of May been prepared for the
imprisonment of the deputies of the cote droit; and for that purpose the
windows which commanded a fine view of the Luxembourg-gardens had been blocked
up to the upper panes, which were barred with iron. Mattrasses were provided
for us in this gloomy chamber, the door of which was locked by one of our
jailors; and we had suffered too much fatigue of body, as well as disturbance
of mind, not to find a refuge from sorrow in some hours of profound sleep.

LETTER II.
THE next morning the sun arose with unusual brightness; and with the aid of a
table on which I mounted, I saw through our grated windows the beautiful
gardens of the Luxembourg. Its tall majestic trees had not yet lost their
foliage; and though they were fallen, like our fortunes, into the sear, the
yellow leaf, they still presented those rich gradations of coloring which
belong to autumn. The sun gilded the Gothic spires of the surrounding convents,
which lifted up their tall points above the venerable groves; while on the
back-ground of the scenery arose the hills of Meudon. It seemed to me as if the
declining season had shed its last interesting graces over the landscape to
sooth my afflicted spirit; and such was the effect it produced. It is scarcely
possible to contemplate the beauties of nature without that enthusiastic
pleasure which swells into devotion; and when such dispositions are excited in
the mind, resignation to sufferings, which in the sacred words of scripture are
but for a moment, becomes a less difficult duty.

The Luxembourg had lately been fitted up to receive the crowd of new
inhabitants, with which it was going to be peopled, and every apartment
obtained a particular appellation, which was inscribed on the outside of the
door. We were lodged in the chamber of Cincinnatus: Brutus, I think, was our
next-door neighbor; and Socrates had pitched his tent at the distance of a few
paces. The chamber of Indivisibility was allotted to some persons accused of
federalism, and Liberty was written in broad characters over the door of a
prisoner who was au secret In close confinement.
. With respect to great names, it has been observed in Paris that almost all
the illustrious characters of Greece and Rome have been led to the Guillotine
-- for instance, Brutus, who often, while we were in prison, came from the
municipality with orders from Anaxagoras, was soon after doomed to an equal
fate, "Alike in fortune, as alike in fame!"
together with Anacharsis, Agricola, Aristides, Phocion, Sempronius Gracchus,
Epaminondas, Cato the elder and the younger, and many other no less celebrated
worthies, who fell in sad succession under the sword of Maximilian The
christian name of Robespierre.
.

Our prison was filled with a multitude of persons of different conditions,
characters, opinions and countries, and seemed an epitome of the whole world.
The mornings were devoted to business, and passed in little occupations, of
which the prisoners sometimes complained, but for which perhaps they had reason
to be thankful, since less leisure was left them to brood over their
misfortunes. Every one had an appointed task; in each chamber the prisoners, by
turns, lighted the fires, swept the rooms, arranged the beds; and those who
could not afford to have dinner from a tavern, or, as the rich were yet
permitted, from their own houses, prepared themselves their meals. Every
chamber formed a society subject to certain regulations: a new president was
chosen every day, or every week, who enforced its laws and maintained good
order. In some chambers no person was allowed to sing after ten, in others,
after eleven at night. This restriction would, perhaps, have been superfluous
in England in a similar situation; but it was highly necessary here, since it
prevented such of the prisoners as were more light-hearted than the rest from
singing all night long, to the annoyance of others of their neighbors, who
might think the music which resounded through the prison during the day fully
sufficient. The system of equality, whatever opposition it met with in the
world, was in its full extent practiced in the prison. United by the strong tie
of common calamity, the prisoners considered themselves as bound to soften the
general evil by mutual kind offices; ^and strangers meeting in such
circumstances soon became friends. The poor lived not upon the crumbs which
fell from the rich man's table, but shared the comforts of the repast; and here
was found a community of the small stock of goods, which belonged to the whole
without the necessity of a requisition. One broom, which was the property of a
countess, was used by twenty delicate hands to sweep the respective apartments;
and a tea-kettle with which a friend furnished my mother was literally, as Dr.
Johnson observed of his own, "never allowed time to cool," but was employed
from morning till night in furnishing the English with tea.

In the afternoon, the prisoners met in an antichamber, which commanded a view
of the gardens. Here they formed themselves into groups: some conversed, others
walked up and down the room; others gazed from the windows on the walks below,
where, perhaps, they recognized a relation or a friend, who being denied the
privilege of visiting the prison, had come to sooth them by a look or tear of
sympathy. During the first days of our confinement, the prisoners were
permitted to see their friends; and many a striking contrast of gaiety and
sorrow did the antichamber then exhibit. In one part of the room, lively young
people were amusing their visitors by a thousand little pleasantries on their
own situation; in another, a husband who was a prisoner was taking leave of his
wife who had come to see him, and shedding tears over his child who was
clinging to his knees, or had thrown its arms around his neck and refused to be
torn from its father. As the number of prisoners increased, which they did so
rapidly, that in less than a week they were augmented from an hundred to a
thousand, the rules of the prison became more severe, and the administrators of
the police gave strict orders, that no person whatever should be admitted.
After this period the wives of some of the prisoners came regularly every day,
bringing their children with them to the terrace of the gardens. You often saw
the mother weeping, and the children stretching out their little hands and
pointing to their fathers, who stood with their eyes fixed on the objects of
their affection: but sometimes a surly sentinel repressed these melancholy
effusions of tenderness, by calling to the persons in the walk to keep off, and
make no signs to the prisoners. -- In the mean time, among the crowd that
filled the public room were fine gentlemen and fine ladies, who had held the
highest rank at court, some flirting together, others making appointments for
card parties or music in their own apartments in the evening, and others
relating to us in pathetic language all they had suffered and all they had lost
by the revolution. It was impossible not to sympathize in the distresses of
some, or avoid wondering at the folly of others, in whom the strong sense of
danger could not overcome the feelings of vanity; and who, although the
tremendous decree had just gone forth, making "terror the order of the day,"
and knowing that the fatal pre-eminence of rank was the surest passport to the
guillotine, could not resist using the proscribed nomenclature of "Madame la
duchess," "Monsieur le comte," etc. which seemed to issue from their lips like
natural melodies to which the ear has long been accustomed, and which the voice
involuntarily repeats. There were, however, among the captive nobility many
persons who had too much good sense not to observe a different conduct, who had
proved themselves real friends to liberty, had made important sacrifices in its
cause, and who had been led to prison by revolutionary committees on pretenses
the most trivial, and sometimes from mistakes the most ludicrous. Such was the
fate of the former count and countess of --, who had distinguished themselves
from the beginning of the revolution by the ardour of their patriotism and the
largeness of their civic donations. They had hitherto lived undisturbed in
their splendid hotel, and there they might probably have continued to live a
little longer had not the Countess, in an evil hour, sent down to her chateau a
fine marble hearth, which by some accident was broken in the way. The steward
sent a letter, in which, among other things, he mentioned that the "foyer Foyer
is the French name for hearth, and also for the central point of a system.
must be repaired at Paris." This letter was intercepted and read by the
revolutionary committee. They swore, they raged at the dark designs of
aristocracy. "Here," said they, "is a daring plot indeed! a foyer of
counter-revolution, and to be repaired at Paris! We must instantly seize the
authors and the accomplices." In vain the Countess related the story of the
hearth, and asserted that no conspiracy lurked beneath the marbles: both
herself and her husband were conducted to the maison d'arret of their section,
from which we saw them arrive at the Luxembourg with about sixty other persons
at the hour of midnight, after having been led through the streets in
procession by the light of an immense number of flambeaux, and guarded by a
whole battalion. These prisoners had at least the consolation of finding
themselves in the society of many of their friends and acquaintances, for all
the polite part of the fauxbourg St. Germain might be said to be assembled at
the Luxembourg in mass. Imprisonment here was, however, no longer the exclusive
distinction of former nobility, but was extended to great numbers of the former
third estate. We had priests, physicians, merchants, shopkeeper, actors and
actresses, French valets and English waiting-women, all assembled together in
the public room; but in the private apartments Benoit's benevolent heart taught
him the most delicate species of politeness, by placing those persons together
who were most likely to find satisfaction in each other's society.

Amidst many an eloquent tale of chateaux levelled with the ground, and palaces
where, to borrow an image of desolation from Ossian, "the fox might be seen
looking out at the window," we sometimes heard the complaints of simple sorrow
unallied to greatness; but, like the notes of the starling, "so true in time to
nature were they chanted," that they seized irresistibly on the heart. Of this
kind was a scene which passed sometimes between a poor English woman and her
dog, which she had brought to keep her company in her captivity. She had been
housekeeper in a French family, and, some months before she was imprisoned,
had sent her daughter, who was her only child, to her friends in England. The
poor woman often exclaimed, while her face was bathed in tears, "Oh, Charlotte,
Charlotte, I shall never see you again!" Whenever the dog heard the name of
Charlotte, he began to howl in so melancholy a note that it was impossible not
to sympathise in his lamention.

The most frightful circumstance which attended our arrestation were the visits
of Henriot, the commandant of the military force of Paris. This wretch had been
one of the executioners on the second of September, and was appointed by the
commune of Paris on the 31st of May to take the command of the National Guard,
to point the cannon against the convention, to violate the representation of
the people, and to act the prelude of that dark drama of which France has been
the desolated scene, and Europe the affrighted spectator. Henriot performed his
part so much to the satisfaction of his employers, that he was continued in his
command; and it was a part of his office to visit the prisons, and take care
that they were properly guarded. The first time I saw him was the day after our
confinement. He entered on a sudden our apartment, brandishing his sword, and
accompanied by twelve of his officers. There was something in his look which
did not give you simply the idea of the ferocity which is sometimes to be found
among civilized Europeans: his fierceness seemed to be of that kind which
belongs to a cannibal of New Zealand; and he looked not merely as if he longed
to plunge his sabre in our bosoms, but to drink a libation of our blood. He
poured forth a volley of oaths and imprecations, called out to know how many
guillotines must be erected for the English, and did not leave our chamber till
one person who was present had fainted with terror. In this manner he visited
every apartment, spreading consternation and dismay; and these visits were
repeated three or four times in a week. Whenever the trampling of his horse's
feet was heard in the courtyard, the first prisoner who distinguished the
well-known sound gave the alarm, and in one moment the public room was cleared;
every person flying with the precipitation of fear to his own apartment. Every
noise was instantly hushed; a stillness like that of death prevaded the whole
dwelling; and we remained crouching in our cells, like the Greeks in the cave
of Polyphemus, till the monster disappeared. The visits of the administrators
of police, though not so terrific as those of Henriot, were nothing less than
soothing. Brutality, as well as terror, was the order of day; and those public
functionaries, whose business it was not only to see that the police of the
prison was well regulated, but also to hear if the prisoners had any subject of
complaint, used to make the enquiry in a tone of such ferocity, that, whatever
oppressions might hang on the heart, the lips lost the power of giving them
utterance. The visits of the police generally produced some additional rigor
to our confinement; and in a short time all access to us whatever was forbidden
ex^^pt by letters, which were sent open, and delivered to us after being
examined by the sentinels. There was sometimes room for deep meditation on the
strange caprice and vicissitudes of fortune. We found the ex-minister Amelot a
prisoner in the Luxembourg; he, who during his administration had distributed
letters de cachet with so much liberality. Tyranny had now changed its
instruments, and he was become himself the victim of despotism with new
insignia; the blue ribband had given place to the red cap, and "de par le roi"
was transformed into "par mesure de surete generale." By his order La Tude,
whose history is so well known, had been confined thirty years in the Bastille.
He was now enjoying the sweets of liberty; and, before the prison-doors were
shut against strangers, came frequently to visit some of his friends in the
very room where the minister was imprisoned.

Amelot, in a comfortable apartment and surrounded by society, did not bear his
confinement with the same firmness as La Tude had borne the solitude of his
dungeon, cheered only by the plaintive sounds of his flute of reeds. He was in
a short time bereft of his reason; and, among the wanderings of his
imagination, used to address letters to all the kings of Europe and all the
emigrant princes, inviting them to sumptuous repasts, to which he sometimes
proposed admitting the national convention, to show that he was above bearing
malice.

Whenever any new prisoners arrived, the rest crowded around them, and hastened
to calm their minds by the most soothing expressions of sympathy. Not such were
the emotions excited by the appearance of Maillard, who was one of the
murderers on the second of September, and who had lately been appointed to a
command in the revolutionary army; from which, for some malversations, he was
now dismissed, sent to prison, and ordered into close confinement. He had taken
a very active part in the late transactions, and had a few days before his own
arrest, conducted to prison two fine boys, who were the sons of the ex-minister
La Tour du Pin, together with their governor, who was a priest. They were
stepping into a carriage, which was to convey them to school, when they were
seized upon by Maillard, who taking the youngest, a child of eleven years of
age, by the shoulder, said to him in a stern accent, "Il faut dire la verite,
toute la verite, et rien que la verite You must speak the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth.
." No sooner was Maillard brought into the antichamber, while his room was
preparing, than the little boy recognized his acquaintance, and running up to
him cried, "Bon jour, citoyen Maillard -- il faut dire la verite, toute la
verite, et rien que la verite."

Nothing could be more painful than the sensations excited by reading the
evening papers, which the prisoners were at this time permitted to receive, and
which were expected with that trembling anxiety with which, under present
evils, we long to look into the promises of futurity. The evening paper seemed
to us the book of our destiny; but there we could trace no soothing characters
of hope, or mercy. Every line was stamped with conspiracy, vengeance,
desolation, and death; and the reading the events of the day left impressions
on our minds which often deprived us of sleep. We sometimes quitted the crowd
in the public room, and, shutting ourselves up in our own apartment,
endeavored, amidst the evils of this world, like Sterne's monk, to look beyond
it. If such meditation was calculated to wipe away our tears, it sometimes made
them flow -- "Let the sighing of the prisoner come before Thee: according to
the greatness of Thy power, preserve Thou those that are appointed to die."

LETTER III.
THE days of my captivity are often brought back to my remembrance, by
circumstances which seem sufficiently remote from sorrows; by that connection of
the past with the present, which Akenside describes so beautifully Pleasures of
Imagination, book iii.
: and you will perhaps think that my imagination is somewhat disordered, when I
tell you that the lake, from the luxuriant banks of which I send you this
letter, recalls to my mind our apartment in the prison. The walls of that
apartment were hung with tapestry which described a landscape of romantic
beauty. On that landscape I often gazed till I almost persuaded myself that the
scenery was alive around me, so much did I delight in the pleasing illusion.
How often, while my eyes were fixed on that canvas which led my wounded spirit
from the cruelty of man to the benignity of God -- how often did I wish "for
the wings of a dove, that I might flee away and be at rest!" To be seated at
the foot of those sheltering hills which embosomed some mimic habitations, or
beneath a mighty elm which rose majestically in the fore-ground of the piece,
and spread its thick foliage over a green slope, appeared to me the summit of
earthly felicity. Those hills, the torrent-stream which rolled down their steep
sides, the shady elm, and all the objects on the tapestry, are indelibly
impressed on my memory; and often when I am wandering through the charming
scenes of Switzerland, a country which nature seems to have created more for
ornament than use, where she has spread over every landscape those lavish
graces which in other regions belong only to a few favored spots, I have felt
my eyes bathed in tears, while, amidst views of overwhelming greatness, some
minute object unobserved by others has led my imagination to the tapestry and
the prison. A few days since I passed along the falls of the Tessino, rolling
through narrow clif^s under rocks of the most terrific form, in a succession of
torrents, sweeping after each other down the abrupt descent, and broken in
their course by enormous fragments torn from the cliffs; sometimes raising
their scattered surges into thin air, and sometimes displaying the prismatic
colors on the foam. While I was standing on one of those daring bridges that
are thrown across the gulf, and that tradition calls the work of supernatural
agency, after the first transport of admiration, in which the mind loses all
traces of the past, or thought of the future, had subsided, the torrent-rill
which rushed down the Luxembourg tapestry presented itself to my memory, while
amidst the pendent groves of pine and fir, bending along the cliffs, and above
the sweeping birch which dipped its drooping branches in the surf, I discovered
a towering elm, the form of which resembled the friend of my captivity -- But
how far have I escaped from my prison! -- You will forgive this digression: my
mind is full of those scenes of beauty and grandeur which have calmed my
troubled spirit, and in which I have found a renovation of existence.

I have yet only given you a general outline of our prison; but there was one
scene of calamity which myself and my family were alone doomed to witness, and
of which our fellow captives had no share. Our apartment, with two others
adjoining, was separated from the public room by a little passage, and a door
which the huissiers carefully locked at night. It happened that these
apartments were then occupied by two persons in whose society we had passed
some of the most agreeable hours of our residence in France. These persons were
Sillery and La Source, two of the members of the convention, who had been long
in close confinement, and who were now on the point of appearing before that
sanguinary tribunal whence, after the most shocking mockery of justice, they
were inhumanly dragged to the scaffold. Sillery on account of his infirmities,
had with much difficulty obtained permission from the police for his servant to
be admitted into the prison during the day, together with an old female friend,
who, on the plea of his illness, had implored leave to attend him as his nurse,
with that eloquence which belongs to affliction, and which sometimes even the
most hardened hearts are unable to resist. While men assume over our sex so
many claims of superiority, let them at least bestow on us the palm of
constancy, and allow that in the fidelity of our attachments we have the right
of pre-eminence. Those prisons from which men shrunk back with terror, and
where they often left their friends abandoned lest they should be involved in
their fate -- women, in whom the force of sensibility overcame the fears of
female weakness, demanded and sometimes obtained permission to visit, in
defiance of all the dangers that surrounded their gloomy walls. Sillery's
friend and his servant being allowed to go in and out of his apartment, the
door was not kept constantly locked, although he and La Source were closely
confined, and not permitted to have any communication with the other prisoners.
The second night of our abode in the Luxembourg, when the prisoners had retired
to their respective chambers, and the keeper had locked the outer door which
enclosed our three apartments, La Source entered our room. Oh! how different
was this interview from those meetings of social enjoyment that were
embellished by ^^e charms of his conversation, always distinguished by a flow
of eloquence, and animated by that enthusiastic fervor which peculiarly
belonged to his character! La Source was a native of Languedoc, und united with
very superior talents, that vivid warmth of imagination for which the southern
provinces of France have been renowned since the period when, awakened by the
genial influence of those luxuriant regions, the song of the Troubadours burst
from the gloom of Gothic barbarism. Liberty in the soul of La Source was less a
principle than a passion for his bosom beat high with philanthropy; and in his
former situation as a protestant minister he had felt in a peculiar manner the
oppression of the ancient system. His sensibility was acute, and his
detestation of the crimes by which the revolution had been sullied, was in
proportion to his devoted attachment to its cause. La Source was polite and
amiable in his manners: he had a taste for music, and a powerful voice; and
sung, as he conversed, with all the energy of feeling. After the day had passed
in the fatigue of public debates, he was glad to lay aside the tumult of
politics in the evening, for the conversation of some literary men whom he met
occasionally at our tea-table. Ah! how little did we then foresee the horrors
of that period when we should meet him in the gloom of a prison, a proscribed
victim, with whom this melancholy interview was beset with danger!

We were obliged to converse in whispers, while we kept watch successively at
the outer door, that if any step approached he might instantly fly to his
chamber. He had much to ask, having been three months a close prisoner, and
knowing little of what was passing in the world; and though he seemed to forget
all the horrors of his situation in the consolation (...) derived from these
moments of confidential conversation, yet he frequently lamented, that this
last gleam of pleasure which was shed over his existence was purchased at the
price of our captivity. In the solitude of his prison, no voice of friendship,
no accents of pity had reached his ear; and after our arrival, he used through
the lonely day to count the hours till the prison-gates were closed, till all
was still within its walls, and no sound was heard without, except at intervals
the hoarse cry of the sentinels, when he hastened to our apartment. The
discovery of these visits would indeed have exposed us to the most fatal
consequences; but our sympathy prevailed over our fears; nor could we, whatever
might be the event, refuse our devoted friend this last melancholy
satisfaction. La Source at his second visit was accompanied by Sillery, the
husband of Madame de Sillery, whose writings are so well known in England.
Sillery was about sixty years of age; had lived freely, like most men of his
former rank in France; and from this dissipated life had more the appearance of
age than belonged to his years. His manners retained the elegance, by which
that class was distinguished which Mr. Burke has denominated "the Corinthian
capital of polished society." Sillery had a fine taste for drawing, and during
his confinement displayed the powers of his pencil by tracing beautiful
landscapes. He also amused himself by reading history; and, possessing
considerable talents for literature, had recorded with a rich warmth of
coloring the events of the revolution, in which he had been a distinguished
actor, and of which he had treasured up details precious for history. With keen
regret he told me that he had committed several volumes of manuscript to the
flames, a sad sacrifice to the Omars of the day.

The mind of Sillery was somewhat less fortified against his approaching fate
than that of La Source. The old man often turned back on the past and wept, and
sometimes enquired with an anxious look, if we believed there was any chance of
his deliverance. Alas! I have no words to paint the sensations of those
moments! -- To know that the days of our fellow-captives were numbered -- that
they were doomed to perish -- that the bloody tribunal before which they were
going to appear, was but the pathway to the scaffold -- to have the painful
task of stifling our feelings, while we endeavored to sooth the weakness of
humanity by hopes which we knew were fallacious, was a species of misery almost
insupportable. There were moments indeed, when the task became too painful to
be endured. There are moments when, shocked by some new incident of terror,
this cruel restraint gave way to uncontrolable emotion; when the tears, the
sobbings of convulsive anguish would no longer be suppressed, and our
unfortunate friends were obliged to give instead of receiving consolation.

They had in their calamity that support which is of all others the most
effectual under misfortune. Religion was in La Source a habit of the mind.
Impressed with the most sublime ideas of the Supreme Being, although the ways
of heaven never appeared more dark and intricate than in this triumph of guilt
over innocence, he reposed with unbounded confidence in that Providence in
whose hand are the issues of life and death. Sillery, who had a feeling heart,
found devotion the most soothing refuge of affliction. He and La Source
composed together a little hymn adapted to a sweet solemn air, which they
called their evening service. Every night before we parted they sung this
simple dirge in a low tone to prevent their being heard in the other
apartments, which made it seem more plaintive. Those mournful sounds, the knell
of my departing friends, yet thrill upon my heart!

I.
Calmez nos allarmes,
Pretez nous les arms,
Source de vrais biens,
Brisez nos liens!
Entende les accens
De tes enfans
Dans les tourmens;
Ils souffrent, et leurs larmes
C'est leur seul encens!
II.
Prenez notre defense,
Grand Dieu de l'innocence!
Pres de toi toujours
Elle trove son secours;
Tu connais nos coeurs,
Et les auteurs
De nos malheurs;
D'un sort qui^t' offense
Detrui la rigueur.
III.
Quand la tyranny
Frappe notre vie,
Fires de notre sort,
Meprisant la mort,
Nous te benissons,
Nous triomphons,
Et nous savons
Qu'un jour la patrie
Vengera nos noms!
THE TRANSLATION.
I.
Calm all the tumults that invade
Our souls, and lend thy powerful aid,
Oh! source of mercy! sooth our pains,
And break, Oh! break our cruel chains!
To thee the captive pours his cry,
To thee the mourner loves to fly:
The incense of our tears receive,
It Is all the incense we can give.
II.
Eternal power, our cause defend,
Oh God! of innocence the friend!
Near thee for ever she resides,
In thee for ever she confides.
Thou know the secrets of the breast,
Thou know the oppressor and the oppressed:
Do thou our wrongs with pity see,
Avert a doom offending thee!
III.
But should the murderer's arm prevail,
Should tyranny our lives assail,
Unmoved, triumphant, scorning death,
We'll bless thee with our latest breath.
The hour, the glorious hour will come
That consecrates the patriot's tomb;
And with the pang our memory claims,
Our country will avenge our names!
La Source often spoke of his wife with tender regret. He had been married only
a week, when he was chosen a member of the legislative assembly, and was
obliged to hasten to Paris, while his wife remained in Languedoc to take care
of an aged mother. When the legislative assembly was dissolved, La Source was
immediately elected a member of the national convention, and could find no
interval in which to visit his native spot, or his wife, whom he saw no more.
In his meditations on the chain of political events, he mentioned one little
incident which seemed to hang on his mind with a sort of superstitious feeling.
A few days after the tenth of August he dined in the fauxbourg of St. Antoine
with several members of the legislative assembly, who were the most
distinguished for their talents and patriotism. They were exulting in the birth
of the new republic, and the glorious part they were to act as its founders,
when a citizen of the fauxbourg, who had been invited to partake of the repast,
observed, that he feared a different destiny awaited them. "As you have been
the founders of the republic," said he, "you will also be its victims. In a
short time you will be obliged to impose restraints and duties on the people,
to whom your enemies and theirs will represent you as having overthrown regal
power only to establish your own. You will be accused of aristrocacy; and I
foresee," he added with much perturbation, "that you will all perish on the
scaffold." The company smiled at his singular prediction: but during the
ensuing winter, when the storm was gathering over the political horizon, La
Source recalled the prophecy, and sometimes reminded Vergniaud of the man of
the fauxbourg St. Antoine. Vergniaud had little heeded the augur; but a few
days previous to the 31st of May, when the convention was for the first time
besieged, La Source said again to Vergniaud, "Well, what think you of the
prophet of the fauxbourg?" "The prophet of the fauxbourg," answered Vergniaud,
"was in the right."

The morning now arrived when La Source and Sillery, together with nineteen
other members of the convention, were led before the revolutionary tribunal.
When the guards who were to conduct them arrived, the other prisoners crowded
to the public room to see them pass, and we shut ourselves up in our own
apartment. They returned about five in the evening; soon after which their
counsel arrived, and we had no opportunity of seeing them till midnight, when
they related to us what had passed. The conduct of the judges and the aspect of
the jury were calculated to banish every gleam of hope from the bosoms of the
prisoners; the former permitted with reluctance any thing to be urged in their
defense, and the latter listened with impatience, casting upon their victims
looks of atrocity in which they might easily read their fate: yet in spite of
these unhappy omens our friends returned from the tribunal with their minds
much elevated. La Source described in his eloquent language the noble
enthusiasm of liberty, the ardent love of their country, the heroical contempt
of death which animated his colleagues, whom he had not seen for some time,
since they had been transferred to the Conciergerie, while himself and Sillery
had obtained permission to remain at the Luxembourg upon the certificates of
their physicians, that they were too ill to be removed without danger. La
Source declared that ancient history offered no model of public virtue beyond
that which was exhibited by his friends at the tribunal, and who in their
prison, blending with the fortitude of Romans the gaiety of Frenchmen, and
being confined in one apartment, passed the short interval of life which was
left in conversation, and cheerful repasts which were usually concluded with
patriotic songs. "You," said Vergniaud to La Source when they met at the
tribunal, "you perhaps will find something to regret in the loss of life. You
have a glimpse of the gardens of the Luxembourg, which may remind you that
there is something beautiful in nature: but we who live in human shambles, who
every day see fresh victims dragged to execution, we are become so familiarized
with death, that we look on it with unconcern.

A few days before this sanguinary trial ended, the administration of the
police sent orders that the English-women confined in the Luxembourg should be
removed the next day to a convent in the fauxbourg St. Antoine. With what keen
regret La Source and Sillery received this intelligence! A thousand and a
thousand times they thanked us for the dangers we had risqued in receiving
them, and for the sympathy which had soothed the last hours of their existence
-- a thousand times they declared, that if it were possible their lives might
be preserved, they should consider themselves for ever bound to us by the most
sacred ties of gratitude and friendship: but they felt, alas! how small was the
chance that we should meet again in this world. Sillery cut off a lock of his
white hairs, which he begged I would preserve for his sake, and La Source gave
me the same relic. They embraced us with much emotion. They prayed that the
blessing of God might be upon us: we mingled our tears together, and parted to
meet no more! --

Let me, before I conduct you to our new prison, give you a short account of
the political events and their causes, which, after bringing those members of
the convention to the scaffold who were most fitted by their talents to defend
liberty, and by their moral qualities to make it beloved, ended in such a
system of cruelty and crimes, that it can be only by a long perseverance in
public virtue that France can make reparation to humanity, or retrieve her
character among the nations.

LETTER IV.
THE republican party of the legislative assembly had, it is well known, very
early projected many alterations in the new constitution. They had observed
with great inquietude the changes which had taken place at the close of the
first national assembly, when its labors underwent a revision previously to
the acceptance of the constitution by the executive power, and when they found
that those who had hitherto been the most strenuous opponents of the court
suddenly became its most zealous advocates and friends.

Though this party formed the minority of the legislative assembly, its
influence by means of the popular societies was very extensive. But when the
struggle took place between the court and the republican party, both of which
were at length agreed in the overthrow of the new constitution, with which each
was for different reasons equally dissatisfied, the party was joined by many
who in this destruction of the regal authority had no other end in view than
the establishment of their own.

The society of the Jacobins, which had been for a long time the rival and at
length the conqueror of the throne, was deserted immediately after the victory
by almost all those who had contributed to gain it. They imagined that every
domestic enemy was annihilated when the first decree of the convention changed
the monarchy into a republic; and though symptoms of discontent discovered
themselves among some who thought that the change had been too hastily decided
on, and symptoms of a more dangerous and fatal tendency to the welfare of the
government had already appeared among others, yet those to whom the people had
given their confidence were not sufficiently aware of the instability of
popular favor, and the precarious tenure by which they held it. The commune of
Paris claimed an equal right to share with the Jacobins the honors of the
triumph over royalty; but dissatisfied with the little credit given to the
services it had rendered during the struggle, it took advantage of the
imbecility of the legislative assembly then expiring, and had already erected
itself into a rival power before the convention had opened its first debates.
The pretense of making extraordinary exertions to oppose the march of the enemy
toward Paris had led the commune, amidst a multiplicity of other acts of
rebellion, to arrogate the functions of the representatives of the people; and
having at the fatal period of the massacre of September humbled the legislative
assembly to the dust, they thought that the same daring conduct would give them
the same superiority over the national convention. But in this calculation they
were deceived. Robespierre and his adherents, who had hitherto directed their
counsels, now aspired to higher destinies; and, though solicitous to make the
commune an auxiliary in their designs, were unwilling that it should become
their rival. In the new election of representatives, all those were excluded
who had been influenced by the court, or who had opposed from purer motives the
republican party. Although this party gained a considerable reinforcement by
the new election, yet the dread of returning royalty, with all the severity of
the old system, had operated so powerfully on the minds of the people of the
departments, that many deputies were chosen whose pretensions to this trust
arose more from the strength of their lungs than of their talents, and whose
harangues made up in noise what they wanted in argument; while the still
greater dread of the return of those horrors which the commune had just been
exercising had so intimidated the citizens of Paris, that a part of their
deputation to the convention, at the head of which was Robespierre, triumphing
over the fears they had excited, took their feats rather as the conquerors than
the representatives of the people. The conduct of the officers of the
municipality, however, called aloud for punishment. It was impossible for the
convention to suffer the crimes they had committed, and the still greater
atrocities which they had meditated, to pass unnoticed. The council-general of
the commune were called to the bar, but escaped justice by dissembled
professions of repentence, and the promise of delivering up those who had led
them to the commission of such enormities. Had the convention, while its rival
was thus subdued, proceeded to distinguish between those who had been the
chiefs of the conspiracy and those who had been the dupes of their imposture,
they would have done a great act of national justice, and would have crushed
any farther attempts against the national honor. But as this humiliation of
the commune was a contrivance to escape examination, of which the conspirators
who directed its operations, and who had been chosen since to the convention,
were afraid; the assembly, deceived by this artifice, had no sooner granted the
pardon they implored, than the faction, emboldened by impunity, perceived that
with audacity and preseverance they might yet attain the end to which they
aspired. While Robespierre sat in the commune, his object was probably to frame
a government of municipalities, of which Paris was to be the chief, and himself
the dictator: but his enterprise being encompassed with difficulty, since the
people had determined to have a national convention, he afterward changed his
measures, and began to meditate a plan of making the convention itself, of
which he was now a member, serve as the instrument of his usurpation.

With this view, he and his disorganizing faction in the convention assumed the
direction of the municipality; and as the society of the Jacobins was deserted
by the republicans, who thought its services no longer necessary, the name and
the place were seized on by the conspirators, and filled with intriguing and
ambitious men, whose hopes of sharing in the plunder or the power induced them
to become accomplices in the guilt.

While the municipality labored to win over the sections of Paris, the
Jacobins made proselytes to their system of anarchy by their affiliations and
correspondence in the departments; and before the existing government was fully
aware of the extent of the conspiracy, or could collect sufficient energy to
counteract it, the faction had gained a most alarming ascendency; and although
they formed a very small minority in the convention, their influence both in
the executive part of the government and amongst the constituted authorities
was sufficient to outweigh that of the representation itself. Every concession
made to the conspirators served only to increase the insolence of their
demands; and although the most eloquent members of the convention, Guadet,
Vergniaud, Pethion, Louvet, Brissot and La Source gave incessant warnings of
the progress of the anarchists toward the dissolution of all order in the
state, yet like Cassandra they were believed only when the prophecies were
fulfilled "Yes," say^ La Source, "There exists a faction, which seeks to crush
the convention and raise the dictatorship on its ruins. This is the faction
which has issued its arbitrary mandates, which has ordered the arrest of eight
of my colleagues who sat in the legislative assembly, which has paid robbers to
plunder and assassins to murder, and which has had the audacity to lay to the
charge of the people the crimes which itself has perpetrated. Were I in going
from this place to fall under the poniards of these traitors, I should die
satisfied in having lifted up the veil which conceals them: a little longer and
I will unmask them altogether." Guadet often detailed the conspiracy of the
Jacobins and the municipality, and, with bursts of honest indignation against
these shameless traitors, implored the convention to save the republic by
dissolving the society and re-electing the commune. Vergniaud with more than
usual eloquence pourtrayed the conspirators. Louvet gave a clear and admirable
detail of their attempts to assassinate the convention in the conspiracy of
10th of March; and Brissot unveiled their treason not only in the convention
and in his journal, but in different publications, of which his address to his
constituents published in May 1794 will furnish interesting matter for history.
.

However criminal this band of conspirators, who have exercised a despotism
more hideous than history has ever presented, may appear, or whatever be the
regrets we feel for those virtuous friends of liberty who fell the victims of
their rage, the historian, more impartial than the friend, will not fail to
animadvert on the negligence of which in some instances they were guilty, and
above all in carelessly throwing aside, by the desertion of the Jacobin
society, the means which they had obtained of informing the public mind and
directing its will.

But before we carry our censures too far, we must recollect that they had to
contend against men hardened in crimes and inaccessible to shame, who found
refuge from the detection of their guilt in the protection of their party, and
who returned the thunder of the patriots in the convention by their noisy
vociferations at the Jacobins and the commune.

The first attempt made on the national representation by the commune of Paris
and the Jacobins, ought to have been punished as an act of rebellion against
the sovereignty of the people. But an ill-judged application of the principles
of individual liberty, a too delicate regard for the rights of persons, led on
the majority of the convention to the permission of offenses, of which they
took no measures to stop the progress, till the conspiracy had acquired such
strength as made every exertion against it ineffectual.

The treason of Dumourier had furnished the faction with new resources for
calumny against the republican party, with some of whom he had formerly been
connected: for, as the faction was in the constant habit of denouncing
indiscriminately every agent of the republic, the completion of one prophecy
gave an air of credit to the rest The conspirators accused the republicans of
being accomplices in Dumourier's treason; the republicans have retorted the
charge on some of their adversaries with the most unquestionable evidence. But
we need not here recur to conspiracies either of Jacobins or Girondists to
discern the motives of Dumourier's conduct. He has endeavored to explain it
himself in his memoirs; to which if any credit ought to be given, the
Girondists will be absolved from all share in his treason. But their innocence
in this respect, as well as their political integrity in every other, is now
established beyond the reach of calumny and detraction.
. Although the conspirators had acquired considerable influence from the
assistance given them by the commune and the Jacobins, they perceived that the
object which they had in view, would never fully be attained till they had
gained so absolute a control over the convention, as to make it, like the
ancient parliaments, the registers of their imperial edicts. To this end all
their efforts were directed: but while those men still sat within its walls
whose virtue and eloquence had hitherto warded off the blow which menaced their
country, there was little hope of success. The prize set before these traitors
was too great to suffer them to hesitate about the means of seizing it; and
having thrown aside all regard to the laws, all respect for individual or
political liberty, they conceived the project of violating the national
representation itself, and tearing from it the most eloquent and intrepid
defenders of its rights. To carry their plot into execution, it was necessary
to cover it with the veil of the wish of the people, of whom a few hired
desperadoes and other ignorant and seduced persons became the representatives,
bearing petitions written by the conspirators themselves, praying the
convention to drive from their seats a certain number whom they marked as
unworthy of their confidence or that of the nation. The indignation of the
convention being roused at these attempts, they instituted a commission of
enquiry to search into the causes of this conspiracy. This commission, in
pursuance of the powers it had received, after mature examination, arrested
Hebert, one of the municipal chiefs, and gave notice to the convention that
they were prepared to make their report. The conspirators seeing that their
crimes were on the point of being brought to light, the discovery of which
would annihilate their project, threw off the mask, and brought forward the
commune of Paris to demand not only the dismission of the commission which the
convention had created, but the arrestation of the members who composed it,
together with the twenty-two deputies of the convention the most eminent for
their virtue and talents. The convention for several days withstood every
effort that was made to shake its firmness. The president Isnard, with all the
warmth of honest indignation, threatened in the name of the republic the
liberticide factioners of the commune, that if they dared to proceed to the
execution of those designs which their present measures indicated, if the
national representation should be violated by any of those conspiracies of
which they had been the accomplices, that Paris should be blotted out from the
rest of its cities, and that the traveller should wander on the banks of the
Seine enquiring where it once stood.

The chiefs of the conspiracy had proceeded too far to be stopped in their
career by such considerations as these; but they found more intrepidity and
firmness in the convention than they expected, and therefore determined to
employ their last expedient. The ringing of the tocsin and the firing of alarm
guns had excited the attention of the citizens of Paris for two days, when on
the third the beating to arms informed them that they were going to be put into
insurrection. The national guard being thus put into insurrection, the cause of
which was unknown, the whole body were conducted to the hall of the convention,
where Henriot the commander of the military force, who had been created by the
conspirators for that purpose, had ordered them to assemble. The convention was
surrounded till nearly midnight by the military force, nor was any member
permitted to leave the hall; but although besieged, the assembly was not yet
conquered. The day passed in the most frightful tumult, and Rabaut de St.
Etienne in vain stood at the tribune, holding in his hand the report of the
commission of twelve upon the conspiracy of the commune, together with the
proofs of its authenticity. His voice was lost in the horrible vociferations of
the tribunes, and the murmurs of the faction within the hall. At length finding
all his efforts ineffectual, he left the assembly in despair.

The assault of the convention on the 31st of May, though it had produced the
most horrible disorder, had not forced from the assembly the decree of
arrestation. But Robespierre with his commune, his Jacobins, and his body guard
of revolutionary women, who were in the van of the attack, and stood in the
passages of the convention armed with poniards, which they pointed at the
bosoms of such of the deputies as attempted to leave the hall, had gone too far
to recede. The first of June they employed in preparations for a fresh attack;
and on the second again the tocsin rung, again the whole city was under arms,
and the convention was again invested by sixty thousand men.

It does not appear that all the adherents of the conspirators, or rather the
different factions in league with them, were acquainted with all the means
which Robespierre, Marat, and the municipality, the original authors of the
plot, meant to employ. La Croix, a member of the mountain, who had been
repulsed in endeavoring to go out of the hall, protested with vehemence
against this violation of their liberties; and when Henriot, in receiving
orders from the president to draw off his troops, replied, that as soon as he
had executed the orders of the people he would obey those of the convention,
and threatened that if they refused to deliver up to justice the twenty-two
deputies whom he called traitors, he would order the cannon to be sired on the
hall; Danton with great indignation imprecated vengeance on the head of the
ruffian, which some months after, at the period of his own fall, was in the act
of accusation alleged against him as a crime. In vain did the convention,
partaking Danton's indignation, hope to obtain their liberty by decreeing that
the officers of the post next the entrance of the hall should be called to the
bar. Two of them had received no orders, and a third informed them that he was
himself consigned by a few strangers who did not appear to him acquainted even
with military forms. These strangers were ordered to the bar; but they refused
to attend: and thus this assembly, which talked of nothing less than bringing
princes and kings in chains to their feet, were made prisoners in their very
sanctuary by a few hirelings, of whom no other description was given than that
they were strangers and wore mustaches. This was an indignity not to be borne.
The president, therefore, proposed that the assembly in a body should go out of
the hall: this was decreed, and the sentinels seeing themselves likely to be
overpowered gave way. The deputies paraded in the garden, expecting every
moment to be massacred; but the conspirators who directed their motions led
them back again to the hall, observing that the convention, after so striking a
proof, could have no doubt of their being at liberty.

Previously to this mock parade, Barrere, who had been weighing the
probabilities of success on either side, and examining which party would have
the ascendency, at length invited the proscribed deputies, for the sake of
peace and for the good of the state, to submit, and devote themselves to their
country. To this admonition three of them acceded; but Barbaroux asserted, that
he had no right to give in his dismission, nor could he obey any other mandate
than that of the people, who having invested him with the power had alone the
right to take it from him. With more vehemence Lanjuinais exclaimed, that he
would remain at his post to his latest breath, or till he was torn from it by
force. His intrepidity provoked the conspirators to rage and tumult.
"Citizens," said he, "we have beheld in barbarous countries the people leading
human victims to the altar, after crowning them with flowers; but we never
heard, that the priests who were about to sacrifice them treated them with
insult. I repeat, that I have no right to lay aside the august character with
which the people have honored me; therefore, expect from me neither
self-dismission, nor voluntary suspension for a moment." This courageous reply
to their fury appalled the tyrants; and had Vergniaud, Rabaut, Brissot, and
others whose names were in the conspirators' list, been then at their post, had
they seconded their proscribed colleagues at this critical moment with the
thunder of their eloquence, the project of the conspirators might easily have
been defeated, and they might have saved both themselves and the republic.
While the conspirators were perpetrating this abominable deed, they were
deliberating in the house of Gaudet about the means that should be taken to
avoid it, and deceived by a report which a friend unhappily ill-informed
conveyed to them, that the blood of their colleagues was flowing; and believing
it to be too late to make any further struggle, they suffered the decree of
arrestation to be carried without opposition Louvet relates the following
singular anecdote: "We began to breathe again, when a man of Bourdeaux, who had
been made prisoner at the battle of Nerwinden, and afterward exchanged,
related to Gaudet, his friend, that having had an opportunity of forming an
intimate acquaintance with one of the officers of the Imperial army, he had
learned from him that Cobourg's staff-officers flattered themselves that in a
short space of time twenty-two beads would fall in the convention. Gaudet
related to me this anecdote, with which we amused ourselves; but judge of our
surprise, and the reflections to which it gave rise, when some time after M.
Pache came at the head of the pretended sections of Paris, to present the
famous petition which proscribed twenty-two deputies.

"It is important to observe, that this first list of proscription having been
composed of twenty-two members, the second list, brought some weeks after to
the convention by the municipal officers and administrators of Paris, was still
twenty-two, though all the names were not the same. At the time when the decree
of accusation passed, Marat made some changes by his own sovereign authority.
He took away some names, that of Lanthenas for example, but he took care to
replace them by others, and mark well, in equal number, so that the proscribed
were always twenty-two. Lastly, when after the taking of Lions the trial of the
republican deputies came on, Pethion, Buzot, Gaudet, Salles, Valady, Barbaroux,
and myself were not in their hands. The list might consequently have been
reduced a third; nevertheless it was still complete, and the victims led to the
scaffold were, if not twenty-two, at least twenty-one. This strange identity of
numbers, at four different periods, gave reason to presume that the number of
twenty-two heads, and always the same number, was what the mountain agreed to
furnish according to one of its private articles in its treaty with the
coalesced powers."


.

Had the convention, when Henriot sent them his mandate, ordered him to be
instantly put to death, their orders, if they could have been promulgated out
of the precincts of the hall, would undoubtedly have been obeyed; but the
conspirators had taken measures to prevent any such transmission, by consigning
every officer to his post, by filling up every avenue with their agents, who
had received orders to suffer no communication between the hall and the court
or garden, and also by closing the gates of the latter, so that the people in
general knew nothing of what was passing.

With many others I saw parts of the execution of this conspiracy. I saw the
armed force surrounding the hall, but was ignorant, like the rest, of what was
passing within. I beheld from a window that overlooked the Tuilleries the
convention in full procession; but I could not account for this singular
parade, nor was it till midnight that I learned the history of the day, which
some of the deputies related to us; among whom was Barrere, who with eyes full
of tears lamented to us the fate of his friends, and the total ruin of the
republic -- that Barrere who a few months after provoked and gloried in their
murder!

Liberty, however, did not see her principles and rights abandoned with
impunity, but has been terribly avenged. From that fatal decree may be dated
all the horrors which have cast their sanguinary cloud over the glories of the
revolution, which have given strength to despots and arguments to slaves. The
national convention has beheld its members dragged in successive multitudes to
the scaffold. The Parisian guard, who submitted to become the passive
instruments of this atrocious faction; the citizens of Paris, who bent their
necks tamely to the yoke; the departments, who, when they afterward accepted
the constitution, had the baseness to make no conditions for their imprisoned
representatives: have seen their fellow-citizens, their friends, their
relations, led to death, their property violated, all social ties shaken,
virtue every where depressed, vice every where triumphant, and their country
one wide scene of calamity, of which the long page of history presents no
similar picture, even in the proscriptions of Sylla or the caprices of Caligula
Louvet, in his interesting note, says: "On the 20th of May another plot was to
have been executed against the republicans of the convention. Letters had been
forged between them and Cobourg. The night of the 20th of May, the twenty-two
were to have been arrested as they entered their respective houses, and carried
to a house in the fauxbourg Montmatre, where every thing was prepared for the
commission of the intended crimes. There each victim was to find a
septembris^^, and they were to be buried in a pit dug in a garden belonging to
the house. The next day their emigration was to be announced, and their forged
correspondence with Cobourg published. The plan was concerted at the house of
Pache the mayor of Paris. The committee of twenty-one had proof of all these
atrocities; more than fifty written and subscribed depositions attest the fact;
a part of these pieces was in the hands of Berjoing, one of the members of this
commission, who had put them into the hands of the administrators of Calvados;
but they, at the time they made their peace, did not fail to give them up to
the mountain. A more considerable part were in the hands of Rabaut St. Etienne.
I do not know whether they have been saved."
.

Immediately after the insurrection of the 2d of June, an insidious address was
published by the committee of public safety to calm the minds, and in their
language to enlighten the understanding, of the people. This address was heard
with great indig^ation by the majority of the convention, some of whom
protested with vehemence against the state of humiliation to which they were
reduced; while others, to give their dissent a more solemn form, assembled and
signed individually a protest, in which they detailed the events of the 2d of
June, representing in strong colors the despotism which had been exercised,
the consequences to which it would lead, and their resolution to take no part
in the deliberations of an assembly whose rights had been so shamefully
violated See Appendix, No. 1.
. This protest was signed by seventy-three deputies a few days after the arrest
of their colleagues; but it was not then published, since the report promised
by the committee of public safety on those who were arrested had not yet been
presented; and as this report never appeared, several members of the committee
being in the number of the conspirators, the protest was found among the papers
of D^perre^, and caused the imprisonment of all those who had signed it.

The tidings of the insurrection in Paris occasioned much fermentation in the
departments, who were expected to have demanded of the Parisians, in a manner
more serious than by address or remonstrance, why the representatives whom they
had committed to their respect and protection were retained as prisoners and
regarded as traitors. The Parisians, who had been altogether passive during
this struggle, were not much moved by these menaces. They had beheld with
indifference the progress of the contest. Finding themselves delivered from the
oppression of the former government; concluding that no tyrant existed except
such as ^ore the name of king; and persuaded that that system could never
return, they were careless whether the plain or the mountain, the cote droit or
cote gauche held the reins of government. This fatal error has been the source
of almost all the evils that have desolated the republic; for had the Parisians
attended to the political duties that were required of them in exchange for
their enjoyment of political rights, they would never have seen their
fellow-citizens dragged daily through their streets to the scaffold, at the nod
of tyrants whom they ought early to have crushed.

During the progress of this conspiracy, the assemblies of the sections where
the citizens met to deliberate on public affairs, were either filled by the
agents of the conspirators, or governed by the conspirators themselves; and
where neither of them had weight sufficient to mislead the citizens, they took
advantage of their departure to propose and carry resolutions among themselves,
which they proclaimed as the voice of the section. Though these practices were
denounced in the convention, and though sometimes the section of today came to
disclaim what the same section of yesterday had said, yet the discovery of the
fraud had no tendency to awaken the citizens to greater vigilance. Had they
known to what end all the artifices of the conspirators tended, they would
undoubtedly have been on their guard; but as they were made to serve the views
of the traitors in demanding the expulsion of their representatives, without
believing that they had committed any crime; so they were also made the
instruments of consummating the treason by assisting in the violation of the
representation itself in the arbitrary arrest of the deputies, without knowing
for what reason they were armed and assembled. A long and mournful experience
has at length shown them, that it is not sufficient to feel the love of liberty
without making continual efforts to preserve it; that so many and various are
the enemies which it has to combat before its reign can be permanently
established, that as much vigilance is required to guard it from the inroads of
the aspiring demagogue, as courage to shake off the yoke of despotism; and that
when the sacred code of freedom is violated in one point it leads to the
destruction of the whole. When the nobles whom the law had confounded in the
class of citizens were persecuted as a cast, when men of superior abilities
became proscribed for "aristocracy of talents," those who were distinguished
for neither deceived themselves in believing they were safe.

Although the citizens remained unmoved at these violations, a considerable
number of the departments felt the indignity, and prepared to avenge the
national honor. Some made eloquent remonstrances at the bar of the convention;
some deliberated on the convocation of the primary assemblies; some proposed
sending no farther contributions to Paris, while others took arms to suppress
the rebellion of the commune against the republic. For some time the arrival of
the departmental force was expected; but the conspirators, who foresaw this
formidable opposition to the accomplishment of their designs, had the prudence
to provide against it by sending previously into the departments as many of
their emissaries as they could spare without weakening their force at home,
taken partly from among their accomplices in the convention, who carried with
them the importance of representatives of the people.

The conspirators had also the advantage of being invested with the authority
of government, as they had seized on the machine. They had possession of the
convention, who were compelled to follow the impulse already given them; they
were proprietors of the national wealth, and had the armies at their command.
The departments, on the contrary, had no central point of union except the
common indignation which the conduct of the conspirators had excited. They had
no treasure at their disposal but what arose from voluntary contributions; and
while they were deliberating what steps they should pursue, the conspirators,
clothed with the national power which they had usurped, reduced the departments
to the same state of subjection as they had the convention and Paris. In the
western departments, where some of the deputies who were accused had fled, and
around whom the people had crowded partaking their indignation, the armies that
had hastily assembled as suddenly disappeared; and the whole of the republic
except the city of Lions submitted to the yoke. The causes of this defection,
which have hitherto been involved in obscurity, it being the interest of the
conspirators to keep them concealed from the world, have lately been developed
by one of the principal actors in those memorable scenes, Louvet, deputy of the
department of the Loiret, who distinguished himself early in the convention by
his accusation of Robespierre, who unmasked the conspiracy of the 10th of
March, and who o^ the 31st of May was honorably proscribed, but is now
restored to his friends and his country. I shall transcribe his own words:

"Gaudet and myself reached Caen on the 26th of June. On the fifth of the same
month eight departments, namely, five of the former provinces of Brittany and
three of Normandy, had entered into a common league. They had just sent their
commissaries to Caen, and their troops were at the point of arriving. Wimpfen
the general of the whole force, had hitherto confined all his exploits to
traveling about and talking, and under the most frivolous pretenses delayed
every kind of organisation. As soon as I saw him I was convinced that he was a
determined royalist, for he took no pains to conceal it. I asked Barbaroux and
Buzot what they could expect from such a man, for the support of our cause. One
of them answered me, that Wimpfen was a man of honor, and incapable of
breaking his engagements, and the other was altogether captivated by his
agreeable manners. Gaudet and Pethion, who had just arrived, did not feel my
apprehensions. They were astonished at my readiness in suspecting every one
that was not as much a republican as myself. From that time I saw that every
thing was going the same way at Caen as it had done at Paris. Wimpfen was
beloved by the Normans; he had a considerable party among the administrators of
Calvados, and had gained the confidence of the Bretons. In order to take the
command from him, it was necessary to unite and make use of all our exertions;
but I found myself altogether unsupported. Every thing therefore was likely to
fail on the side of the republic. Besides, many Normans, who showed the most
favorable dispositions toward us, because in the credit of the newspapers
they believed us to be royalists, changed their conduct in the most pointed
manner when by our conversation, and particularly by our actions, they came to
know us better. My first hopes were directed therefore toward the south. If my
wife had been at Caen, we should have gone aboard some vessel at Hon-fleur
bound to Bourdeaux; and as it would have been very easy for us to have seen
whether things went no better there than elsewhere, we should have taken our
passage aboard the first American vessel, and have been at this time safe in
Philadelphia.

"Three weeks elapsed, while Wimpfen did nothing but lead to Evreux the two
thousand men who had come up from the different departments. In the mean time
report had so swelled this little troop, that it was said at Paris to be thirty
thousand strong. At this period, the patriots there had recovered from their
fears, spoke their opinions publicly, and were preparing to overthrow the
terrible municipality. Many sections had already sent their commissaries to
Evreux, who had carried back to Paris different publications explanatory of our
true sentiments, and particularly a piece which they called, but I know not for
what reason, Wimpfen's Manifesto, and which was a declaration of the
commissaries of the united departments; a declaration which I had composed with
great labor, which breathed only peace, fraternity and assistance to the
Parisians, but open war and exemplary punishment to some of the mountain, to
the municipality and the cordeliers; and this just distinction had produced the
best possible effect in Paris. The commissaries besides had seen and borne
their testimonies against the base calumnies which had been uttered against
this departmental army, when it was accused of having worn the white cockade,
and expressed its wish for royalty. Every thing in short was so disposed, that
if, at this moment, our arms had met but with the slightest success, the
revolution would have been effected in Paris, without the interposition of the
departmental army; but it was not in this kind of success that Wimpfen was
interested.

"The mountain under great apprehensions had at length raised in Paris 1800
foot soldiers, the better half of which were praying for our success, and also
seven or eight hundred ruffians as cowardly as they were thievish: this
collection had just entered Vernon. Then it was that Wimpfen talked of
attacking this town; and here suddenly a Mr. Puysay, of whom we had never
heard, was introduced to us by the general, as an officer full of republicanism
and knowledge. He it was whom Wimpfen ordered to attack Vernon, and certainly
he very well obeyed his secret instructions.

"In order to surprise the enemy, he went out in open day with drums beating.
He marched during the extreme heat, and then made his soldiers, who had no
tents, and who for the greater part had never been in a camp, pass the night in
the open air. He lost the whole of the following day in attacking a small
castle, which he had the honor of taking. The enemy having by this time been
well and duly informed of all his maneuvers, he, in order to give them still
greater advantage, made his troops halt at the entrance of a wood a league
distant from Vernon; placed his cannon one piece behind the other along a wall;
left all his little army in the greatest disorder; did not even place
sentinels; and went to sleep at a cottage at half a league from the place. An
hour after, a few hundred men suddenly made their appearance, who surprised our
men and fired three rounds of grape shot; but the guns in all probability were
charged only with powder, for there is no doubt that it was but a farce well
arranged. However that may be, a ^ont took place immediately among the
soldiers, who did not know with what numbers they had to engage, who could
scarcely find their arms, and who were looking about in vain for their
commander. This was so expeditious a retreat, that, had it not been for the
brave soldiers of the department of the Isle and Vilain^, who stood their
ground for some little time, not a single field-(...) would have been saved. In
short, not a man received the slightest wound: the enemy did not advance thirty
steps to follow up their easy victory. This adventure did not hinder Mr.
Puysay, whom the administration of the department of the Eure entreated not to
abandon them, from declaring that Evreux was not tenable; and in reality the
next day he withdrew himself sixteen leagues, without striking a blow, and
abandoned a whole department to the enemy.

"On the arrival of the courier who brought us these sad tidings, Wimpfen did
not appear at all disconcerted. He moreover assured us that there was nothing
unfortunate in this event: he talked of fortifying Caen, of declaring the city
in a state of defense, of organizing an army somewhat stronger, and of making
paper-money which should be current throughout the seven united departments.

"These observations afforded room for deep reflection. Salles and myself,
after having a long time conversed on the subject, were convinced that the
general, so far from wishing to march to Paris, intended to keep us shut up
with him in the city, where his party was prevalent, to establish a
communication with England, and to commit us with that power if it were
possible; in fine, to make use of us according to circumstances, either to make
his peace with the mountain if the coalition of the southern departments should
be dissolved, or make his peace with the republicans if they should overthrow
the mountain. Our colleagues, to whom we communicated our suspicions, thought
us visionaries, and nothing less was necessary to convince them than what
happened soon after.

"The general requested to have a conference with all of (...) were deputies,
on an affair of the greatest consequence. He began by describing to us our
situations as very critical, unless we took some vigorous resolution. He was
going to Lisieux to organize his army, and to form his camp in such a manner as
to make at least for some time a proper defense. The future, however, required
something more permanent. He returned back to his projects respecting Caen, to
his proposals about the creation of paper-money, etc. etc. etc. and as he
judged it necessary to support his reasoning by terror, though he ought to have
known that such a mode of proceeding would have little influence on men
accustomed to brave daily the fury and the murders of the mountain, an officer,
who undoubtedly had been instructed, suddenly entered, and with a frightened
look informed the general that there was a riot; that the people had arrested
the convoys going to the army; and that they were making violent motions
against the deputies. Wimpfen affected to be angry at the precipitation with
which he told him this alarming news. It is nothing, said he to the officer; go
and talk calmly to the people, make them easy; give them a little money, if it
be necessary. When this man left us, the general thought he might venture to
make the great proposition. Reflect maturely on all that I have said, resumed
he: in order to execute great projects we must employ great means. But stay, I
am going to speak plainly: I see only one possible mode of providing ourselves
with men, arms, ammunition, money, and help of every kind; that is, to
negociate with England; and I myself have the means provided, but I must have
your authority, your engagement.

"The reader may be assured that I have a perfect recollection of the lines I
have written in Itali^s, and I can also assure him that I have stated truly the
scene of the preceding passage. It is difficult to paint the effect which these
words produced on my too confiding friends. All of them at the same moment,
struck with indignation, without any previous consultation rose up. The
conference was instantly interrupted, though the general tried every means of
renewing it.

"Wimpfen, somewhat disconcerted, left us without seeming to feel any
resentment. He only repeated to us that he was going to Lisieux, and
insinuated, that in order to restrain some malevolent people who were
endeavoring in Caen to render us unpopular, we should all do better to remain
in that place. I think that every person must perceive the infamous snare into
which this worthy ally of the mountain wished to draw us. Had fear or the
desire of vengeance prompted us to accede to this proposition, the republic
would have been lost as well as our honor. The mountain would have had
victorious proofs against us. It would have been they who were republicans, we
that were royalists; and all the republicans persecuted for being royalists,
would have been arrested, imprisoned and guillotined. Our conspiracy, they
would have said, extended to the south. It would have been we, and not
themselves, who delivered Toulon to the English. I know, indeed, that after
their terrible triumphs they did not fail to make such assertions; but they
found no honest or enlightened man who gave them credit. They were, therefore,
driven to their accusation of federalism; an accusation not less absurd and
calumnio^^.

"The next day Barbaroux and myself went to Lisieux. The general was somewhat
surprised to see us, but he did not receive us with less courtesy. We learned,
what he himself took care not to inform us, that he had just had a secret
conference with one of the agents of the chiefs of the mountain, who for three
weeks past were throwing away handfuls of assignats at Evreux, and every where
on their passage; and who, soon after, probably sure of powerful support, came
with the intention of continuing the same plan of corruption at Caen, even
under our eyes. We found at Lisieux many people in arms, but no soldiers, no
organization, no discipline, and the rage of making motions. A secret hand in a
single day disorganized even the Breton battalions which had hitherto been
firmly united. The general was at pains to make us observe this disorder, and
to lead us to conclude from thence that he could not maintain his position
there, but that he must march back with all his troops to Caen, and make this
city the central point of resistance, etc. He nevertheless avoided repeating to
us his English prepositions. Accordingly the retreat took place the following
day: all my friends then acknowledged that our affairs were ruined in the
western departments. In vain did the general, after having gone back to Caen,
where he was always desirous of establishing himself, show dispositions for a
serious defense. In vain did he create staff officers, arrange his troops,
employ himself in searching for a convenient situation for encampment,
establish batteries of eighteen-pounders; all this parade no longer imposed on
our colleagues.

"It appears clear, that Wimpfen, the evening before, had given notice by one
of the couriers of the committee of public safety, to the mountain; and I hope
that I am understood, when I say the mountain, that is not of the whole body,
nor even all its leaders, that I speak, but the principal cordelier of the
mountain, such as La Croix, Fabre d'Eglantine, and, who were equally deceiving
and shifting between the republicans, Pethion, Guadet, etc. and the dictator
Robespierre -- that Wimpfen had given information of the bad success of his
English overtures, and that it was useless to renew the proposition. It also
appears that the mountain then determined to disperse our little band, but
without neglecting to throw on our party that coloring of royalism which was
so necessary to effect our ruin; and it was without doubt at this period only
that they determined to deliver, at least to all appearance, Toulon to the
English. What I am now saying will possibly astonish every one who is not well
informed as to this business; but when the proper time shall come, I will
explain myself fully with respect to this terrible farce of Toulon.

"It is thought that Wimpfen had a safe conduct from the mountain, and a ready
opportunity of going into England; but I know not what became of Mr. Puysay,
who suffered himself to be so complaisantly beaten at Vernon. The
administrators of Calvados had given notice to the administration of their
shameful defection. They had secretly made their peace with the mountain,
without giving us any information. The third day only they made it known to us;
and the method they took was to send and post up at the gate of the intendance,
where we lodged, the mountain placard, in which was the decree of our being out
of the law."

The counterpart of the scene acted at Paris, between the conspirators and the
convention, was attempted at Lions, and the same day was appointed in both
cities for the accomplishment of their purpose. At the head of this provincial
conspiracy was a man named Chalier, a Piedmontese by birth (for most of the
agents of the conspirators were foreigners) and a sharper by profession, having
fled his own country on account of having committed fraudulent bankruptcies. He
was sent to Lions by the commune of Paris, after the massacre of September, and
opened his mission by the murder of nine persons who had been committed to
prison by the municipality of Lions for slight offenses. Agreeably to the
instructions he had received, and in conformity to the general plan which the
commune of Paris and the conspirators had formed, their apostle labored
incessantly to propagate the doctrines of robbery, rebellion and murder. Seeing
that these exhortations had been attended with their due effects in Paris, "the
needy villain's general home," where the promise of riches without labor had
allured all the idle and profligate to the standard of the conspirators, he was
disappointed that more proselytes to this seducing system had not honored his
embassy at Lions, where society was less disunited, and where industry had
established a superstitious regard to property, altogether incompatible with
Chalier's system of reform. A few, however, he found who listened to his
projects, and to those he communicated his plan of regeneration, which
consisted in placing a guillotine the following day on one of the bridges,
where all the capital merchants, who were necessarily aristocrats, were to be
executed, and their bodies thrown into the Rhone. Though this secret was
imparted under the solemnity of an oath, yet there were some who touched with
remorse gave private notice of it to the citizens, who took measures to prevent
its execution.

Chalier, who ought instantly to have been put to death by the just indignation
of the people, was suffered to continue his revolutionary projects, to the
great annoyance of the wealthy citizens, against whom his attacks were
continually directed. By perseverance he had at length formed a set out of the
profligate which are to be found in all large communities, and with their aid
he was encouraged to attempt once more the accomplishment of his designs.

He had been appointed procurer of the commune; and as the municipality were
composed of Jacobins, and of others as weak as those were wicked, Chalier,
supported by the faction of Paris, became its principal director. Knowing the
progress of the conspiracy in that city, he prepared his friends for the same
events at Lions, by declaring openly in the popular society on the 27th of May,
that the presidents and secretaries of the sections, together with the rich
egotists, should be beheaded on the following day. The municipality on the
26th, influenced by Chalier, had levied a revolutionary tax of six millions of
livres on the rich, to be paid in twenty-four hours. This municipal levy
excited murmurs as was expected, and gave the anarchists pretenses for raising
tumults. The rich were destined to be the victims, and Chalier's band prepared
themselves to be the executioners. But the Lyonnais might have crushed this
insurrection in its birth, had not the narrow spirit of traffic, which sees
nothing beneficial in society except the accumulation of wealth, made them feel
that their country was but a secondary object, and fitted only to employ the
attention of those whose time was of less mercantile profit than their own.

Apprised of the intentions of the conspirators, who had made out the list of
the proscriptions, and arranged the plan of the massacre, the citizens flew to
arms, and seized on the arsenal. The conspirators kept possession of the
town hall, and both parties prepared for action; for Lions now consisted only
of those who intended to murder, and those who did not like to be murdered. The
combat was vigorously supported on both sides; for the conspirators were aided
by a party of military whom they had previously engaged in their interests.
Victory remained doubtful for a long time, as the battle was fought in the
streets of the city, one quarter being in the possession of the conspirators,
while the republicans were masters of the other. It was not till midnight that
the citizens took the town hall, which was the head quarters of Chalier's
party. This event decided the contest, which had been severe and bloody. The
conspirators were imprisoned, and their chief, after a long and formal trial,
was condemned by the tribunal to death. Had the same resistance been made to
oppression in other communes, that of Paris would have been compelled to submit
to the general will; but as the departments had declined the contest, Lions was
left to withstand alone all the resentment of the conspirators, and was
besieged a few weeks after this period.

LETTER V.
THE chief point of accusation against the deputies who were arrested on the
second of June, was the continual opposition which they were accused of having
made to the formation of a republican constitution. This calumny was
contradicted by the fact; the proscribed deputies having, after the labor of
some months, presented a plan of constitution to the convention, which had been
published by its order; but of which it was a part of the conspirators' plan to
interrupt and prevent the discussion.

As many believed that a constitution was the remedy for every evil, moral and
political, and even physical, that afflicted the state; and that, when once
prepared and administered, all its maladies would be cured; some of the
departments were appeased by the assurance that their present rulers would give
them in a fortnight what they were made to believe their predecessors had so
long withheld.

The appearance of this constitution within the appointed time tended greatly
to allay the discontents, and gave an air of popularity to the proceedings of
the conspirators; for, as long as the people obtained the blessing, they were
indifferent from what hand they received it. They were little aware of the
purposes of their tyrants, who only giving them one short glimpse of this
wished-for constitution, and having obtained their sanction of it, threw it
aside, locked up this hallowed book of the law, shrouded with a dark veil the
tables of the rights of man, and boldly proclaimed a new-invented species of
tyranny, under the denomination of revolutionary government. That epithet has
since justified every enormity, warranted the violation of every principle: and
theft and pillage, noyades and fusilades have all received the common
appellation of revolutionary measures.

What contributed also to dissipate the storm that was going to be poured on
Paris, was the dread which the departments themselves had of extending the
civil war, which then raged in the country south of the Loire, when there was a
possibility of attaining by milder means the objects they had in view, the
re-establishment of their representatives, and confining the extravagant power
of the commune of Paris within its just bounds. What also misled them was, the
subjection to which Paris itself was reduced, and which, deceived by addresses
from the convention and the commune, they mistook for the enjoyment of
tranquillity; and what finished the contest was the thunder of the conspirators
hurled against the departments which had shown most zeal in favor of the
imprisoned deputies, the constituted powers of which were dissolved by the
convention, and its members declared guilty of acts of rebellion. It was
fortunate for the usurpers, that this almost general and speedy acquiescence
took place; as, independently of the coalesced powers, they had a most
formidable enemy to contend with in the royalists of the Vendee, who, while
these struggles for power convulsed Paris, were organizing a force that, but
for the invincible spirit of liberty that inspired the immense majority of the
republic, was calculated to overwhelm every contending party, and bring back
the ancient despotism with all the avenging terrors of sacerdotal and
aristocratical rage.

The country which was the scene of this insurrection in favor of priesthood
and royalty, is situated between the Loire and the Charente, stretching along
the coasts between the two rivers, and making part of the territory which was
called, under the ancient government, the Province of Poi^o^. It is a country
fertile both in corn and pasture; and from its rich abundance distributed
plenty to most of the neighboring departments, and furnished even to the
center of France a considerable part of its supplies. Where nature had done so
much to make this region the seat of plenty, the inhabitant was not solicitous
to increase his riches by foreign traffic; so that commerce contributed but
little to his opulence, and manufacturers were almost unknown. However innocent
and pastoral the life of a shepherd and the husbandman has been represented,
and however productive of those vices that corrupt and enervate mankind the
commercial intercourse between nations may have been found; this communication
brings with it an interchange of knowledge and manners which improves and
embellishes society, while the permanent habitudes of the former serve to
retain him in a state which adds nothing to the common stock of knowledge, and
contributes nothing to the progressive improvement of the world. The negative
merit of exemption from vices to which we have never been tempted, may be
granted to this intellectual darkness, where it is placed beyond the reach of
endangering more enlightened society; but when ignorance becomes the sport of
fanaticism, and ambitious men make it the instrument of their guilty designs,
it becomes a calamity the most terrible in the list of human evils.

The department of the Vendee, from its local situation, had little other
intercourse with the rest of the republic than what arose from the export of
the superfluity of its produce; and while the great and immortal principles
which directed the revolution awakened in the bosom of every mechanic and
peasant throughout France the noble sentiment that no man was superior to him
in his rights, the Vendean, who had only heard of these things through the
organ of the noble and the priest, remained the implicit believer and obedient
vassal, while his fellow-citizens were rejoicing in their emancipation.

In this insulated department the feodal system had been maintained in all its
rigor. The provincial laws of Brittany, which, from the minuteness and
singularity of their oppression, would be rather subjects of ridicule than
abhorrence, had they not contributed so much to the degradation of the human
character in the tyrant who inflicted and the slave who suffered them, were
incorporated with other laws equally barbarous, and peculiar to the country.

As this part of the republic, from its geographical and moral situation, had
received but a few faint rays of the light of that liberty which had burst
forth in France; and as already the seeds of discord had been plentifully
scattered among the inhabitants by the fanatical clergy, it was fitted to
become the retreat of all who were averse to the new order of public affairs.
Accordingly the nobles and the priests, who, in the first meetings of the
constituent assembly, discovered, that by the removal of those factious
barriers by which they had hitherto been separated from the other classes of
the people, they were now to mingle in the common mass, found refuge in these
departments, where they trusted that those distinctions might still be
respected which had elsewhere sunk into contempt. Their influence was
extensive; and as their zeal was quickened by implacable resentment, those laws
of which they could not hinder the promulgation, and particularly those which
respected their own orders, were but imperfectly executed, or apparently
obeyed. Having found that that enthusiasim which led the constituent assembly
to overthrow these gigantic privileges, had considerably evaporated toward its
close; and seeing also that the court, in struggling to regain its lost power,
sought their alliance; they grew bolder in their pretensions, and became more
active in their hatred toward the establishment of the new government. At
first an air of general discontent overspread this part of the country --
partial fermentations next succeeded, and the spirit of insurrection at length
became so general, that the constituent assembly was compelled to take measures
to stop its alarming progress.

The means employed by the legislature were calculated rather to increase than
prevent the evil; for, instead of sending commissaries from their own body to
examine into its causes; instead of enlightening the people, and unmasking and
punishing those who had prompted them to rebellion; they entrusted the court
with the execution of their decrees, and, as it might have been expected, the
insurrection obtained additional force, and even a sort of royal sanction.

The authority of the next assembly was insufficient to repress so alarming an
evil. Too much divided by the spirit of party, and too much occupied in
struggles against the court, the legislative assembly for a long time applied
only palliatives to the disease; nor, till it wore an aspect dangerous to the
existence of the revolution, was the assembly roused to the application of any
effective remedy. The measure they first proposed was the banishment of the
priests who had refused adherence to the new constitution; but this measure
appeared so alarming to the court, and so destructive of the system it had
adopted to regain its lost influence, that the king was advised to make use of
the repressive power which the constitution gave him, and to refuse his royal
sanction. Though this refusal hastened the destruction of the court, already
tottering, it gave new courage to the discontended, who, finding themselves so
zealously supported, burst into open resistance in the Vendee and the
neighboring departments, which it required all the exertion of the
departmental force to suppress.

The fall of the court suspended for a time the progress of this insurrection;
but the unhappy auspices under which the convention met, inspired fresh ardour,
and led the insurgents to new exertions. In hopes of restoring the monarchy, a
vast plan of insurrection was formed, which not only comprehended the Vendee
and the adjoining departments, but extended itself through a great part of
Brittany. The convention was too much occupied in resisting the conspirators at
Paris to attend to the progress of the royalists, who were suffered to take
uninterrupted possession of the Vendee and the neighboring departments. Before
the end of March they had organized an army of 40,000 men, consisting chiefly
of peasants, servants of the former nobility, smugglers, poachers and
game-keepers, men well accustomed to the use of arms, and had began their march
toward Paris before the convention were formally advised that any insurrection
had taken place. Their army was commanded by experienced chiefs who had served
under the ancient government: but what gave the rebellion its fiercest rage was
the fanaticism which the priest inspired, who marching at the head of their
columns, bearing the crucifix in his hand, pointed out to his followers the
road to victory or heaven. The progress which the royalists had made before any
force was opposed to them was so alarming, that at the period when the Jacobins
had seized upon the government at Paris, the portion of the country which the
Vendeens had subdued was so extensive, that it seemed doubtful of which party
France was destined to be the prey. The royalists had entire possession of the
Loire almost as far as Paris, and menaced Rochelle on the one side while they
besieged Nantes on the other, and opened a passage into the departments which
made part of the former province of Brittany.

The faction at Paris did not fail to improve the events of the Vendee to their
own advantage. Pethion, Buzot, Rabaut St. Etienne, Isnard, Lanjuinais,
Barbaroux, Gaudet, Louvet and others of the proscribed deputies having made
their escape, the conspirators declared, in an address to the departments, that
the project of the deputies who were still in arrestation was evidently the
same as that of their colleagues, who were gone to facilitate the march of the
rebels, and aid them in the establishment of the royal power. This calumny,
which was refuted by every address received from the departments See Appendix,
No. II.
, formed the basis of the accusation which was framed against the Giroude; and
the founders and most strenuous supporters of the republic were soon after
dragged to the scaffold as the advocates and protectors of royalty.

In proportion as the departments relaxed in their energy, the ferocity of the
conspirators increased. An event also happened at this period, which, from the
calumnies to which it gave rise, and the consequences it produced, proved fatal
to the arrested deputies. This was the assassination of Marat. In the first
dawn of the conspiracy Marat became a principal instrument in the hands of the
traitors, who found him well fitted for their purposes; and being saved from
the punishment which usually follows personal insult by the contempt which the
deformity and diminutiveness of his person excited, he became the habitual
retailer of all the falsehoods and calumnies which were invented by his party
against every man of influence or reputation. He was the Thersites of the
convention, whom no one would deign to chastise; for his extravagance made his
employers often disclaim him as a fool, while the general sentiment he excited
was the sort of antipathy we feel for a loathsome reptile. His political
sentiments often varied; for he sometimes exhorted the choice of a chief, and
sometimes made declamations in favor of a limited monarchy; but what rendered
him useful to the conspirators was his readiness to publish every slander which
they framed, and to exhort to every horror which they meditated. -- His rage
for denunciation was so great that he became the dupe of the idle; and his
daily paper contains the names of great criminals who existed only in the
imagination of those who imposed on his credulous malignity.

After this first preacher of blood had performed the part allotted to him in
the plan of evil, he was confined to his chamber by a lingering disease to
which he was subject, and of which he would probably soon have died. But he was
assassinated in his bath by a young woman who had traveled with this intention
from Caen in Normandy. Charlotte Anne Marie Corday was a native of St. Saturnin
in the department of the Orne. She appears to have lived in a state of literary
retirement with her father, and by the study of ancient and modern historians
to have imbibed a strong attachment to liberty. She had been accustomed to
assimilate certain periods of ancient history with the events that were passing
before her, and was probably excited by the examples of antiquity to the
commission of a deed, which she believed with fond enthusiasm would deliver and
save her country.

Being at Caen when the citizens of the department were enrolling themselves to
march to the relief of the convention, the animation with which she saw them
devoting their lives to their country, led her to execute, without delay, the
project she had formed Louvet speaks of this extraordinary woman in the
following terms: -- "A young person came to speak to Barbaroux at the
Intendance where we all lodged. She was tall and well shaped, of the most
graceful manners and modest demeanor: there was in her countenance, which was
beautiful and engaging, and in all her movements, a mixture of softness and
dignity, which were evident indications of a heavenly mind. She came always
attended by a servant, and waited for Barbaroux in an apartment through which
we passed frequently. Since this young woman has fixed on herself the attention
of the world, we have each of us recollected the circumstances of her visits,
of which it is now clear that some favor solicited for a friend was only a
pretense. Her true motive undoubtedly was to become acquainted with some of the
founders of the republic, for which she was going to devote herself; and
perhaps she was desirous that at some future day her features should be brought
to their recollection.

"I declare and solemnly attest, that she never communicated to us a word of
her design; and if such actions could be directed, and she had consulted us,
would it have been against Marat that we should have pointed her stroke? Did we
not know that he was then languishing under a fatal disease, and had but a few
days to live?"


. Under pretense of going home, she came to Paris, and the third day after her
arrival obtained admission to Marat. She had invented a story to deceive him;
and when he promised her that all the promoters of the insurrection in the
departments should be sent to the guillotine, she drew out a knife which she
had purchased for the occasion, and plunged it into his breast.

She was immediately apprehended, and conducted to the Abbaye prison, from
which she was transferred to the Conciergerie, and brought before the
revolutionary tribunal.

She acknowledged the deed, and justified it by asserting that it was a duty
she owed her country and mankind to rid the world of a monster, whose
sanguinary doctrines were framed to involve the country in anarchy and civil
war, and asserted her right to put Marat to death as a convict already
condemned by the public opinion. She trusted that her example would inspire the
people with that energy which had been at all times the distinguished
characteristic of republicans; and which she defined to be that devotedness to
our country which renders life of little comparative estimation.

Her deportment during the trial was modest and dignified. There was so
engaging a softness in her countenance, that it was difficult to conceive how
she could have armed herself with sufficient intrepidity to execute the deed.
Her answers to the interrogatories of the court were full of point and energy.
She sometimes surprised the audience by her wit, and excited their admiration
by her eloquence. Her face sometimes beamed with sublimity, and was sometimes
covered with smiles. At the close of her trial she took three letters from her
bosom, and presented them to the judges, and requested they might be forwarded
to the persons to whom they were addressed. Two were written to Barbaroux, in
which with great ease and spirit she relates her adventures from her leaving
Caen to the morning of her trial. The other was an affectionate and solemn
adieu to her father. She retired while the jury deliberated on their verdict;
and when she again entered the tribunal there was a majestic solemnity in her
demeanor which perfectly became her situation. She heard her sentence with
attention and composure; and after conversing for a few minutes with her
counsel and a friend of mine who had sat near her during the trial, and whom
she requested to discharge some trifling debts she had incurred in the prison,
she left the court with the same serenity, and prepared herself for the last
scene.

She had concluded her letter to her father with this verse of Corneille,
"C'est le crime qui fait la honte, et non pas l'echafaud,"
and it is difficult to conceive the kind of heroism which she displayed in the
way to execution. The women who were called furies of the guillotine, and who
had assembled to insult her on leaving the prison, were awed into silence by
her demeanor, while some of the spectators uncovered their heads before her,
and others gave loud tokens of applause. There was such an air of chastened
exultation thrown over her countenence, that she inspired sentiments of love
rather than sensations of pity She excited in this interesting situation a very
strong and singular passion in a young man of the name of Adam Lux, a
commissary from Mayence. He accidentally crossed the street she was passing in
her way to execution, and became instantly enamoured not of her only, but, what
was more extraordinary, of the guillotine. He published a few days after a
pamphlet, in which he proposed raising a statue to her honor, and inscribing
on the pedestal, " Greater than Brutus," and invoked her shade wandering
through Elysium with those glorious personages who had devoted themselves for
their country. He was sent to the prison of the Force, where a friend of mine
often saw him, and where he talked of nothing to him but of Charlotte Corday
and the guillotine; which, since she had perished, appeared to him transformed
into an altar, on which he would consider it as a privilege to be sacrificed,
and was only solicitous to receive the stroke of death from the identical
instrument by which she had suffered. A few weeks after his imprisonment he was
executed as a counter-revolutionist.
. She ascended the scaffold with undaunted firmness, and, knowing that she had
only to die, was resolved to die with dignity. She had learned from her jailor
the mode of punishment, but was not instructed in the detail; and when the
executioner attempted to tie her feet to the plank, she resisted, from an
apprehension that he had been ordered to insult her; but on his explaining
himself she submitted with a smile. When he took off her handkerchief, the
moment before she bent under the fatal stroke, she blushed deeply; and her
head, which was held up to the multitude the moment after, exhibited this last
impression of offended modesty.

The leaders of the faction, who thought every measure good that could be made
subservient to their purpose, found this event too replete with favorable
circumstances to be neglected. Marat, whom they had thrown aside to die at
leisure, unless perchance he should have lived to share the fate to which they
afterward condemned their other agents, was now restored to more than his
ancient honors, was proclaimed a martyr, and his death ordered to be lamented
as an irreparable loss to the republic. The conspirators declared that no
farther doubt of the federalism of the departments remained. The death of Marat
was the point of conviction. Every member of the mountain was to be
assassinated in his turn, and the traitors of the departments had their
accomplices in Paris who had whetted their poniards to involve the city in
destruction. Though the Parisians were not sufficiently credulous to believe
these calumnies, the faction made them the pretense to proceed to the farther
commission of crimes; and while they endeavored to amuse the people with what
they called the inauguration of Marat and of Chalier, they were meditating the
murder of the deputies whom they had driven from the legislature.

It was impossible to contemplate without indignation and despair that glorious
revolution, which had opened to mankind the brightest prospects of happiness,
and which had promised the most beneficial effects to the world, become the
sport of the cruel, and the prey of the rapacious; to see a people who were
called to liberty, bending their necks, like the votaries of the storied
assassin of the mountain, at the nod of their tyrant; to see a nation which had
possessed Rousseau, Mably and Voltaire, prostrate in frantic enthusiasm before
the shrine of Marat, like the idolaters of Montapa^a, whose devotion rose in
proportion to the hideousness of their gods.

Every day some pretended plot was discovered, some dark conspiracy, attributed
successively to nobles, priests, bankers and foreigners, was dragged to light;
but the specimens produced of these counter-revolutionary projects were often
such as did little honor to the invention of those by whom they were
exhibited. Sometimes letters were found from agents of the coalesced powers;
but they were generally so ill fabricated that they only deceived those who
could not read them.

The departments having submitted to the usurpers, they now began their
measures of severity against those who had resisted their authority. The
general denomination for disaffection to their principles was that of being
suspected; and accordingly a decree was issued to arrest all those who came
under this title. The revolutionary tribunal not having all the energy
necessary to carry into execution the plans that were meditating, was denounced
for its moderantism, and the members of which it was composed, renewed.

A certain class of the women of Paris, who gave themselves the title of
revolutionary women, had been serviceable auxiliaries to the conspirators, and
had taken place of the poissards, who not having all the energy which the
present exigencies required, had yielded the palm to their revolutionary
successors. These female politicians held deliberative assemblies, and
afterward presented their views to the convention, while they influenced its
debates by their vociferations in the tribunes, which they now exclusively
occupied. On the days of tumult which preceded the 31st of May they had mounted
guard in person at the convention, and prevented the execution of certain
orders which they disliked. They now presented themselves at the bar of the
assembly, and demanded the exclusion of the former nobles from every function
civil or military, the renewal of all the administrations throughout the
republic, the examination of the conduct of the ministers, the arrest of every
suspected person, the raising of the whole nation in a mass, and obliging the
women to wear red caps. The convention having shown some disinclination to
comply with these modest requisitions, these female politicians insulted some
of the members, and the society was dissolved by a decree.

In the mean time the royalists had proceeded almost as far as Tours on their
way to Paris. Lions was in a state of formidable resistance. The Marseillois
were at Avignon. Mentz surrendered to the Prussians. The province of Alsace was
overrun by the Austrians. Valencienn^s was taken after a formidable siege, and
Cambray was summoned to surrender. The Piedmontese had invaded the department
of Montblanc, formerly Savoy, the Spaniards had invested Perpignan, and the
English were masters of Toulon.

More efficient measures became necessary than had hitherto been employed, and
that which was now adopted was putting into requisition every individual that
could be made useful to his country in any situation in which his services were
claimed. That part of the community which was destined to the most active
service were the young men from 18 to 25 years of age, who under the name of
the first requisitions were immediately invested with the title of the
defenders of their country, and, as soon as arms were procured, sent to the
frontiers.

Whatever may be the difference of political opinion respecting the events of
the French revolution, there can be no dissenting voice against the tribute of
honor and applause which belongs to the armies of the republic. Amidst all the
internal commotions of contending chiefs, regardless of plain or mountain, of
cote droit or cote gauche, they saw their country invaded, and bravely repulsed
the attack, leaving the arrangement of the internal concerns of the state to
the individuals who were left behind. They were not of that class which
composes the usual mass of armies, the idle and the profligate, who seek a
refuge from industry or want in the vocation of a soldier; and they were of
that age when the love of military glory and the passion for liberty are felt
with the greatest ardour. This passion was nourished by the consciousness that
their sections, their communes, the convention, and their country were looking
on them with fond and anxious expectation, and the decrees which declared that
they deserved well of the republic animated them with a more ardent desire to
merit the eulogium.

One of the great springs which mechanically inspired courage and resolution,
was the patriotic songs and hymns which were continually resounding through
their camps. But the great moral motive that urged them to valorous deeds, was
that contempt of death which men in all ages, who combat for liberty and their
country, have felt, and this was a motive which their antagonists could not
feel. The soldier was conscious that, if he survived, he should partake of the
honor he had labored to acquire; and if he died, that his country would
enroll his name among those of its deliverers, and that his fate would inspire
that sentiment which our animated poet has so beautifully described in his ode
on the glorious dead.

How sleep the brave, who sink to rest
By all their country's wishes blessed?
When Spring with dewy fingers cold
Returns to deck their hallowed mould,
She there shall dress a sweeter sod
Than Fancy's feet have ever trod:
By fairy hands their knell is rung,
By fairy forms their dirge is sung:
There Honor comes a pilgrim gray,
To bless the turf that wraps their clay:
And Freedom shall a while repair
To dwell a weeping hermit there.
"But the life of a modern soldier," Dr. Johnson has observed, "is ill
represented by heroic fiction. War has means of destruction more formidable
than the cannon and the sword. Of the thousands and ten thousands that perished
in our late contest with France and Spain, a very small part ever felt the
stroke of an enemy. The rest languished in tents and ships, amidst damps and
putrefaction, pale, torpid, spiritless and helpless, gasping and groaning,
unpitied among men made obdurate by long continuance of helpless misery, and
were at last whelmed in pits or heaved into the ocean without notice and
without remembrance. By incommodious encampments and unwholesome stations,
where courage is useless and enterprise impracticable, fleets are silently
dispeopled, and armies sluggishly melted away."

From this devastation of disease the French have been exempted; for the evils
which Dr. Johnson enumerates most commonly proceed from the absence of those
conveniences which money can procure. But a great part of the first
requisition, which was taken from the class of the rich as well as of the poor,
were enabled, by the attention of their friends, and the expenditure of their
own income, to procure not only the means of plenty to themselves, but to
contribute to the accommodation of their less wealthy companions.

LETTER VI.
THE usurpers saw that those young citizens who had obeyed with alacrity the
call of the convention against the common enemy were not fitted to be the
instruments of these revolutionary projects. Revolutionary committees had been
established in every commune of the departments, and in every section of Paris;
but though the last were in general composed of the creatures of the faction,
they were not so secure of what they called the energy of the committees in the
country. For this reason, a certain number of what was termed the most
sansculotti^e and revolutionary citizens of each section of Paris who chosen by
their respective committees to compose a body of six thousand men, which was
called the revolutionary army, and which, accompanied by a A traveling
guillotine.
guillotine ambulante, was to issue forth from Paris into the departments, to
invite the people to raise themselves to the height of the revolution.

In the mean while, the usurpers framed an act of accusation against the
deputies whom they had driven from the convention on the 31st of May, and
arrested the seventy-three members who had protested against that measure. At
this period also the vague report of a spy, that Beauvais a deputy of the
convention had been put to death by the English at Toulon, served as a pretext
to the usurpers for inflicting twenty years imprisonment on whoever should
introduce English merchandise into the republic, and for throwing into prison
and confiscating the property of all those who had been born in the British
dominions, except such as were employed in manufactures. This impolitic and
savage decree, in open violation of the rights of nations, and breach of that
hospitality under the protection of which but a few months before they had
invited the English then in France to remain among them, was put into
execution; and though it met with universal reprobation, yet as terror was the
order of the day, no one felt himself sufficiently bold to demand its repeal;
and as business of more importance lay before the conspirators than the
consideration of the cases of individuals, those who had the credulity to trust
to their protection were left to ruminate on their injustice.

The next step taken by the conspirators was that of throwing aside the
encumbrance of the constitution. A report was accordingly prepared, showing the
impossibility of conducting the machine of the revolution without the use of
extraordinary measures, and the convention voted without discussion, that the
constitution should be set aside, and that the government should become
revolutionary. The superiority of a monarchical over a republican government
has been said to consist in the unity of its action, particularly in cases of
danger. The Romans in time of great public calamity were accustomed to throw a
veil over the tables of the laws, and place in the hands of one of their
fellow-citizens, whom they called a Dictator, the whole energy of the
government, as long as the danger which threatened the state should exist.
Rousseau admires this policy, and recommends it in similar cases to all free
governments. Of whatever advantage the temporary absence of liberty might have
been, had the people of France, like the Romans, chosen those to rule the storm
who had the greatest skill or the most acknowledged virtue; those sanguinary
and ferocious characters who now seized on the power, instead of making this
temporary despotism a means of saving the country, like the malevolent genii
who preside over evil, filled it with horror, desolation, and death.

To reconcile the nation to the assumption of their new power, the conspirators
thought it necessary to show their distinguishing attachment to what they
called the people by the exercise of every kind of persecution against what
they called aristocracy, an appellation by no means confined to the adherents
of the former court or the nobility. To the "aristocracy of talents" succeeded
the "aristocracy of commerce," which signified that he who enriched himself
while he enriched his country by the supply of its wants, was an object of
suspicion, or a counter-revolutionist. They therefore conceived the project of
reducing every article of merchandise and subsistence to what they called the
maximum, and obliged every merchant and shopkeeper to sell his goods to the
public at the prescribed rate, whatever might have been the first cost. Though
it was evident to the most superficial observer, that such a measure must be
eventually destructive of commerce, and productive of the evil it was intended
to prevent; yet, as it was an evil that but remotely affected the consumer, it
was calculated to please the lower class of people.

The faction, armed with the absolute power they had usurped, fancied they
could control all possible circumstances; and though they could not but
perceive that the manufacturer must necessarily cease his labor when the new
materials exceeded the stated price of the goods he exposed to sale, and that
the merchant could no longer go on with his commerce, when the cargo which he
had purchased abroad was struck with the revolutionary maximum on its entrance
into port; though they could not but see that it was a law fraught with every
evil, yet as it was a blow at the aristocracy of commerce, and a revolutionary
measure, it was proposed and adopted.

While they were thus persuading the people what interest they took in their
welfare by the introduction of plenty, in the extinction of monopolies, and the
reduction of the price of merchandise, they were equally solicitous to show
their regard for the public safety by the punishment of traitors and
conspirators. For a long time the Jacobins had demanded the trial of Maria
Antoinette, whose existence they declared endangered that of the republic. She
was accordingly arraigned for having committed a series of crimes, which in the
language of the indictment comprehended not merely counter-revolutionary
projects, but all the enormities of the Messalinas, Brunehauts, Fredegondes,
and Medicis. A curious account of the evidence in support of these charges, and
the effect which her behavior produced upon Robespierre, is given by Vilate, a
young man of the revolutionary tribunal. The scene passed during the trial, at
a tavern near the Tuilleries, where he was invited to dine with Robespierre,
Barrere, and St. Just. "Seated around the table," he says, "in a close and
retired room, they asked me to give them some leading features of the evidence
on the trial of the Austrian. I did not forget that expostulation of insulted
nature when, Hebert accusing Antoinette of having committed the most shocking
crime, she turned with dignity toward the audience, and said, "I appeal to the
conscience and feelings of every mother present, to declare if there be one
amongst them who does not shudder at the idea of such horrors." Robespierre
struck with this answer as by an electrical stroke, broke his plate with his
fork. "That blockhead Hebert!" cried he, "as if it were not enough that she was
really a Messalina, he must make her an Agrippina also, and furnish her with
the triumph of exciting the sympathy of the public in her last moments."

Marie Antoinette made no defense, and called no witnesses, alleging that no
positive fact had been produced against her. She had preserved an uniform
behavior during the whole of her trial, except when a starting tear
accompanied her answer to Hebert. She was condemned about four in the morning,
and heard her sentence with composure. But her firmness forsook her in the way
from the court to her dungeon -- she burst into tears; when, as if ashamed of
this weakness, she observed to her guards, that though she wept at that moment,
they should see her go to the scaffold without shedding a tear.

In her way to execution, where she was taken after the accustomed manner in a
cart, with her hands tied behind her, she paid little attention to the priest
who attended her, and still less to the surrounding multitude. Her eyes, though
bent on vacancy, did not conceal the emotion that was laboring at her heart --
her cheeks were sometimes in a singular manner streaked with red, and sometimes
overspread with deadly paleness; but her general look was that of indignant
sorrow. She reached the place of execution about noon; and when she turned her
eyes toward the gardens and the palace, she became visibly agitated. She
ascended the scaffold with precipitation, and her head was in a moment held up
to the people by the executioner.

The trial of Marie Antoinette was followed by that of the accused deputies.
Although those guardians of the public weal, the Jacobins, had repeatedly urged
the convention to bring forward their trial, it had been long delayed from the
difficulty of finding any proofs that wore the appearance of probability; and
it remained long undecided what should be the charges, and who should be the
victims. The substance of the accusation was at length founded on a sort of
sportive party romance written by Camille Desmoulins on Brissot and the
Brissotins; and what was meant by the author merely to excite a laugh, was
distorted to serve this horrible purpose. Camille, it is said, remonstrated
loudly on this perversion of his intentions, and disclaimed any participation
in the guilt. He declared that the charges were only extravagancies of his own
imagination, and that he could not support any of them by evidence. This
remonstrance was ineffectual, and the romance formed part of the indictment,
which was filled up with charges of royalism and federalism; which being
presented to the assembly for their sanction, the decree of accusation passed
without a discussion.

The witnesses in support of the charges consisted principally of the chiefs of
the municipality of Paris, who were the original accusers. But the defense
which the prisoners made was so entirely destructive of the accusation, that
though the judges and the jury had bound up their nature to this execrable
deed; though the audience, like the tribunes of the Jacobins and the
convention, were hired to applaud this crime, the eloquence of the accused drew
iron tears down their cheeks, and convinced the whole tribunal of the infamy
and falsehood of the charges. Imagine the remorse with which the minds of the
jury must have been wrung when their employment compelled them to dress out
matter for condemnation from the absurd and lying fables of the conspirators,
who were called as witnesses to the indictment; while, to the demonstration
even of the most perverse and ignorant, the prisoners refuted every charge with
triumph on their accusers; and if any suspicion had existed with respect to
their patriotism or love of the republic, the prosecution would have served to
dispel it.

The judges, as well as the jury, although determined to execute their
atrocious commission, saw that the defense of the prisoners would carry
conviction to the minds of the audience, who, notwithstanding their being hired
by the accusers, began to show signs of compassion. The court, therefore, wrote
to the convention to inform them, that if the trials were permitted to proceed,
the formalities of the law would reduce them to extreme difficulties; and
observed, that in a revolutionary process it was not necessary to be incumbered
with troublesome witnesses, or a long defense. This humane epistle was
supported by a deputation of the Jacobins, who spoke a still plainer language,
by demanding a decree, that the accused should be condemned whenever the jury
should feel themselves "sufficiently instructed," without attending to the
whole of the charge, or hearing what the prisoners might have to allege in
their defense. To this measure the society was urged by the municipal
witnesses, who were stung with shame at seeing their perjuries unveiled.

The decree, empowering the jury to stop the prosecution at whatever period
they thought proper, was virtually pronouncing the sentence of death: and the
tribunal, releasing themselves from the torture they were compelled to suffer,
while their consciences were every hour more and more loaded with the
conviction of the innocence of the victims whose judicial murder they were
bound to perpetrate, lost no time in declaring that they were sufficiently
instructed.

Alas! in what were "they sufficiently instructed?" That the men they were
going to condemn, were those who were the most distinguished for talents, and
most devoted to the establishment of the republic, of which they were the
founders. Were not this sanguinary jury sufficiently instructed, that it was
for their virtues, and not their crimes, that these victims had been dragged
before them? and yet, with all this conviction on their minds, they coolly
commanded the murder.

This atrocious condemnation was remonstrated against by the prisoners in vain.
In vain they alleged, that against some of them no evidence whatever had been
heard; that their names had scarcely been mentioned at the tribunal; and that,
whatever pretense the jury might have for calling themselves sufficiently
instructed respecting the rest, they could not be informed of the crimes of
those against whom no witnesses had appeared. The court, sheltering themselves
under the sanction of a decree, were little inclined to give the reasons of
their conviction; and therefore replied to the arguments of the prisoners, by
ordering the military force to take them from the tribunal. Valaze, in a
transport of indignation, stabbed himself before the court. Brissot, Vergniaud,
Gensonne, La Source, Fonfrede, Sillery, Ducos, Carra, Duperret, Gardien,
Duprat, Fauchet, Beauvais, Duchastel, Mainvielle, La Caze, Le Hardy, Boileau,
Anteboul, and Vigee, were led to execution on the following day. Vergniaud,
having a presage of his impending fate, had early provided himself with poison;
but finding that his young friends Fonfrede and Ducos, who he had some hopes
would be spared, were companions of his misfortune, he gave the phial to the
officer of the guard, resolving to wait the appointed moment, and to perish
with them.

They met their fate with all the calm of innocence, and breathed their last
vows for the safety and liberty of the republic. Those who were the melancholy
witnesses of their last hours in prison, love to relate how they spoke, and
felt, and acted. I have been told by one who was their fellow prisoner and
friend, that their minds were in such a state of elevation, that no one could
approach them with the commonplace and ordinary topics of consolation. Brissot
was serious and thoughtful, and at times an air of discontent clouded his brow;
but it was evident that he mourned over the fate of his country and not his
own. Gensonne, firm and self-collected, seemed fearful of sullying his lips by
mentioning the names of his murderers. He did not utter a word respecting his
own situation, but made many observations on the state of the republic, and
expressed his ardent wishes for its happiness. Vergniaud was sometimes serious,
and sometimes gay. He amused his fellow prisoners at times with the recital of
poetry which he retained in his memory, and sometimes indulged them with the
last touches of that sublime eloquence which was now for ever lost to the
world. Fonfrede and Ducos relieved the sombre of the piece by the habitual
liveliness of their characters, although each lamented the fate of his brother
to their respective friends, and sometimes shed tears over the distress and
ruin of their wives and children; for both had young families and immense
fortunes. Their courage was the more exemplary, as their fate was altogether
unexpected.

Previously to the imprisonment of the deputies, while they were yet under
arrest in their own houses, I frequently visited those who were in the number
of our friends. Vergniaud had long told me that he saw no just foundation for
hope, and that he would rather die, than live a witness of his country's shame.
Fonfrede and Ducos had the full enjoyment of their liberty till the act of
accusation appeared, in which they had not the least suspicion that they should
be included. The day previous to the reading of this murderous proscription in
the convention, Fonfrede had accompanied us to Montmorenci, about four leagues
from Paris, where we had wandered till evening, amidst that enchanting scenery
which Rousseau once inhabited, and which he had so luxuriantly described. Alas!
while the charms of nature had soothed our imaginations, and made us forget a
while the scenes of moral deformity exhibited in the polluted city we had left;
while every thing around us breathed delight, and the landscape was a hymn to
the Almighty; the assassins were at their bloody work, and plotting the murder
of our friends. The next day Fonfrede was sent to the Conciergerie, and we saw
him no more. A week after we were ourselves arrested. He conveyed to us, from
his dungeon, his sympathy in our misfortunes, and, after his condemnation,
wrote to bid us a last farewell; but the letter was carried to the committee of
general safety, and never reached us.

They were condemned at midnight. When they returned to their prison, they gave
the appointed signal of their fate to their fellow prisoners, whose seclusion
afforded them no other means of knowing it, by singing a parody of the chorus
of the Marsellois hymn -- Contre nous de la tyranny
L'etandard sanglant est leve.


After spending the few hours of life that remained, in conversation, now and
then enlivened by the sallies of the young and gay amongst them, they bade
adieu to their fellow prisoners, whose minds were so raised by the heroism
which these patriots displayed, that it was some time before they became
sensible of their loss.

The dungeon which they inhabited was shown with profound veneration to every
prisoner who afterward arrived at this preparatory scene of murder. A
superstitious respect was paid to the miserable mattress of Vergniaud; and those
who felt neither the force of their patriotism, nor shared in their love for
their country, were taught to pronounce with religious awe the names of these
martyrs of liberty.

Had these lamented patriots known all the foulness of the crimes which the
conspirators were meditating against them, it would have been easy to have
withdrawn themselves from their vengeance, as many of their proscribed
colleagues did. Some, indeed, fell under the murderer's hands, but some have
happily escaped -- Lanjuinais, Isnard, Louvet, and some others, appear again on
the scene. Barbaroux and Buzot, I am told, are alive; and Pethion, who but a
few months before was hailed as the support of his country, may again deserve
the appellation -- but the rest are gone for ever; and there is no one who has
any taste for literature, or feeling for liberty, but will sigh at the
remembrance of Rabaut, Guadet, and Condorcet.

LETTER VII.
Paris. MY DEAR SIR,
SINCE my last letter was written, I have left Switzerland, and returned to
Paris, and have had the unspeakable joy of embracing my family again. I have
not yet mentioned to you (for till the Jacobins were destroyed it was too soon
to relate) that I forsook home to return no more while Robespierre existed; and
Robespierre was then in possession of such established dominion, the spirit of
liberty had so bowed itself beneath the axe of the guillotine, from the
pastoral hills of Normandy to the orange-groves of Nice, from the ensanguined
banks of the Loire to the mourning waters of Vaucluse, that when my mother,
while she gave me her last embrace at parting, told me she should see me no
more, my desponding heart assented to the sad prediction. Upon the fall of the
deputies who were proscribed the 31st of May, and who were well known to have
honored us with their friendship, we became a subject of discussion at the
committee of public safety, and a mandat d'arret would certainly have been
issued against us if we had not already been imprisoned in consequence of the
law against the English. By sharing the general misfortune of our countrymen in
France, we were sheltered from any particular mark of vengeance. We afterward
obtained our liberty by means of the municipality, to whom we were unknown; and
when the murderers had satiated their vengeance in the blood of our friends, my
family had no longer any peculiar danger to fear. But my situation was far
different. During the spring preceding the fatal 31st of May, when the deputies
of the Gironde, and Barrere, passed most of their evenings at our house, I had
not concealed that I was employed in writing some letters which have since been
published in England, in which I had drawn the portrait of the tyrant in those
dark shades of coloring that belonged to his hideous nature; and Barrere, in
whose power my life was placed, was now the lacquey of Robespierre, and the
great inquisitor of the English at Paris. He had now seared his conscience with
crimes, and bathed his hands in the blood of the innocent. What still increased
my danger was, that Barrere could not but recollect, with the consciousness of
his present vileness in our eyes, the political sentiments which he had
expressed in those hours of social confidence, when had he been told that he
should become the accomplice of unrecorded horrors, he would have answered with
the feelings of Hazael, "Is thy servant a dog, that he should do this thing?"
He could not but recollect that on the third of June, the day after the
insurrection, he came to our house with looks disordered and haggard, with eyes
filled with tears, and a mind that seemed bursting with indignant sorrow;
repeatedly declaring that, since the national representation was violated,
liberty was lost; deploring the fate of the Gironde, above all of Vergniaud,
and execrating the Jacobins, and the commune of Paris. A thousand times he
wished that he could transport himself to the foot of his native mountains, the
Pyrenees, bid adieu for ever to the polluted city of Paris, and wander for the
rest of his life amidst that sublime scenery which he described with melancholy
enthusiasm.

It was not a little dangerous to have heard such sentiments from the lips of
one who afterward said boastingly in the convention, "Il n'y a que les morts
qui ne reviennent pas;" -- of one who became the leader of assassinations; and
who, mounting the tribune with the light step of gaiety, dressed up with point
and epigram those atrocious edicts of the committee to which his bleeding
country answered with her groans. Barrere also knew that there was no danger of
my declaring these things at the revolutionary tribunal, since those who were
tried were not permitted to speak: and he had no longer any ties of
acquaintance with us which might have restrained him from such conduct; since
very soon after the 31st of May, upon our refusing to receive some deputies of
the mountain whom he asked leave to introduce to us, he abandoned us altogether.

In the mean time the English newspapers came regularly to the committee of
public safety, in which passages from my letters were frequently transcribed,
and the work mentioned as mine; and those papers were constantly translated
into French for the members of the committee. Two copies of the work had also
reached Paris; and although one was at my request destroyed, the other might,
by means of those domiciliary visits which were so often repeated, have been
thrown into the hands of revolutionary commissaries.

Thus I passed the winter at Paris, with the knife of the guillotine suspended
over me by a frail thread, when a singular opportunity of escape presented
itself, and I fled to Switzerland, with a heart almost broken by the crimes I
had witnessed, and the calamities I had shared. I forsook those who were most
dear to me on earth, with no other consolation than that I left them exposed
only to the common danger of every individual in the country, and relieved from
the cruel apprehensions they had felt on my account.

I proceeded on my journey haunted by the images of gens d'armes, who I fancied
were pursuing me, and with a sort of superstitious persuasion that it was
impossible I should escape. I felt as if some magical spell would chain my feet
at the frontier of France, which seemed to me a boundary that was impassable.
As I approached the frontier the agitation of my spirits increased, and when I
reached Bourg-Libre, the last French post where commissaries were appointed to
examine the passports and those who presented them, my heart sunk within me,
and I tried to resign myself to a fate which seemed to my disordered mind
inevitable. But I found that I had disquieted myself in vain: revolutionary
government had relaxed its iron nerve at this distance from the seat of
tyranny; and the commissaries on the frontiers, after having performed their
office with the mildest urbanity, suffered us to proceed to Basil, which is
only half a league further.

Some tall stakes driven into the earth at certain distances mark the limits of
France and Switzerland. We drove rapidly past them, and were then beyond the
reach of revolutionary government, and the axe of the guillotine.

At Basil, now almost the only social speck on Europe's wide surface, where men
meet for any other purposes than those of mutual destruction, I was in safety:
but I was an exile from my family -- from the only friends I had left -- my
friends in England, to whom I had written immediately on my arrival, in the
fullness of my heart, and with the fond persuasion that they had trembled for my
safety and would rejoice in my deliverance, having (with few exceptions
indeed!) returned no answers to my letters. With what overwhelming sensations
did I receive the tidings of the fall of Robespierre, which was to change the
color of my life, and give peace and consolation to so many millions of my
fellow creatures! After waiting till the struggle maintained by the Jacobins
against the national representation had happily ended, I returned to Paris. On
entering again that polluted city, a thousand fatal recollections rushed upon
my mind, a thousand local sensations overwhelmed my spirit. In driving along
the Rue Honor, the appalling procession of the guillotine arose before my
troubled imagination -- I saw in the vehicles of death the specter of my
murdered friends. The magnificent square of the revolution, with all its gay
buildings, appeared to me clotted with blood, and incumbered with the dead.
Along the silent and deserted streets of the fauxbourg Germain, I saw inscribed
in broad letters upon the gate of every hotel, "propriete nationale," while the
orphans whose fathers and mothers have perished on the scaffold, and who lived
upon the alms of charity, pass in silence by the dwellings which are their
rightful inheritance. -- The red flag waving above the portals of their
forfeited mansions, reminded me of an image of horror in De Foe's history of
the plague at London, where, he says, every house that was infected was marked
with a bloody sign of the cross.

Yet at least we are no longer condemned to despair of finding justice on
earth. Every day is signalized by such acts of retribution, that it seems as if
heaven visibly descended to punish the guilty, while at the same time mercy and
humanity are binding up the wounds of the afflicted, and setting the captive
free. We seem to live in regions of romance. Louvet, Isnard, and others of our
proscribed friends so long entombed in subterraneous dungeons, wandering over
desert mountains, or concealed in the gloom of caverns unvisited by day, now
restored to society and to their country, recount to us the secrets of their
prisonhouse, their "hair-breadth escapes" to which we listen with eager
anxiety, and tremble at their past dangers. -- But I must not thus anticipate.
Let me lead you to the convent in the fauxbourg St. Antoine, to which we were
transferred in order to make room at the Luxembourg for prisoners whom it was
thought expedient to guard more strictly. We were taught by the administrators
of the police to consider our removal as a mark of particular indulgence
toward us, since we should have the privilege of seeing our friends through
the grate, and of walking occasionally in the garden of the convent. Our
countrymen were condemned to remain in the Luxembourg, at which they repined
and remonstrated in vain. Wives were separated from their husbands, daughters
from their fathers; and as far the greater part of the English were in confined
circumstances, and lived by their respective occupations, their resources being
stopped by their imprisonment, the little store of assignats which they had
saved from sequestration they were now forced to divide, and, instead of
sharing their frugal meal together, their expenses were doubled. Many were
reduced to the most cruel difficulties, who had been accustomed to maintain
their families respectably by their industry, and felt that the humiliation of
receiving alms was no slight aggravation of the miseries of captivity I cannot
resist mentioning that Mons. and Madame Du F --, with whose misfortunes and
whose virtues you are acquainted, no sooner heard that our property was
confiscated in France, and that in consequence of an act of parliament our
resources were stopped from England, then they wrote to tell us that their
fortune was at our disposal. Those generous friends, together with a few
others, endeavored to atone for the injustice of their countrymen by the
steadfast fidelity of their attachment. Such moments of trial and of danger are
indeed fitted to be the test of friendship, and call forth the real character:
in those respects, the experience of a year of revolutionary government is
equivalent to that of fifty years of ordinary life.
. That part of the convent which the municipality had allotted for our prison
consisting only of bare walls, we were each of us permitted to return to our
respective houses, in order to provide ourselves with beds, and what furniture
and clothes we thought proper. We were attended thither by an inspector of the
police and guards, together with one of the commissaries of our own section,
who had put the seals on our apartments, and who on removing them examined our
papers, consisting now only of a few poetical scraps which had escaped the
flames. Odes, elegies, and sonnets were instantly bundled up and sent to the
municipality, notwithstanding my assurances that the muses to whom they were
addressed, far from being accomplices in any conspiracy against liberty, had in
all ages been its warmest auxiliaries. With what melancholy sensations did we
re-visit that home from which we were again to be torn in a few hours! How
often did my eyes wander over every object in our apartment! The chairs and
tables, which we found in the same position as we had left them on our first
imprisonment, seemed like mute friends whom it was anguish to leave, and whose
well-known attitudes recalled the comforts of the past. With aching hearts we
were once more led through the streets of Paris to our new prison. This
convent, called Les Anglaises, was still inhabited by twenty-three English
nuns, and, as it was their own property, had not shared the general fate of the
monastic edifices. While the French monks and nuns had for more than a year
before this period been driven from their retreats, the religious houses both
of men and women, which belonged to the English, had been respected, and their
inhabitants left undisturbed. The English or rather Irish monks had, however,
long since thrown off their habits, and conformed as well as they were able to
the new system of opinions. But this was not the case with those religious
sisters, whose enthusiastic attachment to the external signs of their
profession was greater, and their worldly wisdom less. The inhabitants of the
fauxbourg St. Antoine, where they resided, accustomed from infancy to revere
them, to have the wants of the poor supplied at the gate of the convent, and,
while under the former government they were treated with neglect or disdain by
others, to be there received with evangelical humility, felt that their esteem
and veneration for the nuns had survived their own superstitious belief. The
conquerors of the Bastile, the terror of aristocracy, and the vanguard of
revolutions, laying aside their bloody pikes and bayonets, humbled themselves
before these holy sisters, whom a sort of visible sanctity seemed to encompass,
and whom they suffered, notwithstanding the general regulation, to wear the
cherished symbols of their order, the veil and the cross, and seven times a day
to ring the bell for prayers. When we had passed the sentinels who guarded the
convent, the gate was unlocked for our admission by a nun in her habit. She
embraced us with affectionate warmth, and, addressing us in English, begged we
would be comforted, since she and the other nuns who were to have the charge of
us were our countrywomen and our sisters. This soothing sympathy, expressed in
our native language, formed such a contrast to the rude accents of inspectors
of police, that it seemed as if some pitying angel had leaned from heaven to
comfort us. The kindness with which we were received by our amiable
country-women, contributed to reconcile us to our chamber, which might more
properly be called a passage to other rooms, where the glowing tapestry of the
Luxembourg was exchanged for plaistered walls, and where we had to suffer
physical as well as moral evils, the weather being intensely cold, and our
wretched gallery having neither stove nor chimney. One circumstance tended to
make our situation tolerable, which was that true spirit of fraternity that
prevailed in our community, consisting of about forty female prisoners besides
the nuns. Into how happy a region would the world be transformed, if that
mutual forbearance and amity were to be found in it which had power to cheer
even the gloom of a prison!

In addition to the tie of common calamity was the tie of a common country; and
in our present situation this bond of union appeared so strong, that it seemed,
as Dr. Johnson said of family relations, that we were born each others friends.
It was the general study of the whole community to prevent each others wishes.
There were no rich amongst us. The rich had made themselves wings, and vanished
away before the promulgation of the law against the English; but those who had
still any resources left, shared all their little luxuries and indulgencies
with those that had none. The young succored the old, the active served the
infirm, and the gay cheered the dejected. There were indeed among us a few
persons, who born of French parents, having passed their whole lives in France,
and not speaking one word of our native language, seemed astonished to find by
their imprisonment that they were English women. They had no trace or
recollection of that country which in evil hour chanced to give them birth, and
did not easily reconcile themselves to the grated convent, while their French
sisters were enjoying perfect liberty.

When such of the former nobility who were our fellow prisoners at the
Luxembourg heard that we were going to be transferred to the fauxbourg St.
Antoine, they gathered round us to express their fears for our safety in that
frightful quarter of the city. I was persuaded, on the contrary, that we had
much more to fear while shut up in this state prison with themselves, than in
the fauxbourg St. Antoine, the inhabitants of which were chiefly composed of
workmen and mechanics, who in the course of the revolution had acted too much
in union to be led to perpetrate any partial mischief; since those immense
numbers which had power to overthrow government could not be bribed to commit
massacres.

The administrators of the police, when they ordered preparations to be made
for our reception, announced us to the section as being all the wives and
daughters of milords anglois. This was no auspicious introduction: accordingly
our first care was to lay aside the honors and dignities conferred upon us by
the officers of the police, and which certainly would not have been confirmed
by the herald's office. The only distinction we now envied was that of
belonging to the privileged class who gained their bread by the labor of their
hands, and who alone were exempted from the penalties of the law. We would
thankfully have consented to purchase at the price of toil the sweets of
liberty, when bereaved of which the sickening soul grows weary of existence. In
vain we tried to twine the flowers of social pleasure around the bars of our
prison; in vain we "took the viol and the harp, or endeavored to rejoice at
the sound of the organ." That good which alone gives value to every other, was
wanting; and music was discordant, and conversation joyless.

Having repelled the calumnious report of our nobility, the revolutionary
committee of our section, under whose inspection we were placed, and who
visited us in succession every day, began to look upon us with a more
propitious eye; and lest our health should be impaired by confinement, they
unlocked the garden gate, of the key of which since our arrival they had taken
possession, to prevent any attempts to scale the walls, and permitted us to
walk two hours every day accompanied by themselves. During these walks we found
means to convince them that we had been guilty of no other offense against the
state, than that of being born in England; and the common principles of justice
taught these unlettered patriots to lament the severity of our fate, which they
endeavored to soften by every mark of honest kindness.

The visits of the administration of police were far less agreeable than those
of our good commissaries. The first time they came, Brutus, one of their
secretaries, fired with uncontrolable rage at the sight of the nun who unlocked
the gate for his admission, rudely seized her veil, which he was with
difficulty prevented from tearing off her face. This ferocious pagan threw down
the cross which was erected in the garden, and trampled it under foot; and
having poured forth a volley of imprecations against the great bell, which
still hung at the steeple instead of being transformed into a cannon, he left
the dismayed nuns trembling with horror, and hastened to denounce the veils,
the crosses, and the great bell at the municipality. The next morning Pache,
the mayor of Paris, sent orders for the bell to be taken down, the crosses to
be removed, and the nuns to throw off their habits immediately. Nothing could
exceed their despair upon receiving this municipal mandate. The convent
resounded with lamentations, and the veils which were now to be cast off were
bathed with tears.

There was, however, little time to be allowed to the indulgence of unavailing
sorrow. Brutus might return, and it was necessary to proceed to action.
Accordingly, a council of caps was called in the room of the superior; and
after a deliberation, sometimes interrupted by sighs and sometimes by
pleasantry, we all went to work, and in a few hours sweeping trains were
converted into gowns, and flowing veils into bonnets. One charming young nun,
who was a pensive enthusiast, begged that, if it were possible, her bonnet
might shroud her face altogether; while another, whose regards were not
entirely turned away from this world, hinted that she should have no objection
to the decoration of a bow.

My chief consolation during my confinement arose from the society of sister
Theresa, that amiable nun who so much wished to hide a face which nature had
formed to excite love and admiration. It was impossible to converse with her
without feeling that the revolution was a blessing, if it was only for having
prohibited vows which robbed society of those who were formed to be its delight
and ornament. I never met with a human creature who seemed to approach nearer
to the ideas we form of angelic purity, who possessed a more corrected spirit,
or a more tender heart. Devotion was her first delight, her unfailing source of
happiness; and sometimes, instead of regretting her fate, I (...) her feelings,
and was tempted to exclaim with Pope, How happy is the blameless vestal's lot,
The world forgetting, by the world forgot!
Eternal sunshine of the spotless mind,
Each prayer accepted, and each wish resigned;
Labor and rest, that equal periods keep;
Obedient slumbers, that can wake and weep;
Desires composed, affections ever even,
Tears that delight, and sighs that waft to heaven.


We were allowed the melancholy indulgence of seeing our friends through an
iron grate; and there were still among the French some persons whose courageous
friendship, undismayed by all the frowns of power, and the increasing terrors
of revolutionary measures, did not abandon us in our prison. The greater part
of the English who were yet in France, having been established in that country
for years, had acquired some friends who lamented their misfortunes, and who
risqued their own personal safety by making unwearied efforts for their
deliverance. The dress of our visitors was indeed not a little grotesque, the
period being now arrived when the visible signs of patriotism were dirty linen,
pantaloons, uncombed hair, red caps, or black wigs, and all, as ^^salind says,
"denoting a careless disorder." The obsolete term of muscadin, which means a
scented fop, was revived; and every man who had the boldness to appear in a
clean shirt was branded with that appellation, and every woman who wore a hat
was a muscadine; for the period was still remembered when a round cap was the
badge of roture, nor were the aristocratical pretensions of the hat yet buried
in oblivion. It is remarkable enough, that at this period Robespierre always
appeared not only dressed with neatness, but with some degree of elegance, and,
while he called himself the leader of the sans-culottes, never adopted the
costume of his band. His hideous countenance, far from being involved in a
black wig, was decorated with hair carefully arranged, and nicely powdered;
while he endeavored to hide those emotions of his inhuman soul which his eyes
might sometimes have betrayed, beneath a large pair of green spectacles, though
he had no defect in his sight.

At this period one of the most accomplished women that France has produced
perished on the scaffold. This lady was Madame Roland, the wife of the late
minister. On the 31st of May he had fled from his prosecutors, and his wife who
remained was carried to prison. The wits observed on this occasion, that the
body of Roland was missing, but that he had left his soul behind. Madame Roland
was indeed possessed of the most distinguished talents, and a mind highly
cultivated by the study of literature. I have been acquainted with her since I
first came to France, and had always observed in her conversation the most
ardent attachment to liberty, and the most enlarged sentiments of philanthropy;
sentiments which she developed with an eloquence peculiar to herself, with a
flow and power of expression which gave new graces and new energy to the French
language. With these extraordinary endowments of mind she united all the warmth
of a feeling heart, and all the charms of the most elegant manners. She was
tall and well shaped, her air was dignified, and although more than thirty-five
years of age she was still handsome. Her countenance had an expression of
uncommon sweetness, and her full dark eyes beamed with the brightest rays of
intelligence. I visited her in the prison of St. Pelagie, where her soul,
superior to circumstances, retained its accustomed serenity, and she conversed
with the same animated cheerfulness in her little cell as she used to do in the
hotel of the minister. She had provided herself with a few books, and I found
her reading Plutarch. She told me she expected to die; and the look of placid
resignation with which she spoke of it, convinced me that she was prepared to
meet death with a firmness worthy of her exalted character. When I enquired
after her daughter, an only child of thirteen years of age, she burst into
tears; and at the overwhelming recollection of her husband and her child, the
courage of the victim of liberty was lost in the feelings of the wife and the
mother.

Immediately after the murder of the Gironde she was sent to the Conciergerie,
like them to undergo the mockery of a trial, and like them to perish. When
brought before the revolutionary tribunal she preserved the most heroical
firmness, though she was treated with such barbarity, and insulted by questions
so injurious to her honor, that sometimes the tears of indignation started
from her eyes. This celebrated woman, who at the bar of the national convention
had by the commanding graces of her eloquence forced even from her enemies the
tribute of applause and admiration, was now in the hands of vulgar wretches, by
whom her fine talents, far from being appreciated, were not even understood. I
shall transcribe a copy of her defense taken from her own manuscript See
Appendix, No. III.
. With keen regret I must add, that some papers in her justification, which she
sent me from her prison, perhaps with a view that at some happier period, when
the voice of innocence might be heard, I should make them public, I was
compelled to destroy, the night on which I was myself arrested; since, had they
been found in my possession, they would inevitably have involved me in her
fate. Before I took this resolution, which cost me a cruel effort, I employed
every means in my power to preserve those precious memorials, in vain; for I
could find no person who would venture to keep them amidst the terrors of
domiciliary visits, and the certainty, if they were found, of being put to
death as an accomplice of the writer. But her fair fame stands in no need of
such testimonials: her memory is embalmed in the minds of the wise and good, as
one of those glorious martyrs who have sealed with their blood the liberties of
their country. After hearing her sentence, she said, "Vous me jugez digne de
partager le sort des grands hommes que vous avez assassines. Je tacherai de
porter a l'echafaud le courage qu'ils y ont montre You think me worthy, then,
of sharing the fate of those great men whom you have assassinated. I will
endeavor to go to the scaffold with the courage which they displayed."
."

On the day of her trial she dressed herself in white: her long dark hair
flowed loosely to her waist, and her figure would have softened any hearts less
ferocious than those of her judges. On her way to the scaffold she was not only
composed, but sometimes assumed an air of gaiety, in order to encourage a
person who was condemned to die at the same time, but who was not armed with
the same fortitude.

When more than one person is led at the same time to execution, since they can
suffer only in succession, those who are reserved to the last are condemned to
feel multiplied deaths at the sound of the falling instrument, and the sight of
the bloody scaffold. To be the first victim was therefore considered as a
privilege, and had been allowed to Madame Roland as a woman. But when she
observed the dismay of her companion, she said to him, "Allez le premier: que
je vous epargne au moins la douleur de voir color mon sang "Go first; let me
at least spare you the pain of seeing my blood shed."
." She then turned to the executioner, and begged that this sad indulgence
might be granted to her fellow-sufferer. The executioner told her that he had
received orders that she should perish first. "But you cannot, I am sure," said
she with a smile, "refuse the last request of a lady." The executioner complied
with her demand. When she mounted the scaffold, and was tied to the fatal
plank, she lifted up her eyes to the statue of Liberty, near which the
guillotine was placed, and exclaimed, "Ah Liberte, comme on t'a Jouee "Ah
liberty! how have thou been sported with!"
!" The next moment she perished. But her name will be recorded in the annals of
history, as one of those illustrious women whose superior seize seem
fitted to exalt her sex in the scale of being.

She had predicted that her husband would not survive her loss, and her
prediction was fulfilled. Roland, who had concealed himself till this period,
no sooner heard the fate of his wife, whose influence over his mind had often
been a subject of reproach amongst his enemies, than, feeling that life was no
longer worth possessing, he put an end to his existence. His body was found in
a wood near the high-road between Paris and Rouen: the papers which were in his
pocketbook were sent to the committee of general safety, and have never seen
the light. His unhappy daughter found an asylum with an old friend of her
proscribed parents, who had the courage to receive her at a period when it was
imminently dangerous to afford her protection. But the time probably now draws
near when this child will be adopted by her country, and an honorable
provision will be made for her, as a testimony of national gratitude toward
those who gave her birth.

Amidst the extraordinary changes which were passing in France, the convention
now changed time itself, and decreed the new calendar. A report was made on it,
so philosophical and so pleasing to the imagination, that, amidst the
sanguinary measures of those days, it seemed to the oppressed heart what a
solitary spot of fresh verdure appears to the eye amidst the cragginess of
louring rocks, or the gloom of savage deserts. Love of change is natural to
sorrow; and for my own part I felt myself so little obliged to the months of my
former acquaintance, which as they passed over my head had generally brought
successive evils in their train, or served as the anniversaries of some
melancholy epoch, that I was not much displeased to part with them for months
with appellations that bring to the mind images of nature, which in every
aspect has some power of giving pleasure, from Nivo^e the month of snows, to
Floreal the month of flowers. I therefore soon learnt to count the days of my
captivity by the new calendar, which was highly necessary, since, if a
reclamation for liberty had been dated on Monday instead of Primidi, or on
Tuesday to the neglect of Duodi, the police would not only have passed to the
order of the day, but declared the writer suspect. After two months
imprisonment we obtained our liberty, in consequence of the unwearied efforts
which were made for that purpose by a young Frenchman whom my sister has since
married. He was at Rouen in Normandy when the decree against the English
arrived, and a few hours after saw a long procession of coaches pass through
the streets filled with English prisoners, who, just torn from their families
and their homes, were weeping bitterly. Deeply affected by his spectacle, he
flew to Paris with the resolution of obtaining our liberty, or of sharing our
prison. He haunted the municipality every night, attended the levees of^
administrators of police every morning, risqued his own personal safety a
thousand times, and at length, like a true knight, vanquished all obstacles,
and snatched his mistress from captivity. I could not help lamenting, that he
was compelled to make application for our release to Chaumette, the procureur
of the commune, who had been the principal evidence against the deputies of the
Gironde. Nothing could be more cruel than this kind of humiliation -- Prostrate
our friends' dire murderer to implore,
And kiss those hands yet reeking with their gore.


With what delicious emotions did we return to our own habitation! After
passing two months in prison at such a period, we felt the blessedness of home
in its full extent. To range through our own apartments without being pursued
by guards or jailors, to return to domestic comforts and domestic peace,
excited sensations the most delightful. Society had indeed vanished, and home
was but a milder prison, where we lived in voluntary seclusion, trembling at
every knock at the gate, lest it should bring the mandate of a new arrestation;
and afraid to venture out, lest we should be found guilty of an English
physiognomy, by some of the numerous spies of the police, who were continually
prowling through the streets of Paris. These indeed were the only persons we
had to fear; for even at the very moment when the permanent order of the day at
the Jacobins was the crimes of the English, far from receiving the smallest
insult from the people of Paris, they displayed the utmost sympathy for our
situation, and our release from prison seemed to diffuse general satisfaction
through our whole neighborhood.

The prisons became more and more crowded, and increasing numbers were every
day dragged to the scaffold, Suspect was the warrant of imprisonment, and
conspiracy was the watchword of murder. One person was sent to prison, because
aristocracy was written in his countenance; another, because it was said to be
hidden at his heart; many were deprived of liberty, because they were rich;
others, because they were learned; and most who were arrested enquired the
reason in vain.

LETTER VIII.
Paris.
A FEW weeks after our release from prison, Rabaut de St. Etienne was put to
death. He was one of the most enlightened and virtuous men whom the revolution
had called forth, and had acquired general esteem by his conduct as a
legislator, and considerable reputation by his talents as a writer. He was the
president of the famous committee of twelve, which was appointed by the
convention, previously to the 31st of May, to examine into the conspiracies
which threatened its existence, and which, as I have already related, hastened
its partial dissolution. Rabaut, as often as he presented himself to make the
report, was compelled by the interruptions of the conspirators and their agents
to retire from the tribune, until that moment arrived, when he, together with
the members of the commission, and the deputies of the Gironde, were expelled,
or torn from the convention! I saw him on this memorable day (for he took
shelter for a few hours at our house) filled with despair, not so much for the
loss of his own life, which he then considered as inevitable, as for that of
the liberty of his country, now falling under the vilest despotism. He escaped
arrest on the 2d of June, from not having been present at the convention when
the conspirators consummated their crime by means of the military force of
Paris, and concealed himself in the house of a friend, with his brother, one of
the seventy-three deputies who had signed the protest.

They enclosed part of a room for their place of shelter, and built up the wall
with their own hands, placing a book-case before the entrance, so that there
was not the least appearance of concealment. They employed a carpenter, in whom
they had great confidence, to make the door, and the wretch betrayed them.
Rabaut de St. Etienne was immediately brought before the revolutionary tribunal
to have his person identified, for he was now outlawed, which in France is the
sentence of death. He was led to execution; and his wife, a most amiable women,
unable to support the loss of a husband whom she tenderly loved, put an end to
her existence. His brother was taken to the Conciergerie, where he languished
with three other victims, for many months in a subterraneous dungeon; and there
being only one bed allotted for four persons, he lay upon the damp floor, and
contracted such violent disorders, that his life was long despaired of. He has
now taken his seat in the convention. The generous friend and his wife, who had
given the brothers an asylum, were also dragged to prison; and some time after
were condemned, for this noble act of friendship, to perish on the scaffold.

If France, during the unrelenting tyranny of Robespierre, exhibited unexampled
crimes, it was also the scene of extraordinary virtue; of the most affecting
instances of magnanimity and kindness. Of this nature was the conduct of a
young man, who being a prisoner with his brother, happened to be present when
the names of the victims were called over, who were summoned to appear the next
day before the sanguinary tribunal. The young man found the name of his
brother, who at that moment was absent, upon the fatal list. He paused only an
instant to reflect, that the life of the father of a large family was of more
value than his own; he answered the call, surrendered himself to the officer,
and was executed in his brother's stead. A father made the same sacrifice for
his son; for the tribunal was so negligent of forms, that it was not difficult
to deceive its vigilance.

The increasing horrors which every day produced, had at length the effect of
extinguishing in every heart the love of life, that sentiment which clings so
fast to our nature. To die, and to get beyond the reach of oppression, appeared
a privilege; and perhaps nothing appalled the souls of the tyrants so much as
that serenity with which their victims went to execution. The page of history
has held up to the admiration of succeeding ages, those philosophers who have
met death with fortitude. But had they been led among the victims of
Robespierre to execution, they would have found themselves, in this respect,
undistinguished from the crowd. They would have seen persons of each sex, of
all ages, and all conditions, looking upon death with a contempt equal to their
own. Socrates expiring surrounded by his friends, or Seneca and Lucan sinking
gently into death, have perhaps less claim to admiration than those blooming
beauties, who in all the first freshness of youth, in the very spring of life,
submitted to the stroke of the executioner with placid smiles on their
countenances, and looked like angels in their flight to heaven.

Among the victims of the tyrants, the women have been peculiarly distinguished
for their admirable firmness in death. Perhaps this arose from the superior
sensibility which belongs to the female mind, and which made it feel that it
was less terrible to die, than to survive the objects of its tenderness. When
the general who commanded at Longwy on its surrender to the Prussians was
condemned to die, his wife, a beautiful young woman of four-and-twenty years of
age, who heard the sentence pronounced, cried out in a tone of despair, "Vive
le roi!" The inhumane tribunal, instead of attributing her conduct to
distraction, condemned her to die. Her husband, when he was placed in the cart,
was filled with astonishment and anguish when he saw his beloved wife led
toward it. The people, shocked at the spectacle, followed her to the scaffold,
crying, "Elle n'a pas merit la mort." "Mes amiss," said she, "c'est ma fault;
j'ai vo^lu perir avec mon mari "She did not deserve death." -- "My friends, it
is my own fault; I was resolved to perish with my husband."
."

The fury of these implacable monsters seemed directed with peculiar virulence
against that sex, whose weakness man was destined by nature to support. The
scaffold was every day bathed with the blood of women. Some who had been
condemned to die, but had been respited on account of their pregnancy, were
dragged to death immediately after their delivery, in that state of weakness
which savages would have respected. One unfortunate woman, the wife of a
peasant, had been brought to Paris, with nineteen other women of the same
class, and condemned to die with her companions. She heard her sentence without
emotion; but when they came to carry her to execution, and take away the infant
who was hanging at her breast, and receiving that nourishment of which death
was so soon to dry up the source, she rent the air with her cries, with the
strong shriek of instinctive affection, the piercing throes of maternal
tenderness -- But in vain! the infant was torn from the bosom that cherished
it, and the agonies of the unfortunate mother found respite in death.

Fourteen young girls of Verdun, who had danced at a ball given by the
Prussians, were led to the scaffold together, and looked like nymphs adorned
for a festival. Sometimes whole generations were swept away at one moment; and
the tribunal exhibited many a family-piece, which has almost broken the heart
of humanity. Malesherbes, the counsel of Louis XVI. was condemned to die, at
eighty years of age, with his daughter, and son-in-law, his granddaughter and
grandson.

His daughter seemed to have lost sight of every earthly object but her
venerable parent: she embraced him a thousand times on the way to execution;
bathed his face with her tears; and when the minister of death dragged her from
him, forgetting that the next moment put an end to her own, she exclaimed,
"Wretch, are you going to murder my father?"

These proscribed families seemed to find the sweetest source of consolation in
dying together, and to consider the momentary passage which they were going to
make, as so much the less painful, since they should undergo no separation, but
enter at the same instant into another state of existence. A young lady, the
former marchioness of Bois-Berenger, was imprisoned in the Luxembourg with her
whole family. When her father, mother, and younger sister received their act of
accusation, and she found herself alone exempted, she shed a flood of tears,
her heart was overwhelmed with anguish. "You will die without me," she cried;
"I am condemned to survive you; we shall not perish together!" While she
abandoned herself to despair, her act of accusation arrived: a ray of transport
was instantly diffused over her countenance, she flew into the arms of her
parents, and embraced them. "My dear mother," she exclaimed, "we shall die
together!" When the family was transferred to the Conciergerie, she never left
her mother a moment, but watched over her with unwearied tenderness; and while
she tried to sooth her sufferings by her filial endearments, she endeavored to
inspire her with courage by the example of her own heroic fortitude. It was the
picture of a sort of Roman charity. The unfortunate mother was mute, and her
whole soul seemed petrified with horror. She seemed another Niobe. Her
admirable daughter died with the most noble resolution.

Mademoiselle Malesi, her younger sister, when condemned to die, said to her
father with naivete, "Je me serrerai tant contre vous, mon bon pere, vous qui
etes si honnete homme, que Dieu me laissera passer malgre mes peches "I will
cling so fast to you, my dear father, you, who are so good, that God will
suffer me to pass in spite of my transgressions."
."

In the prison of the Force, the men were allowed to breathe the air in a
courtyard separated by a wall from the habitation of the women. A common-sewer
was the only means of communication. At that spot, an unhappy son presented
himself every morning and every night, to enquire after his mother, who was
condemned to die, but reprieved because she was pregnant, and after her
dilivery executed. That pious child, in his early age already the victim of
misfortune, knelt down before the infectious sewer, and, with his mouth placed
upon the hole, poured forth the feelings of his filial tenderness. His younger
brother, a lovely child of three years of age, and who was suffered to remain
with his mother till the last moments, was often placed at the opposite end of
the fewer, and answered for his mother when she was too ill to undertake that
task herself. A person of my acquaintance heard him say, "Mama a moins pleure
cette nuit -- un peu reposee, et te fouhaite le bon jour; c'est Lolo, qui
t'aime bien, qui te dit cela "Mama has not cried so much tonight -- She has
slept a little, and wishes you a good morning: it is Lolo who speaks to you,
who loves you very much."
." At length this unfortunate mother, when going to execution, transmitted to
her son, by the sewer, her long and graceful tresses, as the only inheritance
she had to give. She then bade her infant a last farewell, and was led to the
scaffold, where her husband had perished some months before.

One of the persons most distinguished by their noble contempt of death was
Girey Dupre, with whom I was well acquainted. He was the writer of a paper
called the Patriote Francois, in conjunction with Brissot: he had acquired a
high degree of literary reputation, and maintained his mother, a widow, by the
labors of his pen. He was twenty-four years of age, and his countenance was
one of the most agreeable I ever saw. To these personal advantages he united
the most frank and pleasing manners, and distinguished powers of conversation.
He had defended the deputies of the Gironde with too much energy not to be
involved in their fate, and he was also connected by the ties of friendship
with Brissot. Dupre was forced to fly from his persecutors, and seek refuge at
Bordeaux, where he was seized and brought back in irons to Paris. Far from
being depressed by his approaching fate, the natural gaiety of his disposition
never forsook him a single moment. When interrogated at the tribunal with
respect to his connection with Brissot, he answered only in these words "I knew
Brissot; I attest that he lived like Aristides, and died like Sydney the martyr
of liberty."
, "J'ai connu Brissot; j'atteste qu'il a vecu comme Aristide, et qu'il est mort
comme Sydney martyr de la liberte." He presented himself at the tribunal with
his hair cut off, the collar of his shirt thrown open, and already prepared for
the stroke of the executioner. On his way to the scaffold he saw Robespierre's
mistress at the window of his lodging, with her sister, and some of their
ferocious accomplices. "A bas les tyrans et les dictateurs "Down with tyrants
and Dictators!"
!" cried Dupre, repeating this prophetic exclamation till he lost sight of the
house. While going to execution, he ^ung in a triumphant tone a very popular
patriotic song which he had himself composed, and of which the chorus was
"Plutot la mort que l'esclavage "Rather death than slavery!"
." That cherished sentiment he fondly repeated even to his last moment, and
death left the half-finished sentence (...) his lips:

Claviere, who had been contemporary minister with Roland, and who was
imprisoned in the Conciergerie, upon receiving his act of accusation, saw that
the list of witnesses against him was composed of his most implacable enemies.
"These are assassins," said he to a fellow-prisoner; "I will snatch myself from
their rage." He then repeated these lines of Voltaire, Les criminels tremblans
sont trains au supplice;
Les mortels genereux disposent de leur sort:
and after deliberating with his companion upon the most effectual manner of
striking himself so that the dagger might reach his heart, he retired to his
cell, where he was found a few minutes after breathing his last sigh. Madam
Claviere, upon receiving the tidings of his death, swallowed poison, after
having embraced her children, and regulated her affairs. Notwithstanding his
suicide, the property of Clavierre was confiscated, as if he had been regularly
condemned. A law had lately been passed to construe an act of suicide into a
counter-revolutionary project, when the father of a family who knew that his
life was devoted, had voluntarily put an end to his existence in the hope of
preserving his children from want. Robespierre and his financial agents found
nothing more pressing than to baffle those conspiracies against the revenues of
their government; for confiscation was so evidently the leading motive for the
great mass of their judicial assassinations, that the guillotine, amongst other
numerous titles, was most generally called the "minister of finance." The
tribunal now began to use the language of the orator See Mr. Sheridan's
eloquent speech on Mr. Hastings's trial.
, "to look into their cash account for delinquency, and found the offenders
guilty of so many hundred thousand pounds worth of treason. They now accused by
the multiplication table, tried by the rule of three, and condemned, not by the
sublime institutes of Justinian, but by the unerring rules of Cocker's
arithmetic."

On some occasions the genuine feelings of nature burst forth amidst the
stupefied terror that had frozen every heart. A law had lately passed, obliging
every merchant to inscribe on his door the stock of merchandise in his
warehouse, under the penalty of death. A wine-merchant, whose affairs had
called him hastily into the country, entrusted the business of the inscription
to his son, who from ignorance or negligence, for it was clearly proved that
there existed no intention of fraud, had omitted to affix the declaration in
the precise words of the law. The conscientious jury of the revolutionary
tribunal condemned him to death, presuming on the counter-revolutionary
intention in this case from the act, though they were in general accustomed,
for want of other evidence, to find the act by guessing at the intention. The
innocent prisoner had prepared himself for death, when the minister of justice,
informed of the case, wrote to the convention, demanding a respite. His letter
had not been half read before the hall resounded with the cry of "reprieve,
reprieve!" and fearing that the act of parliament would arrive too late, the
convention, dispensing with the usual formalities, not only sent its officers
and part of the military force, but great numbers of the deputies rushed out to
stop the execution. The officer who received the order first, with which he
flew toward the place of the revolution, told me that on his coming out of the
convention he saw the scaffold reared and the crowd assembled. He had scarcely
reached the first tree of the vista when he saw the fatal knife descend; he
redoubled his speed, but before he got to the end of the walk another head had
fallen: a third person had mounted the scaffold, but the voice of the messenger
was too weak, from the efforts he had made to reach the spot, to be noticed by
the multitude. The fourth had ascended when he gained the place, rushed through
the crowd, called to the executioner, and leaped on the scaffold. The prisoner
had been stripped, his shoulders were bare, and he was already tied to the
plank; when the cry of "reprieve" burst forth. The officer enquired his name,
which the young man told him. "Alas! you are not the person," he replied. The
prisoner submitted calmly to his fate.

The bearer of the reprieve, who is a person of a very benevolent disposition,
declared that he never felt so acute a pang as when he was compelled to turn
away from this unfortunate victim. He hastened, however, to the prison, where
he found the person who was reprieved awaiting the return of the cart and the
executioner, his hair cut and his hands tied, to be led to death at another
part of the city where his house stood. A wife and nine children were deploring
the miserable loss of a husband and a father, when the officer who had brought
the tidings of life to the prisoner, went at his request to carry them to his
distracted family. I need not describe what he related to me of the scene --
your heart will readily fill up the picture.

That class of men who were peculiarly the object of the tyrant's rage-were men
of letters, with respect to whom the jealousy of the rival mingled with the
fury of the oppressor, and against whom his hatred was less implacable for
having opposed his tyranny, than for having eclipsed his eloquence. It is a
curious consideration, that the unexampled crimes of this sanguinary usurper,
and the consequent miseries which have desolated the finest country of Europe,
may perhaps, if traced to their source, be found to arise from the resentment
of a disappointed wit. Robespierre, for the misfortune of humanity, was
persecuted by the most restless desire of distinguishing himself as an orator,
and nature had denied him the power. He and his brother were born at Arras, and
left orphans at an early age. The bishop of Arras had bestowed on them the
advantages of a liberal education. Robespierre distinguished himself by his
application to his first studies, and obtained many literary prizes. At the age
of sixteen, elated by the applause he had received, he fancied himself endowed
with such rare power of genius as would enable him to act a splendid part on
the theater of the world, and his friends indulged the same fond expectation.
He applied to the study of the law, and already in imagination contemplated
himself disputing with the first orators of the age the palm of eloquence.
Experience, however, convinced his friends, and at length himself, that they
had indulged a vain illusion. He discovered no taste or aptitude for the
profession for which he was designed, became weary of study, was checked by the
slightest difficulties; and being found destitute of those talents which were
necessary to his success as a public speaker, his benefactor, after a trial of
sufficient length, refused to support him any longer at a considerable and
fruitless expense at Paris, but ordered him to return to Arras, where in an
humble sphere, better suited to the mediocrity of his abilities, he might
pursue his profession as a lawyer. Robespierre was compelled to return to
Arras; which, after the splendid dreams he had indulged of fame and honors in
the capital, was an humiliation he felt keenly, but which he brooded over in
silence: for he never on any occasion displayed his sensibility to
mortifications, which was in proportion to his excessive vanity, but
concentered within his vindictive soul his disgrace, his resentment, and his
projects of vengeance. From the period of his return to Arras may be dated his
abhorrence of men of talents. From that moment, instead of admiring genius, he
repined at its existence. The same feelings clung to his base and envious
spirit when he had usurped his dictatorial power. He made it pain of death to
be the author of what he called seditious publications, by which means it was
easy for him to involve men of letters in a general proscription. He suppressed
every dramatic piece in which there were any allusions he disliked, or wherein
the picture or history held up to view any feature of his own character. And it
was his plan to abolish theatrical entertainments altogether; for he considered
the applause bestowed on fine poetry as something of which his harangues were
defrauded. He held up men of letters to the people as persons hostile to the
cause of liberty, and incapable of raising themselves to the height of the
revolution; and to make them still greater objects of mistrust and suspicion,
he had long instructed his agents to declaim unceasingly against them as
statesmen; the meaning of which word, in the dictionary of these conspirators,
was counter-revolutionist. Their system had even arrived at some maturity, when
Brissot, in his speech for an appeal to the people on the trial of the late
king, thus pourtrays them:

"Il semble a entendre ces hommes qu'on ne puisse etre a la hauteur de la
revolution, qu'en montant sur des piles de cadavres. Il semble que le secret de
l'homme d'etat soit maintenant le secret des bourreaux. Veut-on fair entendre
le langage de la saine politic? on est soudoye par des puissances ^trangeres.
Veut on parler celui de la raison? c'est de la philosophy toute-pure,
s'ecrie-t-on; et on accoutume la multitude a mepriser sa bienfaitrice, a
diviniser l'ignorance "According to these men, no one can possibly be at the
height of the revolution without mounting on heaps of dead. It seems as if the
knowledge of the statesman was commensurate only with the skill of the
executioner. If we speak a language dictated by sound policy, we are in the pay
of foreign powers. Do we speak that of reason? This is nothing, they exclaim,
but the dreams of philosophy: and thus the multitude are instructed to despise
their benefactress, and deify ignorance."
."

"L'ignorance de la multitude est le secret du pouvoir des agitate^urs comme
des despotes; c'est la le secret de la duree de l'art de calomnie^. Voila
pourquoi ils s'elevent contre la philosophy, qui veut affermir la liberte sur
la raison universelle. Voila pourquoi ils plaisantent sur le systeme
d'^ducation, sur l'utilite des ecoles primaires. Il s'agit bien de tout cela,
c'est de massacres qu'il faut entretenir le peuple. Voila pourquoi ils
supposent, ils accusent sans cesse l'aristocratie du talent. Ah pourquoi le
talent? n'est-il qu'un etre metaphysique? Avec quel doux plaisir ces Vandales
le nivelleroient, si leur faux pourroient l'attaindre "The ignorance of the
multitude is the master-spring of the power of anarchists as well as of
despots: it is by this they keep alive the breath of calumny. Furnished with
this engine, they make war on philosophy, which teaches us that universal
reason is the only basis of liberty; and thus deride every plan of education,
and deny the utility of public schools. These are reveries, say they; the
people must be re-generated with blood. This is the reason why they are
inveighing so continually against the aristocracy of genius. Alas! why has
knowledge only a metaphysical existence? With what complacency would not these
Vandals bring it to their own level, if their destroying scythe could reach it!"
!"

One of the objects of Robespierre's resentment was M. Bitauby, a Prussian,
well known in the literary world by his elegant translation of Homer into
French. He was a member of the academy at Berlin, from which the king of
Prussia ordered his name to be struck out, and the pension with which the great
Frederic had rewarded his merit to be discontinued, on account of his avowed
attachment to the principles of the revolution. M. Bitauby had fixed his
residence at Paris several years previous to that event. I have been acquainted
with him and his lady since my first arrival in France, and have never met with
persons who blended with the wisdom and seriousness of age, so much of all that
is amiable in youth. M. Bitauby, in the first days of the revolution, had been
personally acquainted with Robespierre, who frequently dined at his house; but
he was not long in discovering the sanguinary and fanatical ideas of liberty
which filled the soul of the tyrant, and which so much disgusted him that he
gave up his acquaintance.

Robespierre did not forget the affront, which he had now the power to avenge.
M. Bitauby and his wife were dragged to prison in the beginning of the winter,
where they languished ten months; and deprived of those cares which their age
and their infirmities required, they had almost sunk beneath their weight.
Madame Bitauby's indispositions required medical assistance; but so many
formalities were necessary before a physician could be admitted into the
prison, that, if the disorder was not of a lingering nature, the patient
expired while the police were arranging the ceremonials previous to his relief.
During the last months of Robespierre's usurpation, the prisoners were refused
the consolation of being attended by their own physicians. Professional men
were appointed by the police; and as selections were made among those who were
able to give clearer proofs of their Jacobin principles than of their medical
skill, these revolutionary doctors sometimes robbed the revolutionary jury of
their prey. A few however of these "officers of health" possessed the negative
merit which Dr. Franklin ascribed to old and experienced physicians, " they let
their patients die," for the remedies they administered were of too harmless a
nature to be capable of doing mischief. The physician of the Conciergerie had
as strong a predilection for tisanne as Dr. Sangrado for hot water. Tisanne was
the vivifying draught which was destined to sooth all pains, and heal all
maladies. One day the doctor, after having felt a patient's pulse, said to the
jailor, "He is better this morning." "Yes," answered the jailor, " he is
better, but the person who lay in this bed yesterday is dead." "Eh bien,"
resumed the doctor coolly, "qu'on done toujours la tisanne."

M. and Madame Bitauby had an advocate in their distress whom it was difficult
indeed to resist. This was an old servant of eighty years of age. His figure
was so interesting that Sterne's pencil only could sketch in well; and had
Stern seen him, he would not have failed to draw his portrait. He pleaded me
cause of his master with such pathetic eloquence, that at the revolutionary
committee he sometimes "drew iron tears from Pluto's cheek." But the old man
was eloquent in vain, and was sinking with despair into the grave when the
revolution of the 9th of Thermidor restored his master and mistress of liberty.

The fate of Bo^cheu, author of a poem called "The Months," excited particular
sympathy. He passed his time in prison, in educating one of his children, and
this employment seemed to charm away his cares. The day she received his act of
accusation, knowing well the fate that awaited him, he sent his son home;
giving him his portrait, which a painter who was his fellow-prisoner had drawn,
and which he ordered child to give his mother. Below the picture he had written
the following lines: Ne vous etomiez pas, objets charmans et doux,
Si quelqu'air de tri^tesse ob^c^^cit mon visage;
Lo^squ'un savant crayon ^^'^^inoit cet image,
On dressoit l'^chafaud, et je penso^s a vous.
Loved objects, cease to wonder when ye trace
The melancholy air that clouds my face;
Ah! while the paint^r's skill this image drew,
They reared the scaffold, and I thought of you!


Lavoisier, the celebrated chemist, was put to death with the other farmers
general. He requested a fortnight's respite to enable him to complete a
philosophical experiment. The Vandals had no time to pause in their career of
blood for the pursuits of philosophy, and sent him away, observing that the
republic had no longer any need of chemists. Chamfort, a member of the French
academy, and an enthusiastic advocate for the revolution, with feelings too
keen to bear the horrors by which so noble a cause had been stained, hid them
from his sight by a voluntary death. La Harp was thrown into prison, and was
destined to perish on the scaffold. The author of the Travels of the younger
Anacharsis, notwithstanding his advanced age, was the object of continual
persecution. Florian, who was himself imprisoned, and condemned to see his
dearest friends perish, had not sufficient fortitude to sustain such trials.
His charming pen had displayed the most soothing images of happiness and
virtue; and when he beheld around him only misery and crimes, his disordered
imagination hastened his death. Vicq d'Azyr died of a broken heart. Bailly, the
first mayor of Paris, whose astronomical researches have placed him in the
highest rank of science, was murdered with circumstances of particular
aggravation. He was to have been executed in the Champ de Mars; but from the
caprice of the sanguinary mob, he was compelled to wait two or three hours at
the place of execution, while the scaffold was removed to a field adjoining,
where he stood drenched in rain, in the midst of winter, and, which was more
difficult to bear than the "pelting of the pitiless storm," exposed to the
insults and injuries of an execrable set of wretches who usually attended these
horrid spectacles. The red fl^g was burned before his eyes, and he was
compelled to set fire to the pile that consumed it, while the ruffians plunged
his head into the smoke for their farther amusement. He submitted to all that
was inflicted on him with the serenity of a philosopher, and only requested
with mildness, that his sufferings might be terminated. One of the barbarians
by whom he was tormented, said to him in a tone of savage mockery, "Tu
trembles, Bailly." "Mon ami, c'est de froid "You tremble, Bailly." -- "It is
with cold, my friend."
," replied the sage. At length, after having made him drink the cup of
bitterness to the very dregs, they permitted him to die.

LETTER IX.
ONE of the particular objects of Robespierre's rage was general Miranda, a
native of Peru, well known in Europe by that philanthropic spirit of adventure
which led him to pass many years in traveling through various parts of the
globe, with the view of being useful to his own country; which, since the
period of the sanguinary Spanish conquests, has groaned beneath the yoke of the
most abject slavery. If this philosophical enthusiast should not accomplish the
purpose for which he undertook his crusade of patriotism, it has at least
enabled him to furnish his mind with such acquisitions of knowledge, such
stores of observation, and such a distinguished taste for the fine arts, as
render his society in the highest degree instructive and delightful; while with
an understanding of the first order he unites that perfect simplicity of
manners which usually belongs to great minds Dumourier, in his Memoirs, while
he does justice to Miranda's talents, complains of his " haughtiness and
hardness of character." Miranda has certainly more of the sedate dignity of a
Spaniard, than the brisk air of a Frenchman; and if that elevation of soul
which scorns to make any composition with principles be haughtiness, and that
inflexibility which steadfastly pursues the straight path of integrity and
honor be hardness of character, Dumourier is in the right.
.

When the Prussians were on their march toward Paris, Miranda accepted a
command in the army of Dumourier, who was then retreating before them. After
the defeat of the Prussians, and on the entrance of the republican army into
the Low Countries, Miranda added to the high reputation he had already acquired
through Europe, by the gallant manner in which he executed that part of the
conquest of those countries which was allotted him. When Dumourier came to
Paris, the command of the whole army devolved on Miranda; and when the campaign
began, and Dumourier was invading Holland, the attack of Maestricht, and the
army on the Meuse, were committed to his care. The successful march of the
Austrians on Aix-la-Chapelle obliged him to raise the siege; and he was joined
soon after by Dumourier, who had left his conquest in Holland to repair the
misfortunes of the army commanded by Valence. The ill humor which Dumourier
had brought with him from Paris, where the Jacobins had already begun their
system of misrule and anarchy, was not lessened by ill success; and goaded by
the pang of indignation and of disappointed ambition, he formed the criminal
design of betraying the republic. This spirit of rebellion found the most
inflexible opposition from Miranda, whose personal friendship for Dumourier did
not lead him to forget that his first duty was toward that country which had
entrusted him with its defense. The event of the battle of Nerwinden, fought
against the repeated advice of Miranda, and in which this general lost a
considerable part of the troops he commanded, having been forced to sustain the
whole shock of the enemy, afforded Dumourier the means of getting rid of an
opponent so hostile to his designs; and Miranda was sent by the commissaries La
Croix and Danton, without being previously heard by them, to give an account of
his conduct at the bar of the convention. He underwent the most strict
examination before the committees of war and general safety, who declared, that
not the slightest doubt remained of his military conduct, or his fidelity to
the republic. But this report was stifled by the intrigues of La Croix, Danton,
and others of their party; and he was sent, in defiance of all decency, to the
revolutionary tribunal.

His trial took place in the beginning of May, before justice had for ever fled
from that sanguinary court. The hour of carnage was not yet arrived: the
tribunal, though from its institution terrible, and cruel in its forms, which
placed the life of the accused upon a casting voice, had not yet become a
shrine consecrated to infernal deities, and reeking with the daily sacrifice of
human victims. The voice of innocence was not yet stifled by the savage
vociferations of monsters thirsting for its blood; and Miranda pleaded his
cause with such sublime energy, as proved that his powers as an orator were not
inferior to his talents as a general. He covered himself with glory, and his
enemies with confusion; and overstepping the usual forms, the jury made their
verdict the vehicle of eulogium upon his conduct.

After his trial he retired to a small distance from Paris, where he lived in
literary leisure, amidst his books and paintings, and where I visited him
frequently. His repose was however of short duration. He was too distinguished
a character to escape the tyranny which the conspiracy of the 31st of May had
established; and after having been persecuted by domiciliary visits on various
pretenses, he was again thrown into prison, charged with being the chief
defender and abettor of the Gironde and Girondism. The real cause of
Robespierre's animosity toward him is not well known, but may be resolved into
that general hatred which he bore toward all men of talents; and as he knew
that the eminent abilities of Miranda were improved by advantages which had
fallen to the lot of few, he might naturally think that the existence of such a
man was dangerous to his own.

Twice, in the zenith of his tyranny, he accused Miranda to his subjects the
Jacobins; and when we heard that the name of Miranda had issued from those
pestilential lips, we considered his murder as inevitable. One obstacle was
found sufficient to shield him from the tyrant's vengeance; and this was a
feeling of shame which lurked in the mind of the public accuser, who, covered
as he was with blood, did not dare to meet the look of Miranda, and bring
forward a second accusation, after having once joined the general voice of
applause upon his acquittal. This sentiment led Fouquier Tainville to put off
the second trial required by Robespierre, till the tyrant would hear of delay
and excuses no more; and himself inscribed Miranda's name on the fatal list for
the twelfth of Thermidor. The revolution of the tenth restored him to liberty.

Miranda submitted to an imprisonment of eighteen months, under the continual
expectation of death, with that philosophical strength of mind which he
possesses in a most emiment degree. He had indeed determined not to be dragged
to the guillotine, and had therefore provided himself with poison. Thus armed,
he sent for a considerable number of books from his library, and placed them in
his little chamber, of which he found means to keep the sole possession. Here
he told me, that he endeavored to forget his present situation in the study of
history and science. He tried to consider himself as a passenger on a long
voyage, who had to fill up the vacuity of time with the researches of
knowledge, and was alike prepared to perish or to reach the shore. During his
long confinement, the only person with whom he associated was the former
marquis Achille Du Chatelet, who possessed all the accomplishments of
literature, and whom the tyrants had dragged to prison while the wounds were
yet unhealed which he had received in defending his country. He and Miranda
used to meet every evening, take their tea together, and talk over the books
they had read during the day, avoiding as much as possible the subject of
politics, which affected them too deeply, nor could Du Chatalet bear to
pronounce the names of the decemvirs. Tidings, however, of the horrible scenes
which were passing in Paris reached him in the gloom of his prison; and the
emotions of his mind, together with the irritation of his wound, produced a
fever. Miranda attended him day and night alternately with another prisoner;
and he was recovering from this disorder, when he heard that some of his
dearest friends had perished on the scaffold. The next morning, when Miranda
went to his room to relieve a fellow-prisoner who had watched him during the
night, he observed that his whole face was violently inflamed. He enquired
eagerly what was the matter. Du Chatelet pressed his hand, and bade him
farewell. This unfortunate young man, unable to support the shock occasioned by
the murder of his friends, and grown weary of existence, resolved not to wait
till the assassins called him to the scaffold, but had recourse to poison, with
which he had provided himself. A physician had furnished Vergniaud, Du
Chatelet, and several other martyrs to their country, with this lethean remedy,
which they called The pill of liberty.
la pillule de la liberte. A note was found in Du Chatelet's chamber, in which
he declared that he had sold his books and all that belonged to him in the
prison, to Miranda. This was the only mode in which he could leave his effects
to his friend, or prevent their being seized by the nation.

Miranda found a memorial among his papers, which he has put into my hands,
where he traces the history of his political life. It contains an honorable
list of the sacrifices he had made, the labors he had achieved, and the
perils he had encountered in the public cause, from the period when in 1789 he
contributed in the baillage of Perronne to the union of the nobles with the
third estate, till the middle of the year 1793; when, although his wounds were
not closed, he desired leave to return to the army, and obtained the command of
the district of Air. But he soon found that his infirmities did not permit him
to fulfill the duties of his station: -- he was obliged to return; and though
his fortune was now lost, he refused to accept his pay as a general officer,
since he was no longer able to serve his country. At the very moment when he
was preparing to return home, he was arrested by the revolutionary committee at
Air, as a measure of " general safety," and conducted with guards to the
committee of general safety of the convention, who, with the same tender regard
for public security, instead of declaring that this gallant young officer had
merited well of his country, sent him to the prison of the Force, and refused
to let his servant enter for a few minutes in the day to dress his wound. His
prison six months after became his grave, and he was placed beyond the reach of
tyranny. Miranda was then left to absolute solitude; but he had still the
courage to live, and at length the hour of deliverance arrived.

You will perhaps think, dear sir, that the sketch which I have given you of
public and private calamity is sufficiently gloomy. But, alas! the scene
blackens as we advance, and wears a deeper horror. We have now arrived at that
period when the tyrant, grown bolder by success, intoxicated with power, and
throwing aside all regard even to forms, reaching the climax of his crimes, and
accelerated the moment of his fall. You will view him and the agents of his
iniquity no longer satisfied with victims in detail: they now murder in mass,
and, in the words of Racine, "Lavent dans le sang leurs bras ensanglantes."


I shall in the course of a fortnight send you a history of the ast scenes of
this foul tragedy, and give you such a detail; as can only be learnt on the
spot, of the events which produced the revolution of the 9th of Thermidor, and
of the incidents which on that memorable night determined the fate of the
French republic.

In the mean time, you will not exclaim as the Roman poet did with respect to
religion, "Of so many evils could Liberty have been the cause!" It is, alas!
the condition of our uninstructed nature, that nations like individuals should
acquire wisdom only in the school of experience; and though the page of
history, which according to Lord Boling-broke is "philosophy teaching by
example," be open before us, we are too presumptuous, or too careless, to heed
or apply the lesson. I need not make use of any reasoning to convince you that
Liberty is innocent of the outrages committed under its borrowed sanction; for
though we might from some momentary impulse blaspheme its name, as Lucretius
did that of religion, we must be persuaded that neither religion nor liberty is
chargeable with the crimes committed by tyranny or superstition. As no weeds
are more pernicious than those which arise in that soil from which good fruit
alone should have sprung, so no crimes have exceeded those which the tyrant and
the fanatic have committed in the name of Freedom, the guardian angel of the
happiness of mankind, and in that of the Being "whose tender mercies are over
all his works."

I must not conclude without informing you, that the dark picture which you
have been contemplating is relieved by a bright and soothing perspective. The
past seems like one of those frightful dreams which presents to the disturbed
spirit phantoms of undescribable horror, and "deeds without a name;" awakened
from which, we hail with rapture the cheering beams of the morning, and
anticipate the meridian luster of the day. The 9th of Th^^midor has established
the republic; and nothing now remains but to arrange its for^^s. Its internal
situation will no more offer a hideous contrast to its external victories. The
guilty commune of Paris exists no longer; the den of the Jacobins is closed;
and the whole nation, roused into a sense of its danger by the terrible lesson
it has been taught, can be oppressed no more. There scarcely exists a family or
an individual in France, that has not been bereaved by tyranny of some dear
relation, some chosen friend, who seems from the grave to call upon them with a
warning voice to watch over the liberties of their country. The love of public
virtue in the people of France is now blended with all the sympathies and
affections of their natures: it is heard in the sighs of general mourning; it
speaks in the tears of the widow and the orphan; and is not only imprinted by
every argument that can render it sacred and durable on the understanding, but
clings to every feeling of the heart.

LETTER X.
Paris. MY DEAR SIR,
WHILE far along the moral horizon of France the tempest became every hour more
black and turbulent, the spring, earlier and more profuse of graces than in the
climate of England, arose in its unsullied freshness, and formed a contrast at
which humanity sickened. The lovely environs of Paris are not, like those of
London, so encumbered with houses and buildings that you must travel ten or
twelve miles from town to find the country, but, the moment you have passed the
barriers of the city, present you with all the charming variety of vine-clad
hills, and fields, and woods, and lawns. Immediately after our release from
prison we quitted our apartments in the center of the town, and tried to
shelter ourselves from observation in an habitation situated in the most remote
part of the fauxbourg Germain. From thence a few minutes walk led us to the
country. But we no longer dared, as we had done the preceding year, to forget
awhile the horrors of our situation by wandering occasionally amidst the noble
parks of St. Cloud, the wild woods of Meudon, or the elegant gardens of
Bellevue, all within an hour's ride of Paris. Those seats, once the residence
of fallen royalty, were now haunted by vulgar despots, by revolutionary
commissaries, by spies of the police, and sometimes by the sanguinary decemvirs
themselves. Often they held their festive orgies in those scenes of beauty,
where they dared to cast their polluting glance on nature, and tread with
profane steps her hallowed recesses. Even the revolutionary jury used sometimes
on a decadi, the only day of suspension from their work of death, to go to
Marly or Versailles; and, steeped as they were to the very lips in blood,
without being haunted by the mangled specter of those whom they had murdered
the preceding day, they saw nature in her most benign aspect, pleading the
cause of humanity and mercy, and returned to feast upon the groans of those
whom they were to murder on the morrow.

Those regions of decorated beauty being now forbidden ground, we confined our
walks to some pasturage lands near the town, which were interspersed with a few
scattered hamlets, and skirted by hills, and were so unfrequented, that we
heard no sounds except the sheep-bell, and the nightingales, and saw no human
figure but an old peasant with a white beard, who together with a large black
dog took care of the flock. It was in these walks that the soul, which the
scenes of Paris petrified with terror, melted at the view of the soothing
landscape, and that the eye was lifted up to heaven with tears of resignation
mingled with hope. I have no words to paint the strong feeling of reluctance
with which I always returned from our walks to Paris, that den of carnage, that
slaughterhouse of man. How I envied the peasant his lonely hut! for I had now
almost lost the idea of social happiness. My disturbed imagination divided the
communities of men but into two classes, the oppressor and the oppressed; and
peace seemed only to exist with solitude.

On the 15th of Germinal (the beginning of April,) the committee of public
safety, or rather of public extermination, caused a law to be passed, ordering
all the former nobility and strangers to leave Paris within ten days, under the
penalty of being put out of the law; which meant, that if found in Paris after
that period, they were to be led to the scaffold without a trial, as soon as
their persons were identified. This law, to which my family and myself were
subject, was a part of the plan of general proscription that Robespierre had
formed against nobles and foreigners; and which he was now impatient to put in
force. We were ordered by the decree, after choosing the place of our retreat,
to present ourselves at the revolutionary committee of our respective sections,
who delivered to each of us not a passport, but what was called a pass, on
which was written a declaration that we left Paris in conformity to the law of
the 26th of Germinal. Thus we were condemned to wander into the country with
this pass, which was the mark of Cain upon our foreheads, and which under pain
of imprisonment we were to deposit at the municipality where we bent our
course; and we were also condemned to present ourselves every twenty-four hours
before the municipality, and inscribe our names on a list, which was to be
dispatched every decade to the committee of public safety. And lest the country
municipalities should mistake the intentions of the committee, and treat
particular individuals with lenity upon their producing testimonies of their
attachment to the cause of the revolution, these devoted victims were ordered
by a decree to burn every certificate of civism of which they might happen to
be in possession. We chose for the place of our retreat a little village half a
mile distant from Marly, and with hearts overwhelmed with anguish bade adieu to
my sister, who, being married to a Frenchman, was exempted from the law; and we
were once more driven from our home, not to return under the penalty of death.
Our neighbors came weeping to our gate to take leave of us; and the poor, who
were the only class which now dared to utter a complaint, murmured loudly at
the injustice of the decree. We were obliged to pass the square of the
revolution, where we saw the guillotine erected, the crowd assembled for the
bloody tragedy, and the gens d'armes on horseback, followed by victims who were
to be sacrificed, entering the square. Such was the daily spectacle which had
succeeded the painted shows, the itinerant theaters, the mountebank, the dance,
the song, the shifting scenes of harmless gaiety, which used to attract the
cheerful crowd as they passed from the Thuilleries to the Champs Elisees.

When we reached the barrier we were stopped by a concourse of carriages filled
with former nobles, and were obliged to wait till our passes were examined in
our turn. The procession at the gate was singular and affecting. Most of the
fugitives having, like ourselves, deferred their departure till the last day,
and it being the forfeiture of our heads to be found in Paris the day
following, the demand for carriages was so great, and the price exacted by
those who let them out, and who knew the urgency of the case, so exorbitant,
that a coach or chariot was a luxury which fell only to the lot of a favored
few. The greater number were furnished with cabriolets, which seemed from their
tottering condition somewhat emblematical of decayed nobility; and many who
found even these crazy vehicles too costly, journeyed in the carts which
transported their furniture, seated upon the chairs they were conveying to
their new abodes.

We reached our little dwelling at the hour of sunset. The hills were fringed
with clouds, which still reflected the fading colors of the day; the woods
were in deep shadow; a soft veil was thrown over nature, and objects
indistinctly seen, were decorated by imagination with those graces which were
most congenial to the feelings of the moment. The air was full of delicious
fragrance, and the stillness of the scene was only disturbed by sounds the most
soothing in nature, the soft rustling of the leaves, or the plaintive notes of
the wood-pigeon. The tears which the spectacle of the guillotine had petrified
with horror, now flowed again with melancholy luxury. Our habitation was
situated within a few paces of the noble park of Marly; and the deserted alleys
overgrown with long grass -- the encumbering fragments of rock, over which once
fell the mimic cascades, whose streams no longer murmur -- the piles of marble
which once formed the bed of crystal basins -- the scattered machinery of the
jets d'eaux, whose sources are dried -- the fallen statues -- the defaced
symbols of feudality -- the weeds springing between the stone steps of the
ascent to the deserted palace -- the cobwebbed windows of the gay pavillions,
were all in union with that pensiveness of mind which our present circumstances
naturally excited. And here, where we could see nothing of Paris but the
distant dome of the Pantheon, we should have been less unhappy, if we had not
too well known that the committee of public safety had not sent nobles and
foreigners into the country to enjoy the freshness of rural gales, or the
beauty of the opening spring, but as the first step toward a general
proscription; and as we passed every evening through the park of Marly, in
order to appear before the municipality, that appalling idea "breathed a
browner horror over the woods." We were again rescued from the general danger
by the two benevolent commissaries of the revolutionary committee of our
section, who when they came to conduct us to prison had treated us with so much
gentleness, who had afterward reclaimed us of the administration of police,
and who now, unsolicited and even unasked, went to the committee of public
safety, declared they would answer for us with their lives, and caused us to be
put into requisition; a form which enabled us to return to Paris, and thus
snatched us from the class of the suspected and the proscribed. To their
humanity we probably owe our existence; and I shall ever recollect with
gratitude that noble courage which led them amidst the cruel impulse of
revolutionary government, the movement of which was accelerated as it went on,
to pause and succor the unfortunate. I have the satisfaction of adding, that
those commissaries are now at liberty on account of their general good conduct,
while scarcely any other members of revolutionary committees have escaped
imprisonment. Our benefactors have indeed a right to this honorable exception;
who, although appointed the immediate agents of terror, the order of the day,
regulated their actions by the eternal code of humanity.

A short time before our departure from Paris, the guillotine, upon which so
many innocent victims had been sacrificed, for once streamed with the blood of
the guilty: " The guilty only were of life bereft:
" Alas! the guilty only then were left!"
LUCAN's PHARSALIA.

One of the secrets of Robespierre's government was to employ as the
step-ladders of his ambition men whose characters were marked with opprobrium,
or stained with crimes. Such men were best suited to his purpose; since they
were not likely to pause in the execution of his orders, depending upon his
favor, perhaps, for shelter from legal punishment; and when they had fulfilled
the part he allotted them, and he no longer stood in need of their agency, he
had sufficient address to lead them to make some extravagant proposition, which
he denominated ultra-revolutionary, and for which he sent them to the scaffold,
even with the approbation of the public. Such was the sentiment excited by the
execution of Hebert, one of the chiefs of the municipality of Paris, whose
arrest by the commission of twelve, previously to the thirty-first of May, had
served the conspirators as the signal for ringing that fatal tocsin which was
the knell of liberty. Hebert was the man who upon the trial of Marie Antoinette
outraged all the feelings of nature, by an accusation which wrung from her
bursting heart that affecting appeal to every mother who was present. It was he
who loaded her with the indignity of gross abuse, and poured the bitterness of
insult into the cup of death. He soon after acted again at the revolutionary
tribunal the part of evidence against the twenty-one; those virtuous patriots,
the Sidneys and the Russels of their country, whose martyrdom has been avenged,
not as they wished, but as they predicted, by scenes of universal desolation
and despair.

Hebert was commonly called Pere du Chesne, on account of a daily paper he
published, bearing that title. In this paper he professed to tread in the steps
of Marat, and indeed he proved himself worthy to be his lineal successor. He
had the same insatiable thirst of blood; he demanded with the same vehemence
the heads of all conspirators, nobles, bankers, writers and merchants, the
faction of federalists, and the faction of Pit and Cobourg. Those mild demands
were breathed in the language of the lowest vulgar: every line was enforced by
an oath, and every period rounded by an imprecation. Camille Desmoulins, after
drawing the character of this journal, concluded by saying that it was written
"pour fair les delices de Coblentz, et le seul espoir de Pit To form the
delight of Coblentz, and the only hope of Pit.
." Such was Hebert! who having succeeded with his colleagues of the
municipality in accomplishing what they called the revolution of the 31st of
May, felt with indignation that his revolutionary genius was forced to bend
before the genius of Robespierre, and determined to immortalize the month of
Ventose by a new revolution.

They had hitherto met with such splendid success in insurrection, that they
began to think it was no very difficult enterprise, now that the routine was
known. It was but to ring the tocsin, beat the generale, put the city under
arms, take the direction of the military force, overthrow the committee of
public safety, and seize the reins of government. The ideas of March, however,
proved as fatal to the dominion of the red cap, as they had heretofore done to
that of the purple robe. In vain Hebert mounted the tribune at the Cordeliers,
asserted that tyranny existed, and caused a black veil to be thrown over the
table of the rights of man -- in vain the section of Marat declared itself in
insurrection: the other sections of Paris were of opinion, that to go from the
committee of public safety to the municipality was flying from Scylla to
Charybdis; and though all France groaned under the tyranny of the committee,
there was little hope that the wounds of the bleeding country would be healed
by men who were the leaders of massacre, and the preachers of the agrarian law.
The Parisians therefore applauded the decree which sent Hebert and twenty of
his co-adjutors in revolutionary crimes to that sanguinary tribunal, which,
after a mockery of trial, ordered them to execution, "and bade the cruel feel
the pains they gave." There appeared so much of retribution in the
circumstances that attended the death of Hebert and his colleagues, that it
seemed as if Heaven were visibly stretching forth its arm to punish the guilty.
For it is remarkable enough, that they were not tried for any of the multiplied
crimes they had committed, but for having asserted that tyranny existed: a
sacred truth which every heart swelled to acknowledge, though no lips but
theirs had dared to give it utterance. -- The behavior of Hebert and his
associates upon the approach of death was far different from that of the
innocent sufferers who had consciences void of reproach. Along those
subterraneous galleries where all the light which entered was "darkness
visible," terrific phantoms covered with blood seemed to pursue their steps,
and with menacing looks prepare to drag them to abysses of deeper horror: they
fancied they saw the headless trunks of murdered victims encumbering the
ground; they heard human groans and shrieks founding hollow through the vaulted
passages; while the knife of the guillotine, like Macbeth's aerial dagger, hung
suspended before their affrighted imagination. Anacharsis Clootz, a Prussian
baron and a member of the national convention, known by the title which he
conferred upon himself, of orator of the human race, suffered death with this
band of ruffians. He was also a preacher of blood; but, cruelty being the order
of the day, what most distinguished him from others was not the ferocity of his
principles, but the chimeras of his imagination. His publications which were
numerous, were always dated " Paris, chef lieu du globe Paris, capital of the
globe.
;" and he seriously proposed, that as soon as all the potentates of the earth
were overthrown, an event of which he had a bird's eye view from the beginning
of the French revolution, the people of every nation should send their
representatives to Paris, who should be honored with seats in the national
assembly of France, and there form an universal republic, of which France
should be the center, and the other kingdoms of the world the departments. He
proposed for instance, that as soon as the deputies of the English nation
arrived, England should take the name of le departement de la Tamise The
department of the Thames.
.

Soon after the memorable 10th of August, Anacharsis marched to the bar of the
legislative assembly at the head of a number of men he had hired to represent
the natives of every quarter of the globe; and who were clad in the respective
dresses of the people they personated. This embassy of the human race declared,
by the organ of their common orator Anacharsis, their admiration of the French
republic, and their attachment to its cause. The conclusion of this drama
however was less splendid than the opening scene at the bar of the convention;
for the next morning the door of Anacharsis was beset with Italians, Germans,
Swedes, Poles, Jews, Turks and Russians, clamorously demanding to be paid: but
none were more noisy in their vociferations than a Calmuck Tartar, and an
Indian of the banks of the Ohio, who menaced their orator with the vengeance of
the whole fauxbourg of St. Antoine, if he refused to pay them for the loss of
their day's labor, and the hire of their dresses. Anacharsis, after much
altercation, came to a compromise with the deputation of the human race, who
departed not very well satisfied with their Champion. -- Clootz met death with
more firmness than might have been expected from his general character, and his
atheistical principles. Hebert and his colleagues passed their time, when
together, like the fallen spirits in Milton, in mutual accusation, till Clootz
with a loud voice recited to them those well known lines: Je revois cette nuit,
que de mal consume,
Cote a cote d'un gueux on m'avoit inhume;
Et que, bless pour moi d'un pareil voi^inage,
En mort de qualite je lui tins ce langage.


This citation had the effect he wished: they became reconciled to each other;
and Clootz, whose only apprehension was lest any of them should die in
religious belief, preached atheism to them till their last sigh.

The death of Hebert was the signal for throwing off the hideous masquerade of
sansculottism, in which all the world had been arrayed during the winter, in
submissive deference to his interpretation of equality. Immediately after his
execution, the scene suddenly changed: black wigs, red caps, sailor's jackets,
and pantaloons were cast aside; and the eye was refreshed with the sight of
combed locks, clean linen, and decent apparel; -- while the women, who for some
months had reluctantly bound up their hair beneath the round cap of the
peasant, now unfolded their tresses, perfumed and powdered, to the vernal
gales, and decorated in whatever manner they thought proper, provided the
national cockade formed one of their ornaments.

LETTER XI.
THE execution of Hebert and his colleagues was soon followed by that of a
considerable number of the mountain deputies, among whom were Danton and
Camille Desmoulins, names not unknown to fame in the annals of the revolution.
Danton had acted a distinguished part on the political theater, before
Robespierre had been heard of; and Camille Desmoulins, on the day preceding the
taking of the Bastille, had the glory of being the first man in France who
placed the national cockade in his hat, and called upon his fellow-citizens to
shake off the fetters of despotism. And surely it was glorious to be a leader
of the revolution; for, although the sun of liberty, like the orb of day when
seen through opposing mists, has been turned into blood, its dawning beams were
radiant, and it will again shake off the foul vapors that have hung around it,
and spread that insul^ied light which exhilarates all nature.

Robespierre was not deterred from marking Danton and Camille Desmoulins as his
victims, by the consideration that Danton had saved him at the moment when
Louvet's representation of his crimes on the 2d of September had so strongly
excited the indignation of the convention, that a decree of accusation was on
the point of being hurled against him; and that Camille Desmoulins had been his
school-fellow and his friend. But the tyrant felt that Danton was too "near the
throne;" and Camille Desmoulins had awakened all his fury by an appeal which he
made to the people, in a paper called the "Old Cordelier," and which found an
echo in every heart. The excessive severity of the revolutionary law against
the suspected had excited Desmoulin's indignation; and in a happy parallel
between the capricious tyrannies of the Roman emperors and those of the
committees of government See Appendix, No. IV.
, he expanded the glowing precision of Tacitus into charges so extremely
ludicrous, that they honored lord Shaftesbury's axiom, that ridicule is the
test of truth. This publication made some atonement to humanity for the
mischiefs which his former writing, had produced; above all, that cruel
pleasantry upon the party of the Gironde, on which their act of accusation was
founded. The atonement came too late; tyranny was established; and Camille
Desmoulins perished, to use his own words, "for having shed one tear over the
unhappy."

Several other deputies suffered at the same time; and Camille Desmoulins
observed when he was going to the scaffold, "Robespierre fait des coups perces
de la convention," alluding to the mode of cutting down the forests in France
by portions, which are marked to be hewn at certain periods. The person most
regretted among the deputies who now perished was Philipeaux, who having been
sent on a mission to the Vendee, made known at his return the horrors of which
he had been a witness, and was dragged to the scaffold for having dared to lift
up the veil which the conspirators had thrown over their crimes. Fabre
d'Eglantine, who had been one of the founders of the revolutionary government
and auxiliary of Robespierre, perished unlamented. He possessed fine talents
for literature, and had written a celebrated comedy, entitled Philinthe. It was
observed, that he had carried the spirit of intrigue which prevailed in his
comedy into the part he had acted as legislator. The love of fame, the
prevailing passion of authors, he felt strong in death; and all his thoughts
seemed fixed upon a comedy of five acts, which he had deposited at the
committee of public safety, and of which he was afraid Billaud Varennes would
take the credit. Fabre d'Eglantine was also the author of the new French
calendar. Danton, while at the Conciergerie, often conversed with the prisoners
across the bars of his dungeon. He seemed ashamed of having been duped by
Robespierre, with whom, by means of a common friend, he had an interview a few
days before he was arrested, in order that they might come to an explanation.
Danton, after a long conversation, finding that he was unable to move the
implacable Robespierre, who listened to him with a look of insulting malignity,
shed some tears, and left the room, saying, "Je vois que mon sort est decide,
mais ma mort sera votre ruin "I see that my fare is decided, but my death will
be your ruin.'
." This prediction was fulfilled; for no sooner had Robespierre rid himself of
all his rivals than he pressed forward with a more rapid course toward his own
destruction. Danton in his dungeon expatiated continually on the charms of
nature, on the beauties of rural scenery, and the peace of rural shades. "In
revolutions," cried he, "the power always remains in the hands of villains. It
is better to be a poor fisherman than to govern men. Those fools! they will cry
'Long live the republic!' on seeing me pass to the scaffold. -- This day last
year I caused the revolutionary tribunal to be instituted. I ask pardon of God
and of men; it was not that it should become the scourge of humanity; it was to
prevent the renewal of the massacres of September." Camille Desmoulins and
Danton, who had both possessed considerable powers of eloquence, defended
themselves at the tribunal with so lofty a spirit, and treated their judges
with so much disdain, that at length irritated by their contempt and the
sallies of their wit, and impatient at their perseverance in vindicating
themselves when it was determined they should die, the public accuser sent a
letter to the convention, informing them that the prisoners were in a state of
revolt against the tribunal. The committee of public safety caused a decree to
be passed which put them out of the law, and sent instantly to execution all
such of the accused as dared to insult their judges. In vain Danton called upon
Barrere, upon Billaud Varennes, and upon other members of the committee of
public safety to appear in evidence. Danton was left to his fate, and sent with
his colleagues to execution. At the gate of the Conciergerie, while the
executioner was placing the condemned deputies in the carts, Danton amused the
crowd who were looking on by many sportive observations. He said to Fabre
d'Eglantine, who was a poet, "Eh bien, nous deviendrons tous poets, nous
allons tous fair des verse An equivoque on the word verse, which in French
signifies worm, as well as verses.
." On his way to the scaffold his head was bare, and many persons were struck
with its resemblance to the medals of Socrates. He behaved with remarkable
firmness, conversing with those who were placed in the same cast, and sometimes
answering the cries of the populace by looks of strong indignation. When he was
tied to the plank he cast his eyes upwards to the fatal knife, and his
countenance and figure assumed an expression of magnanimity with which the
spectators were deeply penetrated.

" Pale heads of Marian chiefs are borne on high,
Or heaped together on the forum lie;
There join the meeting slaughters of the town,
There each performing villain's deeds are known."
LUCAN's PHARSALIA. A proof of the horrible oppression under which we groaned,
was, that we lamented the fate of Danton -- of Danton, the minister of justice
on the 2d of September, and one of the murderers of liberty on the 31st of May!
Yet with all these crimes upon his head, Danton still possessed some human
affections: his mind was still awake to some of the sensibilities of our
nature; his temper was frank and social, and humanity in despair leant upon him
as a sort of refuge from its worst oppressor A week after the death of Camille
Desmoulins, his wife, a charming woman of twenty-three years of age, was led to
the scaffold. For her fate no eye except those of her barbarous judges refused
a tear. Her execution forms an epoch in the annals of the revolutionary
government; since on that occasion, for the first time, a conspiracy supposed
in a prison became the pretext for murder, and multitudes afterward perished
the victims of that fatal invention. Camille Desmoulins was in habits of
friendship with Arthur Dillon, an Irish general, who had bravely defended the
pass in the forest of Argonne against the Prussian army, and who held the
highest rank in the service of the republic. Soon after the the 31st of May, he
was arrested with multitudes soupconnes d'etre suspects Upon a suspi^^^^ of
being suspected.
, and was confined in the prison of the Luxembourg. His hopes of regaining his
liberty rested upon the influence of his friend Camille Desmoulins, and he was
deeply affected by the intelligence of his being sent to the revolutionary
tribunal. In his affliction he made use of some imprudent expressions to a
fellow prisoner, and seemed to flatter himself with the hope that the people
would not suffer such a patriot as Desmoulins to perish. The wretch to whom
Dillon confided these sentiments had the atrocity to write a denunciation
against him to the committee of general safety, with the view of purchasing his
own freedom by the life of his unfortunate companion. Dillon had also, a few
days before Desmoulins perished, written a letter to his wife, expressing his
sympathy in her misfortunes, and his hope that the innocence of her husband
would yet triumph. In this letter Dillon enclosed three thousand livres. All
these circumstances were made known to the committee; and a few days after the
execution of Desmoulins, Dillon, the turnkey to whom he had offered the letter,
and Madame Desmoulins in the first transports of grief upon the loss of a
husband whom she tenderly loved, were sent by an order of the committee to the
Conciergerie to take their trial at the revolutionary tribunal. It appeared
upon the trial that the turnkey had refused to take the letter; upon which
Dillon had slipped it into his pocket; which the turnkey perceiving, returned it
to him immediately, and Dillon tore it in pieces. Madame Desmoulins, it was
therefore clear, had never received the letter or the three thousand livres
enclosed. She answered the interrogatories of her judges with the candor of
innocence, and the sweet complacency of her manner sensibly affected the
spectators. Those assassins in the robes of justice condemned Dillon to die as
the author of a conspiracy in the prisons against the security of the French
people; the turnkey was sent to death for having had sufficient humanity not to
make a declaration to the police of Dillon's proposition respecting the letter;
and the unfortunate Madame Desmoulins was dragged to the scaffold because a
letter was written to her which it was clearly proved had never been sent. In
the first anguish of separation from the object of our affections, death ceases
to be an evil; and Madame Desmoulins deplored her husband too tenderly to
regret that they were going to be reunited in a happier state of existence. She
dressed herself in white, and with some care; and went with a placid smile upon
her countenance to exetion, conversing with her companions in the cart,
particularly with the wife of Hebert, who was put to death at the same time,
and met her fate with equal firmness. It was one of the singular chances of
these revolutionary moments, that Camille Desmoulins who with the pointed
shafts of his wit had overthrown the idol of the populace Hebert, perished
himself but a fortnight later; and that his own wife and the wife of Hebert,
seated on the same stone in the Conciergere, deplored their mutual loss, and
were led together to the scaffold. The people, as Madame Desmoulins passed
along the streets to execution, could not resist uttering exclamations of pity
and admiration. "Comme elle est belle! elle a l'air si doux! quel dommage
qu'elle va perir "How beautiful she is! how mild she looks! what a pity she
should perish!"
!" At the foot of the scaffold she embraced the wife of Hebert, bade her
companions in the cart farewell, and resigned herself to the executioner with
the serenity of an angel. Dillon went to death with great composure, and, as he
passed to execution, bowed to a friend of his and mine whom he saw in the
street. Far different from the meek and placid resignation with which Madame
Desmoulins made the sacrifice of life in all its bloom and freshness, was the
behavior of Chaumette procureur of the commune, and Gobet the archbishop of
Paris, who perished at the same time. Their aspect testified that death
appeared to their perturbed spirits, not in the form he wears to suffering
innocence, to whom he comes the messenger of peace, but armed with all his
stings, and clad in all his terrors.

Chaumette, one of the leaders of the conspiracy of the 31st of May, saw
himself dragged to the scaffold by the man whom he had powerfully contributed
to raise to supreme eminence, and for a measure by which he expected to confirm
his own popularity, which was overthrowing the altars of the catholic church.
And Gobet, the archbishop of Paris, a weak old man, whom Chaumette and
Anacharsis Clootz had persuaded to go with the municipality to the bar of the
convention, and at sixty-seven years of age declare that the profession of his
life had been imposture, that he renounced the christian faith and his
ecclesiastical dignity, and demanded that the churches consecrated to religious
worship should henceforth become the temples of Reason, was punished for his
apostasy with death. Robespierre embraced the new doctrine till the church was
despoiled of all the treasures with which superstition had enriched it, and
soon after abolished the decadary feasts of the goddess Reason, and sent her
high priests Gobet and Chaumette to the guillotine. One of the few instances of
fortitude in death exemplified by persons who had neither the consciousness of
innocence nor the sentiment of sympathy to sooth their minds in so severe a
trial, was that of the former duke of Orleans, in whose life nothing was worthy
of applause except his manner of leaving it. The remembrance of the vote he had
given against his unfortunate relation Lewis XVI. from motives of personal
vengeance and ambition, could not but gnaw upon his heart, and depress his
spirit, and must have been mingled not only with a feeling of indignation
against the wretches who made him suffer upon false pretenses, but with all the
anguish of remorse for having joined their party; by which act of debasement he
had incurred not only guilt, but its speedy punishment. Yet notwithstanding
such reflections could not fail to embitter his last moments, he went to
execution with a calm dignity worthy of a better mind. Nor did he gratify the
populace by betraying any emotion when the cart in which he was placed stopped
for ten minutes before the gate of the Palais-Royal, the scene of a life of
luxurious pleasures. He looked at the building with apparent unconcern; and
whatever pangs of recollection might struggle at his heart, his behavior
expressed no sentiment but that of magnanimity till he expired.

The resignation and courage with which the victims of this cruel tyranny in
general resigned life were truly admirable. Many young persons, after receiving
their act of accusation, composed verses written with a pencil at the table
where they partook their last repast with their fellow prisoners. The
following, written by a young man of twenty-four years of age, to his mistress,
the night before his execution, are simple and affecting:

I.
L'heure avance ou je vais mourir,
L'heure son et la mort m'appelle
Je n'ai point de laches desirs,
Je ne fuirai point devant elle:
Je meurs plein de foi, plein d'honnour:
Mais je laisse ma douce amie
Dans le veuvage et la douleur --
Ah! je dois regretter la vie!
II.
Demain, mes yeux inanimes
Ne s'ouvriront plus sur tes charms;
Tes beaux yeux a l'amour fermes
Demain seront noyes de larmes.
La mort glacera cette main
Qui m'unit a ma douce amie!
Je ne vivrai plus sur ton feign --
Ah! je dois regretter la vie!
IMITATION.
I.
The hour that calls to death is near,
It brings to me no throb of fear;
The breast that honor arms, can brave
The murd'rer's steel, the untimely grave;
But thou, to whom I gave my heart,
From thee for ever must I part, (...)
And leave my mourning love to sigh?
(...) a cruel (...) to die!
II.
Tomorrow, my closed eyes no more
Shall gaze on beauty I adore:
Tomorrow, sadd'ning every grace,
Unceasing tears shall bathe thy face;
Tomorrow, chilled by death's cold grasp,
This hand no longer thine shall clasp;
From thee for ever I shall fly --
Ah, it is a cruel task to die!
Among the crowds who were led to the guillotine, two persons only displayed
strong marks of dismay and terror. One of these persons was Madame du Barry,
the mistress of Lewis XV. She had been induced to leave England, where she
passed some time after the revolution, and return to France, in order to secure
her property; and soon after the 31 of May was led from her beautiful pavillion
at Lucienne, to a prison in Paris, by one of the agents of terrorism, who, I am
sorry to add, was an Englishman. The prisons, to use a French mode of
expression, in a short time became the anti-chambers of the scaffold; and
Madame du Barry's mind was impressed strongly with a presage of her fate.
Whenever the door of her chamber in the prison opened, she was seized with
violent trembling, and sometimes with fainting fits. At length the fatal
summons to the revolutionary tribunal arrived. The chief evidence against her
was a negro slave, whom she had reared from an infant, and to whom she was so
much attached, that he was generally to be found in her apartments; and one day
Lewis XV. sportively created him governor of Lucienne, with a pension of six
hundred livers a year, which this viper, who stung the bosom that cherished
him, still enjoys.

One of the most flagrant testimonies which were produced of Madame du Barry's
counter-revolutionary principles was Mr. Pitt's picture, which she said had
been given to her the night before her departure from London by Lord Thurlow.
This unfortunate woman was condemned to die; and a person of my acquaintance
who was at that time a prisoner in the Conciergerie told me, that she was
deluded with the promise of pardon provided she would discover the spot where
she acknowledged that some treasures were concealed; but no sooner were they
found, than she was ordered to execution. During her passage thither she
appeared almost dead, and leaned her head upon the shoulder of the executioner.
But when she reached the square of the revolution, the sight of the instrument
of death rallied her sinking spirits, and called forth the most cruel agonies
of reluctant nature. She rent the air with her shrieks, and was deaf to the
expostulations of Noil, a deputy of the Gironde who perished at the same time,
and who encouraged her to resign herself to a fate which was inevitable. Her
convulsed frame acquired extraordinary strength: she struggled with her
executioners, and, after a conflict at which humanity shudders, was forced to
undergo the fatal stroke, and released from frantic desperation.

With Madame du Barry perished the banker Vanderuyver, and his two sons,
accused of being her accomplices in sending money into England, and also of
having aided the knights of the poniard, as they were called, in the chateau of
the Thuilleries on the memorable 10th of August, although twenty-five witnesses
attended to prove that Vanderuyver had not quitted his house during the whole
of that day. But those who first appeared in his favor being arrested as they
went out of court, the others made their escape, and left this unhappy family
to their fate.

Their real crime was their great wealth, which it was thought expedient to
seize, On this account bankers were the objects of particular proscription: for
although the great revolutionary financier Cambon had one day called them all
together, and favored them with an harangue of considerable length upon the
value of paper money, and the worthlessness of gold, which he asserted every
real lover of his country ought to despise as dross, and of which he exhorted
them to rid themselves as fast as possible; it was feared that in spite of this
precious morsel of eloquence, an obstinate attachment to metallic coin still
lurked in the hearts of the bankers, who were for the most part punished for
this grovelling predilection with death. Of this number was Laborde, once the
banker of the court, and now guilty of a revenue of two millions of livres.
This respectable old man was dragged to the scaffold at seventy-six years of
age, although since the first epoch of the revolution he had given
unquestionable proofs of his attachment to its cause, and the magnificence of
his donations were more than proportionate to his wealth. His first patriotic
gift was twenty thousand louis; he had sent all the fine horses with which his
stables were filled to the municipality; he had lodged troops of national
guards at his house; and above all, he had been the father of the country where
his fine seat of Meriville was placed. The year before his death I had passed
some very agreeable days at that noble mansion, where strangers properly
recommended were received and entertained with the most splendid hospitality.
The pleasure-grounds had been formed in a flat situation unfavourable to
beauty. With immense labor and expense pastoral hills arose, and jutting rocks
hung over crystal waters, or were worn into fragments by the fall of lavish
cascades. A beautiful Grecian temple reared its Corinthian pillars upon a broad
green ascent, and amidst the deep recesses of spreading oaks a monument was
erected to Captain Cook. Perhaps the decorated scenes of Meriville are somewhat
too richly hung with ornaments, but in creating this blooming Eden, which was
the work of years, Mons. Laborde had given employment to the whole country. For
a great extent of space round his dwelling no wants were felt which his
munificence was not eager to re^^eve; and when the eye saw him, it blessed him.
Nor was the good he conferred confined to the precincts of his own possessions.
The Paris markets were often supplied with such articles of living as were most
wanted, at the very time when its owner was languishing in prison. With tears
and lamentations his tenants heard of his confinement. Whole villages and
municipalities crowded to the bar of the convention, and claimed the enlargment
of their common benefactor, but in vain. The rich spoils of his chateau were
too tempting to be resisted, the seizure of his immense property was an
expedient of finance, and as a preliminary step to its confiscation he was put
to death.

I have mentioned among the multitudes who perished, that Madame du Barry and
one other person only were remarked for having betrayed symptoms of weakness
and terror in their last moments. You will be surprised to hear that this
person was general Custine.

Who combats bravely is not therefore brave:
He fears a deathbed like the meanest slave.
This unfortunate general, although accustomed to look upon death with
intrepidity in the ranks of battle, shrunk from it in a form of horror for
which he was unprepared. His son, an amiable and accomplished young man, who
suffered a few months after as the accomplice of his father, because he had
given proofs of filial affection, behaved with admirable courage. I shall
transcribe a letter which he sent to his wife on the day of his execution See
Appendix, No. V.
.

This interesting young woman had the courage, during the trial of her
father-in-law the general, to sit at his feet at the tribunal, to wipe the
damps from his brow, to animate his failing spirits, and calm the agitation of
his mind by her soothing attentions. After seeing her husband dragged to the
scaffold, she was thrown into prison, from which she was one of the last
persons released.

Early in the spring Madame Elizabeth was brought before the revolutionary
tribunal. The only crime that could be imputed to her was that she was the
sister of a king, and had shown that steadfast fidelity to her brother, which in
generous minds, whatever might be their political opinions, would have excited
sentiments of esteem and admiration. She had taken no part in those fatal
schemes of crooked policy, which, by seeking to seize once more that despotic
power which the will of a mighty nation had torn from its grasp, lost that
limited empire, and that circumscribed dominion of which it might still have
held possession. But whatever were the errors of Louis XVI. or the vices of
Marie Antoinette, no blame was by any party imputed to the princess Elizabeth.
She had neither shared in the intrigues or the licentiousness of the court. All
that was known of her in prosperity was her virtuous manners, and her
charitable disposition; and in adversity, her unshaken friendship for her
brother, and her piety and resignation to God. She had suffered not only the
most severe extremes of calamity, but all those indignities, wants, and
hardships, which could give misfortune a keener edge; for, during the tyranny
of Robespierre, the forms of decency which had till then been observed were
altogether disregarded. She, who had been used to the long train of attendants
of the most splendid court of Europe, was compelled to perform the most menial
offices herself; to dress her scanty meal, and to sweep the floor of her
prison. In such circumstances, with no ray of hope to cheer the gloomy towers
where she was immured, except that hope which was fixed on a better state of
existence -- she probably looked upon death as her most soothing refuge, and
therefore met it with tranquillity and firmness. I shall transcribe her
examination at the revolutionary tribunal, not only as a proof of the calmness
and dignity with which she answered the interrogatories of her barbarous
judges, but also as a specimen of the manner in which the trials at this
sanguinary court were conducted even before the period arrived when all
enquiry, all form was laid aside.

Trial of Madame ELIZABETH, as published at the Time by the Tribunal.
President to the Princess Elizabeth. Where were you on the 12th, 13th, 14th of
July, 1789? had you any knowledge of those conspiracies?


Elizabeth. I was with my family. I had no knowledge of any of those
conspiracies of which you speak, and the events which then took place, I was
far from either foreseeing or seconding.


Court. When the tyrant your brother fled to Varennes, did you not accompany
him?


Elizabeth. Every consideration led me to follow my brother; and I made it a
duty then, as I should have done on any other occasion.


Court. Did you not appear at the infamous and scandalous orgies of the
body-guard; and did you not walk round the table with Marie Antoinette, to
induce each of the guests to repeat the horrid oath which they had sworn to
exterminate every patriot, in order to stifle liberty in its birth, and
re-establish the tottering throne?


Elizabeth. Such orgies I believe never took place; but I declare that I was in
no manner whatever informed of their having happened, and never had any concern
in them.


Court. You do not speak truth; and your denial can be of no use to you, when
it is contradicted on one side by public notoriety, and on the other by the
likelihood which there must be in every sensible man's opinion, that a woman so
intimately connected as you were with Marie Antoinette, both by the ties of
blood and those of the strictest friendship, could not but be a sharer in her
machinations, and favored them to the utmost of her power. You were therefore
necessarily in league with the wife of the tyrant; you provoked the abominable
oath taken by the satellites of the court, to exterminate and annihilate
liberty in its birth; you have likewise provoked those bloody outrages done to
the precious sign of liberty, the three-coloured cockade, in causing your
accomplices to tread it under foot.


Elizabeth. I have already said that all these things were foreign to my
character. I have no other answer to give.


Court. Where were you on the 10th August, 1792?


Elizabeth. I was at the palace, my usual and natural residence for some time
past.


Court. Did not you pass the night from the 9th to the 10th of August in your
brother's chamber; and did you not hold secret conferences with him, which
explained to you the end or motives of all the movements and preparatious which
were making before your eyes?


Elizabeth. I passed the whole night which you mention with my brother; I never
left him; he had a great deal of confidence in me; nevertheless I remarked
nothing, which indicated any thing of what afterward passed.


Court. Your answer is both untrue and improbable; and a woman, like you, who
has shown during the whole course of the revolution so marked an opposition to
the new order of things, cannot be believed, when she would wish to make us
think that she was ignorant of the causes of the meetings of every sort which
took place near the palace on the eve of the 10th of August. -- Will you tell
us what hindered you from going to bed on the night of the 9th of August?


Elizabeth. I did not go to rest, because the constituted authorities came to
inform my brother of the agitation and ferment which prevailed among the
inhabitants of Paris, and of the danger which might probably result from it.


Court. It is in vain for you to dissemble, especially after the different
confessions of Capet's wife, who asserted that you had attended the orgies of
the body-guard, that you had supported her amidst her fears and apprehensions
on the 10th of August, for the interests and the life of Capet. But what you
will not be able to deny is the active part which you took in the action that
happened between the patriots, and the satellites of tyranny. It was your zeal
and your eagerness to serve the enemies of the people, which made you provide
them with bullets, which you took pains yourself to chew, as they were to be
fired against patriots, and destined to mow them down. It is the prayers which
it is well known you made, that your brother's partisans should be victorious,
and encouragements of every kind which you gave to the assassins of the
country: what do you say to all this?


Elizabeth. All these things which are imputed to me, are so many indignities
which I am far from ever having sullied myself by committing.


Court. Previously to the shameful flight of the tyrant to Varennes, did you
not take away the diamonds of the crown, and did you not send them to Artois?


Elizabeth. These diamonds were not sent to d'Artois; I only placed them in the
hands of a confidential person.


Court. Will you inform us with whom you placed these diamonds?


Elizabeth. Mons. de Choiseul is the person with whom I chose to make this
deposite.


Court. What are become of these diamonds which you entrusted to Mons. de
Choiseul?


Elizabeth. I am altogether ignorant what is become of them, not having had an
opportunity of seeing M. de Choiseul, I have not concerned on troubled myself
about them.


Court. You are imposing on us in every answer you give, and especially with
respect to the diamonds; for a proces-verbal taken on the 12th of December
1792, by representatives of the people, who knew what they were about in the
affair of the diamonds, states in an undeniable manner that these diamonds were
sent to d'Artois. Have you had any correspondence with you brother, the
cidevant Monsieur?


Elizabeth. I do not recollect to have had any, especially since such
correspondence was prohibited.


Court. Were you not yourself anxious in dressing the wounds of the assassins
sent to the Champs Elysees by your brother against the brave Marseillois?


Elizabeth. I never knew that my brother had sent assassins against any one
whatever. If I have ever chanced to assist in dressing the wounded, it was
humanity only that could have influenced me: it was not necessary for me to be
informed what was the cause of their misfortunes to hesitate whether I should
afford them relief; and if I make no merit of this, I do not imagine that you
can impute it to me as a crime.


Court. It is difficult to reconcile these sentiments of humanity to which you
pretend, with that barbarous joy which you discovered, when you saw streams of
blood flowing on the 10th of August. Every thing leads us to believe that you
were humane only toward the assassins of the people, and that you have all the
savageness of the most blood-thirsty beasts toward the defenders of liberty.
So far were you from giving any assistance to the last, that you provoked the
massacre by your applauses: so far were you from disarming the murderers of the
people, that you lavished on them handfulls of instruments of death, by means
of which you flattered yourself, you and your accomplices, with the
re-establishment of despotism and tyranny. Here is the humanity of the rulers
of nations, who have at all times sacrificed mankind to their caprice, their
ambition, or their avarice.

The prisoner Elizabeth, whose defense consists in denying every charge brought
against her, will she be honest enough to agree that she has fed little Capet
with hopes of succeeding to his father's throne, and that by these means she
has provoked to royalty?


Elizabeth. I have conversed familiarly with that unfortunate child, who is
dear to me on more than one account; and I gave him all those consolations
which appeared to me likely to reconcile him to the loss of those who had given
him birth.


Court. This is saying in other words, that you fed little Capet with those
projects of vengeance which you and yours have never ceased forming against
liberty, and that you flattered yourself with building up again the wrecks of a
broken throne by deluging it with the blood of the patriots." -- Here the trial
ended, no witnesses were called, and the prisoner was condemned without farther
examination.

Madame Elizabeth betrayed some emotion at the sight of the guillotine; but she
recovered herself immediately, and waited calmly at the foot of the scaffold,
till twenty-five persons who perished with her were put to death, her former
rank being still sufficiently remembered to give her a title to pre-eminence in
punishment.

Sometimes amidst these horrors, the most ludicrous violations of the laws of
nations took place; and we might have smiled at the absurdities of our tyrants,
if they had been mingled with less atrocity. The revolutionary committee of
Cette, in the department of Harault, with a noble defiance of all ordinary
forms and observances, thought fit to put in requisition not only some mules
belonging to the consul of a northern court, and a cart which was his property,
but the consul himself to be their driver. The requisition was signed by
William Tell, Brutus, Marat, Cato, and Caesar. Whether the consul was of
opinion, that such great names were not to be trifled with, or whether he
thought that driving mules was a safer occupation than contending with tigers,
is uncertain; but it is well known that he submitted himself with passive
obedience to this sans-culotte edict, till the 9th of Thermidor; after which
period he sent to Paris to complain of the indignity he had suffered, and
demanded the chastizement of William Tell and his colleagues.




LETTER XII.
IT would require the pencil of a master to trace in all its dark coloring
that picture of calamity and horror which Paris presented at this period. A
deep and silent gloom pervaded that city, where heretofore every heart bounded
with gaiety, and every eye sparkled with delight. The citizens in general saw
with stupefied terror those processions of death which daily encumbered the
streets, and the feelings of sympathy and indignation were repelled by the
sense of that personal danger from which no individual was secure. Even in his
own habitation, and in the bosom of his family, no man dared to utter a
complaint but in anxious whispers, lest a servant should over-hear the
forbidden expostulations of humanity, and denounce him as a
counter-revolutionist. Many persons wearied of spectacles of horror put an end
to their existence; and some who desired to die, but shrunk from giving
themselves the stroke of death, took measures to be sent before the
revolutionary tribunal, where they knew assassins were ever ready. The usual
means employed for this purpose was the cry of "Vive le ^oi!" words which many
young women who had lost their parents or their lovers on the scaffold repeated
in the phrensy of despair, and found them, as they wished, a passport to the
tomb. Well might the people of France have exclaimed in the words of our divine
poet,

"Alas poor country, almost afraid to know itself! It cannot be called our
mother, but our grave, where nothing, but who knows nothing, is once seen to
smile; where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air are made, not
marked where violent sorrow seems a modern ecstasy: the dead man's knell is
there scarce asked for whom; and good men's lives expire before the flowers in
their caps, dying or ere they sicken." -- MACBETH.

The beginning of the month of Prairial, a man of the name of Admiral formed
the design of assassinating Robespierre and Collot d'Herbois: he failed in the
attempt, was seized, and sent to the Conciergerie. A few days after Amee Cecile
Renaud, a girl of nineteen years of age, whose sensibility it appears was
singularly affected by the scenes which were passing before her, and whose
imagination perhaps was somewhat disordered by those terrible impressions, had
the courage, while an armed nation bowed before its assassins, to enter alone
and unarmed the monster's den, and, as it would seem, with the intention, at
the expense of life, to point out to her countrymen the tyrant under whom they
groaned. Cecile Renaud went one morning to Robespierre's house, and enquired if
he was at home. She was answered in the negative; and being asked what she
wanted, replied that she came to see what sort of thing was a tyrant. Upon this
declaration she was instantly led to the committee of general safety, and went
through a long examination. She again declared with the same simplicity, that
she had only gone because she wanted to see a tyrant; and upon being searched,
no offensive weapon was found upon her, and all that was contained in a little
bundle which she held under her arm was a change of linen, with which she said
she had provided herself, knowing she should want it in prison. The conduct of
this heroic young woman furnished the tyrants with an opportunity of murder too
favorable to be neglected. They instantly proclaimed that a vast plan of
conspiracy against the lives of those renowned patriots Collot d'Herbois and
Robespierre had been formed by traitors within the prisons, and traitors
without.

The father, mother and aunt of Cecile Renaud were led with herself to the
Conciergerie, where she was again interrogated, and threatened that her whole
family should perish with her, if she did not confess her intention of
assassinating Robespierre. She repeated what she had said at the committee; and
added, that they might put her to death if they thought proper, but, if she
deserved to die, it was not for any intention to assassinate, but for her
anti-republican sentiments. Cecile Renaud, who was very young and handsome, was
dressed with some care, and perhaps coquetry. Her appearance led her savage
judges to invent a new species of question in order to bring her to confession.
By their directions she was stripped of her own clothes, and covered with
squalid and disgusting rags, in which condition she was made to appear in the
council chamger and undergo a new interrogatory, where the same menaces were
repeated, and where she answered as she had done before; and with great spirit
rallied her judges upon the absurdity of trying to shake her purpose by a mode
of punishment so contemptible. Notwithstanding no proof of any intention to
assassinate Robespierre could be brought against her, she together with her
whole family was put to death. Her two brothers, who were fighting the battles
of the republic on the frontiers, were ordered to be conducted to Paris, that
they might share her fate; but the tyrants were too impatient for blood to wait
their arrival, and owing to this circumstance they escaped.

With Cecile Renaud perished not only her own family, but sixty-nine persons
were brought from different parts and different prisons of Paris, who had never
seen or heard of each other till they met at the Conciergerie, and were
together dragged before the tribunal, and declared guilty of one common
conspiracy. Their trial only lasted a sufficient length of time to call over
their names; none of them were permitted to make any defense; the jury declared
themselves satisfied in their souls and consciences; and the devoted victims,
covered with the red cloaks worn by assassins on their way to execution were
led to death. Among those who perished on this occasion were madame Saint
Amaranthe, her daughter, who had married Monsieur Sartine the son of the
ex-minister, and who was now only in her nineteenth year, and one of the most
beautiful women in France, and her brother, who was but seventeen years of age.
A friend of mine was confined in the same prison with this family. A servant
from the outside of the walls had made madame Saint Amaranthe understand by
signs that her son-in-law, who had been confined in another prison, had
perished, and that she herself was in danger. She went immediately to her
daughter, and said to her, "Your husband is no more, and it is very probable
that we shall follow him tomorrow to the scaffold -- No tears -- this is no
time for softness -- we must prepare to meet with courage a fate that is
inevitable." The next day passed, and no summons to the Conciergerie arrived;
but on the night following at eleven o'clock a huissier entered madame Saint
Amaranthe's chamber, and told her she was wanted below. The call was well
understood. "And are not we too wanted?" cried her son and daughter.
"Certainly," answered the huissier. They both flew to their mother, threw their
arms round her neck, and exclaimed, "We shall die together!" The next day they
perished. Fouquier Tainville, the public accuser, that monster, "horribly
tricked with blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, baked and impasted
with the parching streets," placed himself at a window of the Conciergerie
close to the gate through which the prisoners passed, in order to ascend the
carts which were to carry them to execution. There he feasted his atrocious
soul with the sight of sixty-nine victims, covered with assassin's cloaks; and
observing among them some young women, particularly the lovely madame Sartine,
walking toward the vehicles of death with that firmness which belongs to
innocence; "How bold those women look!" cried Fouquier, enraged at their
calmness; I must go and see if they show the same effrontery on the scaffold,
even if I should lose my dinner!"

Robespierre had now attained nearly the summit of his hopes; and his ignorance
being equal to his vanity, he did not perceive that the few steps he had to
climb before he could grasp at absolute dominion, must be trodden with cautious
prudence; since he had advanced so far, that, if he was now compelled to
descend, it could only be by a descent which would lead to death. He had
destroyed his most powerful rival Danton; but his spies and emissaries, and
above all his guilty conscience, told him that more of his colleagues must fall
to give him perfect safety. He read in the countenances of the deputies, in the
silent gloom with which his edicts were sanctioned, that new storms gathered
over his head; and he prepared in conjunction with Couthon, the means of
putting the lives of all those who opposed him more absolutely in his power. In
the mean time he thought fit to amuse the people by a festival in honor of the
Supreme Being, whose existence he had lately proclaimed, and whose name he had
dared to utter with his unhallowed lips. The plan of the festival was arranged
by the celebrated painter David; he, whose mind the cultivation of the finer
arts has had no power to soften; who, not satisfied with displaying on canvass
those scenes of sanguinary guilt which from the horrors they excite furnish fit
subjects for the pencil, has contributed to give them in his bleeding country
"a local habitation and a name;" who, instead of cherishing that sacred flame
of enlightened liberty which is connected with the sublimer powers of the
imagination, was the lacquey of the tyrant Robespierre, and the friend of the
man of blood, Marat; who, ambitious of recorded disgrace, of immortal ignominy,
debased the noblest gift of heaven, genius, and employed his degraded pencil in
tracing the hideous features of the monster Marat, while a groaning people were
compelled to bow the knee before the image he had set up; and who, at the
tribune of the national convention, insulted all common sense and decency by a
comparison which, from its audacious absurdity, excites as much ridicule as
indignation. "Cato, Aristides, Socrates, Timoleon, Fabricius, and Phocion,"
exclaims the panegyrist David, "ye whose venerable lives I admire, I have not
lived with you -- but I have known Marat!" (blessed compensation!) "I have
admired him like you, and posterity will do him justice!" Yes, David, repose
with your idol upon the civic crowns, the palms and laurels won by
revolutionary measures, and doubt not that posterity will do ample justice both
to you and Marat. Posterity will indeed be spared the task of overthrowing his
altars, since they are already in the dust; and while the offenses of many of
our vulgar tyrants will be forgotten with their ignoble names, David's shame
will be as durable as his celebrity.

While I am upon the subject of Marat and his friend, I cannot help observing
that nothing appears more strange to us in this country than the opinions which
are formed in England of the public characters of France, not by the enemies
but by the friends of the French revolution. That Brissot, Gaudet, Vergniaud
should receive no incense of applause from those who perhaps lament that the
king's castle of the bastile was overthrown, is natural; but when we hear Mr.
Sheridan speak in the house of commons of the faction of the Gironde, and when
we read in Mr. Gilbert Wakefield's answer to Mr. Paine's pamphlet his remark
upon the Brissotine faction, we are filled with astonishment. They might with
as much propriety talk of the faction of Sidney, of Russel, and of Hampden.
Such observations are blasphemies indeed from the lovers of liberty; they who
ought to pronounce with veneration the names of those illustrious martyrs, who,
after the most honorable struggles for their country, shed their blood upon
the scaffold in its cause, with heroism worthy of the proudest days of Greece
or Rome. But though the iron scepter of revolutionary government has restrained
the groans, the lamentations, of a mourning nation for the fall of its best
defenders; and though the slavish pen of the Moniteur, from which Europe
received French intelligence, applauded the assassins of liberty; though
Brissot, it was asserted, had filled his coffers with English gold, while his
widow was languishing with an infant at her breast, with no other nourishment
than bread and water, in one of the dungeons of Robespierre, and at this moment
exists with three children "steeped in poverty to the very lips;" yet with
becoming pride disdaining to solicit support, till the memory of her husband
has received, as it shortly will do, some mark of public atonement and public
honor; history will do justice to his character -- history will judge between
Brissot and Robespierre, between the Gironde and the Mountain. History will not
confound those sanguinary and ambitious men who passed along the revolutionary
horizon like baneful meteors, spreading destruction in their course, with those
whose talents formed a radiant constellation in the zone of freedom, and
diffused benignant beams over the hemisphere till extinguished by storms and
darkness.

Perhaps it will not be displeasing to you to read the following sketch of
Brissot, traced by Madame Roland, who was intimately acquainted with him, and
who was so admirable a judge of character.

"Brissot came to visit us: I know nothing more pleasant than the first
interview of those who, though connected by correspondence, have never seen
each other. We look with earnestness to see if the features of the face bear
any resemblance to the physiognomy of the soul, and if the figure of the person
confirms the opinion which we have formed of the mind.

"The simplicity of Brissot's manners, his frankness, his natural negligence,
seemed to me in perfect harmony with the austerity of his principles: but I
found in him a sort of lightness of mind and character which was not very
consistent with the seriousness of a philosopher. This disposition always gave
me uneasiness, and his enemies always took advantage of it. The more I became
acquainted with him, the greater was my esteem. It is impossible for any one to
unite a more perfect disinterestedness to a more ardent zeal for the public
service, or feel with so perfect a forgetfulness of his own interest a greater
desire of doing good. But his writings are more fitted than his person to
effect it, because they have all the authority which reason, justice and
knowledge give to literary works, while his figure, from its want of dignity,
inspires no respect. He is the best of human beings; a good husband, a tender
father, a faithful friend, a virtuous citizen. His conversation is as mild as
his character is easy. Confident even to imprudence, gay and sprightly as a
youth of fifteen, he was formed to live with the wise, and to be the dupe of
the wicked. As a well-informed politician, and studying during his whole life
the different relations of society, and the means of procuring the greatest
quantity of happiness for the human race, he was well acquainted with the
nature of man, and altogether ignorant of the characters of men. He knew that
vice existed, but he never could believe him to be a vicious man who spoke to
him with an open countenance; and when he discovered such persons he treated
them as fools whom he ought to pity, without taking any precautions against
them. He could not hate: his mind, though very susceptible, had not solidity
enough for so vigorous a sentiment. His knowledge was so extensive, that all
literary labor was to him extremely easy: and he composed a treatise with the
same facility as another would copy a song: an experienced eye will therefore
discern in his works, together with an excellent fund of information, the hasty
touches of a rapid and sometimes a slight mind. His activity, his good humor,
never refusing to join in any thing which he thought useful, have given him the
air of meddling in every thing; and have subjected him to animadversions as an
intriguer by those who were eager to find fault. A curious kind of intriguer
indeed! a man who never thought of himself, or even the interest of his
friends; who is as incapable as he is averse to look after his own concerns;
who is no more ashamed of poverty than he is afraid of death, considering both
as the usual reward of public virtues.

"I have seen him consecrating the whole of his time to the revolution, without
any other motives than wishing to see the triumph of truth, and concurring in
the establishment of the public good; working diligently at his journal, which
he might easily have made a good object of speculation, but contenting himself
with the moderate share allowed him by his partner. His wife as modest as
himself, with much prudence and great strength of mind, formed a more severe
judgment of things. She had, since their marriage, continually turned her eyes
toward the United States of America, as the place most suited to their taste,
and their manners, and where it was easy to live with a very small income.

"Brissot had made a voyage thither, and they were on the point of their
departure when the revolution fixed him in France. As he was born at Chartres,
and was the school-fellow of Pethion, who is a native of the same city, Brissot
formed a still stronger attachment to him in the constituent assembly, where
his knowledge and his labor were of essential service to his friend. He
brought us acquainted with him, as well as with many other deputies whom former
acquaintance or conformity of opinion and zeal for the public good frequently
called together to converse on the subject. It was even agreed that they should
assemble four hours a week in the evening at my house, because I was always at
home, had good apartments, and was so conveniently situated that it was not far
from any of those who composed our little circle."

I cannot resist adding to this sketch the copy of a letter addressed by
Brissot to Barrere, the day after the latter, from the tribune of the
convention, had promised to satiate the people with Brissot's blood.

J. P. BRISSOT to BARRERE, Deputy of the Convention.
Abbey prison, 7th of September, 2d year of the Republic, one and indivisible.
THE people ask you for bread, and you have promised them my blood! You thus
sentence me to death before I appear at the tribunal. Thus you insult the
people in supposing them to have a taste for blood, and the tribunals, which
you conclude are the instruments of your passions! Alas, if my blood could
furnish abundance and extinguish all divisions, I would shed it myself in an
instant. In order to excuse this sanguinary phraseology, you pretend that I am
forming conspiracies in prison; you pretend that I have declared, that before
my head fall, many in the convention would fall.

"This is a new calnmny, invented to irritate the minds of the people against
me. I defy you to cite a single witness, a single proof of this conspiracy and
of this assertion. I abhor blood: I would not even demand that of my
prosecutors, who would willingly drink up mine. Philosophy, justice, good
order, and humanity, are the true foundations of a republic. It is well known,
my only crime is that I have opposed all other means of establishing it. This
is the conspiracy which I still continue to practice in my prison. Yes, I am in
conspiracy with my triple bars, and my triple bolts. I am in conspiracy alone,
or with the philosophers of antiquity who teach me how to support my
misfortunes, for the sake of liberty, of which I have ever been an apostle.
This is the plot which shall be added to the list of those already imputed to
me, and of which you seek in vain the evidence, since it is all imaginary. But
you wish for victims! Strike then, and may I be the last republican sacrificed
to the spirit of party!"


But let us leave the martyrs of liberty, and return to the polluted festival
instituted by a tyrant. David, ever ready to fulfill the mandates of his master
Robespierre, steps forth, marshals the procession, and, like the herald in
Othello, "orders every man to put himself into triumph."

At this spot by David's command, the mothers are to embrace their daughters --
at that, the fathers are to clasp their sons -- here, the old are to bless the
young, and there, the young are to kneel to the old -- upon this boulevard the
people are to sing -- upon that, they must dance -- at noon they must listen in
silence, and at sunset they must rend the air with acclamations.

Ah, what was then became of those civic festivals which hailed the first
glories of the revolution! What was become of that sublime federation of an
assembled nation which had nobly shaken off its ignominious fetters, and
exulted in its newborn freedom! What was become of those moments when no
emotions were pre-ordained, no feelings measured out, no acclamations decreed;
but when every bosom beat high with admiration, when every heart throbbed with
enthusiastic transport, when every eye melted into tears, and the vault of
heaven resounded the bursts of unpremeditated applause!

But let us not even now despair of the cause of liberty. Let us not abandon a
fair and noble region filled with objects which excite the thrill of tenderness
or the glow of admiration, because along the path which France has chosen
serpents have lurked beneath the buds of roses, and beasts of prey have issued
from the lofty woods: let us discover, if we can, a less tremendous road, but
let us not renounce the land of promise.

The citizens of Paris had been invited, and the invitation amounted to a
command, to decorate their houses in honor of the festival. Accordingly Paris
on that morning, lighted up by brilliant sunshine, presented the most gay and
charming spectacle imaginable. Woods had been robbed of their shade, and
gardens to the extent of some leagues rifled of their sweets, in order to adorn
the city. The walls of every house were covered with luxuriant wreaths of oak
and laurel, blended with flowers; civic crowns were interwoven with national
ribbands; three-coloured flags waved over every portal; and the whole was
arranged with that light and airy grace which belongs to Parisian fancy. The
women wore garlands of fresh-blown roses in their hair, and held branches of
palm or laurel in their hands: the men placed oaken boughs in their hats, and
children strewed the way with violets and myrtle. The representatives of the
people had large three-coloured plumes in their hats, national scarfs thrown
across their shoulders, and nosegays of blended wheat-ears, fruits, and flowers
in their hands, as symbols of their mission.

From this profusion of gay objects, which in happier moments would have
excited delightful sensations, the drooping soul now turned distasteful. The
scent of carnage seemed mingled with these lavish sweets; the glowing festoons
appeared tinged with blood; and in the back ground of this festive scenery the
guillotine arose before the disturbed imagination. I thought of that passage in
Mr. Burke's book, "In the groves of their academy, at the end of every vista I
see the gallows!" Ah Liberty! best friend of mankind, why have sanguinary
monsters profaned thy name, and fulfilled this gloomy prediction! --

A great amphitheatre was raised in the garden of the Thuilleries immediately
before the palace, now the seat of the convention. Upon a tribune in the center
of the theater, Robespierre as president of the convention appeared; and having
for a few hours disencumbered the square of the revolution of the guillotine
this high priest of Moloch, within view of that very spot where his daily
sacrifice of human victims was offered up, covered with their blood, invoked
the Parent of universal nature, talked of the charms of virtue, and breathed
the hope of immortality. When the foul fiend had finished this impious mockery,
he descended from the tribune, and walked with great solemnity toward a
grotesque kind of monument that was raised upon the basin in the front of the
palace, which had been covered over for that purpose. On this monument was
placed a misshapen and hideous figure, with ass's ears, which for some hours
served as an enigma to the gazing crowd, who knew not how to account for this
singular appearance; till Robespierre having set fire to this image of
deformity, which was declared to be the symbol of atheism, its cumbrous drapery
suddenly vanished, and a fair and majestic form was discovered, emblematical of
wisdom and philosophy.

Atheism being thus happily destroyed, the convention, attended by a numerous
procession of people, and preceded by triumphal cars and banners, marched to
the Champ de Mars, where with much toil and cost a rocky mountain had been
reared, upon whose lofty summit the tyrant and his attendants climbed, and from
whence he once more harangued the people; and the festival closed with hymns
and choral songs in honor of the Supreme Being.

Robespierre on this day, intoxicated with his power, lost sight of his usual
prudence, and displayed all the littleness of his vanity. He caused a line of
separation to be made between himself and the other deputies of the convention,
and marched at some distance before them, like a captain at the head of his
band. He had the folly to display his importance by keeping the convention and
the assembled multitude waiting, and the ceremony suspended for two hours,
while he was sought for in vain. During the procession his creatures attempted
to raise the cry of "Vive Robespierre!" but it was faintly re-echoed by the
spectators, many of whom followed him with "curses, not loud but deep, which
the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not."

Two days after this festival in honor of the Supreme being, Robespierre, the
scourge of his creatures, compelled the enslaved convention to pass a law,
which permitted the revolutionary jury to condemn those who were brought before
them, from their own internal conviction, without any proof whatever, or
hearing any witnesses; and which also suppressed the superfluous office of
official defender, or counsel; a privilege that Couthon, who made the report in
the name of the committee of public safety, asserted conspirators by no means
deserved Amidst the definitions of aristocracy, when the law passed against
suspected people, Couthon ingeniously observed, that any good citizen was
authorized to arrest every man in the street as an aristocrate, who held his
head too much up or too much down, and also all those who looked on one side,
instead of looking you in the face.
. In other words, the jury were now authorized to pass sentence without even
the forms of a trial. From this period, till the fall of Robespierre, all the
judicial solemnities of the revolutionary tribunal consisted in reading over
the names of the accused, who were immediately after declared by the jury to be
guilty of a conspiracy against the safety of the French people, and the
indivisibility of the French republic.

If any of the unhappy persons thus proscribed attempted to speak in their
defense, they were thus silenced by the president: "Tu n'a pas la parole "It is
not your turn to speak."
" and if they persisted in declaring their innocence, they were put what was
called "horse de debats;" that is, ordered immediately out of the court,
condemned in their absence, and sent to execution. "I was not in prison when
this conspiracy took place," cried the viscountess de Noailles, madame de la
Fayette's sister. "But you would have been in the conspiracy if you had been
there," answered the president; and this unfortunate lady, the mother of three
children, perished with her own mother and grandmother. Madame de la Fayette
being in another prison was, in the hurry of forming the lists of death,
forgotten when her family suffered -- and still lives. From this period the
prisons* became the scenes of unexampled horror and despair. Till now, the
crowds by which they were inhabited had submitted to their fate with that
cheerful resignation, and often with that careless gaiety which is buoyant at a
Frenchman's heart in circumstances that would altogether overwhelm the sinking
spirits of the people of other countries. The houses allotted for the prisons
of the suspected persons were for the most part hotels of emigrants, which were
placed in the most agreeable situations of Paris, with extensive gardens, and
commanding beautiful views of the country. Such habitations had nothing of that
gloom and darkness which we usually associate with the idea of a prison, and
they were peopled with the best society of Paris.

The ladies were attentive to the duties of the toilette, the gentlemen were
polite and assiduous, and the courtyard of the Luxembourg, the convent of St.
Lazare, and some other prisons, exhibited of an evening almost as much
brilliancy and gaiety as the Thuilleries or the Champs Elisees. Music and
literature had their amateurs. At the Luxembourg, select circles were formed to
hear lectures from men of letters, sometimes on chemistry, sometimes on
astronomy. At St. Lazare, ladies sent invitations to dinner from the corridor
of Frimaire to the corridor of Floreal, with the fame formalities as formerly
from their respective hotels. Sometimes cards, sometimes bout-rimes, charades,
and epigrams beguiled the evening of its length, and thus the days of captivity
rolled on The maisons d'arret were now so multiplied that almost every street
of Paris had its prison, and in some of the smaller hotels the revolutionary
laws were less rigorously observed than in those which contained a greater
number of prisoners. Instead of giving a sketch myself of one of these milder
abodes of captivity, I shall translate a letter written to me on that subject
by M. Maron, the protestant minister at Paris.
. They were indeed embittered by one hour of mournful melancholy, and one of
trembling terror: the first when the evening paper arrived, and the list of the
victims of the revolutionary tribunal was read over, among whom the prisoners
seldom failed to find some friend or acquaintance to lament. But this was a
sensation of gentle sadness, compared to that turbulent dismay excited by the
hoarse voice of the turnkey sounding at midnight through the long galleries the
knell of some devoted victim, who was called upon to rise, in order to be led
to the Conciergerie by gendarmes sent for that purpose from the revolutionary
tribunal. Still, however, amidst the tears which the prisoners shed over their
lost companions, many of them cherished the fond hope that they themselves
should escape. But the law of the 22d of Prairial tore away every illusion of
the imagination or the heart, and displayed the general proscription of the
prisoners in all its extent of horror. It was no longer a solitary individual
who was called to death; multitudes were summoned at once. Every returning
night, long covered carts drawn by four horses entered successively the court
yards of the different prisons. Whenever the trampling of the horses' feet was
heard, the prisoners prepared themselves for their doom. The names of the
victims marked for execution the following day were called over, and they were
instantly hurried into these gloomy hearses. The husband was scarcely allowed
time to bid his wife a last farewell, or the mother to recommend her orphan
children to the compassion of such of the prisoners as might survive the
general calamity. At the prison of the Luxembourg, an hundred and sixty-nine
victims were in one night torn from their beds, and led to the grated dungeons
of the Conciergerie, that prison over the gates of which might with equal
propriety have been written, the same as over that of the infernal region of
Dante," "Let him lose all hope who enters here."
Lasciate speranza voi ch'entrate;" for here it might literally be said, "hope
never came, that comes to all." I have seen the Conciergerie, that abode of
horror, that antichamber of the tomb. I have seen those infectious cells,
where the prisoners breathed contagion, where the walls are in some places
stained with the blood of the massacres of September, and where a part of the
spacious courtyard, round which the grated dungeons are built, remains unpaved
since that period, when the stones were taken up for the purpose of burying the
dead. I have seen the chamber, where the persons condemned by the revolutionary
tribunal submitted to the preparatory offices of the executioner; where his
scissars cut off the lavish tresses of the youthful beauty, and where he tied
her tender hands behind her waist with cords. Merciful Heaven! and among those
who have thus suffered were persons to whom my heart was bound by the ties of
friendship and affection. -- But though I have survived such scenes, they have
left upon my heart that settled melancholy which never can be dissipated -- For
me, the world has lost its illusive coloring; its fairy spells, its light
enchantments have vanished; and death, the idea most familiar to my
imagination, appears to my wearied spirit the only point of rest.

The usual pretext for those murders in mass, which were practiced at this
period, was that of a conspiracy in the prisons; a vague and wide term which
the tyrants might interpret at their pleasure, and which gave them the power of
including whatever persons and whatever numbers they thought proper. Spies were
placed in every prison, who, after making out their lists of proscription as
they were directed by the tyrants, declared that a conspiracy existed, of which
those marked on the lists were the authors, or accomplices. Persons who had
never seen or heard of each other till that moment, were often brought together
from different prisons to take their trial for the same conspiracy: and when
the decemvirs wished to get rid of any particular individual, he was without
any hesitation added to what was called the fournee, the batch; for such was
the appellation given to the crowds dragged together to the guillotine, and
with such terms of jocular familiarity was mourning humanity insulted.
Sometimes the persons accused only received their act of accusation as they
were led up to the tribunal. Sometimes in the hurry, confusion, and
carelessness with which these indictments were made out, one person was
mistaken for another. The duchess of Biron among other instances, went to the
tribunal with an act of accusation which was destined for her steward. The
indifference of the tribunal with respect to such errors, enabled mons.
Loiserolles, at sixty years of age, to deceive his barbarous judges, by dying
for his son, a youth in his twenty-first year. It was observed, that this
generous parent, who thus a second time gave life to his child, answered with
uncommon alacrity when his name was called upon, and went with a look of
exultation to the scaffold. Perhaps history does not offer a more affecting
instance of parental tenderness, making the voluntary sacrifice of life to save
the object of its affection. But this extraordinary epoch called forth the
lights and shades of the human character in all their strongest coloring. The
last excesses of ferocious crimes were contrasted by the sublime enthusiasm of
the virtuous affections, shedding their sweetness like solitary flowers over
the wilderness where serpents hiss, and beasts of the forest howl; and by the
noblest efforts of heroical philanthropy bidding us cease to despair of
humanity, and converting the throb of indignant horror into the glow of
sympathetic admiration; -- bidding us turn from the tribunal of blood, from
Robespierre and his jury of assassins, to Loiserolles dying for his child; to
Madame Berenger, led in the bloom of life to execution with her parents, and,
altogether forgetful of herself, seeking only to support the sinking spirits of
her mother; -- to madame Bousquet, the sister-in-law of Gaudet, scorning the
impious laws which punished humanity with death, affording shelter to her
proscribed friends, and dying with them on the scaffold for having done so.

Among the multitudes who perished at this period, all were not armed with the
same fortitude; and sometimes even when tyranny spared the life of its victim,
its cruel persecutions bereaved the sufferer of reason. Of this mademoiselle --
was a melancholy instance. This unfortunate young lady saw her father, her
mother, and several of her relations dragged to the scaffold: she alone was
spared, and remained a prisoner at the Conciergerie. Along the gloomy vaults of
that terrific prison, by the dim light of sickly lamps, she fancied she saw the
mangled specter of her murdered parents, and in a short time became entirely
bereft of reason. She obstinately refused all sustenance, and remained
motionless as a statue, holding to her bosom her parrot, whom she had insisted
on bringing with her to her dungeon. When conjured by the other prisoners to
take some nourishment, she only answered, " "I want nothing. -- No, he wants
nothing. -- My parrot is like me, he wants nothing."
Je n'ai besoin de rien." "But your parrot," said they, "your poor parrot is
hungry." "Non," she constantly replied, "non, il n'a besoin de rien -- Mon
paroquet est comme moi -- il n'a besoin de rien." The tyrant has fallen, and
the dungeon of this unfortunate young lady is thrown open -- but alas! for her,
redress and freedom have come too late -- her reason is gone for ever!

The Polish princess Lubomirska united with superior talents all the charms of
early youth and distinguished beauty. She had been traveling through different
countries of Europe, and two years since was compelled to leave Berne in
Switzerland, on account of the attachment she had avowed to the cause of the
French revolution. She came with her husband to Paris, and cultivated the
society and friendship of Vergniaud and of other deputies of the convention,
who were the most eminent for their talents and their zeal for liberty. This
democratic princess, to whom a true republican would have offered a civic
crown, became an object of resentment to the vindictive Robespierre, on account
of her friendship for some members of the Gironde: she was thrown into prison,
from thence sent to the revolutionary tribunal, and condemned by the jury of
assassins to die. Being in a state of pregnancy, her execution was deferred. In
the mean time her friends gave information of her danger to Kosciusko, the
Polish general, and desired his interposition in her behalf. Kosciusko
instantly dispatched a letter to Robespierre, declaring that the princess
Lubomirska had ever shown the most devoted attachment to the principles of
liberty, and conjuring Robespierre to spare the life of a zealous friend to the
common cause in which France and Poland were engaged. Robespierre, after
reading the letter, exclaimed, " "What! pardon for a princess! -- Ah,
Kosciusko! -- let her be guillotined."
Quoi! grace pour une princess! -- Ah, Kosciusko! -- qu'on la guillotine." The
unhappy princess, having miscarried, was immediately sent to execution. -- Two
days before the fall of Robespierre, eight women who had been respited having
declared themselves pregnant, were dragged to the scaffold. Among this number
was the princess of Monaco. As she passed along the court of the prison, she
said to the prisoners who were assembled to see the sad procession, and bid a
last farewell to the companions of their misfortunes, "I go to death with the
calmness which innocence inspires, and wish you from my soul a better fate."
Then addressing herself to one of the turnkeys who was leading her toward the
chamber where the executioner waited to bind the victims, "I have one favor to
ask you," said she, taking a packet from her bosom, "will you promise to grant
it? This packet contains my hair: I implore your compassion, I conjure you in
my own name, in the name of all who hear me, send it to my son, to whom it is
directed; swear to me in the presence of those virtuous persons, whom the same
destiny as mine awaits, that you will render me this last service which I
require of humanity." The dismay and terror of one of her women who was
involved in the proscription, formed a striking contrast to the firmness she
herself displayed. "Take courage, my dear friend," cried the princess, "take
courage, it is the guilty only who ought to fear." -- The prison of Port Libre
offered an affecting spectacle of filial piety. Madame Lachabeaussiere, in
consequence of a malignant denunciation made against her by her son-in-law, was
not only dragged to prison, but placed in a dungeon in close confinement till
the moment arrived when she was to appear before the tribunal. Her daughter,
madame Malessi, who was already confined in another prison, procured leave to
be transferred to that where her mother was immured, whom by tears and
supplications she obtained permission to see. Madame Lachabeaussiere was taken
out of her dungeon, and led to her daughter, who flew toward her, and,
throwing her arms round her neck, remained a long time pressing her mother to
her bosom, and without power to articulate a word. After this melancholy
interview, madame Lachabeaussiere was led back to her dungeon. Her situation
affected her daughter so deeply, that she became bereft of her reason.
Sometimes she took up her needle work for a few moments; then throwing it
aside, rose with precipitation, and flew along the galleries of the prison,
till she reached her mother's cell. She usually seated herself at the door, and
listened attentively: when she could hear nothing, she used to weep bitterly,
and repeat again and again in a tone of despair, "Oh my mother! Oh, my tender,
my unfortunate mother!" She often remained many hours together, seated upon the
stone-floor, and she was in a state of pregnancy. Her hair hung dishevelled
over her shoulders, her eye seemed bent on vacancy, her cheeks were sometimes
flushed with deep red, and sometimes of a deadly paleness, and she was often
seized with convulsive faintings. Every day she carried the greatest portion of
her food to her mother, who without this succor would have often wanted
sufficient nourishment for her support. It is soothing to add, that madame
Lachabeaussier was snatched from death by the fall of the tyrant, and that her
tender and virtuous daughter is restored to reason.

While the tyrants, far from finding any satiety of blood in their daily
murders, were erecting new ranges of seats in the hall of the revolutionary
tribunal, sufficient to contain an hundred instead of fifty accused persons,
death now hovered in a new form over the prisons. The administrators of the
police went to each prison attended by a strong guard, and ordered the
prisoners to be shut up in their respective chambers, and not suffered to have
any communication till the purpose of the visit was effected. They then went
successively to every apartment, and demanded of the prisoners their knives,
scissars, razors, buckles, watches, and all the money they had in their
possession. These unhappy persons, being altogether ignorant of the object of
the visit, had no time to conceal any thing, and were stripped of all they had
except fifty livres in paper, which each prisoner was suffered to retain in
order to pay for his subsistence. But from this day famine scowled along these
gloomy mansions, adding to the pangs of mental sufferings those of debility and
disease. The prisoners were no longer permitted to receive their daily meals
from their own houses, or from a tavern; but were ordered from henceforth, in
conformity to the laws of equality, to eat a la gamelle Out of one dish at a
common table.
. Their food was provided for them at the rate of fifty sous a day, by a cook
placed in the prison. Their nourishment consisted of one meal in twenty-four
hours, often too scanty to satisfy the calls of hunger, and sometimes composed
of such nauseous diet as the greater part of the prisoners were unable to eat.

Age and infirmity were denied every indulgence necessary to support the
disordered frame, or raise the sinking spirits. A little bread saved from this
wretched meal, and water, was all that could be obtained during the rest of the
day Even the prisoners of war ware compelled to submit to this rigorous
treatment. General O'Hara has since told me, that after having avoided the
gamelle for some weeks on the plea of illness, he was at length forced to share
the common evil. His friends in England will be glad to hear that he is now
released from his lodgings in a prison, and from a gendarme when he walks out,
and is gone on his parole to Chantilly.
. To this meal the prisoners at the Luxembourg, where nine hundred persons were
confined, were summoned in a succession of three hundred at a time, by a great
bell, which called them to a hall, at the door of which stood the jailor, who
had been an executioner under Collot d'Herbois at Lions The keeper of the
prison at the time we were in confinement, Benoit, distinguished in Paris by
the epithet of the bon Benoit, had long before this period been turned out of
office, being unfit to execute the purposes of his masters.
. This man was remarkably tall, big, and muscular; his arms were bare to the
elbow; he wore a fierce red cap, which had now become the symbol of blood, and
looked as if he were prepared for a massacre. He only suffered twenty persons
at a time to enter the hall, and then flinging the door in the faces of the
others, obliged them to remain in the passages till those within were seated at
the table. The hour of dinner passed like the other hours of the day, in gloomy
and unbroken silence; for even the soothing intercourse of conversation was now
forbidden, under the penalty of being dragged immediately before the tribunal,
since the spies placed in the prisons, whenever they observed two or three
persons talking together, inquired sternly if they were forming a conspiracy.
What most occupied the minds of the prisoners at this period was contriving the
means of escaping from their tyrants by a voluntary death, which was now become
difficult, since they had been stripped of every instrument which could have
served that purpose. Such was the situation of these unhappy victims of
tyranny, when on the night of the 9th of Thermidor the tocsin sounded, and the
city was called to arms. Many circumstances which I shall afterward relate,
led the prisoners to believe that these sounds were the signal of a general
massacre. But the tocsin now rung the joyful, the triumphant peal of liberty.
Before I give you a detail of the scenes which passed on the 9th of Thermidor,
I must trace the political events which led to that memorable epoch, and
rescued France from a state which was the astonishment and shame of human
nature; from a state more terrible than all which the most cunning tyrant could
have inflicted upon slaves whom he had previously disarmed. And all this was
suffered by a nation which called itself free, which had taken up arms to
assert its freedom, and gained the most glorious victories in its defense.
France, covered with all the laurels of heroic valor, and the terror of
combined Europe, held out her neck to vulgar assassins and executioners,
instead of crumbling them into dust. -- Such are the strange contradictions of
human nature! The effects resulting from the terrible impulse of revolutionary
government upon the moral world, may perhaps be compared to those produced upon
the natural scene by the tremendous tempests which sometimes sweep along the
western islands; when the mingled elements rush forth in irresistible fury,
when the deluging waters bear away vegetation, trees, and rocks, and the
shrieking whirlwinds shake the dwellings of man to their foundations. -- The
storm is past -- the enormous vapors have rolled away -- a soft light hovers
on the horizon, and we are now left at leisure to sigh over the ruins that
surround us, and lament the victims laid prostrate by the blast. But let us
hope that this stormy revolution will at least produce some portion of felicity
to succeeding generations, who have not, like us, felt the tumultuous horrors
of this convulsion of the passions, who will owe their happiness to the
struggles of a race that is passed away, and whom they have never known; while
we, who have been spectators of the cruel conflict -- we, who have lost the
friends we loved and honored, are often unable, amidst the tears we shed over
their tombs, to consider, "all partial evil as universal good."

To Miss HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS.
Paris, 15th Ventose, 3d year of the French Republic.
" VOUS M. Maron, when he adresses me in verse, uses a style of compliment
which would have led me to omit the poetry, if i^ did not belong to the history
of the letter. Besides, fiction is the privilege of poets, and the French
language is still that of gallantry, although the days of French chivalry are
gone for ever.
, qui des bords de la Tamise
Delaissant les brouillards epais,
Au milieu du peuple francais
Cherchates la terre promise;
Vous qui carressates long-tems
Cette illusion delectable,
Comme s'amusent les enfants
Des reves brillans de la fable;
Vous, que les guichets, les verroux
Ont acheve de mieux instruire;
Mais qui voyez des jours plus doux
Enfin a l'horison reluire;
Aimable eleve d'Apollon,
Qui, sur le somment du Parnasse,
Pers des Pope, et des Addison,
A deja fix votre place.
You ask me, madam, to give you a sketch of the maison d'arret, where, under
the tyranny of Robespierre, I found myself shut up on a suspicion of being
suspected; and like your countryman Howard, active in your researches, you wish
to add my little recital to your history of our revolutionary dungeons. I obey
your orders, for Peut-on rein refuser aux Graces,
Quand la Virtue, quand la Raison,
Inseparables de leurs traces,
Par vos accens, commandent en leur nom? --
I cannot however promise you any very interesting detail: the hotel Talaru,
converted into a maison d'arret of the section Lepelletier, has been the scene
of no very remarkable events. It never was reckoned in the number of those
fatal depots which were called the antichambers of the guillotine. But it is
probable that it would have had its turn also. There is even room to believe
that it would not have been long delayed, if the ninth of Thermidor had not,
for our good fortune, deranged certain anthropophagical measures announced by
Barrere in the sitting of the convention previous to that day. But I am
anticipating facts; and as I have to write a journal, and not an epic poem, I
shall keep within chronological order.

Though my residence in Paris does not exceed twelve years, I have witnessed
the building of the hotel Talaru, in the rue Richelieu, now rue de la Loi, near
the national library, by the marquis of that name; who was first maitre-d'hotel
to the queen. Considerably reduced in his fortune by the new order of things,
the citizen Talaru took last year the resolution of leaving his hotel, and of
withdrawing into the adjoining house, which also belonged to him, and which was
called the little hotel Talaru. He let the great hotel to one Gence, a
tavern-keeper, who intended to make it a furnished hotel. Gence, on reflection,
thought that it was not probable that any considerable number of foreigners
would come to Paris under the present circumstances, or that the citizens of
the departments would now find Paris a very pleasant abode; and fearful that he
had made a bad speculation, he was anxious to rid himself of the affair. We had
now reached that disastrous period when maisons d'arr^t sprang up in every
quarter; when every section in Paris had its exclusive prisons at the service
of its revolutionary committee; and Gence proposed the hotel Talaru to the
revolutionary committee of the section Lepelletier, to be applied to this
patriotic purpose. His proposal was accepted, and the agreement made; but I
have never learnt what were the conditions. A German porter was put into this
new prison, and the mine became worth the digging.

In reality, all whom their evil destiny led hither were made to pay for their
lodging a most exorbitant price. Such was in a short time the fate of Talaru
himself. He expressed a wish, on account of his age and infirmities, to have a
room to himself; and he obtained this special favor at the rate of 18 livres a
day, that is, paying almost as much for his small apartment as he himself was
paid for the whole house.

I was the eighth person who was lodged in a beautiful saloon on the ground
floor toward the garden. We each paid four livres a day. This saloon therefore
brought in three hundred livres a decade, nine hundred and sixty livres a
month, ten thousand two hundred and fifty livres a year; and the whole hotel
was let by the proprietor for seven thousand livres. What became of this
exorbitant rent, and among whom were the spoils divided, as I have never been
in the secret, I can give no information on that head.

On the 10th of Thermidor we were about two hundred prisoners.

If any person complained of these extortions, he was answered, "Citizen, you
are at liberty to leave this place, and if you like you may be transferred
elsewhere." But the fear of being thrown into some one of those houses which
were premature graves, made us bear with resignation the ills we had.

It was on the 19th of Prairial that I exchanged my own modest apartment for
the fine saloon in question. The order of the committee of public safety by
which I was arrested, did not express in what prison I should be confined. I
asked therefore the agent of the committee, who was the bearer of the warrant,
conjointly with two members of the revolutionary committee of my own section,
if I might be allowed to choose my prison? He answered courteously, that he did
not wish for any thing more than to oblige me.

De m'obliger! l'aimable politesse!
Je demandai le Luxembourg.
Il me fut fait ce refus net et court:
Citoyen, je ne peux, car on s'y trouve en press.
Les Carmes, citoyens? -- Helas! c'est meme cas.
Picpus? C'est enc^re pis, ainsi qu'a Saint Lazare.
Enfin, pour sortir d'embarras,
Je pensai demander d'aller droit au Tenare.
Happily things did not proceed to this extremity. I referred myself to the
knowledge and kind offices of my courteous agent, and he carried me to the
hotel Talaru. I found on my entrance an order of things altogether different
from what I had expected. I thought that all the maisons d'arr^t were at this
period equally guarded, and treated with the same rigor, and prepared myself
for solitary confinement and the gamelle. But I found the communication among
the prisoners perfectly free: they visited each other without any impediment,
and even the communication without was attended with very little difficulty. I
saw some receive their wives and children, others their friends and mistresses.
Persons of both sexes met together; every one amused himself as he thought
proper, and fared as he liked. If it was not the image of liberty, it was at
least that of equality and fraternity; and I said to myself, "Well! if we must
build our tabernacles here, so let it be!" How many persons whom I knew were
much more to be pitied than myself! The art of contentment is to look not at
what is better, but what is worse than our own situation.

Here then, for the third time since the institution of the republic, was I
deprived de la clef des champs; "of the key of the fields." -- I have perhaps
more merit than many others in loving the republic, which has cost me more
personal vexations than I had ever dreamt of suffering.

The very day of its proclamation (21st September 1792, O. S.) I was arrested
at Seves, for twenty-four hours, from having met the municipality and the
military force of the place, at the house of one of my friends whom they were
come to take to prison, and who was then gone to Paris to confound the calumny
of his persecutors before the committee of general safety. The first
anniversary of this same day, twenty fusileers took me from my bed at five in
the morning, and I was lodged in the horrible chamber d'arret of the
mayoralty-house We were stowed up in that place to the number of one hundred
and two. This room was much more dreadful before an honest Swiss, Louis Major,
established a kind of corporation under the name of the society of perfect
equality. This regulation made the dwelling more supportable: I had the honor
of being president twice twenty-four hours.
. But I must own that this last time the prospect was a little more alarming on
account of the progress of tyranny, which since the establishment of
revolutionary government stalked on with giant steps, and knew no bounds. I
acknowledge at the same time to have felt that the perspective of evil, when it
is clothed with a certain degree of probability, is often worse than the evil
itself.

The daily spectacle of the misery of so many good men whom I esteemed or
loved; the image which was ever before my mind of those honorable veterans in
patriotism whose heads had been placed under the fatal axe; the audacious
insolence of the wicked in every popular assembly, which was equalled only by
their folly, and by the abject stupor of the people of the higher classes,
whose name was now become a title of proscription Had the historian Sallust
been a witness of this horrid system, and undertaken to draw sketches of it, he
might have found an exact description in a picture he has himself given, to
which it bears the most perfect resemblance.

"In primo caepere pessimum quemque et omnibus invisum necare: ea populus
laetari et merito dicere fieri. Post, ubi paulatim licentia crovit, juxta bonos
et malos lubidinose interficere; caeteros metu terrere. Ita civitas, servitute
oppressa, stultae laetitiae graves poenas dedit -- uti quisque domum aut
villam, postremo aut vas aut vestimentum alicujus concupiverat, dabat operam ut
in proscriptorum numero esset. Homines incertissimi, quorum omnis vis virtusque
in lingua sita est, forte atque alterius socordia dominationem oblatam
insolentes agitant. Quae pessimi et stultissimi decreverunt, ea bonis et
sapientibus facienda. Mollitia decr^torum senatui dignitatem, Lepido metum
detrahi." Sallust. in Bello Catil. et passim in Fragmentis.

"They first began by putting to death the nobility and clergy; and as the
people felt no sympathy with the aristocracy or the church, they discovered
great marks of satisfaction at their proscription. But when the tyranny became
by degrees so confirmed that all classes were indiscriminately murdered, and
every one shrunk with fear, the city suffered for its silly joy, by oppression
and horrors of every kind -- so that whoever coveted the house or villa, or
even the plate and dresses of any person, used his endeavors to get him put
into the list of proscription. Men of doubtful characters, whose whole courage
and virtue lay in their tongues, taking advantage of the stupidity or indolence
of the rest, assumed absolute power, and behaved themselves with unexampled
insolence. Whatever these profligate and weak men decreed, the wise and the
good were obliged to sanction; and the convention, terrified into submission by
the committee of public safety, lost all its dignity, and sunk into registers
of its imperial edicts."


, embittered my existence more than the rigours of imprisonment; tempered, I
allow, by a great number of unhoped-for-comforts, and by a stoical tranquillity
of which I did not think myself capable. Society was become to my feelings the
Cape of Storms, my prison was the Cape of Good Hope.

My first regrets were bestowed on the festival of the following day; that
which was celebrated in honor of the Supreme Being. My absence from this
national solemnity gave me pain. Notwithstanding all that has been said of the
decree of the convention expressing the adhesion of the French nation to the
immutable principles of all morality and all worship, I cannot help observing
that this decree is one of those proposed by Robespierre which I disapproved
the least. Atrocious disturbers of social order, by carrying to their utmost
length the most impious abominations, had thrown on republican France a general
odium. Justice had overtaken these persons; but the coalesced powers were not
less careful to take advantage of this delirium, and discredit the cause of
liberty with their own people, by treating as atheists, that is to say, as
universal disorganizers, its partisans and friends. The national representation
was willing to give an authentic and formal denial to this calumny; and it is
true that in this point of view the decree had a good effect. The convention
never entertained the absurd idea of decreeing that God existed, that the soul
was immortal, and that the French ought to believe this because such was the
good pleasure of the legislature. It meant, by a declaration of a kind as new
as the circumstances were in which it was placed, to absolve and exculpate a
great nation from those calumnious imputations seized on by its enemies to
serve their views; and I repeat it, all the friends of principle have applauded
the decree, and I confess that I was enthusiastic in its favor.

It was for its object, and not the mode of celebrating the festival of the
20th of Prairial, that I regretted my absence from it. The mode I had judged
beforehand would be a series of pantomimes and harlequinades; and during a long
walk I had taken in the country a few days before, I had lamented the
devastation made in the woods, and in particular among the young trees around
Paris; a devastation which extended over the whole surface of the republic, and
of which our sons as well as ourselves will feel the sad effects.

I composed, two or three days after my arrest, the following couplets, in
which I attempted to describe my moral situation, and which I sent to a few
friends to comfort them on this point. They are set to the air of the
"vaudeville de la Soiree orageuse," which the affecting adieus of Mountjourdin
to his wife and his friends have so much contributed to make the fashion.

I.
Si de riches appartemens,
Si le luxe de la dorure,
Des glaces, des tableaux charmens,
Pouvoient adoucir ma cloture;
A mes regrets, a mon ennui
Je devrois imposer silence:
Mais envain j'y cherche un appui
Propre a soutenir ma constance.
II.
O precieuse liberte!
Premiere passion du sage,
De ta paisible volupte
Rien, helas! ne nous dedommage.
Nous ne respirons que pour toi,
Ta soif jour et nuit nous to^^ente:
En nous soumettant a la loi
Toi seule encore es notre attente!
III.
Dernier asyle du malhear,
Esperance consolatrice,
De ton baume restaurateur
Prete-moi le secours propice!
Qu'l tremble, l'ami des tyrans,
Pret a leur vendre sa patrie.
La virtue venge ses enfans
Des forfaits de la calomnie.
IV.
Oni, par toi je dois triomphe^
D'une malveillance perfide!
Et que po^rrois je redouter,
Virtue! couvert de ton egide?
Quand la paix regne dans mon sein,
Que mon front en offer l'empreinte!
Il ne pe^t etre que serein,
Alors que la coeur est sans crainte.
In this manner I accommodated myself every day more and more to my new
dwelling, and every day the good company increased by new arrivals.

But by degrees the police of the house became more severe, and we were
successively deprived of little comforts which we much regretted.

First of all the communication with our friends, so far as receiving their
visits in our room, entirely ceased. It was soon a particular favor to talk
with any one for a few minutes at the door of the prison. Soon after, the
entrance of the newspapers was forbidden, and this prohibition was not one of
those things which affected us the least. It was common enough, however, to
have a newspaper smuggled in, and then it was privately handed about, and
sought after with anxious curiosity, for we never failed learning the death of
some acquaintance or friend; but we were informed also of the success of our
armies; and their victories sometimes compensated for our individual pains and
sufferings.

A short time had elapsed, when in the chamber where I lodged we had a precious
resource for intelligence. The first secretary of the liquidation office, the
citizen Dutilleul, was one of our fellow prisoners. He was so necessary in his
office, that the director-general Denormandie was authorized to put him in
requisition every time he stood in need of him, and this happened almost every
day. At seven o'clock, Dutilleul was sent for at the maison d'arret, and
conducted by a gendarme to his office, where he passed the whole day at work;
and the grateful republic put him under lock and key every evening. Judge how
well he was questioned on his entrance; and it happened pretty often, that
through inadvertence he had left the "journal of debates and decrees" at the
bottom of his pocket. In the meanwhile we killed the present time, and shut our
eyes on the future, by play and bodily exercise; such as battledore and
shuttlecock, and fives: we feasted, read, and made bout-rimes. I frequently
partook of the two last amusements with a very amiable young man named R -- n,
and we had a Muse, who daily amused herself in setting up some prize, which my
antagonist, I own, generally obtained. Till then we had neither of us had any
idea of our talent for poetical composition I was one day employed in the
exercise of a talent of another kind than that of making bout-rimes, and which
I also acquired in prison, and that was washing the dishes; when the boy who
made our beds, being alone at that moment with me, looked at me at first with
an embarrassed air, and then stared with astonishment while he asked me half a
dozen successive questions. "Pray, sir, are you a protestant?" "Yes" "Did you
know any person of Nismes?" "Yes." "Rabaut St, Etienne?" "Yes." -- His eyes
glistened -- "Are you a minister, sir?" "Yes." "Of the Dutch embassy formerly?"
"Yes." "And now at St. Thomas de Louvre?" "Yes." -- The boy burst into tears
--. "Good God! sir, is it possible that it can be you? -- What! you here! I can
scarcely believe my own eyes!" -- And then wiping away his tears, he told me
who he was, and talked to me of Nismes, and my respectable friend Paul Rabaut,
and his unfortunate brother Rabaut St. Etienne. "No, no, sir," added he, "you
shall wash no more dishes; I will take care of that, and I beg your pardon for
not having known you sooner." I thanked the good lad, and informed my
compannions of his offers. He rendered each of us the same service, which was
worth fifteen livres to him a decade; and I was afterward indebted to him for
many little acts of kindness.
. Et voila du malheur l'utilete palpable!
Il developpe en nous le germe du talent.
Rameau dit de Labor de: "Helas! c'est bien le diable:
Que le fort a ce drole ait prodigue l'argent!
Il nous eff^coit tous, si, loin de l'opulence,
Son genie eut connu l'aiguillon de la (...).
Amiss, du bien, du mal, admi^^ns la balance:
Ils concourent ensemble a la meilleure fin.
What made me think in this place of Rameau and Laborde is, that this last, not
the rival of Plutus but of Orpheus, was also our companion in his misfortune,
and that I shall have soon to inform you of his fatal catastrophe. As to our
poetical sports, I shall communicate some of them, my dear madam, at the end of
this letter. Even the charade, the logogryphe, and the acrostic furnished us
with amusement.

L'ennuyeux loisir du couvent
Parmi les moines les fit naitre
En depit du bon gout: le meme sentiment
En prison les fit reparaitre
Thus passed away the long days of Prairial and Messidor; Thermidor came. Till
this time we had been soothed with the consoling idea, that the hotel Talaru
was only a depot of prisoners detained as a measure of general safety, and not
of those who were termed suspected; and that there was little apprehension of
any thing more than captivity. The fourth of this month robbed us of this
assurance. Three of our companions were taken from us the preceding evening;
Talaru, the proprietor of the house; Boutin, former treasurer of the navy,
known by his beautiful English garden, which he called Tivoli The French Virgil
has consecrated these verses to him: Tell que ce frais bouton,
Timide avant-coureur de la belle saison,
L'aimable Tivoli, d'une form nouvelle
Fit le premier en France entre^oir le modele.
DE LILLE, Poem des Jardins, chapter I. He celebrates, two verses afterward, the
garden of the Desert, which had been laid out with so much taste by another of
our companions in misfortune at the hotel Talaru, M. Demonville.


; and Laborde, formerly valet-de-chambre to Lewis XV. celebrated for his
passionate taste for the arts, and in particular for that of music, in which he
had been a great composer, and of which he had also written the history. The
day after their removal was the last of their existence; and their heads fell
with forty-three others under the pretended axe of the law.

An event of this nature darkened a little the color of our ideas, from the
sad presage which it offered, especially to prisoners of a certain cast.

Quand de l'etre au neant le passage est si bref,
On se tate par fois si le trone tient au chef.
Fallen from the hopes which the greater part of my fellow prisoners had
indulged of a speedy release, their gaiety and good humor were changed into
looks of melancholy and sorrow. They were astonished and sometimes impatient at
my unshaken philosophy. The house now overflowed with waggon-loads of
prisoners, who were brought up from the departments: the guard became more
strict, and the rigours and pains of our captivity more severe. About this time
I composed two couplets to the tune of the Marsellois hymn:

I.
Chers camarades d'infortune,
Compagnons de captivite,
De notre disgrace commune
Consolons nous par l'amitie:
De tous les revers de la vie
Elle t^mpere la rigueur,
Le bon droit vengera l'honneur
Des efforts de la calomnie.
Courage, o mes amiss! bravons les coups du sort!
Virtue! (bis) c'est avec toi qu'on meprise la mort.
II.
Retranche dans sa conscience,
Le republican genereux
Doit bientot de son innocence
Voir briller le jour radieux.
Equitable moins que fevere,
La patrie, au gre des tyrans,
Auroit-elle pour ses enfans
Cesse de vouloir etre mere?
Courage, o mes amiss! bravons les coups du sort!
Virtue! (bis) c'est avec toi qu'on meprise la mort.
I had no doubt but that this system of blood was drawing near its end I
thought with Sallust: "Ego cuncta imperia crudelia magis acerba quam diuturna,
arbitror neque quemquam a multis metuendum e^^e, quin ad cum ex multis (...)
r^^edat." In Fragm.

"The reign of violence is more cruel than lasting; and no one becomes an
object of terror to the multitude, without feeling that the multitude is an
object of terror to himself."


; but who was sure of living to see it? None of us dared believe that it was
(...) near. The eighth of Thermidor no paper could pass the portal, and
Dutilleul had not been sent for to his office. He went however the ninth. How
long he seemed to us in returning! He came at last; but his return was
accompanied by circumstances that appeared extraordinary. The keeper, holding
him by the arm, hurried him across the court, where we were walking, and
waiting to see him; and led him up to his room, without permitting him to stop.
When we joined him, we found his lips completely closed with respect to what
was passing, to which effect he had received express orders. We were all shut
up two hours sooner than usual, and enjoined to go to bed. But one of us, who
had gone down into the court yard for a moment between nine and ten o'clock,
heard a For some days past the news-men had been enjoined not to cry their
papers near the hotel. This man had been ordered by the sentinal to march on,
and hold his tongue. He answered, swearing a great oath, "There are a number of
unfortunate persons within; and they ought to know what is passing." I was
informed of this precious anecdote the next day.
newsman cry distinctly in the streets, "La grande arrestation de
Catiline-Robespierre et de ses accomplices The wonderful arrest of
Catiline-Robespierre and his accomplices!"
!" He told us of this circumstance; and you may well imagine what an effect
such a piece of information produced on our minds. We knew at least to what we
ought to attribute the beat to arms, and the retreat which we heard some time
after. We slept but little, and the next morning early we were informed of the
whole. All then was ecstacy; the countenances of the prisoners were scarcely to
be recognized. As my dejection had not been very great, my joy on this happy
occasion was less immoderate. The same day I made this imprompt^ epitaph on
Robespierre: Ci git un monstre abreuve de forsaits;
Tigre ^l^ere de sang tyrant, suant le crime:
Caligula, Neron, Phalaris traits pour traits.
La (...), helas! trop ^ard l'a plonge dans l'abime.


On the 10th and the 11th, prisoners of a pretty opposite description made
their appearance.

On the 12th I was set at liberty. I was the first in the house who was thus
indebted to the change of system, and one of those who least expected it On the
examination of my papers, which was done by two members of the revolutionary
committee of my section, without myself being present, or any one on my behalf;
a letter was found, I was told, from the mother of God Catherine Theos was a
fanatic who indulged in all the airy and fanciful dreams of Swede^borg, and,
like all other fanatics, had a certain number of followers. This poor woman was
arrested as a counter-revolutionist, the tyrants of the day calling every thing
they did not comprehend, counter-revolutionary. She had the address to flatter
Robespierre; probably gave him some claim to relationship; and Robespierre
protected her secretly from the fangs of Vadier, who was very earnest in making
war on those citizens of Heaven, and bringing them to the guillotine.
: I was of course her accomplice, and it was expected I should be tried with
her. The very day after the fall of Robespierre, Vadier, that veteran in
virtue, brought to the recollection of the public this vast conspiracy, and
informed the convention that he had a report ready, which would unfold all its
mysterious horrors. I said to myself, "So many innocent people perished as
accomplices of L'Amiral, why should I not perish as the accomplice of Catherine
Theos?" What comforted me was the absurdity of this accusation, to which none
of my friends, nor any person who had the least acquaintance with me, could
give credit. It seemed curious enough to ascend the fatal cart, and get to the
next world with the votaries of the sybil of the rue Contrescarpe.
. I did not want much entreaty to go out; and I visited my penates, my friends,
and my books, with a pleasure which the experience only of the unfortunate can
estimate. Before I finish my history, I should do justice to the keepers, to
whose care I was entrusted for fifty-three days. They were not equally
praiseworthy, but, taking one with the other, they were not much amiss; and
the agreeable aspect of a bottle of wine or an assignat humanised ed them
completely.

I shall characterise Smydth by a single trait. While the greater part of the
jailors were followed by ferocious mastiffs, his usual companion was a sheep [a
sheep with four legs Every person in Paris knows who the two-legged sheep were,
and their abominable employment in the prisons under the tyranny of
Robespierre. Very different from the -- placidum pecus, inque tuendo^
Natum homines.



which never quitted him, and which made him look more like St. John than St.
Roch.

Ainsi de mes arrets se termine l'histoire:
O siecles a venir, daignerez-vous y croire:
P. S. A singular anecdote I cannot help relating. Rousselin, one of my
fellow prisoners at the hotel Talaru, had been carried before the revolutionary
tribunal, and acquitted. He came the next day to visit his old companions, and
impart to us the good news. He informed me on this occasion, that a Dutchman
called Van Hooff had been dragged to the guillotine at the moment when he
(Rousselin) entered the Conciergerie, and that he lay down on the bed yet warm
of this unfortunate man, who had just left it. Van Hooff was my friend; and his
unhappy catastrophe affected me extremely. I was so much the more strongly
persuaded of the death of Van Hooff, as it was announced in several of the
public papers: and you may imagine without much difficulty what was my
astonishment, when a fortnight or three weeks after, I received a letter from
Van Hooff, in which he congratulated me on the justice which had been done me,
and begged me to use my interest to procure him his liberty. I hastened to the
prison of Plesses to see him, where he had been just transferred. He cleared up
the mystery of his resurrection, by informing me that the cannibals had
guillotined, from a mistake in the name, a poor Brabanter, who was called Van
Hove, instead of himself. Not having had it in his power to repair this error
till it was too late, he had taken advantage of it, and acted the dead man till
farther orders.


LETTER XIII.
THE surrender of Lions, which took place some-days previous to the murder of
the deputies of the Gironde, contributed to hasten the execution of that
atrocious deed. The Lyonnais had long struggled against the commissaries of the
mountain faction, who, under the pretense of an ardent zeal for liberty, were
diligent in seeking opportunities for riot and plunder; and however strongly
this detachment of conspirators were supported by those who directed their
motions from Paris, they could not withstand the indignation and vengeance of
the citizens of Lions, who, roused by the dangers with which they were
threatened, crushed their oppressers, the chief of whom, Chalier, they sent to
the scaffold. The Lyonnais had proceeded too far to hope for any mercy from the
faction, who had now accomplished their treason at Paris: and seeing the cause
of liberty abandoned by the departments, who had made their peace with the
traitors, they were driven either to suffer patiently the weight of their
wrath, or prepare to oppose it. Of this dreadful alternative they chose the
latter; but finding themselves unsupported in the project they had at first
formed of marching to Paris, they determined to defend their own city. In the
mean time they employed the most honorable means to explain to the convention,
that their resistance arose neither from disaffection to the republic, nor from
any wish to form a federal government, of which they had been accused; that
they had sworn fidelity to the republican constitution, and had issued orders
to assemble the primary assemblies for its acceptance. But resistance for any
cause was now a crime, and this concession of the Lyonnais only served to
increase the insolence of their oppressors, who decreed that the city was in a
state of rebellion, and that all who had resorted thither from the neighboring
departments should be treated as emigrants: for the conspirators easily
perceived that this city might form a central point of opposition, by
collecting together all those persons in the southern provinces who were averse
to the revolutionary order of things. An army was immediately levied, and
ordered to march against Lions; and it was believed that when the Lyonnais were
informed that the affair was about to became so serious, they would make no
farther opposition.

The general who commanded the conventional army, endeavored by proclamations
to conciliate the parties, but in vain. His proposals of pardon were rejected
by those who thought themselves injured, and who know by fatal experience what
degree of confidence was to be placed in the offer of tender mercies from the
cruel. The Lyonnais were allowed three hours to deliberate on the gracious
propositions of the general, but a discharge of cannon returned their answer
before the first had expired; and though new proclamations were issued, and on
the anniversary of the 10th of August both parties sent deputations to
celebrate that event together, the Lyonnais continued their warlike opposition,
and prepared to make an obstinate resistance.

In the mean time the department of Mont-Blanc, formerly Savoy, was recovered
by the Piedmontese, who took advantage of the absence of the army which had
been called off for the purpose of reducing Lions; and the representatives who
conducted the operations of the siege wrote to the convention to repeal the
decree which the conspirators in their wrath had poured out against that city.
The Lyonnais were as deaf to these concessions as they had been to the
proclamations of the generals, who now proceeded to extremities, and began the
bombardment of the city, which was set on fire in several places, and a great
number of the inhabitants perished. Other proclamations followed this act of
hostility, which met with the same reception. The black flag continued floating
on the towers, indicating resistance till death; and though the city, being
unfortified, had nothing to defend it but the bravery of its inhabitants, no
impression could be made except by bombardment. The conspirators therefore sent
their emissaries into the adjoining departments to raise the people in mass;
and, if any credit is to be given to the reports of those who were employed,
the besieging army was reinforced by other armies amounting to fifty thousand
men With this reinforcement the attack began afresh the city was surrounded,
all communication cut off, and the convention was informed that famine would
soon effect what the obstinacy of the Lyonnais had hitherto prevented. During
three months these brave republicans contended against the numerous armies that
the conspirators had assembled; and had not their ardor been checked by their
commanders, they would all have witnessed against the cowardice and baseness of
their countrymen, by whom they were left unsupported, with the last drop of
their blood. After having performed prodigies of valor, till they were
overpowered by numbers, and resistance became no longer possible, they
endeavored to effect their retreat, by forcing their way through the
besiegers; for according to the dispatches sent to the convention they were
entirely surrounded. In this retreat some succeeded; but a great part were cut
to pieces, and the conventional army entered the city in triumph.

With the savage joy of the famished cannibal, when he seizes on some
ship-wrecked wretch whom the waves have unkindly spared from the fate of his
companions, the mountain conspirators heard of the reduction of Lions. The
committee of public safety, through the organ of Barrere, in congratulating the
convention on the news, informed them that measures were taken to exterminate
every fugitive; that no weakness, no mercy should be shown; and that this den
of conspirators must make ample reparation, and that this reparation must
consist in burying this rebel city under its own ruins. And lest this moment of
wrath should be transient, lest the indignation which had filled their
capacious souls should evaporate, these guardians of the public weal methodized
their vengeance by a decree, which the convention sanctioned, that Lions should
be razed on the ground, and struck out of the cities of the republic. This
"great and vigorous measure, the total destruction of the city, was the only
one that had escaped us," the deputies in mission at this devoted place echo to
their colleagues of the committee. They had already created military tribunals
to judge the inhabitants; but complete extermination had not been within the
reach of their comprehension: and left this example of vengeance should be lost
to the world by some misplaced hesitation, by some sentiment of weak humanity,
the committee dispatched one of its own members to direct and superintend the
execution.

What had hitherto passed was scarcely the beginning of horrors. Collot
d'Herbois, a comedian, who had been driven from the stage for his professional
incapacity, but who had acted a considerable part in the conspiracy, was gone
thither to give tragedy some original strokes. "Alas," says the eloquent
reporter on the correspondence of Robespierre and the extent of his enormities,
(...) the terrible instrument of death, erected only for the punishment of
crimes, springs up like poisonous plants over every part of the republic. It
becomes naturalised under the opposite skies of the north and the south: the
frozen bear and the devouring dog star alike mourn over its fatal successes.

"O! come; let us penetrate together, my fellow-citizens, across those fiery
torrents, under those ruined walls which seem crumbling down to threaten us
with ruin; let us pass into those cities heretofore filled with people, now
widowed of their inhabitants; into those new des^rts more frightful than those
of Paran or Horeb. See them, like the hyena growling fiercely over its prey! --
Do you not perceive them like destroying demons rushing with their devouring
torches over every monument of genius or of art? These new Gengis, who have
conquered neither Persia, nor Egypt, nor Lybia, are anxious to make Frenchmen
of the 18th century a race of barbarians, reduced not to the practice, but to
the simple reading of the rights of man, as the Saracens were heretofore
instructed in the knowledge of the Koran.

"Look for a moment with us, on these vile dilapidations of the treasures of
Ptolemy Philadelp^^s; observe those evil principles, those Arimanes, who have
been disputing with each other for twelve months past the palpitating limbs of
our dismembered country! What were they, and what are they now, those founders
of committees of demolition, those creators of ruins? -- Vile slaves, trembling
in the presence of the mighty.

"It is the conspiracy of folly and of crimes united against genius and virtue.
It is the insurrection of robbery against the precept of mine and thine. It is
the reign of private vengeance and the most abject passions.

"O Lions! city celebrated for thy commerce, who is this new Gengis Gengis,
unknown and despised under the name of Themugin, returned as a conqueror to
avenge the insults which he had received. Collot, who knew professionally the
parts which the Tartar had played, is accused of having taken him for a model,
and of having avenged, like him, private injuries.
, who, with the axe and the thunder in his hand, pours down on thy walls, and
rushes on to avenge the injuries of Themugin? It is finished, and thy ruin is
sworn!"

It is unnecessary to ask of the unfortunate inhabitants, as I have sometimes
done, the history of their woes -- their tyrants blazon themselves their crimes
to the open day, and invite you to read the black catalogue of their
enormities. "In destroying a rebel city," says Collot, "we shall consolidate
the rest. We must leave nothing but ashes. We demolish with cannon balls, and
with explosions like those of mines." When such were his principles, his
projects, and his exploits, it would be trifling to stop to talk of individual
distresses -- to relate how he ordered three ladies, who had thrown themselves
at his feet to implore his mercy, to be tied for six hours to the scaffold
where their husbands were to be executed; or to speak of the execution of a
young heroine, who had shown prodigies of valor during the siege. These were
only interludes in this great tragedy, one of whose languishing actors, in his
existing correspondence writes, that since the guillotine has been at work, his
health has been established; that every thing goes well, and is expected to go
better; "since it is found," continues he, that the guillotine is not
sufficiently expeditious, and in a few days three or four hundred will be
dispatched at a time; and the houses are fast demolishing."

This was no empty menace -- the tragedian executed what this savage had
promised. -- "The guillotine and fusillade do not go amiss," says he; "sixty,
eighty, two hundred at once are shot, and every day care is taken to arrest a
sufficient number, so as not to leave the prisons empty." But still these were
ordinary means. This new Salmoneus was not contented with the insignia of the
god, he panted to imitate his destroying power; and accordingly some of the
miserable inhabitants were placed before batteries of cannon; and while they
were shattered and torn in pieces by the artillery, though the greater part
were left to be dispatched the following day by the spades of those who came to
bury them, Collot amused himself in beholding the operation.

During this waste of life, that of the property of the unfortunate victims was
not more respected. "It costs four hundred thousand livres each decade for
demolitions," writes one of these demons, who talks of re-colonizing the
country. "More heads every day, more heads are falling. What ecstacies thou
would have felt," adds the monster to his correspondent, "if thou had seen
this national justice executed on two hundred and nine rascals! What cement for
the republic! We have knocked off five hundred; and when we have dispatched
twice as many, which we shall do, things will go forward."

Where then, it might be asked, was the convention, while these horrors were
executing? Where? Alas! this convention, sent by a free people to consolidate
their liberty, was in chains. Had it been less enslaved, the decree, that Lions
should no longer exist, would have justified the executioners. -- Collot was
not willing that this decree of devastation should remain a figure of rhetoric
-- he says so: "The revolutionary army arrives the day after tomorrow, and
then," continues he, "I shall be able to perform great things. These
conspirators must soon be dispatched -- Lions must exist no longer -- and the
inscription thou have proposed," for this letter is addressed to Robespierre,
"contains a great truth, for hitherto the decree has been but an hypothesis. It
will be your business to make it what it ought to be, and we will prepare the
amendments before hand."

This was the private correspondence of the monster with Robespierre. But let
us not conceal his language to the convention itself. "We are hardened," says
he, "against the tears of repentance -- Indulgence is a dangerous weakness --
The demolitions are too slow -- We must employ means more adapted to republican
impatience. The explosion of the mine, the devouring activity of the flame
alone can express the omnipotence of the people: its will cannot be impeded
like that of tyrants; it ought to have the effect of thunder." And what answer
does the convention return to its colleague? -- The wretch for a whole year
after retained a ^ea^ in the assembly. -- It was the plan of Collot to banish
those whom he did not destroy; for he found it difficult to carry his purpose
into full execution; and after having murdered a part, and exiled the rest, he
discovered that he had fulfilled his commission, and should be able on his
return to say with truth, that Lions existed no longer.

"What ideas! what fury!" exclaims the reporter: "it seems as if the moral
world was fallen back into chaos. And these are legislators! Alas! if the
Erebus of the ancients had had its legislation also, it would undoubtedly have
been more consistent and more humane."

We are at first tempted to believe, in passing in review these ferocious
characters, that all the monsters of the desert had quitted their dens to rush
in on our cities; or rather, to adopt more natural ideas, we cannot help
discovering the end of these horrible levellers, which was the destruction of
commerce, and the establishment not of an equality of happiness, but of an
equality of misery, throughout the republic.

It will scarcely be thought possible, yet it is very generally believed, that
Collot was led to this vengeance on the people of Lions for having hissed him
when he acted on their stage. Thousands of victims have atoned for the insult
offered to a wretched comedian; and this great city, which from the time of
Augustus had been the center of the commerce of Gaul, where he lavished his
favors, and for three ages received the tribute of gratitude in the honors
that were rendered him, had now fallen under the stroke of the most vulgar of
tyrants. Had these monsters looked for precedents for their cruelties, they
might have found them in their prototype Caligula, for in this very city that
tyrant once resided: and the resemblance of Caligula and Collot is so far
striking, that they both exercised their despotism over the same class of
citizens; though the motives of Caligula appear to have been more natural than
those of Collot, and his cruelty more discriminate.

While this tragic ruffian was acting his part at Lions, others with principles
as atrocious, though they were less steeped in blood, were carrying desolation
into other parts of France. Bourdeaux, which had been raising itself to the
height of the revolution, was now a prey to the caprice of a young monster who
had not yet counted twenty years, and who was the valet of Robespierre in the
commission of crimes. The republican patriots having long since fallen under
the proscription, Julien's instructions and plan seem to have been the
establishment of sancul^ttism over the aristocracies of commerce, or
muscadinism, and of wealth. His correspondence is as silly as it is atrocious,
and of its atrocity we may judge when he condemns the measures of blood already
taken as being moderate and almost counter-revolutionary. It appears that he
was one of the first who had denounced the enormities of Carrier; but ages of
punishment or repentance will not atone for the murder of Salles and Gaudet,
who were executed at Bourdeaux during Julien's administration, together with
Gaudet's father, mother, sister and her husband, the husband's brother, and one
of his aunts; in short, the whole family, excepting Gaudet's wife, whose murder
was delayed till she recovered from a severe indisposition, which happily
lasted till the tyrants fell.

LETTER XIV.
NO class of men were more interested in the preservation of the abuses of the
ancient government than the priests. When the constituent assembly lessened the
influence of the higher clergy, by stripping the church of its domains, and
making the salaries of its ministers more equal, the national wealth was not
only increased, but the great mass of the priesthood were satisfied with the
distribution. The majority of those who had hitherto directed the machine of
the revolution were fully persuaded that the priesthood shared but little in
its spirit; and, knowing that whatever does not keep pace with his career,
retards its progress, had sought at different times to dissolve the alliance of
the church and state altogether. They felt indeed that the article in the
declaration of rights, which says, "that no one shall be disturbed in his
religious opinions," must be eventually subversive of the established religion;
since whoever believed it to be not only unnecessary and expensive, but hostile
to the great principles of liberty, would murmur at contributing to its support.

A considerable part of the clergy refused to accede to the civil constitution
which the constituent assembly had formed, alleging that in matters of
religion, or in the regulations of the church, no one ought to guide their
faith, or receive their obedience, but the personage who, in constant
succession from the great author of christianity, had held the delegated power.
This class had by their nonconformity lost their employment, but they were not
the less cherished on that account by those who thought with themselves, that
man was made for the sabbath, and not the sabbath for man. The zeal of these
non-jurors for the faith which they contended was once delivered to the saints,
was too ardent to suffer this humiliation of the church in silence; nor was the
vigilance of the friends of the revolution less awake to counteract their
efforts. The majesty of the church, of which they believed themselves to be the
only true supporters, would not permit them to bow before the majesty of the
people; and when the legislative assembly undertook to be the interpreters of
the law, and enacted decrees for the banishment of the unconstitutional clergy,
they sought refuge in the majesty of the throne, the cherished ally hitherto of
the church, whose power was at this time scarcely more confirmed than its own.

The protection given by the court to the nonjuring clergy hastened the ruin of
both Of the secret history of that eventful period which overthrew both the
monarchy and the church in France, madame Roland has left us many curious
particulars. The principal actors are now no more, except Servan and Dumourier
-- all the rest having perished on the scaffold. See Appendix, No. VI.
. The king refused at first to sanction the decree of the legislative assembly,
who however at length prevailed: and when the royal power was annihilated,
which happened not long after, the priests were compelled to seek asylums of
charity in foreign countries, of those whose ancestors had fled from the bloody
persecutions of their order, but whose injuries the sons had forgotten; or if
still remembered, they perhaps answered as Guise did to Poltrot, "If your
religion enjoins you to murder, ours compels us to forgive."

The disposition of the national convention was still more unfavourable than
that of the legislative assembly to the civil establishment of the clergy. The
truth is, that the enlightened part of the country had considered religion as a
personal thing. Those who believed, of which the number was not very great,
thought the protection of the state no addition to its dignity; and those who
disbelieved, or, which was the same, confounded the doctrines of christianity
and the established church, thought that its alliance was not only burdensome,
but pernicious. The great divisions of the contending parties for the
government gave the priesthood respite. But no sooner was this question
decided, and the reign of Robespierre established, than the men of reason, as
they called themselves, renewed the attack against the men of the church, who
were unable to make any farther resistance.

The constitutional clergy had no protection but that which was given them by
the constitution now proscribed, and had inspired no interest in the devotees,
who considered them rather as apostates from religion, than defenders of the
faith; and treacherous guides in the road of salvation, on account of their
compliance with the law.

A strict adherence to the ceremonies and doctrines of the Romish church was
not the only superstition that darkened France. There was another of a more
terrible nature and more destructive of social order, which was atheism.
Voltaire has observed, that a reasoning atheist is a greater scourge to
mankind, than the most sanguinary fanatic. The commune of Paris had assumed
this character; and, having twice contributed to overturn the civil government
of the country in the space of a few months, imagined that the kingdom of the
next world was to be taken by force as well as the kingdom of the present. This
formidable project was conceived, and brought to maturity in modest silence.
The good people of Paris, who had troubled themselves but little about
religion, but who imagined that there might be something good in it, as there
is in the worst of vocations, were extremely surprised to see the archbishop of
Paris, with his clergy, present themselves at the bar of the convention,
attended by the constituted powers of the department and the municipality, "to
be regenerated;" that is, to abjure their former belief, and make their new
confession of faith, in which they declared that there was no other duty than
liberty, no other gospel than the republican constitution, and no other worship
than equality. This illumination was not the result of the deep studies either
of the archbishop or his vicars. The secret was imparted to him by Chamette,
the procurer of the commune, to whom it was discovered by one Clootz commonly
called Anacharsis, a Prussian by birth, and an atheist by profession, whose
history I have already related. Clootz had written a book, which he told the
convention on presenting it was the fruit of fifteen hours labor every day
during the course of four years. He also instructed them, that this work,
singular in its method and curious in its detail, overturned at one stroke all
sects, ancient or modern, of natural or revealed religion. -- Of this work,
which "proved the nothingness of all religion," the convention decreed the
acceptance, and honorable mention; and, thus armed, Anacharsis set out on his
travels to convert the world to atheism. There was something masterly in his
first attempt; and had he been satisfied with the conversion of the archbishop
and the commune, whom he brought to the bar of the convention, he might have
enjoyed his triumph in security; but when he attempted to proselyte the
convention itself, Robespierre opposed the invader with his doctrine of the
Supreme Being, and Anacharsis was sent to the prison of the Luxembourg. There a
friend of mine found him in daily controversy with Thomas Pain, who had just
written "The Age of Reason," for his credulity in still indulging so many
religious and political prejudices. Soon after, this vain enthusiast was sent
by his polemic antagonist Robespierre to the guillotine, where many of his
converts in succession followed him, and among his pupils was the archbishop.

Many of the bishops and priests who were deputies in the assembly, and some of
the ministers of the protestant faith, animated by the example of the
archbishop, made their public recantation. Of this last sect one observed that,
though his system of faith inculcated, more than any other, moral obligations,
yet, as the great day of judgment was arrived, the reign of reason, the triumph
of philosophy, he must divest himself of his sacerdotal character, and become
regenerated also, since, as he confessed, "tous les pr^tres dans tous les
cultes ont toujours un peu de charlatanisme All priests of all religions have a
little spice of the mountebank.
."

The ingenuousness in the members of one profession provoked the same candor
in those of another. The priests having confessed that there was a little
quakery in their administration of the next world, the physicians crowded to
the bar of the commune, to acknowledge that they had been "un peu pretres"
also, and that a little spice of mountebank dealing entered into their
administration of this. Admitting that nature and reason were the best
remedies, they made offerings of their diplomas by which they had been
authorized to cure secundum artem, in direct contradiction to both; and this
virtuous dereliction of their former practice was rewarded with applauses and
civic insertion.

Reformation, as well as terror, was the order of the day: the searching eye of
the commune left nothing unexplored. To the epuration of the priests and
physicians, succeeeded that of the comedians, who had no professional sins to
confess, since they had acted their parts on the stage of the world without any
disguise. However, the commune thought that those who had been in the habitude
of personating princes, and nobles, and queens, and countesses, could little
relish habits of equality, and therefore sent to prison both actors and
actresses as suspected.

The spirit of reform did not stop at the consecration of the spoils of the
church to the services of the state. It seized on those privileges which in all
countries, and under every establishment of religion, have been accorded with
the common consent of mankind, and on the exercise of which much of the order
and happiness of the world has been thought to depend. On our entrance into the
world it is the priest who confers on us our moral existence; in riper days it
is he who hallows our affections; and without his dismission we have been
taught to think that our road to heaven was not altogether secure. Of the two
first of these functions, the legislative assembly had taken possession -- the
fathers brought their children to be regenerated at the municipal font, and the
lover led his blushing mistress before the altar of Hymen, and received her
from the hand of the civil officer, who pronounced their union "in the name of
the law." The care of disposing of the citizens at death yet remained to the
church, and the funerals continued to darken the way in long processions, till
the commune seized on this last prerogative of the clergy, and decreed, that
gay revolutionary colors of the nation should take place of the funeral pall
-- the priests should be changed into municipal officers, and the cemetery
should be called the place of repose, where, instead of the hope of being
troubled with a resurrection, the citizens should have the privilege of
sleeping for ever.

The church of Notre Dame was changed into the temple of Reason; and the
commune, with the divinity herself, attended by a splended train, came to
request the convention to sanctify with their presence the consecration. The
Goddess of Reason was a fine blooming damsel of the opera-house, and acted her
part in this comedy also to the entire satisfaction of her new votaries. From
her imperial throne, in which she was borne by four porters, she descended to
the right hand of the president of the convention, and by a decree received the
fraternal kiss, as soon as the procureur of the commune, who attended as high
priest, or master of the ceremonies, had announced her negative and positive
character; "first, that she was not, like the objects of the ancient worship, a
cold and inanimate image; and next, that she was a masterpiece of nature; and
that her sacred form had so enflamed every heart, that only one universal cry
was heard, "No more priests, and no other gods!"

When the deputies arrived at the temple, the Goddess of Reason introduced them
to the Goddess of Liberty, who came out of the house of Philosophy, to receive
their homage, and bestow her benediction. The enemies of the revolution
encouraged these follies, which the patriot disavowed and lamented: and the
philosopher would only have smiled at these transient puerilities, had they not
been mixed with atrocity and crimes. Alas! the respect for Reason was as
fleeting as the respect for other strange gods; for her altars were soon
deserted, and her high priests, and the divinity herself, were soon after
conducted amidst the applauses of the people to the guillotine. Immediately
after the regeneration of the metropolitan, those who felt the same conviction
of its necessity made confession of their sins, and applied for the
conventional blessing. This conviction nevertheless was far from being general
in either profession; for though the constitutional clergy were attached to the
cause of liberty, and rejoiced in the regeneration of their country, they did
not imagine that the belief of reward in a future state would make a less
virtuous citizen of the present. This counter-revolutionary obstinacy was held
in great indignation. Though the commune had called on Reason, like the priests
of Baal, "from morning until noon," the votaries at her shrine were few and
solitary, and it became necessary for the honor of the goddess, that more
revolutionary measures should be pursued. Accordingly, attended by the
committees of the sections, and the popular societies of Paris, the
municipality appeared a second time at the bar of the convention, where, after
a philippic against the unrecanting clergy, they demanded the suppression of
their salaries, and that those who believed in "the tales of augurs should pay
them." The convention, who probably had as little faith in augurs as the
commune, had however more charity, and deferred the sentence of famine, which
the municipality had decreed. The commune, though it did not succeed in the
attack on the priesthood, was more successful in its attacks on the church. The
word of order was issued, and the streets of Paris were filled with mock
religious processions. The most ludicrous masquerades presented themselves in
every quarter; pioneers and artillery-men led the march, clothed in the
surplices of the inferior clergy; the national guard were arrayed in the habits
of the priests; the revolutionary citizens of the section were vested in
garments still more costly; the revolutionary ladies and the priestesses of
Reason had sanctified themselves with the dresses belonging to the Virgin, and
St. Frances and St. Bridget; and the revolutionary committee had reserved for
their own decoration, with great prudence, all the garments of fine gold,
embroidery and jewels, while the caps of the priests and the mitres were placed
on the heads of the horses employed in dragging these weighty spoils, which
were to be presented to the convention. These offerings consisted of crosses,
suns, vases, chandeliers, and chases, apostles and saints in gold and silver,
St. Anthony and his pig, St. Roche and his dog, and all the other saints
registered in the calendar who were found to be of the same metallic worth.
From the convention, after undergoing the sentence of condemnation for
aristocratical and counter-revolutionary principles, they were sent to be
regenerated at the mint, and make expiation for the long series of impositions
they had been practicing on the world, by becoming under a new form, the
protectors of liberty and the republic.

The wooden saints, who in moral and religious estimation were equal, and
oftentimes superior, in paradisaical rank to their brethren, though their
consideration in these moments of irreligious phrensy was infinitely less, were
committed, without remorse, to the flames at the place of execution. And into
the same unhallowed fire were thrown those inestimable treasures which had been
for ages the consolation of the suffering believer, and the refuge of the
faithful and pious. Amid the sacrilegious pile lay three eyes of the
evangelists; a blue jacket, bedaubed with paint, taken from the wardrobe of St.
Luke; a piece of ragged tent cloth, that had been purchased from the warehouse
of St. Paul, and his cloak, which had been left with Carpus; a few of the coats
and garments of St. Dorcas, which the weeping widows had shown to St. Peter;
all which, with other relics still more precious, such as some of the movables
belonging to the holy Virgin, with parts of her apparel; the spoon and pap-dish
of the holy child; the head of some renowned saint of St. Genevieve's
acquaintance; the bones of the patroness of Paris herself, with her linen, and
other property found in her chapel This holy ark had been regarded with
religious awe, as the palladium of Paris, and a security for the protection of
St. Genevieve. It had been estimated at millions: but whatever might have been
its worth in former times, it was now considerably diminished, since the
precious stones with which it was ornamented had been displaced by other stones
of little value. The figures engraved on this sacred utensil were singular
enough for a saint. On one side was Mutius Scaevola, in the heroic act of
putting his hand into the flames, with Constantine the Great, and Jupiter and
Hebe; while Venus and Cupids were sporting on the other. The saint had surely
paid little attention to the outside of the dwelling.
, of which age had obliterated the knowledge, with arms, legs, toes, and little
fingers of illustrious martyrs, became the prey of revolutionary flames,
kindled with bundles of the real wood of the cross.

But these civic sacrifices were not confined to the worshippers of the
established system; the sectaries also burnt with the same patriotic zeal; the
followers of Moses and of Calvin applauded these votive offerings of their
catholic brethren. They beheld with secret satisfaction the downfall of a
power, of which they had been for ages the victims, while they deposited the
precious ornaments and utensils of their own worship, but without complimenting
the state with the abjuration of their religious belief. In this madness
against superstition some method was observed. Almost every monument that bore
the mark of genius, every relic that could contribute to the progress of the
arts, was preserved with care, and deposited in places of safety. Many a saint
owes his rescue from destruction to the chisel of the sculptor or the painter's
skill; and except in a few of the departments, nothing was destroyed that was
worth preserving.

The great depository at St. Denis nevertheless suffered from this reforming
rage. The crowns of Dagobert and Clovis; the sceptres of Philip the beautiful,
and Henry the fowler; the silver helmet and golden spurs of Charlemagne; and
the rich variety of treasure arising from the munificence of sovereigns to the
tutelary saint of France, were mingled together in the crucible of the mint.
The bodies of these monarchs and heroes were not treated with equal respect;
for, as the edict had gone forth against every vestige of royalty, and every
mark or remnant of aristocracy, the tombs in which they had been for ages
quietly inurned were forced to open their ponderous jaws; and those furious
Jacobins, worse than "the hellish rout that tore the Thracian bard in Rhodope,"
had the satisfaction to see the bones and ashes of the long line of their
Charles's Henry's, and Louis; of their Condes, Montmorencies, and Turennes,
before whose lowest valets they would have trembled in submissive silence,
become the prey of famished dogs, and the sport of the winds.

One of the pretenses for this violation of the dead, which was general around
Paris, and in some of the neighboring departments, was the want of the coffins
that enclosed them to make bullets for the use of the army. The cemeteries were
therefore called the revolutionary lead-mines. If the ramblings of imagination
might be indulged amidst the horror which this sort of plunder inspired, we
might pursue these revolutionary instruments of death to their destination, and
see many an emigrant laid prostrate with the former covering of his parents'
dust. On many a countenance doomed to long night, the sun once again shone, and
many met its beams, whose features preserved all their original force and
character. Among others, madame Sevigne was found entire, with the unfading
bloom of healthy and virtuous old age: but as the edict against aristocracy and
privileges comprehended talents as well as birth, the wise as well as the
mighty suffered in the general proscription against lead coffins; except
Descartes, whose bones were put into a basket, and carried to the Pantheon,
where he is fated to repose with the "immortal and divine Marat."

LETTER XV.
WHILE Paris was delivered up to the most execrable factions, of which I shall
hereafter give you a detail, the western departments became the theater of
calamities infinitely more tremendous. The struggles which took place
previously to the 31st of May between the republicans and the conspirators,
together with the defeat of the northern armies, and the defection of
Dumourier, had diverted the attention of government from the dangers by which
they were menaced in the Vendee. Of this war we yet know but little, and what
we do know is only the history written by the party which persecuted.

Of all the evils which infest mankind, those occasioned by war are the most
destructive. The hurricane, the earthquake, and the volcano, those convulsions
in nature which shake the earth to its basis, and seem to threaten it with
annihilation, are not to be compared with the scourges of war. We read of
cities besieged and taken by storm, without sympathizing very deeply in the
history. We see neither the insidious mine which shatters a thousand limbs at
one blow, nor hear the cannon and the bomb, which perform the work of
destruction more openly. The soldier climbing precipices, or scaling walls, to
fall with indiscriminate rage on the old, the infant, and the defenseless, and
to convert flourishing cities into one vast cemetery, is only a being of
romance to those who have lived at a distance from such scenes, and the terror
of whose days has glided away in tranquillity. When the laws of war according
to the regulations of civilized society are observed, the miseries are still
tremendous: the laws of nature are perverted; it is the young, not the old,
that descend first to the tomb, and all the dear and tender relations of life
are broken -- the father laments his son -- the wife the husband torn from them
to serve the purposes of ambition or cruelty -- whole countries are
depopulated, fields lie uncultivated, and famine produces despair.

If such are the evils attendant on war when men murder each other without
provocation and without resentment; when they scarcely know either the cause of
the dispute which brought them into the field, or for whom they are going to
shed their blood; what must be the horror of that conflict where every
regulation of humanity is considered as conspiracy and treason, where every
action becomes laudable in proportion as it becomes ferocious, where murder is
the only mark of bravery, and where extermination alone is conquest!

The progress of the royalists after the events of the 10th of August to the
epoch of Dumourier's defection, had remained unnoticed; nor was it till they
had raised a most formidable camp and menaced Nantes, Angers, and other cities,
and issued their formal manifestoes demanding the re-establishment of the
priesthood, nobility, and royalty, that any effective measures were taken to
repress them. The first generals that were sent against them, who were
Berruyer, Marie, and Ligonier, acted, it is said, as if they were their allies,
rather than their enemies; and Quetinau, who succeeded them, is accused of
having surrendered Touars, with the magazines which it contained, and an army
of four thousand men.

These defections on the one side, and the victories of the royalists on the
other, at length roused the convention, who decreed that an army of three
hundred thousand men should be raised to succor what they called the patriots
in the Vendee, who were opposed by the robbers. As this seemed to be an
extra-service, great rewards were given to those who would enlist to go and
assist "their brethren;" but most of these heroes, who were paid enormous sums
to perform this act of charity, went and increased the armies of the
malcontents, instead of fighting against them. A short time after the 31st of
May, Saumur was taken by the royalists, and a number of other important places,
Veh^irs, Partenay, Bressuire, and Fontenay the capital of the department, fell
into their power. The armies of the convention fled continually before numbers
greatly inferior, and abandoned their magazines, baggage, and cannon; so that
the Vendean troops were furnished completely with stores, of every kind from
the cowardice of the conventional forces, or the treachery of their commanders.
While these disgraces befell the armies on the western side, Nantes, which was
besieged by an army of forty thousand men, was defended with five thousand, by
Canclaux, who by the prudence and vigor of his operations saved the province
of Brittany, and gained several important victories. Other generals who
appeared to have the means as well as the intention of finishing the war
expeditiously, among whom was the former due de Biron Madame Roland was a
prisoner with Biron in the Pelagie, "At this moment," she says, "Biron is my
fellow prisoner. Biron came to Paris at the latter period of Pache's
administration, to denounce him to the convention, provided with papers to
prove the minister's dilapidations. Biron saw him, was seduced by his seeming
frankness, and was persuaded that there was more of ignorance than of ill
intention in his conduct. He felt how cruel it would be to send a man to the
scaffold who might only have been deceived: he abandoned his intention, of
which he informed Pache himself. Pache comes to an explanation, gets into his
own hands the papers and proofs of the complaints against him, and sends Biron
to the army in Italy [the Vendee she ought to have said] where he leaves him in
want of every thing. He gains a few advantages, nothing is said about them; he
makes reclamations, no attention is paid; the time runs on, the evil increases;
he insists, and is ordered to Paris, where he arrives, and is shut up in the
Pelagie. He now knows the hand of Pache in the tyrant who oppresses him."
, were suspended, as well as Canclaux, while Ronsin and Rossignol, two (...)
generals, were loaded with eulogiums by the conspirators of Paris, in
proportion as they were defeated by the royalists.

The royalists, encouraged by their successes, and finding themselves so well
seconded by these generals, marched on the 27th of July toward Angers, and to
a bridge which was an important pass, called the bridge of Ce. Orders were
given to evacuate this post, as had been done in preceding instances. But
contrary measures being taken by a deputy in mission, and other dispositions
being made by general Tune, both places were saved, and for the first time a
victory was obtained. This general gained a still greater advantage, and a
fortnight after he was broke.

The evacuation of Cholet by the royalists would have been the consequence of
their defeat; but when general Rey was proposing to take advantage of his
victory, an imperial edict of the same sansculotte general forced him to a
retreat. As a reward for successes which Rey afterward gained, he also was
broke; and his adjutant, who came to Paris to plead for him, was thrown into
the dungeon of the Conciergerie.

These plans of military operations were not likely to be attended with much
success, and have appeared at all times mysterious. Phillipeaux, in his
strictures on this war, calls it a strange phenomenon for history, that the
government should have looked calmly on, whilst those who gained victories were
disgraced, and those whose only prowess had consisted in converting whole
armies composed of some of the bravest and best disciplined troops in the
republic, into heaps of carcases, were caressed and continued in command.
Phillippeaux, in his letter to the committee of public safety, assures them
that the two generals Ronsin and Rossignol had butchered from forty to fifty
thousand patriots.

But time reveals most mysteries. At this period the conspirators in Paris were
more in dread of the resentment of the departments than they were of the army
of the royalists. Of the various calumnies which they invented against the
deputies who had fled from Paris, that of joining the royalists was the most
industriously propagated; and while the proscribed deputies were held up to the
public as the supporters and actors in a cause which all parties agreed to call
rebellion, the conspirators found themselves justified in taking the measures
best fitted to exterminate the only rivals they had to dread. Had the royalists
been defeated, and the rebellion crushed, the calumny would have been
discovered, and all pretense for punishment taken away. It was the interest
therefore of the usurpers to menace the people with the vengeance of royalism
and federalism united; and none were better calculated to fulfill their
intentions, than those inexperienced and profligate men, who had the most
remarkable talents for procuring the defeat of the armies they commanded.

Whether or no this be the real explanation of that which has been deemed so
mysterious, must be left to the consideration of those who wish to penetrate
into this labyrinth. When we see the history of the war of the Vendee written
by the royalists themselves, it is probable that they will say, that their own
valor, and the goodness of the cause in which they were engaged, gave them
these victories. In yielding its full force to this explanation, and supposing
that the conventional armies were defeated by braver troops, it will yet remain
unexplained, why, of two classes of conventional generals, those who beat and
those who were beaten, the former should have found either imprisonment, or the
scaffold, and the others prodigality of favors.

The usurpers having succeeded in their criminal designs against the republican
party, now found it necessary to rid themselves of the royalists, whom they had
hitherto made useful to their designs. The latter end of August they formed a
different plan for the remainder of the campaign, which consisted in attacking
at once the royalists from every point, and finishing the contest as it were at
a single blow. The army on the northern side was committed to Rossignol and
Ronsin, and the revolutionary legions and the army on the western coast were
entrusted to Lechelle. However well this plan might have been combined, the
first specimen those who were to execute it gave of obedience to their
instructions was to suffer the insurgents to take possession of the island of
Noirmoutier, Machecoul, and other places, and evacuate Montaigu, where they
abandoned immense magazines of every sort, and the army was reduced to sleep in
the open air; while their ignorant or treacherous leaders kept at a convenient
distance, surrounded by actresses, courtesans, and all the licentiousness of an
eastern camp, with all the vulgarity of the lowest profligacy.

This defeat was followed by many others, and by the capture also of several
towns. The expedition which Lechelle made was so contrived, that his troops had
not the means of effecting a retreat. The protection of the city of Nantes was
entrusted to him, and he suffered a body of some hundred royalists to cut off
its provisions for several days in the face of his whole army; and when the
representatives of the people requested him to send a detachment to rescue a
convoy of flour which had fallen into the enemy's hands, he treated the
application with contempt.

While this general was disposing of the conventional armies on the western
side, his colleagues Rossignol and Ronsin, the latter of whom having seen some
service took the title of minister-general, were preparing to execute the plan
of the campaign on the other side. Instead of (...) to attack the enemy, they
halted for some time at Saumur and Tours, so as to let the royalist army
acquire its proper consistency. To surround the enemy was the great object; and
orders were sent to the commanders of the southern armies at Niort, Lucon, and
Partenay, to cooperate. The event of this arrangement was, conformably to the
ordinary system, the total defeat of these divisions; and on the 18th of
September so admirably were the instructions obeyed, that fifty thousand men at
Coran and near the passage of the Loire at Ce, commanded by Ronsin and
Rossignol, were attacked by an army consisting of three thousand royalists
only; and what could appear scarcely credible, the sansculotte generals had so
ingeniously arranged their troops, that they were not only defeated by this
inconsiderable detachment, but the slaughter was immense.

This extraordinary defeat will not, I am told, surprise any military man, when
he hears that the conventional army was arranged for battle in a single column,
in the defiles of Coran, with eight men in front, and presenting a flank to the
enemy, who had possession of the heights, of nearly twelve miles in extent. The
artillery, instead of being placed on those heights, under the protection of a
strong detachment, as was proposed by the guides, and those who knew the
country, was placed at the head of this long column, and of course fell into
the hands of the royalists, who turned it against the conventional troops, and
made great carnage. In the mean time, detachments of the enemy gained
possession of the heights without difficulty and without resistance, massacred
the troops below, taking them in flank, and made them, from the confusion into
which they were thrown, the exterminators of each other.

The generals who commanded this expedition were, in the mean time, regaling
themselves at a distance, with their mistresses, some of whom were afterward
goddesses of reason; but they had the prudence to destroy their magazines,
instead of leaving them as usual at the disposition of the enemy. The harvest
of that part of the country was just then gathered in, and would have sufficed
them for a whole year, had they secured it agreeably to the orders of the
convention.

This new plan of a campaign was not attended with more happy success than the
former, and the mystery which embarrassed Phillippeaux became still more
inexplicable. It would be difficult indeed to define what could be the motive
which led the government to look with so much complacency on this continued
system of defeat and carnage, did we not see what combinations of crooked
policy were put into execution to secure the purposes of ferocious ambition.
The party of the Gironde, being completely crushed, gave them no longer any
inquietude, and it became now the interest of the usurpers to bring the war to
a speedy issue. The two former plans not having succeeded, the committee of
public safety published another. These conspirators had seen how efficacious
their decrees had been in several instances, and therefore imagined a mode of
putting an end to this destructive contest by decreeing that it should finish
on the 20th of October, and that the generals should receive the triumphal
crown on the first of November following. We should be inclined to smile at
this excess of folly, if that disposition were not suppressed by indignation
and horror at the atrocious orders which were given for this purpose to their
armies, "that desolation and indiscriminate destruction must now become the
order of the day."

The decree having stated in express terms, "that all the retreats, mills, and
ovens of the robbers should be destroyed and burnt, and that the minister of
war should be ordered to send combustible matter for that purpose;" and the
proclamation of the convention having invited the soldiers of liberty to
exterminate all these robbers, before the end of October; "the soldiers of
liberty," and all those who were invited to the accomplishment of this new plan
of the campaign, prepared to put it into execution. Neither the committee of
usurpation, nor the convention had been nice in the definition of their terms,
and therefore the soldiers of liberty undertook to construe them at their
pleasure. Accordingly, every house of the peaceful inhabitant came within the
definition of the retreat of a robber, since every inhabitant of the Vendee was
considered as a robber, and consequently his dwelling must be a retreat.

Whether or no the instruments of this barbarous and execrable policy reasoned
after this manner, they certainly became practical logicians; and the army, in
addition to their hundred thousand bayonets, were armed with a hundred thousand
torches; and having been pronounced by the usurpers the executors of their just
vengeance, the property of the armed royalist and the peaceable republican
became alike objects of their rapacity and fury; and indiscriminate massacre
and plunder were literally the order of the day.

In the first days of the revolution, when liberty and philosophy went hand in
hand together, what a moral revolution was instantly effected throughout
Europe, by the sublime and immortal principles which this great change seemed
about to introduce into government! But what eternal regrets must the lovers of
liberty feel, that her cause should have fallen into the hands of monsters
ignorant of her charms, by whom she has been transformed into a Fury, who,
brandishing her snaky whips and torches, has enlarged the limits of wickedness,
and driven us back into regions of guilt hitherto unknown!

So unexampled are the crimes which have been committed, that it will require
stronger evidence than the historian is commonly bound to produce, to persuade
future generations of their reality. Alas! but a faint outline has been drawn
of this terrifying picture, over which the friend of liberty would, if it were
possible, like the recording angel, drop a tear, that might blot it out for
ever. -- "If some sweet oblivious antidote" could drive from my brain the
remembrance of these things, and from my heart the feelings that oppress it, as
well as from the knowledge of the world, I should be tempted to snatch from the
enemies of Liberty the triumph they assume from this mournful history. But
these horrors must stain the page of the revolution for ever. The bloody
characters must remain indelible on the wall, a dreadful, but instructive
lesson to future ages, and to those countries, which are destined to labor
through revolutions, and who will learn, while they contemplate this terrific
chart, how to avoid the rocks on which Liberty has been nearly wrecked.

Dreadful indeed has been the crisis we have passed! yet it is some
consolation, amidst this mighty mass of evil, that France is at length
beginning to learn wisdom from the things she has suffered. France no longer
looks around to find apologies for the crimes that have been committed: she
herself holds up the criminals to the world. She boasts not of her victories
over Europe armed against her rights; but she triumphs in the conquests she has
made over herself. It is some relief, while I am struggling through the gloomy
history of these horrors, that I see again the dawn of that glorious light
which will chase them away. The last stroke has been given to that vile and
degrading system, which ignoble usurpers had framed: we may now approach the
altar of Liberty with confidence and hope; the hideous specter that haunted it
have fled for ever; and its incense in future will rise grateful to heaven, and
spread fragrance over a regenerated land.

APPENDIX.
No. I.
THE representatives of the French people undersigned, considering that, amidst
events which excite the indignation of the whole republic, they cannot remain
silent with respect to the attempts committed against the national
representation, without feeling themselves chargeable with the most shameful
pusillanimity, or with becoming still more guilty sharers in the crime:

Considering that the same conspirators, who, from the very period in which the
republic was proclaimed, had never discontinued their attacks on the national
representation, have at length filled up the measure of their crimes, in
violating the majesty of the people in the persons of their representatives, by
driving some to seek their safety in slight, by imprisoning others, and forcing
the rest to bend their necks under the yoke of the most insulting tyranny:

Considering that the heads of this faction, emboldened by long impunity,
growing strong through excess of impudence, and relying on the number of their
accomplices, have seized on all the branches of the executive government, on
the treasury, on the means of defense and the resources of the nation which
they dispose of at their pleasure, and which they are employing to effect its
ruin:

Considering that they have at their command the chiefs of the military force,
and the constituted authorities of Paris; that the majority of the inhabitants
of this city, intimidated by the excesses of a faction which the law is unable
to reach, affrighted by proscriptions with which they are continually
threatened, find themselves not only incapable of destroying the machinations
of the conspirators, but often, through respect to the law, which enjoins
obedience to the constituted authorities, compelled even to become as it were
accomplices in their crimes:

Considering that so great is the oppression under which the national
convention labors, that not one of its decrees can be executed, unless it be
approved or dictated by the heads of this faction; that the conspirators have
in fact set themselves up as the only organ of the public will, and that they
have reduced the rest of the national representation to be the passive
instruments of their pleasure:

Considering that the national convention, after having been forced to invest
with unlimited powers those commissaries who have been sent into the
departments and to the armies, and who have been chosen exclusively by this
faction, has been unable to check the arbitrary acts which they have committed,
or even to protest against the incendiary and disorganizing principles which
the majority amongst them have propagated:

Considering that not only has the national convention been rendered incapable
of prosecuting the despoilers of the public wealth, or the wretches who have
given orders for murder and pillage; but even these same conspirators, after
having sailed in their designs on the night of the 10th and the 11th of March,
have accomplished them with more success on the 20th, 21st, 27th, and 31st of
May, and on the 2d of June last past:

Considering that at this last epoch they beat to arms, rung the tocsin, and
fired the alarm guns; that the barriers of the city were shut, all
communication cut off, the secrecy of letters violated, the hall of the
convention blockaded by an armed force of more than 60,000 men; that a
formidable artillery was stationed at every avenue of the national palace, that
furnaces were fixed to serve the guns with red hot balls, and that every
preparation was made for an attack; that the battalions enrolled for the
Vendee, but detained for this purpose in the neighborhood of Paris, were
amongst the number of the besiegers; that ruffians in the pay of the
conspirators, and fitted for the execution of their bloody projects, occupied
the most important posts and the passages of the hall; that they were openly
rewarded for their zeal by distributions of provisions and money; that at the
moment when the national convention presented itself in full assembly at the
avenue of the national palace to enjoin the military to withdraw, the
commander, invested by the conspirators with the most absolute dictatorship,
had the audacity to insist that the proscribed deputies should be delivered up
to the vengeance of the people; and that on the refusal of the convention he
had the impudence to call to arms, and put in danger the lives of the
representatives of the French people:

Considering, finally, that it is by machinations such as these that they have
forced from the convention, or rather from a sixth part of the members who
compose it, a decree which pronounced the arbitrary seizure and deprived of
their functions, without accusation, without evidence, in contempt of all
forms, and through the most criminal violation of the rights of man and the
national sovereignty, thirty-two representatives marked out and proscribed by
the conspirators themselves:

They declare to their constituents, to the citizens of every department, and
to the French people, whose rights and sovereignty have been thus shamefully
violated, that from the moment in which the unity of the national
representation has been broken by an act of violence, of which the history of
nations has never yet furnished an example, they have neither been able nor
have they thought it their duty to take any part in the deliberations of the
assembly:

That driven by these unhappy circumstances to the impossibility of opposing by
their individual exertions the slightest obstacle to the success of the
conspirators, they can only proclaim to the whole republic the hateful scenes
of which they have been both the witnesses and the victims.

Paris, the 6th of June, 2d year of the French Republic. Signed by
seventy-three deputies.

No. II.
REPUBLICANS, you are acquainted with the dangers which threaten the public
weal. They are so great that we must either take arms and die in the field of
honor, or submit to the stroke of the assassin in our homes. We must save the
republic, or perish with it: we must crouch to anarchy or destroy it. We must
resume our rank among the nations, or yield the precedence to the slave of the
Asiatic despot, or the uncivilized Tartarian horde.

When the national representation, by losing its unity, becomes virtually
dissolved; when the departments whose deputies are shamefully arrested,
consider themselves in reality as no longer represented; when the majesty of
the people is violated by the attempts committed against its mandatories; when
the faction which is longing for the return of royalty insolently domineers
over that corrupted city by which we are menaced, there is no longer any room
for hesitation.

Shame and slavery, or let us fly to Paris! You waste the precious moments
which are yet left to apply the remedy, in deliberating on the disease. Your
country, your liberties, your honor as Frenchmen, yourselves, your wives, and
children, are lost. Neither public nor private fortunes any longer exist: you
lose four years of toil, of care, of labor, of watchings, of battles, and
torrents of blood shed in defense of the most glorious of causes. These will be
inevitably lost, and it is but a vile handful of factious traitors who are
deciding on the liberty of twenty-five millions of men.

In this critical and desperate situation one general voice is heard from the
center to the confines of the republic. It proclaims that the nation is roused,
to conquer or die. The nation is roused; let us march! Marseilles calls on you;
Marseilles which has unquestionably so much right to your confidence, and so
deep a concern in the support of this revolution, of which she has given so
noble an example. This appeal is the last use which she wishes to make of the
liberty of speech in order to promulgate the great resolutions she has adopted,
and the decisive measures she has taken. Far from a warlike people, far from a
nation of soldiers, who wait only the signal for battle, be the vain tinsel of
words! To dare, and to act, is all we have to do.

Let us strike; and let Frenchmen, so long characterised as frivolous, show the
world, that if they deserved the imputation while under the control of kings,
they have now resumed their ancient habitudes, and are become independent and
formidable like the Gauls and the Franks, from whom they glory in being
descended.

Republicans, who pant for liberty and detest licentiousness, who abhor
royalty, and desire the establishment of the republic united and undivided,
league yaurselves with the Marseillois, who breathe the same vows already made
by a considerable number of departments. They declare that the present
political state of Paris is equivalent to a declaration of civil war against
the whole republic.

They accuse, and present to you as guilty of all the disorders that afflict
France, Philip d' Orleans and his faction; the frantic monster Marat.
whose venal howlings are his purchase, and whose name would sully this
declaration; the den of the Jacobins of Paris; the seditious and factious men
who are spreading themselves throughout the republic, and exciting it to
commotion. Marseilles points them out as common enemies, who have been wishing
to lead us to the brink of the precipice, to adulterate their monstrous but
measured system of anarchy with a king of their own creating: and this king
would have been the most dishonored being in existence; a man overwhelmed with
debt, rich in disgrace, debauchery, and baseness; a man whom no virtuous
citizen would admit among his servants, and who would be driven by themselves
from their society; a man, in short, who is imprisoned within our walls, and of
whose speedy and severe punishment we are equally desirous.

We invite you to sign with us this just and indispensable covenant which we
propose for the public safety, and to wipe off the stain of so many injuries.

Marseilles, therefore, declares, that it is in a legal state of resistance to
oppression, and that it is authorized by the law to make war against the
seditious:

2. That it can no longer acknowledge a convention whose unity is violated, to
be the national representation; and that at that period only, when the deputies
of the people shall be fully and freely reinstated in their functions, the
nation will obey its orders with confidence and submission:

3. That the throne of anarchy has been raised on the wrecks of the throne you
have overturned, and that tyranny is detestable in proportion to the corruption
of those who are prompted to exercise it:

4. That the conspirators have already proceeded to dissolve the national
convention by reducing and disorganizing it, and exciting it to acts of folly,
rashness, and disorder; and that the French nation can consider those acts
which are promulgated by a portion of its representatives who yet keep their
seats, only as evidences of the tyranny exercised over some by the perfidy and
wickedness of others:

5. That the imprisonment of a great number of deputies of the convention is an
attempt made in the delirium of guilt, an act which posterity will scarcely
believe, if its authenticity were not proved by the record of the just
vengeance we have sworn to take, and which you will aid us in inflicting:

6. That the good citizens who still inhabit Paris are invited to assist, as
much as lies in their power, the united efforts which we are going to make for
the public welfare, and to let the whole weight of the responsibility rest on
the heads of the conspirators, which we declare are forfeited by their crimes:

7. That the domineering faction at Paris has compelled the departments to lead
into that city, so long the prey and sport of ambitious men, the military force
which is the last resource of the sovereign people; declaring at the same time
that the united force under the direction of the departments, and in conformity
to their wishes, is destined to extripate those whose criminal hands have been
employed in effecting the ruin of their country:

8. That every man capable of bearing arms is summoned, in the name of the law,
in that of his own and the public interest, and in the name of humanity, to
join his efforts in strengthening the dyke which we are opposing to this
desolating torrent; that he may avoid being swept away into that abyss which
the anarchists and infamous plunderers have opened before us:

9. That by decreeing a levy of a stated number of men ready to join in mass to
destroy utterly every faction in its strong-hold, the Marseillois, who are
solicitous to finish a revolution which they began, and make the example which
they have just given an object of imitation, call upon every citizen to join
them who is anxious to deserve well of mankind.

They have taken this preliminary step only in consideration of the urgency of
the measures to be adopted, submitting them to the examination and the
approbation of the whole sovereign body, without pretending to set bounds to
the zeal of the generous defenders of their country, who shall voluntarily come
forward to strengthen the phalanx of liberty. They hope that it will increase
in its march, and that every citizen anxious for the public weal will bear a
part:

10. That in the colors of this army the soldiers of the country shall read
inscribed the accomplishment of every good law: "The republic united and
undivided, respect for persons and property;" words of consolation already
graven on every heart:

11. That we appeal to God, and to our arms, against the attempts that have
been made on the unity of the national representation, against the violence
which has been exercised on the personal liberty of our special deputies,
against the conspiracies destructive of liberty, from which the superintendance
of Providence has delivered us, of which Marseilles is pursuing the accomplices
who undertook to execute the most horrible deeds within its walls. A popular
tribunal, the guardian of established and well regulated order, is carrying on
the prosecution of the conspirators, notwithstanding the obstacles with which
it is surrounded. Invested with the confidence of the people, and by them
supported, the most imperious law, that of circumstances, determines the
activity of its operations; and the people of Marseilles, far from deserving to
be considered as disobedient to the law, in making use of the sword to punish
the guilty, fulfill the first of social duties, which consists in the
distribution of the most exemplary justice.

It is thus that the city of Marseilles, in addition to the motives arising
from the general danger of the republic, joins the detail of the particular
grievances which affect its tranquillity, and explains the necessity it is
under of silencing its calumniators, who, in despair at not having succeeded in
kindling the torch of discord among us, have dared to present it to the
convention as the light of truth.

Republicans, the signal is given. The moments are precious, and the measures
are decisive. Let us march, let the law enter with us into Paris! and if you
are unacquainted with the way, follow the traces of the blood of your brethren,
which will lead you to the feet of its walls, from whence have issued forth
those murderous scourges, those sanguinary conspiracies, and that consuming
traffic of finance, the source of all our misery.

There you will give liberty to good citizens, dignity to the national
convention, the ruffians will disappear, and the republic will be saved.

Taken into consideration in the general committee of the 32 sections of
Marseilles, the 12th of June, 1793, the second year of the French republic.

Signed, PELOUX, President, Secretaries. CASTELLANET and PINATAL,


Yesterday, the 16th, all the administrative bodies took the oath expressed in
the manifesto.



No. III.
THE accusation against me is founded wholly on the supposition of my being an
accomplice with men called conspirators. My friendship for a few of those
persons is prior to the political circumstances which form the charge against
them. The corr^spondence I held with them by an intermediate channel, at the
time of their departure from Paris, is altogether foreign to state affairs. I
have had in truth no political correspondence; and in this respect I might
absolutely deny the charge; yet, although I cannot be called upon to give an
account of my private affections, I may glory in them, as I do in the whole of
my conduct, and I have nothing to conceal from the world.

I declare then, that I have received testimonies of regret on account of my
imprisonment, and was informed that Duperret had two letters for me; but
whether written before or after my friends had left Paris, whether from one or
two of them, I am altogether ignorant, since these letters have never reached
me. At another time, I was earnestly conjured to escape from my prison, and
received offers of assistance in the attempt, and to convey me to whatever
place I should think proper. I was deterred from accepting these offers, from
considerations both of duty and honor; of duty, because I would not injure
those to whose care I was committed; of honor, since in all cases I should
prefer exposing myself to the consequences of every possible vexation, rather
than incur the appearances of guilt, by a flight unworthy of my character. I
should not have been so careless with regard to my safety on the 31st of May,
had I had an intention of effecting my escape at a later period. This is the
extent of my connections with my friends who fled. Undoubtedly if the
communication had not been interrupted between us, or if I had not been
restrained by my imprisonment, I should have endeavored to procure information
concerning them, for I know of no law that forbids it. Alas! in what age, or
amongst what people were those sentiments of esteem and fidelity which bind men
to each other, ever accounted a crime? I do not pretend to decide upon the
measures taken by those who were proscribed: but I never will believe that
those men have intended ill, whose intregrity, patriotism, and generous
devotion to their country I have seen so clearly displayed. If they have erred,
their errors are those of virtue; they are overcome without being degraded;
they are unfortunate in my eyes, without being guilty. If I am criminal in
offering vows for their safety, I declare myself so to the whole world. I am
under no concern for their glory, and I willingly share in the honor of being
oppressed by their enemies. I have known these generous men (...) are accused
of having conspired against their country. They were firm but humane
republicans; they were persuaded that good laws were necessary to make the
republic beloved by those who had no confidence in its stability: but this was
indeed a more difficult task than to murder them. The history of all ages has
proved that great talents are necessary to lead men to virtue by good laws,
while violence alone has been sufficient to restrain them by terror, or
annihilate them by death. I have heard my friends maintain that plenty, like
happiness, could only result from an equitable government; that the omnipotence
of bayonets might produce fear, but not bread. I have seen them animated by the
warmest enthusiasm for the happiness of the people, disdaining to flatter them,
determined to fall rather the victims of their blindness, than deceive them. I
own that these principles and this conduct have appeared to me altogether
different from those of tyrants and ambitious men, who amuse the people only to
enslave them. It is for these reasons that I am filled with esteem for these
generous men. This error, if it be one, will go with me to the grave, and I
shall glory in following those whom I could not accompany thither.

My defense, I may venture to assert, is more necessary to those who are
desirous of being informed, than it is to myself. Conscious of having fulfilled
my duties, I look to the future with security and confidence. My taste for
study and my habits of retirement have kept me at a distance both from the
follies of dissipation, and from the bustle of intrigue. Enamoured of liberty,
the value of which I learnt from reflection, I viewed the revolution with
transport, persuaded that it was the epoch of the subversion of despotism,
which I detest; of the reformation of abuses, under which I had (...) sighed,
(...) the fate of the unhappy and oppressed hung upon my heart. I have followed
the progress of the revolution with solicitude. I have expressed myself on the
subject with warmth; but I have never overpassed the limits prescribed me by my
sex. Some talents perhaps, a little philosophy, a greater degree of courage,
and which in times of danger did not weaken that of my husband, are probably
what those who knew me have imprudently ascribed to me, and which may have
contributed to make me enemies amongst those by whom I was not known. Roland
sometimes employed me as his secretary; and the celebrated letter to the king,
for instance, was copied wholly by me. This would be a good paper enough to
frame part of my indictment, if the Austrians were my prosecutors, and thought
proper to extend the responsibility of the minister to his wife. But Roland had
long since displayed his sentiments, and his love of great principles. The
evidence of this exists in the numerous books which he has published during
these fifteen years past. His knowledge and his integrity are eminently his
own; and he had no need of a wife to become a wife and faithful minister.
Neither conferences nor cabals have ever been held at his house. His friends,
his colleagues, whoever they were, and his acquaintances met at his table once
a week, where in very public conversation they discoursed openly on those
topics in which every one was interested. On the whole, the writings of this
minister breathe throughout the love of order and peace, explaining in the most
affecting manner the best principles of morality and policy. They will for ever
bear witness to his wisdom, as the accounts he has given in bear witness to his
integrity.

I return to the crime imputed to me. I observe that I had no intimate
acquaintance with Duperret. I had sometimes seen him, while my husband was
minister, but he had not visited me during the six months that have elapsed
since Roland quitted the administration: and I might make the same remark
respecting the other deputies who were our friends; which certainly does not
tally with the accusation of conspiracy and secret understanding imputed to us.
It is clear from my first letter to Duperret, that I wrote to this deputy, only
because I found it difficult to write to any other, with the idea that he would
be inclined to render me service. My correspondence with him, therefore, was
not a thing projected; it was not the sequel of any preceding connections; and
it had no political view. It furnished me with an opportunity of receiving
intelligence of those who were absent, and with whom I was in habits of
friendship, altogether independent of political considerations. Such
considerations formed no part of the correspondence which I held with them in
the first moments of their absence. No memorial to this effect is brought in
evidence against me. Those which are produced, only intimate that I share in
the opinions of those who are called conspirators. This induction is founded, I
own it to the world, and I glory in this conformity of sentiment; but I have
never published these sentiments in any manner that can be imputed to me as a
crime. In order to establish the being an accomplice in any project, it must be
proved that advice has been given, and means furnished. I have done neither; I
am therefore not guilty in the eyes of the law; there is none which can condemn
me; there exists no fact for the application of any.

I know that in revolutions, law as well as justice is often forgotten; and the
evidence of this is, that I am at this bar. I am indebted for this prosecution
only to those prejudices and that violent hatred which burst forth amidst great
convulsions, and which, in general, fix upon those who are placed in
conspicuous situations, or who are known to possess energy of character. It
would have been easy for me to have avoided this trial which I foresaw; but I
thought it more becoming to meet it: I thought that I owed this example to my
country: I thought that if I should be condemned, I should leave to my tyrants
the odium of sacrificing a woman who had no other crime than perhaps some
talents of which she seldom availed herself, great zeal for the interests of
mankind, courage to adhere to her unfortunate friends, and to render homage to
truth at the hazard of her life. Those who have true greatness of soul throw
away selfish feelings, remember that they belong only to the species, and look
to futurity for their reward. I belong to the virtuous and persecuted Roland. I
was in habits of friendship with men whom ignorance and the jealous hatred of
low, vulgar minds have proscribed and murdered. I am to perish also, because it
is consistent with the principles of tyranny to sacrifice those whom it has
cruelly oppressed, and annihilate every witness of its crimes. Under both these
titles you ought to condemn me to die, and I await my sentence. When innocence
mounts the scaffold to which it is condemned by error or wickedness, it reaches
the goal of triumph. May I be the last victim that shall be sacrificed! I shall
leave with joy this unhappy land, which is destroying the good, and drinking in
the blood of the just. O truth, my country, friendship, sacred objects,
sentiments dear to my heart, receive my last offering! My life was devoted to
you, and ^e alone spread a softness and grace over my last moments! God of
Heaven! enlighten this unhappy people, for whose liberty I breathe my warmest
vows! -- Liberty! -- to those great souls it eminently belongs who despise
death, and who can meet it with courage: but it was not formed for weak minds,
who compound with crime, while they conceal their self-love and their cowardice
under the name of prudence. It was not formed for those profligate men, who,
rising from their beds of debauchery, or creeping forth from a sink of
wretchedness, run and bathe themselves in the blood that streams from the
scaffolds. But it is the guardian of a wise and humane people who practice
justice, despise flatterers, know their true friends, and revere truth. As long
as you shall not form such a people, O my fellow-citizens! you will talk in
vain of liberty; you will live only in a state of licentiousness, of which each
of you will fall the victim in your turn; you will ask for bread, but you will
find only mangled carcasses, and you will end in being slaves.

I have concealed neither my sentiments, nor opinions. I know that a Roman lady
was sent to execution under Tiberius, for having lamented her son. I know that
in times of blindness and party-spirit, whoever dares to avow himself the
friend of condemned or proscribed men, exposes himself to share their fate; but
I despise death. I have never feared any thing but guilt; and I would not
purchase my life at the price of meanness.

Unhappy times, unhappy people, when the obligation of rendering justice to
injured virtue is beset with danger; but too happy are those who have courage
to brave it. -- It is now for you to examine if it be compatible with your
interests to condemn in defect of evidence, for simple opinions only, and
without the support of any law.

No. IV.
AFTER the siege of Perusia, say the historians, in spite of the capitulation,
the answer of Augustus was; "You must all perish." Three hundred of the
principal citizens were dragged to the altar of Julius Caesar, and there on the
day of the ides of March were murdered: after which the remainder of the
inhabitants were put without distinction to the edge of the sword; and the
city, which was one of the finest in Italy, was reduced to ashes, and as much
effaced as Herculaneum from the surface of the earth.

There was formerly a law in Rome, says Tacitus, which defined state crimes and
high treasons, and which decreed the punishment of pain of death. These crimes
of high treason, under the republic, were reduced to four sorts: namely, if an
army had been abandoned in an enemy's country; if sedition had been excited; if
the members of the constituted bodies had mismanaged public affairs, or
misapplied the public money; and if the majesty of the Roman people had been
degraded. The emperors wanted but a few additional articles to this law to
involve both the citizens and whole cities in a general proscription. Augustus
was the first to extend this law of high treason, in which he comprehended
writings which he called counter-revolutionary. Under his successors, the
extension of this law became unbounded. When simple remarks were construed into
state crimes, it required but a little stretch of power to change looks either
of compassion or sorrow, or even sighs, and silence itself, into guilt.

It was a crime of high treason or counter-revolution in the city of Nursia to
have erected a monument to its inhabitants who were killed at the siege of
Mutina, in fighting under Augustus himself: but it was, because Augustus then
fought with Brutus; and Nursia met with the fate of Perusia.

Crime of counter-revolution in L. Drusus, for having enquired of fortune
tellers whether he should not be at some future time a rich man. Crime of
counter-revolution in Crematius Cordus, a newswriter, for having called Brutus
and Cassius the last of the Romans. Crime of counter-revolution in one of the
descendants of Cassius, for having in his possession a portrait of his great
uncle. Crime of counter-revolution in Mamercus Securus, for having composed a
tragedy in which there was a verse liable to a double construction. Crime of
counter-revolution in Augustus Silenus, for living expensively. Crime of
counter-revolution in Petreius, for having had a dream about Claudius. Crime of
counter-revolution in Appius Silenus, because the wife of Claudius had had a
dream about him. Crime of counter-revolution in Pomponius, because a friend of
Sejanus had sought an asylum at one of his country-houses. Crime of
counter-revolution, to complain of the misery of the times, for it was blaming
the government. Crime of counter-revolution, in not invoking the divine genius
of Caligula. For this omission, a great number of citizens were beaten with
clubs, condemned to the mines, or to be thrown to the wild beasts, and some
even to be sawed asunder. Crime of counter-revolution in the mother of the
consul Fuscius Gemi^us, for having lamented the fatal death of her son. Unless
you were willing to perish yourself, you must express joy at the death of your
friends or relations. Under Nero, many, whose kindred he had destroyed, went to
return thanks to the gods, and illuminated their houses. It was necessary at
least to wear an air of satisfaction and cheerfulness, and every one was afraid
least fear itself should be the means of his condemnation.

Every thing gave umbrage to the tyrant. Was a citizen popular? He was the
prince's rival, and might kindle a civil war. Studia civium in se vert^^et; et
si multi idem audeant, bellum esse. Suspected.

Did a man shun popularity, and confine himself to his fireside? This retired
kind of life made you remarked, and gave you consideration. Quanto metu
occultior, tanto plus famae adeptus. Suspected.

Were you rich? There was imminent danger that the people would be corrupted by
your liberality. Auri vim atque opes Plauti principi infensas. Suspected.

Were you poor? What then? -- Invincible emperor, this man must be watched more
narrowly. There is no one so enterprising as he that has nothing. Syllam
inopem, unde praecipuam audaciam. Suspected.

Are you of a thoughtful melancholy character, or slovenly in your manners? You
are afflicted because public affairs go so well. Hominem bonis publicis
moestum. Suspected.

If, on the contrary, a citizen amuses himself and lives luxuriously; he is
merry only because the emperor has had an attack of the gout, which happily is
nothing: we must show this gentleman that his majesty is in the prime of life.
Reddendam pro intempestiva licentia, moestam et funebrem noctem, quasentiat
vivere Virilium et imperare. Suspected.

Was he virtuous, or austere in his manners? Good! a new Brutus, who pretends
with his pale countenance and jacobin wig to criticize an agreeable and
well-powdered court. Gliscere aemulos Brutorum, vultus rigidi et tristis quo
tibi lasciviam exprobrent. Suspected.

Was he a philosopher, an orator, or a poet? He wanted to have more fame than
those who were at the head of affairs! Could an author be tolerated who had
more attention paid him in the upper gallery, than the emperor in the stage
box? Virginium et Rufum claritudo nominis. Suspected.

In short, if you acquired military reputation, you became the more dangerous
from your talents. With a silly general you knew what to do; if he became a
traitor, he could not so dexterously betray his army to the enemy, but that
some would come back. But an officer of merit, such as Corbulo or Agricola, if
he became a traitor, not a man would return. The best way was to dispatch them.
At least, great emperor, hasten and rid the army of them. Multa militaris famae
metum fecerat. Suspected.

You may well imagine that it was a very serious thing indeed if you were a
grandson or one of the family of Augustus. You might some day have pretensions
to the throne. Nobilem, et quid hinc spectaretur a Caesarum posteris. Suspected.

And all the suspected did not get off as with us, by being sent to the
Madelonettes, the Scotch College, or St. Pelagie Prisons in Paris.
. The prince sent them to their physician or apothecary to choose in
four-and-twenty hours what kind of death they liked best. Missus centurio qui
maturaret eum.

It was (...) impossible to possess any kind of quality, unless it became an
instrument of tyranny, without awaking the jealousy of the despot, or exposing
yourself to certain ruin. It was a crime to have a great place, or resign it;
but the greatest of all crimes was to be incorruptible. Nero had so thoroughly
extirpated all good and virtuous men, that after having got rid of Thrasea and
Soranes, he boasted that he had abolished even the name of Virtue from the
earth. When the senate had condemned them, the emperor wrote a letter of thanks
for their having put to death enemies of the republic. The tribune Clodius
erected an altar to Liberty in the place where Cicero's house had been rased to
the ground, and the people shouted, "Vive la Liberte!"

One was executed on account of his name, or that of his ancestors, and another
on account of a beautiful house at Alba. Valerius, Asiaticus, because the
empress was pleased with his gardens; Statilius, because she did not like the
cut of his face; and a numerous multitude without any reason whatever.

Foranius, the tutor, the old friend of Augustus, was proscribed by his pupil
without any apparent cause, except that he was an honest man, and loved his
country. Neither age nor innocence could shield Quintus Gellius from the bloody
hands of the executioner; and this same Augustus, whose clemency has been so
much boasted, tore out his eyes with his own hands. You were betrayed and
poniarded by your own enemies or slaves; or if you had no enemy, your host,
your friend, your son became your assassin.

In one word, under three reigns the natural death of a celebrated man was so
rare a thing, that it was put into the gazette as a sort of epoch, and
transmitted by historians to the remembrance of ages, "Under this consulate,"
says our annalist, "the pontiff Piso died in his bed, which appeared somewhat
miraculous."

The death of so many excellent citizens appeared a less calamity than the
insolence and scandalous fortunes of their murderers and denunciators. Every
day the sacred and inviolable informer made his triumphant entry into the
palaces of the dead, and seized on some rich inheritance. All these
denunciators assumed the most respectable names, and called themselves Cotta,
Scipio, Regulus, Cassius, Severus. Denunciation was the only means of arriving
at honors, and Regulus was made consul three times on account of his
informations.

In this manner every one threw himself in the way of arriving at dignities,
since the road was so easy; and the marquis Serenus, in order to make his first
appearance with eclat, and gain reputation as an informer, began a prosecution
against his aged father as a counter-revolutionist; after which he decorated
himself with the sounding name of Brutus.

The judges resembled the accusers: the tribunals, which ought to have been the
protectors of life and property, were become butcheries; and robbery and murder
bore the names of confiscation and punishment.

If there were no means of sending a man to the tribunal, he was assassinated
or imprisoned. Celer AElius, the famous Locusta, the physician Anicetus, were
poisoners by profession, privileged men, traveling in the suite of the court,
and a kind of lords of the bedchamber to the crown. When these half-measures
were not found sufficient, the tyrant had recourse to a general proscription.
Thus it was that Caracalla declared all his friends and the partisans of
Sejanus enemies of the republic, to the number of thirty thousand. Thus it was
that Sylla in one day forbade the use of fire and water to seventy thousand
Romans. If a lion-emperor had a praetorian guard of tigers and panthers, they
would not have torn in pieces a greater number than the common informers, the
freedmen, the poisoners, and the cutthroats of the Caesar's; for the cruelty
caused by hunger ceases with hunger, while that caused by fear, by the avarice
and the suspicions of tyrants has no bounds. To what a degree of degradation
and baseness must not the human race have fallen, when we think that Rome
suffered the government of a monster, who complained that his reign had not
been signalized by any calamity, pestilence, famine or earthquake; who envied
Augustus the happiness of having had under his empire an army cut to pieces,
and in the reign of Tiberius the disaster of the amphitheatre of Fid^nae, where
fifty thousand persons perished; and to sum up all in one word, who wished that
the Roman people had but one neck, to put it in mass through The cant word for
the guillotine.
"the little window!"

No. V.
The two last letters of young CUSTINE to his wife.
Nine o'clock in the morning.
I CANNOT begin my last day better than in speaking to you of the tender and
painful sentiments which I feel on your account. I sometimes endeavor to
suppress them, but they are never very distant from my mind. What will be your
fate? They will leave you at least your habitation, your chamber at least?
Melancholy ideas, melancholy reflections!

I have slept nine hours. Why was not your night as calm as mine? for it is
your tenderness, not your affliction, that is necessary to me.

You already know the sacrifice that I have made. I have a poor unfortunate
companion here who has seen you when you were a child, and who seems a worthy
man. What a happiness it is at the close of my misfortunes to have the means of
alleviating those of others. Tell this to Philoctetes.

I have forgotten to tell you that I made almost wholly my own defense, and
only made it on account of those who love me.

Four o'Clock.
I MUST leave you -- I send you my hair in this letter; madame..... promises me
to give you both. Assure her of my gratitude.

It is all over, my poor Delphina: for the last time I embrace you! I cannot
see you, and even if I could I would not. The separation would be too cruel,
and these are not moments for indulging my feelings. What do I say? for
indulging my feelings! -- How shall I avoid so doing? Your image! -- there is
but one way -- that of banishing it from my remembrance with savage but
necessary barbarity. My reputation shall be such as it ought to be; and as for
life, it is a thing frail by its nature. Regret a few, the only emotions which
give a momentary disturbance to my tranquillity. You, who know so well my
sentiments, will know how to express them; but drive from your thoughts the
remembrance of those regrets which are the most painful to me, for they are
addressed to you! I do not believe that I have ever done evil to any person
intentionally. I often felt the warmest desire to do good. I could have wished
to have done more; but I do not feel the burden of remorse, and why should I
feel any disquietude? To die is necessary, and, an event as natural as that of
being born. -- Your fate afflicts me -- may it be softened! -- may it even one
day become happy! -- This is the wish nearest to my heart. -- Teach your son to
know his father, May your watchful care banish vice far from him! and as for
misfortune, may he learn how to bear it as he ought!

Farewell! I do not frame axioms of the hopes of my imagination or my heart;
but be assured that I do not leave you without the expectation that we shall
meet again. I have forgiven the few who seemed to rejoice in my imprisonment.
Bestow a reward on the person who will convey to you this letter.

No. VI.
"THE situation of affairs, and the discontented state of the public mind,
alarmed the court. The ministers soon became the object of general
animadversion, and their conduct did not appear at all favorable to the
establishment of the constitution, which the king had sworn to maintain
contrary to his will and feelings, and which he was determined not to support.
Amidst the frequent changes and confusion which then took place in
administration, the court was puzzled and doubtful of whom to make choice. It
was said openly and loudly, that, if the king was sincere, he would choose his
ministers amongst men whose reputation for patriotism was not doubtful. The
king had hitherto decided as cowardice or fear dictated; sometimes with the
hopes of gaining over those who were named, or with the resolution, if this
plan did not succeed, of driving them altogether from the court. At length the
king seemed determined to choose his ministers amongst those who were called
patriots, for then the appellation was not dishonored. How that came to pass I
never have been informed. Intelligent men reflected how important it was to
direct the choice of the court toward men of talents and of respectable
character; for it was possible that it might have taken a malignant pleasure in
making a selection of a set of wrong-headed Jacobins, whose blunders and
exaggerations would have justified complaints, and brought disgrace on the
whole body of patriots. I do not know who it was that in the committee of the
Place Vendome named Roland as one of those who ought to be chosen; but his name
was connected with the idea The committee of Place Vendome was an assembly of
patriot deputies, who met at the house of one of their colleagues for the
discussion of public affairs.
of a man well informed, who had written on several branches of administration,
who had experience in these affairs, who besides possessed a considerable
degree of reputation, and whose principles unequivocally expressed in his
writings, even before the revolution, discovered him to be a warm partisan of
liberty, being so in all respects. The king was not a stranger to these
considerations, as I shall have occasion to prove.

This project was communicated to us only three days before the new ministry
was formed. Brissot came to me one evening when I was alone, and told me that
Roland was thought of as minister. I smiled, and asked him what he meant by his
pleasantry? He answered me, that he was in earnest, informed me of what I have
just related, and added, that he was come to know if Roland would undertake the
charge. I promised to speak to Roland on the subject, and give him an answer
the next day. Roland was as much astonished as myself at the event. A
multiplicity of affairs to one of his active mind was no cause of objection;
and he told me, that as he had always observed placemen to be beings of a very
middling rank with respect to talents, and yet public business went forward, he
was not himself afraid of the undertaking; that the situation was indeed
critical, on account of the distinct interest of the court and the uncertainty
of the king's intentions; but that whoever attended only to his duty, and was
careless about the loss of his place in executing it, had nothing to fear:
besides which, a zealous man, who was conscientious in the means he made use
of, could not be without hope of being of essential service to his country.
Roland therefore determined to accept the office, and made known his intentions
to Brissot, who came the next evening at eleven o'clock at the breaking up of
the council, accompanied by Dumourier, who announced to him officially that the
king had just made choice of him as minister for home-affairs. Dumourier, who
had been minister for some little time, spoke of the king's sincere
dispositions to support the constitution, and his hopes of seeing the machine
go on with success, when the whole of the council should be animated by the
same spirit: he testified also to Roland his particular satisfaction in seeing
so virtuous and enlightened a patriot named to the administration of government.

Brissot observed that the department for home-affairs was the most delicate
and the most intricate of all, and that it was a consolation to the friends of
liberty to see it entrusted to pure and firm hands. The conversation turned
slightly on these heads, and the hour was fixed on for Roland the next day to
be presented to his majesty, to take the oath, and his seat at the council.

I found in Dumourier the manly air of a soldier, the address of an able
courtier, the style of a man of wit, but no trace of truth. In comparing this
man with his new colleague, whose austerity and frankness sometimes border on
rudeness, I asked myself if they were made to go on long together? "Here is a
man," said Roland, after their departure, "who possesses talents." "Yes,"
replied I, "and against which you must be on your guard; for I think him
capable of casting you all off, if you do not keep to his pace: we shall see."
The first time Roland appeared at court in his ordinary simple dress, which he
had for a long time worn for the sake of convenience, a few scattered hairs,
combed over his venerable head, a round hat, and his shoes tied with strings,
those valets of the court who placed the highest importance in the etiquette on
which their own existence depends, looked at him with disdain, and with some
astonishment. One of them approached Dumourier, and, knitting his brows,
whispered him, while he pointed out with his eyes the object of his surprise,
"Sir! sir!..... no buckles in his shoes!" Dumourier, putting on an air of
affected gravity, exclaimed, "Ay, sir, it is all over, we are all ruined." The
story went round, and those laughed at it who had the least disposition to be
diverted.

Lewis XVI. behaved to his ministry with the greatest good humor. This man was
not precisely such a personage as he has been industriously represented by
those who were interested in degrading him. He was neither that stupid sot
which he has been held out to be for the purpose of exciting contempt, nor that
polite, good and affectionate character for which his friends have extolled
him. Nature had formed him in a common kind of mould: he would have acted well
in an obscure situation; but he was depraved by a royal education, and lost his
moderation at a critical period, in which his safety could have been effected
only by the assistance of genius or virtue. A common mind, educated at court,
and taught from the cradle the art of dissembling, acquires many advantages in
its commerce with mankind. The art of discovering to each no more than he would
wish him to know, is only a habit, to which constant exercise gives the
appearance of address; and a man must be born an idiot, in order to appear a
fool in a similar situation. Lewis XVI. had besides a good memory, and a great
share of activity; he never was a moment unemployed, and read a good deal. He
had the most perfect and minute knowledge of all the treaties made by France
with the neighboring powers; he was well acquainted with its history, and was
the best geographer in his kingdom. Knowledge of names; the just application of
them to the physiogomies of the persons of the court to whom they belonged;
acquaintance with all their private anecdotes, had been extended by him to
every individual, who had at all distinguished himself in the revolution; and
no one of any quality or description could be mentioned to him, of whom he
could not give some kind of information founded on their private history. But
Lewis XVI. without strength of character, was confined in his views, and had
twisted as it were his feelings by superstitious prejudices and jesuitical
principles. The great ideas of religion, the belief of a God, and the assurance
of immortality, are perfectly in harmony with philosophy; and while their ear
its column on those most solid of all foundations, they likewise adorn it with
the most (...) capital. Wretched are the legislators who despise these powerful
means of inspiring political virtues, and of forming the morals of a nation. If
they were even illusions, we ought to cherish them, for the consolation of
mankind: but the religion of our priests presented us only with objects of
childish fear, and miserable mummeries, instead of good works; and also
consecrated the whole code of despotism, on which the authority of the
established church is founded. Lewis XVI. was literally afraid of hell, the
horns and hoofs of the devil, and excommunication, and with all this it was
impossible he should be any thing but a poor creature of a king. If he had been
born two hundred years earlier, and had had a reasonable wife, he would have
made no more noise in the world than other princes of his line, who have passed
across the stage without doing either much good or evil: but ascending the
throne amidst the dissoluteness of the court of Lewis XV. and the disordered
state of the treasury, and surrounded by corrupted men, he was drawn on by a
giddy woman, who joined to Austrian insolence the forwardness of youth, and to
the arrogance of grandeur the intoxication of the senses, and the carelessness
of levity; and who was herself seduced by all the vices of an Asiatic court.
Lewis XVI. too weak to hold the reins of government, which was now falling
headlong into ruin, and crumbling to desolation, hastened his own by faults
without number. Neckar, who always acted the pathetic in politics as well as in
writing; a man of moderate abilities, but of which the world entertained a high
opinion, because he had formed a high opinion of them himself, which he was
careful to make known; without foresight; a sort of a retail financier, who
could only calculate the contents of a purse, and was talking continually of
his reputation, as women of intrigue talk of their chastity; Neckar was but a
sorry pilot for the storm that was gathering. France was, as it were, exhausted
of men: it is a thing highly surprising that they should have been so scarce in
this revolution: it has brought forth scarcely any but pigmies. It is not
because there was any want of wit, of information, of knowledge, of philosophy:
these ingredients had never been more common: it was the blaze of the torch
just expiring. But that energy of soul which J. J. Rousseau has so admirably
defined as the first characteristic of the hero, supported by that solidity of
judgment which knows the just value of every thing; with that foresight which
penetrates into futurity, the reunion of which constitutes character, and
forms the superior man; we have looked for it every where, but it has been no
where to be found.

Lewis XVI. continually floating between the fear of irritating his subjects,
and his wish to keep them within bounds, and unable to govern them, convened
the states general, instead of reforming the expenses, and regulating his
court. After having himself unveiled the spring, and showed the way to
innovation, he hoped to stop its progress, by affecting a power against which
he had furnished arms, and against which he had himself given instructions for
resistance.

No other means were left him, than to sacrifice with a good grace a part of
his authority, in order, by means of the other, to seize the whole, on a proper
occasion, which he was not however likely to do; since he gave himself up to
the most desperate sort of intrigues, the only sort familiar to those whom he
chose for his advisers, under the protection and patronage of his wife. He had
certainly preserved under the constitution sufficient means both of power and
of happiness, if he had had the wisdom to keep himself within bounds. Want of
ability had disabled him from preventing the establishment of the new
government; but honesty alone would have been sufficient to have saved him, if
he had been sincere in executing, when he had accepted the constitution.
Unhappily for himself, on one hand to support what he was overthrowing with the
other, was his crooked policy; and this perfidious conduct first excited
mistrust, and then finished by kindling general indignation.

When he had made choice of patriotic ministers, he was particularly anxious to
inspire them with confidence; and he succeeded so well, that for three weeks, I
saw Roland and Clavieres, enchanted with the king's dispositions, thinking only
of the happy order of things, and flattering themselves that the revolution was
finished. -- "Good God!" I said to them, "every time I see you come from the
council with this great confidence, I always think that you are about to commit
some act of great folly." "I assure you," answered Clavieres, "that the king is
perfectly convinced that his interest is intimately connected with the
observance of the laws which have been just established: he reasons about them
too feelingly not to have a perfect conviction of this truth." "If," added
Roland, "he be not an honest man, he is the most arrant cheat in the kingdom:
dissimulation can hardly go so far." "And for my part," I replied, "I have no
great confidence in any man's regard for the constitution, who has been
educated in the prejudices of despotism and habits of dissipation, and whose
conduct latterly has exhibited a total want both of genius and virtue. Lewis
XVI. must be a man very much above the common standard, to have any sincere
regard for a constitution which narrows the limits of his power; and if he had
been such a man, he would not have suffered those events to have taken place
which have brought about this constitution." My great argument for his
insincerity was founded on his flight to Varennes.

There was a council four times a week. The ministers agreed to dine together
at each other's houses by turns every council day. I received them on Fridays.
De Grave was the minister of war. He was a slight man in all respects; nature
had made him mild and timid; his prejudices would have made him haughty, but
his heart forced him to be gentle; and from his embarrassment to reconcile
these different parts of his character, he became in reality nothing. I think I
see him marching with his courtier-like air, his head quite aloft from his
feeble frame, showing the white of his blue eyes, which he could scarcely keep
open after dinner, without the help of two or three cups of coffee; speaking
but little, as if he had been reserved, but which silence proceeded only from
penury of ideas: in fine, he was so bewildered amidst the business of his
department, that he asked leave to retire. Lacoste was a true clerk of office
under the old system, with an insignificant mien, a cold look, and a dramatical
tone, with talents for the ordinary run of affairs: but his formal physiognomy
concealed a violence of character which, in discussions where he met with
contradiction, made him ridiculous: he had no comprehensive views, nor the
activity necessary for a minister. Duranthon, who had been brought up from
Bourdeaux to be minister of justice, was honest, as they say, but very
indolent: he had an air of vanity, and always appeared to me an old woman, from
his timorous character and his consequential babble. Clavieres was appointed
minister of finance, from the reputation he had gained for his knowledge in
that branch, but of which I am no judge. He was laborious and active, irascible
and obstinate, as those men generally are who live confined to their desks;
punctilious and difficult in his discussions, and often in contradiction with
Roland: these two men esteemed without ever loving each other, but never
disagreed in the great leading principles of their duties.

Dumourier had a greater share than any of these in what is called wit, and
less of morality. Diligent and brave, a good general, a thorough-paced
courtier, a good writer, a ready speaker, and capable of great undertakings; he
was deficient only in firmness of character, and wanted a cooler head to
execute the plans he had conceived: good humoured with his friends, and ready
to cheat every one of them; assiduous to the ladies, but no way fitted to
succeed with those who were to be won only by tenderness; he was altogether
formed for the ministerial intrigues of a corrupted court. His splendid
qualities, and his love of glory, led us to think that he might be usefully
employed in the armies of the republic; and perhaps he would have acted well if
the convention had acted wisely; for he had too much good sense not to behave
as an honest man, when his reputation and his interest were so intimately
concerned.

At this time De Grave was about to be dismissed. The ministers and the patriot
deputies were at a loss on whom to fix for his successor, since the military
men who had distinguished themselves were almost all of them hostile to the
constitution. Roland thought of Servan, who had been long in the service, and
had obtained the cross of St. Lewis; and whose principles were not equivocal,
since he had published them previously to the revolution in an excellent work
called "The soldier a citizen." We knew him personally from having seen him at
Lions, where he had the deserved reputation of a wise and industrious man; and
where he retired after having lost his place at court as governor of the pages,
his politics not being suitable either to those of M. St. Priest, or the palace.

Servan is an upright man in the full extent of the term, of an ardent mind,
pure morals, with all the austerity of a philosopher, and all the goodness of
an affectionate heart; an enlightened patriot, a brave s^ldier, a vigilant
ministe^: he wanted only perhaps a little more coolness of temper, and more
energy of character; but he had a degree of merit rare to find, and we should
have been too happy to have had many men of this stamp.

The sittings of the council might be called decent in comparison with what
they became afterward; but they were at that time puerile, considering the
great interests which were at stake. Each of the ministers who had bons Bons
are orders for certain operations, most commonly for the delivery of money.
to sign, or other papers belonging to his office, went to the king on the
council day to arrange this particular business before the council began. They
all went afterward into the council hall; where, after the decrees had been
signed, which the minister of justice presented, debates took place respecting
the operations of government, internal order, relations with foreign powers,
peace or war, etc. With respect to the proclamations of the day, they had only
to examine the decree and apply it, which was always a short business. The king
suffered his ministers to talk: in the mean time he read the gazette, the
English newspapers in their own language, or wrote letters. The sanction of
the decrees, however, fixed his attention: he did not give his sanction
readily, but never refused. When a decree was presented for the first time, he
put off sanctioning it till the following council, when he came with his mind
made up.

With respect to objects of great political concern, he often eluded examining
them, by turning the conversation on different subjects, or on matters peculiar
to each of the ministers. If the business turned on war affairs, he talked
about travels; if it was a diplomatic discussion, he began a history of the
manners of the country in question, or made enquiries about its situation and
produce; if the examination of the state affairs led him into details of
agriculture and rural economy, he questioned Roland about his works, talked to
Dumourier about his anecdotes, and so with the rest. The council in short was
little else than a coffee-house, where every one learnt the news of the day,
and amused himself with trifles: there was no register kept of the
deliberations, no secretary to minute them. After three or four hours
conversation the council broke up, without having done any thing, except
putting some signatures, and this took place three times a week. "But this is
pitiful!" I could not help exclaiming with some ill humor when, o^ Roland's
return, I asked him what had passed. "You are all of you too courteous, because
you meet with no opposition, because you are treated with affability and
politeness, because you have the appearance of doing each of you in your
respective departments just what you please. I am much afraid that you will all
be deceived."

"But nevertheless," says Roland, "business goes on." -- "Yes, but time is
lost; for in the torrent of affairs that is overwhelming you, I would rather
see you employ three hours in solitary meditation on those great combinations
of events before you, than waste them in useless talk."

The enemy were now forming their plans, and it became absolutely necessary to
declare war; a measure which brought on warm discussions, and which the king
assented to with extreme repugnance: he had delayed the decision as long as
possible, and appeared to yield only when he saw that the majority of the
assembly were of that opinion, and that his council was unanimous.

The continuance and multiplicity of religious troubles respecting which the
minister for home-affairs had continually but in vain solicited him for some
time past to take strong and repressive measures, now compelled him to do so.
On the other hand, the bold steps taken by the foreign troops being formidable
and menacing, had given the minister of war, Servan, an idea of a military
project, which the assembly seized on with enthusiasm, and instantly decreed.

It is very true that these two decrees, one for forming a camp of twenty
thousand me^ between Paris and the frontiers, and the other respecting the
priests, were altogether decisive. The court beheld in these measures the
overthrow of its secret machinations, of all its plans of partial
insurrections, by the means of sanaticism, and the progress of the enemy
toward Paris; both of which operations it protected.

The king was too much decided in refusing his sanction to be very earnest in
declaring his determination. He made use of different pretenses, by which means
he avoided an explanation for fifteen days. A debate was begun several times on
these two articles. Roland and Servan insisted with warmth, and with great
energy declared the most striking truths, because each felt the importance and
the necessity of the law as it respected his particular province. The general
interest of the affair was a thing evident to all of them, and the six
ministers had but one opinion on this subject.

During these disputes, Dumourier, who was intimate with the king, and whose
morals were more in unison with those of the court, was often a visitor of the
queen; and as he was not in great harmony with his colleagues, the austerity of
whose manners was a reproach to his own, he found soon the means of getting rid
of them, and entered into arrangements the effects of which were not long in
being felt. A misunderstanding, or rather a serious dispute, had taken place
between Dumourier and his colleagues, particularly Roland, respecting Baron
Carrieve, whom Dumourier had made director-general of the foreign department. A
report was spread that the sum of one hundred thousand livres was paid to
Madame de Beauvert, who lived with Dumourier as his mistress, and did the
honors of his table, to the great scandal of those who were connected with
him. Dumourier received the representations that were made to him by Roland,
both with respect to his neglect of decency, and his attachment to this
director-general, with ill-humour: he quitted the meeting of the patriotic
deputies, and became visibly cool toward Roland. "From this moment," continues
Madame Roland, "he ceased holding any farther communication with the deputies,
and became more reserved toward his colleagues; and no doubt began to meditate
how he might most expeditiously rid himself of those whose characters were
least in unison with his own. I foresaw the effect of these conferences, and
said to Roland; "If you were an intriguer, capable of behaving according to the
errors of the old court and its former system, I should say that the moment is
come when you ought to get rid of Dumourier, to hinder him from playing you
some trick." But honest men understand nothing of these sort of courtier-like
skirmishes, and Roland was as incapable of having recourse to them as he was
unfitted to practice them.

The delay of the sanction was now understood as a positive veto, as the time
was almost expired. We felt that the council not having courage and consistence
enough to pronounce their opinions in mass, it was Roland's duty, and what
integrity and courage directed him, to step forward singly; and we determined
together on writing the well-known letter to the king. I composed this letter
myself, which was written without much meditation. He carried it to the council
to read it aloud on the day when the king, who was still urged respecting his
sanction, required the ministers to give each of them his opinion written and
signed, and then went rapidly on to talk of other affairs. Roland returned
home, added a few lines in the cover of the letter, and had it put into the
king's hands on the morning of the 11th of June. The next day, the 12th, about
eight o'clock, Servan called on us with a gay countenance. "Give me joy," said
he, "I have had the honor to be turned out." "My husband," I replied, "will
soon share the same fate, and I am somewhat picqued that you are the first." He
told us, that having gone that morning to the king for some private business,
he had talked with him very warmly on the necessity of the camp of twenty
thousand men, if he was really in earnest in opposing the designs of the enemy;
that the king had turned his back to him in very ill humor; and that Dumourier
had just left the war-office, where he had gone to take the seals in
consequence of an order which he carried with him. "Dumourier! he plays a sorry
part -- but it does not surprise me." The three preceding days he had often
been at the Thuilleries in long conferences with the queen; and it is not amiss
to remark, that Baron Carrieve had some interest through her women. Roland
hearing that Servan was with me, left the persons to whom he was giving
audience, learned the news, and sent to invite his colleagues, Dumourier
excepted, to come to him.

It seemed proper not to wait to be dismissed; and as Servan's dismission had
taken place, those who possessed the same principles ought to give in their
own, at least unless the king would recall Servan, and dismiss Dumourier, with
whom they ought never again to sit in council. I do not doubt but that if the
four ministers had behaved in this manner, the court would not have been a
little embarrassed to replace them; that Lacoste and Duranthon would have done
themselves credit, and that the business would have been so much the more
interesting for the public, as it became so in a very different manner.

The ministers debated without coming to any conclusion, except that they would
meet again the next day at eight o'clock in the morning, and that Roland should
prepare a letter for them. I could never have believed, if circumstances had
not put me in the way of knowing it, that judgment and firmness of character
were so rare: how few men are there, consequently, fitted for business, and how
much fewer still are formed to govern! Were we to wish for the union of these
qualities with perfect disinterestedness, we wish for a Phoenix, almost
impossible to find. I am not astonished that men above the common standard, and
who are placed at the head of empires, should hold most commonly the human race
in contempt. It is the almost necessary consequence of great knowledge of the
world, and in order to avoid the errors into which those may fall who are
entrusted with the happiness of nations, there must be a fund of philosophy and
of magnanimity not very common.

The ministers kept their appointment, but concluded that it would be better to
speak to the king in person than to write to him; a measure which appeared
rather as an expedient to avoid losing their places than to come to an
explanation. While they were yet deliberating, the king sent a message to
Duranthon, the minister of justice, to go immediately and alone. The ministers
Roland and Clavieres went to wait for him at his hotel. Duranthon returned with
a lengthened face and hypocritical air, and drew out slowly from his pocket a
paper containing the dismission of his two colleagues. "You have made us wait a
long time for our liberty," said Roland to him, smiling, and taking the paper:
he returned and acquainted me with the news, which I had well foreseen. I
congratulated him on it, and advised him not to wait till the king announced it
to the assembly, but to do it himself; and, since his majesty had taken no
advantage of the instructions contained in the letter, to make them useful to
the public by publishing them himself. I saw nothing more consistent with the
courage of having written to him, than firmness in sending a copy of it to the
assembly: in hearing of your dismission, the assembly will become acquainted
with the cause of it.

This idea proved agreeable to my husband, and every one knows the honors
which the assembly conferred on the three ministers Servan, Roland, and
Clavieres; by declaring that their dismission was accompanied by the regrets of
the nation; as well as the applause bestowed on the letter, which was ordered
to be printed and sent into the departments."

This citation from madame Roland's memoirs will not perhaps be thought too
long, since it contains the detail of those circumstances which precipitated
Lewis XVI. from the throne, and destroyed monarchy in France. It is probable
that at some future period this fabric would have fallen amidst the storms of
popular discussions: but its dissolution, had the conduct of the court been
different, would have been at least more gentle. I have already mentioned that
madame Roland sent me from her prison certain papers, with a view no doubt,
that I should in some happier days vindicate her memory to the world; and I
have till this period, when I find that many of her papers have been preserved,
felt the keenest regret, that I was compelled by the late sanguinary system to
destroy those in our possession without taking a copy, since to have had them
discovered was certain death.

Of the account of the conduct of the court written by madame Roland, general
Servan, the only principal actor who still remains, has given me many
illustrations. Servan, as minister of war, had to contend not only with the
enemies on the frontiers, but with those much more formidable to the state, in
the Thuilleries. His office compelled him to hold longer communications with
the king than the other ministers -- if that could be called so which was only
a continued altercation. -- His duty prompted him to explain to him that his
conduct was precipitating himself as well as the kingdom to ruin, and that the
whole tenor of it discovered him to be hostile to the constitution, as well as
to the interest of the state. "The king seemed at times so thoroughly
convinced," says Servan, "That I deceived myself into a belief that the next
meeting he would assent to the propositions offered him: but in the interval he
had been assailed and hardened into resistance in favor of Austria, by the
queen -- in favor of the priests, by madame Elisabeth; so that it required
going the same round of argument to bring him again to conviction. The king
sometimes appealed to Servan, as knowing, from having been long at court, the
rectitude of his intentions; to which Servan never would assent: on the
contrary, he told him that his weakness, which was criminal, would never be any
shield against the indignation of the people, who would not enter into
distinctions. Sometimes Servan finding no good was to be done that day, sat
down to write till the hour when the council broke up, which distressed the
king exceedingly; who frequently interrupted him, by asking if he was taking
notes of their conversation. No secretary was allowed, though decreed by the
constitution, and repeatedly insisted on by Roland and Servan; the former of
whom brought his great morocco covered book, under his arm, to the great
diversion of Servan, in order to enter the records: but the king persisted in
his refusal, and the pages remained from the first to the last unsullied.

THE END.

