A SERMON DELIVERED AT HAVERHILL, New Hampshire, JULY 28, 1796, AT THE
EXECUTION OF THOMAS POWERS, Who was EXECUTED FOR A RAPE, Committed at LEBANON,
on the 7th of DECEMBER, 1795. BY NOAH WORCESTER, A. M. PASTOR of a CHURCH in
THORNTON.

HAVERHILL, New Hampshire, PRINTED and SOLD BY N. COVERLY. MDCCXCVI.

A SERMON DELIVERED AT THE EXECUTION OF Thomas Powers.
WE are convened this day to be spectators of a most solemn and affecting
event, the launching of a moral vessel from the land of probation into the
boundless ocean of eternity, and endless retribution, never to return. And
whether it will depart, freighted with the love of GOD, penitence, faith, and
the joys of pardoning grace, as a vessel of mercy, prepared unto glory; or
freighted with pride, impenitence, unbelief, and the guilt of unpardoned sin,
as a vessel of wrath fitted to destruction, is, to us, a matter of dreadful
uncertainty.

Such an event must deeply interest the feelings of every benevolent spectator,
and produce the most servent prayer, that what shall be said on the occasion,
may prove a favor of life unto life, and not of death unto death.

As a directory for our thoughts, and the ground of our discourse, on the
present occasion, the following passage of scripture has been selected.

LUKE xxiiid Chapter, 39, 40, 41, 42 and 43d verses. -- And one of the
malefactors, which were banged, railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save
thyself and us.

But the other answering, rebuked him, saying -- Do thou not fear GOD, seeing
thou art in the same condemnation.

And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds, but this man
has done nothing amiss.

And be said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom.

And Jesus said unto him, verify I say unto thee, To day shall thou be with me
in Paradise.

This passage of sacred history presents to our view, a past scene, in all
respects as solemn, and in some respects, vastly more interesting than the
present.

The great Redeemer, who was rich, for our sake became poor; that we through
his poverty might be made rich. To accomplish the important work of our
redemption, he appeared on earth in the likeness of man. And according to
ancient prophecy, in the last years of his visible residence among men, the
spirit of the Lord God was upon him, and he was anointed to preach good tidings
to the meek, to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the
captives, and the opening of the prison to those that were bound; to preach the
acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God. -- But
although he manifested the greatest benevolence, both with regard to the souls
and bodies of men, yet his faithfulness in reproving the wickedness and
hypocrify of the Jews, excited their indignation to such a degree, that nothing
would satisfy their malicious desires, short of embruing their hands in his
blood. With these malignant feelings, they incessantly sought to ensnare and to
destroy him.

But here we may observe that it was a great part of his errand into the world
to die an accursed death on the cross; to give his life a ransom for many; for
without the snedding of blood, there could be no remission. So while the Jews
with wicked hands crucified and slew him, they did what God's hand and counsel
had before determined should he done.

And when the time drew nigh which the Father had appointed, and to which the
Son had previously consented, that he should be made a sacrifice for the sins
of the world; he was betrayed by one of his own family into the hands of his
enemies. And when by art and malice they had obtained against him an unjust
sentence of condemnation, he was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a
malefactor to the place of execution.

And for the greater reproach and indignity, he was hung between two thieves,
the one on his right hand, and the other on his left. Their placing him thus,
between the two malefactors, was probably, to represent him as the ringleader
in mischief, and the greatest criminal of the three, -- This will appear
further probable, if we consider, that while the three hung on the cross
together, Christ was the peculiar object of their insults. We have no account
that one insulting word was said to either of the malefactors; but against the
Son of God, the artillery of hell was discharged in the most barbarous insults
and reproaches.

They that passed by, railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying, Thou that
destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thyself. If thou be
the Son of God, come down from the cross. -- Likewise, also the chief priests
mocking him, with the scribes and elders, said, He saved others, himself he
cannot save; if he be the king of Israel, let him come down from the cross, and
we will believe him. And when, from anguish of soul, he cried, Eloi, Eloi,
Lamasabachthani; some said he calls for Elias -- One ran and took a sponge,
and filled it with vinegar, and gave him to drink; and the rest said let us be,
let us see whether Elias will come to save him.

Had Christ been the greatest criminal who ever suffered an infamous death,
their insulting him thus, in the hour of distress, would have been an indelible
blot upon humanity. But considering him as perfectly sinless and holy, no
wonder that the sun refused to give them light; that the earth quaked with dire
convulsions, and the rocks burst asunder with indignation, while such a horrid
deed was perpetrated; such indignity shown to him, who was the brightness of
the Father's glory, and the express image of his person.

But notwithstanding we reprobate the conduct of men on that occasion, we must
adore the conduct of GOD. The event, in one view of it, was gloomy and
infinitely dreadful; but in another, it was gloriously expressive of the love
of GOD to mankind. It was needful that the Captain of our Salvation should be
made perfect through suffering. It was needful that he should die that we might
live. -- And for this end he came into the world; so it pleased the Father to
bruise him, and to lay upon him the iniquities of us all; that whosoever should
believe in his name might have everlasting life. Thus Christ suffered for sins;
the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God.

Let us now turn our attention to some particulars suggested in our text.

We may notice that awful degree of stupidity which appeared in one of the
malefactors, in the hour of crucifixion. -- And one of the malefactors railed
on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself and us.

The railing and insults of the spectators, on that occasion, was evidential of
very great malignity and inhumanity. But the railing of this malefactor not
only evidenced his inhumanity, but the most surprising stupidity and hardness
of heart. He himself was just closing his state of probation, and about to
enter into the world of retribution. It would he natural to expect, that in
such a solemn and critical moment, his mind would have been otherwise employed
than in inventing raillery against a fellow sufferer. No words can sufficiently
express the detestable nature of such hardness and stupidity. How much more
becoming a rational creature it would have been, to spend those few moments of
life, in pouring out his foul before GOD, in humble consession of his sin, and
servent supplication for his forgiving grace.

It is not supposable that he arrived at that pitch of stupidity otherwise than
by a long course of practicing iniquity. It is not improbable, that in his
younger years, the very thought of such an infamous death would have filled him
with fear and trembling, and had a prophet foretold him that in some future day
he would discover such shocking stupidity, he would have utterly disbelieved
it; thought it impossible, and replied as Hazael did to Elisha -- Is thy
servant a dog that he should do this thing!

But by continuing in the practice of iniquity, violating his conscience, and
despising reproof, he grew more and more feared, and regardless of danger,
still he would rush blindly and unfeelingly into the bosom of despair.

Nor is it improbable, that while he pursued his sinful course, he found his
conscience and his fears of future misery, an embarrassment; and to free
himself from inward anguish, greedily swallowed the doctrine of the sadduces,
or some other sentiment calculated to please his heart, and to footh his
conscience, while he gave full latitude to his vicious inclinations. And that,
because he did not like to retain GOD in his knowledge, the Lord in
righteousness gave him over to a reprobate mind, and sent him strong delusions
to believe a lie, that he might be snared in the works of his own hands, and
finally damned for having pleasure in unrighteousness. And thus, by degrees, he
was fitted for destruction. So that when the solemn hour of execution arrived,
he could mock at death, laugh at the idea of a future retribution, and spend
his expiring moments in railing on him, who alone could save him from endless
death.

It is common for persons in the time of youth, and till they become hardened
in the extreme, to fancy, that if they have any previous warning respecting the
hour of death, they shall, assuredly, attend to the concerns of their souls,
repent of their sins, and make their peace with GOD. But from this instance of
the malefactors stupidity, we may see that there is no certainty that sinners
will not be as stupid in the hour of death, as in any former period of their
lives; and consequently to pursue sinful courses in hopes of a disposition to
repent, at such a late period of life, must be infinitely hazardous.

We may attend to the temper and conduct of the other malefactor at the same
solemn hour.

While he heard his former companion in wickedness, impiously, railing on the
Son of GOD, and manifesting his stupidity; his soul was filled with
astonishment and contrition. In the most solemn, feeling and affecting manner,
he rebuked him, Do thou not fear GOD, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation? -- And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our
deeds; but this man has done nothing amiss.

No language could have been more suitable on the occasion, nor better
calculated to have a good effect upon the mind of that hardened wretch; had he
not been past feeling, he must have sunk in contrition under the weight of such
a seasonable, solemn, and humble reproof.

The former part of this reproof, will pertinently, apply in many cases. --
When one person judges, censures, or rails upon another for crimes, while he
himself is guilty of the same or greater crimes; it may be said to him, Do
thou not fear GOD, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? So when one
person, in a careless and unfeeling manner, sees another punished for certain
crimes, while he himself is guilty of the same, or greater, he might in this
language justly be rebuked. -- Do thou not fear GOD, seeing thou art in the
same condemnation?

"And is it not to be feared that there are some persons in this assembly to
day, to whom the rebuke may be penitently applied; -- Some who are guilty of
the same or greater crimes, than that for which this prisoner is to be
executed, and yet are destitute of any proper feelings toward the prisoner,
and any suitable contrition for their own sins. To such we may say, to such
their own consciences may say, Do thou not fear GOD, seeing thou art in the
same condemnation? -- For although their crimes have not been brought into
public view, and their persons condemned by a Court of Justice; yet, they and
their crimes are open to the view of GOD, and by his law they are condemned.
And they are now prisoners to Divine Justice, and on their way to trial and
execution; and nothing short of a cordial repentance, will prevent their
receiving a more dreadful punishment than it is in the power of man to inflict.

In the latter part of this malefactors reproof to his companion, he evidenced
the penitent feelings of his heart. He did not, like a self justifying sinner,
say, And you indeed justly, for you receive the due reward of your deeds. But
like one who was sensible of his own guilt, and disposed to condemn sin in
himself as freely as in others, he said, And we indeed justly, for we receive
the due reward of our deeds. It is natural enough for impenitent sinners to
accuse one another; but while they are disposed to accuse one another, they are
generally disposed to excuse themselves.

The truly humble and penitent are most deeply affected with their own guilt
and vileness, and disposed to think others less vile than themselves. The
reason is this, they have not so clear a discovery of the hearts of others, and
the aggravations of their conduct, as they have of their own.

The difference between the feelings of a self justifying and a self condemning
sinner, is strikingly illustrated by Christ, in the parable of the Pharisee and
Publican, who went up into the temple to pray. The Pharisee, unaffected with
the wickedness of his own heart, could draw near and proudly thank GOD that he
was not as other men. But the publican feeling most sensibly, his own vileness,
could not so much as lift up his eyes toward Heaven, but, standing at an
humble distance, smote on his aching breast, and said, GOD be merciful to me a
sinner.

Similar to the feelings of the Publican were those of the malefactor, when he
said, and we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds. How
suitable were these feelings for one in his situation -- and how great the
contrast of tempers in the two malefactors!

When the penitent had done his duty, in reproving his companion in sin and
suffering, and had confessed his own guilt and ill deserts, he humbly made his
supplication to the suffering Redeemer. Lord, remember me when thou come into
thy kingdom. -- This is expressive of the sense he had of his need of a
Savior; his faith in Christ as the Messiah; his love to the character of
Christ as Mediator; his willingness to subject himself to Christ as his Lord,
and the pleasure of his soul in committing himself into the divine hand. While
others mocked and derided he was not ashamed to own the Lord, and to call upon
his name. And to his humble request he received the most comforting reply.

Thus we are led,

3d. To consider the import of the Lord's answer, to the penitent thief -- To
day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

By Paradise is doubtless intended, the heavenly state; a state of complete
felicity and the highest enjoyment, exempt from all sin and suffering; where
the weary are at rest, and the wicked cease from troubling. Every soul being
perfected in holiness, is completely prepared to be pleased with divine
government, and to enter into the joys of the Lord. As they are prepared to
enter into the joys of the Lord, so they are prepared to be comforted in each
others comfort. And as GOD will never cease to display his glory, and as it may
be supposed that Angels and saints will for ever be in a state of youthful
vigor, so it may be supposed that they will be perpetually growing in
knowledge, in holiness and felicity. -- Every employment of the saints in
serving the Lord and each other, will afford refined pleasure. As numerous as
the company of happy beings, so numerous are the streams of individual
felicity; and the perfection and happiness of GOD, with his innumerable family,
collectively considered, will be, to every soul, an ocean of delight, without
surface, shore or bottom.

Into such a paradise of joy unspeakable and full of glory, Christ promised the
penitent malefactor immediate entrance.

This answer of Christ naturally leads us to conceive, that men have souls
capable of existence in a state of separation from the body; that this soul is
the most important part of the man, and that immediately upon the death of the
body, the soul enters into a state of retribution.

There is no reason to suppose that Christ expected the body of the malefactor
would, that day, be with him in Paradise. Yet, he said to him -- To day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. Which evidently conveys the idea, that the soul is
capable of separate existence; likewise that the soul is so important a part of
the man, that it may be considered as the person when separated from the body;
and also, that as soon as the soul leaves the body, or as soon as the body
dies, the soul enters into a state of retribution.

That upon the death of the body, the soul enters immediately into a state of
retribution, is denied by some who profess adherence to the scriptures as the
word of God. But the words of Christ, under consideration, most naturally
conveys this idea. And several passages of Scripture, are calculated to confirm
us in the belief, that this was really the meaning of Christ, one or two of
which will here be brought into view.

The apostle Paul in his epistle to the Phlippians mentioned a conflict of
desires in his own breast. He expressed himself thus: "For me to live is
Christ, and to die is gain. -- Yet what I shall choose I wot not. For I am in a
strait betwixt too, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ; which is
far better. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you."

Now how can this be reconciled to the idea of the souls remaining in a state
of insensibility from the death of the body, to the general resurrection?

It, perhaps, will be pleaded that during the time of the souls insensibility
it has no perception of any thing; and therefore it can perceive no loss of
time. Consequently, it must be all one, as to the perceptions of the soul,
whether it be one second, or thousands of years, from the death of the body, to
the souls entering into Paradise. And as the Apostle was, in this world,
subjected to grievous afflictions; and as he expected that, on his first
perception after death, he should find himself with the Lord; he might, with
propriety say, to die is gain. To this we may answer,

1. A man may be sensible, before he lies down to sleep, that if, in his
sleeping moments, he shall have no perception or succession of ideas, that he
can, during that state, have no consciousness of the passing of time: yet,
while he contemplates the matter beforehand, he will, also, be sensible that
time will pass, during his sleep, whether he shall then be conscious of it or
not. And when a man awakes in the morning, he may be conscious that time has
passed while he was asleep, although he cannot recollect any perceptions which
he had during his slumber. -- So if Paul expected that his soul would rest in a
state of total insensibility from the death of the body to the general
resurrection, and that during that state he should be unconscious of the
passing of time, yet doubtless, he was sensible that there would be loss of
time during that state of insensibility. Therefore, if he did not view such a
state as necessary to prepare the soul for future services and enjoyments, as
sleep is necessary while the soul and body are united, he must estimate living
in this world as preferable to such a state of insensibility: provided that the
happiness he might enjoy in this life, would be sufficient in the least degree,
to overbalance the sufferings he must endure. For if happiness be at all a
desirable object to be continued in existence, in the enjoyment of one degree
of real-happiness, is preferable to annihilation, or a state of insensibility.

2d. It will be readily granted that Paul's afflictions in the present state
were exceedingly great; but it will not be granted that his afflictions were so
great as to overbalance his happiness. For in the same epistle, he says,
respecting himself, "I have learned in whatever state I am, therewith to be
content". And in another of his epistles he testifies that Godliness with
contentment is great gain. It is therefore, easy to conceive that he might
enjoy in this world, sufficient degrees of happiness greatly to overbalance all
the calamities to which he was subjected.

Paul was possessed of that charity which seeks not her own. He was formed
for activity, and to do good and communicate was pleasure to his soul. -- This
pleasure he expected he could enjoy while he lived. And to such a mind the
thought of passing into a state of total inactivity must be highly disagreeable.

Besides, it was Paul's opinion, that the afflictions of saints in the present
life, work out for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; which
sentiment would be a great support to his soul under his present trials. We may
therefore on the whole, conclude, that had Paul expected, that, at death, his
soul would remain for thousands of years, in a state of inactivity and
insensibility, he would rather have said -- To die is less, to live is gain.

From what has been said, already, it appears pretty evident, that the souls of
the righteous, or penitent, immediately after the death of the body, enter into
a state of retribution. And if it be so with the righteous, we may expect it
will be so with the wicked. If we may suppose that the penitent go immediately
into Paradise, we may suppose that the wicked go immediately into hell: And
both these ideas are clearly exhibited in the parable of the rich man and
Lazarus.

The beggar died, and was carried by the Angels, not into a state of
insensibility, but into Abraham's bosom. The rich man died also, and the next
news we hear of him, is this. In hell he lift up his eyes, and saw Abraham afar
off, and Lazarus in his bosom, and so far was he from being in a state of
insensibility, that he cried, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for
I am tormented in this flame.

That the wicked are here represented as being in hell, and the righteous in
heaven, before the judgment day, appears evident from the last petition of the
rich man. When he was denied so much favor as one drop of water to cool his
tongue, he further requested that Lazarus might be sent to his father's house
to warn his five brethren, left they also should come to that place of torment.
But after the resurrection the wicked in hell will have no brethren left in
this world to need either the dead or the living to warn them.

Our Savior's answer to the malefactor, is also expressive of the riches and
freeness of Divine Grace in pardoning the penitent.

This malefactor had been a great sinner. He had delayed repentance to the
eleventh hour, and was just about to enter into eternity. He then came to
himself. The feelings of penitence took place in his breast; the love of God
was shed abroad on his soul; he cried for mercy with a humble heart. -- And lo!
with what readiness his petition was granted. Although he had been exceedingly
guilty in delaying repentance so long, yet no objection was made to his
forgiveness and salvation. But said the all compassionate Redeemer, To day
shall thou be with me in Paradise.

As there is this one instance of repentance and forgiveness at the eleventh
hour, recorded in scripture, it may afford encouragement to all such as have
delayed to that time. But as there is only this instance recorded, and as in
the same connection, there is another instance of the most shocking stupidity at
the last hour, it concerns every one who has now the opportunity to improve an
earlier season to make his peace with God.

We may now proceed to some particular application of the subject, and
improvement of the solemn occasion, upon which we have convened. And here the
prisoner claims our first attention.

UNHAPPY FELLOW MORTAL.
At your request I speak on the present occasion. You will therefore suffer me,
to address you as one on the borders of eternity; hearing the gospel for the
last time; and this day to give account how you hear.

The great GOD, who brought you into this world, gave you a rational soul, and
placed you in a land blessed with gospel light. You have proved yourself to be
by nature, a child of wrath, by being a child of disobedience. You have been a
lover of pleasure more than a lover of God; by yielding to the temptations of
Satan, and indulging your own vicious inclination, you have paved the way to an
infamous death. The Lord has beheld your wickedness, and has been greatly
displeased. He has so ordered things in his Providence that you should be
ensnared with the work of your own hands. He has caused your wickedness to be
detected, and your sins to find you out.

According to the laws of the land, you have forfeited your life, with all the
privileges of a citizen: And, in the bloom of youth, you are condemned to die;
to be cut off from the land of the living as a cumberer of the ground. Unhappy
man! unhappy fate!

you are soon to appear before another tribunal, at which the fate of your soul
is to be decided for eternity. Before the setting of the sun, your soul is to
appear at the bar of God, and from his mouth you must hear a sentence never to
be revoked, a sentence which will fill your soul with joy unutterable, or
anguish insupportable. For your benefit, and the benefit of others, I have
brought into view a passage of scripture, in which you may find your character,
and read the way of life.

The blessed Redeemer who had been exhibited as hanging on a tree, was cut off,
but not for himself, he shed his blood for the remission of sins, and although he
died, he lives again, and is now a merciful advocate for sinners, before the
throne of God the Father: And through him there is forgiveness with God, even
for the chief of penitent sinners. He makes the most free and gracious
proclamation. Ho! every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. And
whosoever will, let him take of the waters of life freely, And although your
sins are great, nothing but continuing impenitent will exclude you from an
interest in Christ, and the joys of the heavenly world.

You have, I hope, observed the different tempers which appeared in the two
malefactors who were crucified with Christ, and it becomes you seriously to
consider, to which of these tempers your present feelings bear the greatest
resemblance.

If like the penitent thief, you are now possessed of a broken heart, and a
contrite spirit, and from such feelings, are disposed to cry, God be merciful
to me a sinner: You may freely apply the gracious promise of Christ to
yourself, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And the gallows will be to
you as the last step to heaven.

Should this be your lot, what a happy change will soon be made in your
circumstances? You will pass from a world of sin, to a world of holiness, from
a world of misery to a world of perfect happiness. -- From being a prisoner on
earth, you will become a free citizen in the New-Jerusalem above. In a word,
you will exchange an infamous halter, for a crown of immortal and unfading
glory.

But if you are now possessed of the temper of that impenitent wretch, who
could spend his last moments in railing rather than praying, how perilous is
your situation! should you continue in such a temper but a few minutes more,
you are undone! forever undone!

How unfit is a person with such a flinty heart, for the society of heaven? And
how impossible that he should ever enter those holy gates? If you die with an
impenitent heart, despising the Lord that bought you, you will bring upon
yourself swift, and remediless destruction; You will exchange the prison of tho
county, for the prison of despair. The chains which have confined and oppressed
your body, will be exchanged for chains which will bind your soul in endless
confinement. And instead of having the various comforts which have been
afforded you in prison, you will be separated from every comfort, not allowed
so much as one drop of water to cool your tongue forever. How important to you
then are these precious moments of probation! You are not in hell. Yet there is
hope. O then repent and your sins shall be blotted out, humble yourself before
God, and he will lift you up. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, call upon his
name and you shall be saved.

With what fervency of soul are the friends of God, now praying for your
repentance and salvation! What a multitude of invisible angels, good and evil,
are now hovering about, waiting for your decisive choice, and the departure of
your precious soul! How are some of the holy angels waiting, to fly to the
courts above, with the transporting news of your repentance, while others are
waiting to convey your immortal spirit to the world of bliss.

And how are devils, who have led you in the road to ruin, waiting with the
malicious hope, soon to take possession of your soul, and hurry it down to the
regions of woe. Behold now is to you the accepted time! behold now is your only
day for salvation.

Having thus set before you life and death, the blessing and the cursing, with
hearty prayers, that you may choose the good and escape the evil, we must leave
you in the hand of God, and bid you adieu, till we meet you again at the bar of
the ETERNAL JUDGE.

MEN, BRETHREN and FATHERS,
THE occasion on which we are convened has had no precedent in this county, and
but very few in the State. And it is devoutly to be desired that this
melancholy event, may have such a happy influence upon all classes of people,
that a similar occasion for convening, shall never be needful.

Although capital punishments have seldom taken place among us, yet criminal
prosecutions and such crimes as lay a foundation for them, have of late, been
very numerous; which evidences a corruption of morals, and growth in
wickedness, and gives reason to fear that capital punishments will be
multiplied. It may, therefore, be suitable in this serious hour, to bring into
view some things which have influence to corrupt the morals of community; that
for the future, we may all be on our guard, and act a faithful part according
to our respective stations and capacities, for the suppression of vice, and a
reformation of morals. And consequently, for preventing a further increase of
criminal prosecutions, and capital punishments.

There are four classes of citizens who have great influence in regulating, or
corrupting the morals of society, viz. -- Rulers, Public Teachers, Professors
of Religion, and Heads of Families.

1st. Rulers. -- They have vast influence upon the morals of community. When
they duly execute their respective offices, they are ministers of GOD for good
to the people. They are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. -- So
that, while good rulers are in authority, and faithfully discharge their duty,
vice hides its head, and the people rejoice. But when the wicked bear rule,
iniquity abounds, and the people mourn. The wicked walk on every side, when the
vilest men are exalted. It is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler
of thy people. And we wish not do it. -- But perhaps we may, for a good end,
humbly point out faults, without justly incurring censure for speaking evil.

It may, however, be suitable here to observe, that we have great cause of
thankfulness, that we have so many good rules in our land* and especially, that
we have such an unblemished and exemplary character as President of the Nation.

But is there not still some reason for mourning on account of deficiencies in
our Rulers? -- Are not those who may be esteemed good Rulers, chargeable with
some deficiency at the present day? -- Are they not, in some degree, too
negligent of their duties, and too regardless of the morals of community? --
Are there not several laws in this state, against immoralities, which are
frequently violated, but seldom if ever executed? viz. -- Such as respect
Adultery, Drunkenness. Tavern Haunting, Idleness, Gaming and profane Swearing.
Now, if the laws of the State are, in these instances trampled upon with
impunity; -- if executive officers are negligent in their duty respecting such
violations of law, does not this tend to encourage the vicious, and pave the
way to capital crimes?

Besides, are there not some who sit as legislators, and sustain the office of
magistrates, who are notoriously vicious in their characters, immoral in their
lives, and profane in their language! -- Such characters in office, are a real
curse to community. While they thus trample on the laws themselves, are they
not guilty of the most solemn perjury? And instead of being a terror to evil
doers, are they not rather a terror to those who do well?

While they thus encourage vice by their own example, their conduct tends
directly to the subversion of Government, to the corruption of morals, to the
destruction of happiness, to infamous deaths, and the ruin of souls And were
not persons of this character most fearfully hardened, they would blush
whenever they take the seat of judgment, to execute the laws upon others; and
like Felix or Belshazzar, they would tremble at the prospect of a judgment to
come.

2d. PUBLIC TEACHERS are another very influential class of citizens. If they
preach the gospel of JESUS CHRIST, they inculcate the best system of morals
with which human society has ever been blessed -- Morals which proceed from the
purest principles, which are enforced by the highest motives, and which issue
in the greatest good. And while Ministers preach as Christ preached, and walk
as he walked, their influence is vastly beneficial to community, as to the
regulation of morals.

But if a Minister preaches Benevolence in words, and Selfishness in deeds; if
he preaches that men should be just and merciful, while his practice encourages
dishonesty and incompassion; -- if he preaches that men should be sober and
temperate in all things, and yet devotes himself to dissipation and
intemperance; the influence of his example so far over balances the influence
of his preaching, that he does much more hurt than good.

Or if a Public Teacher, under pretense of preaching the gospel of Christ,
preaches the gospel of Satan; -- if in opposition to the gospel of Christ, he
makes no difference between the holy and profane, the saint and the sinner,
either with respect to their characters here, or their rewards hereafter; or if
he does not preach that the grace of GOD, which brings salvation, teaches us
that, denying all ungodliness and every worldly lust, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world; -- but instead of this, in his
preaching and practice, he tolerates those revellings, banquettings, and vain
amusements, which have no respect to the glory of GOD, the good of the soul, or
the benefit of community; it is easy to see, that while men are lovers of
pleasure more than lovers of GOD, such preaching is calculated to please the
hearts of the vicious, and to ruin their souls forever. And it is referred to
the judgment of others, whether the corruption of morals is not, in some
degree, to be attributed to the preaching and practice of some, who profess to
be ambassadors for Christ.

3d. PROFESSORS OF RELIGION, are also to be considered as influential in
forming the morals of society. They are for lights in the world, their conduct
is particularly noticed, and has great influence upon the minds of such as are
conversant with them. When they walk according to their profession, they hold
forth the word of life in their morals; as they are constant and devout in
worshipping God, so they love one another with a pure heart servently, and walk
in wisdom toward those who are without. Their morals proceed from that wisdom
which is from above; which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without
hypocrisy. Such morals, every one must see, can do no injury to community.

But those professors of religion who are negligent respecting the word and
worship of God; who bite and devour one another; who are fordid and a varicious
in their pursuits; knavish in their dealings; implacable and unmerciful in
their conduct; loose and profane in their language, do vast mischief in
society; for, it is natural for careless sinners to respect professors as
examples, and to think it lawful for themselves to be less circumspect than
those who profess to be followers of Christ.

And are there not, at the present day, many professors of religion who are so
loose and careless in their morals, that they contribute rather to the increase
of darkness than light. Are there not many whose morals would be a reproach
ever to a heathen? Many who are so worldly minded that they regard neither
justice nor mercy in their pursuits? who not only countenance iniquity in
others, but even set the most impious examples themselves.

Do not many professors of religion, almost forsake the public worship, and
institutions of God. David could say, I was glad when they said unto me, let us
go into the house of the Lord. How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord, My soul
longs, yea, even faints for the courts of the Lord: For a day in thy courts
is better than a thousand. I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my
God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

But must not many modern professors of religion make a great change in this
language to repeat it from the heart. Must they not say I was glad when they
said unto me let us go into the house of merriment. How amiable are thy
tabernacles O Prince of Darkness! My soul longs, yea even sainteth for the
Ball room, the licencious tavern, or the chambers of revelling and wantonness;
for a day in such sport's are better than a thousand: -- I had rather be a
doorkeeper in these tents of wickedness, than to dwell in the House of the
Lord.

It is a common observation, that actions speak louder than words; and it is
submitted to conscience whether the practice of many professors does not
clearly express the ideas which have now been brought into view.

4th. HEADS OF FAMILIES -- These are, in a high degree, influential as to the
morals of community. The morals of society depend much on the education of
children. For a general rule we may say as Solomon has said -- Train up a child
in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. -- But
the education of children is under the immediate direction of parents. Their
instructions and examples have vast influence upon their offspring in forming
their habits and morals.

If parents were universally faithful in the discharge of their duty, in giving
instruction, governing and setting good examples, children would, in general,
shun immoral courses, and grow up for usefulness in the world.

But if parents are irreligious and immoral; if they neglect to give their
children good instruction, and set evil examples before them, and surrender the
right of government, or make it subordinate to the inclinations of children,
young people will imbibe vicious habits, follow vicious courses, and grow up
for mischief and destruction. It will perhaps, be said that some of the most
pious and exemplary parents have some of the most vicious children. This may be
admitted, and still it is no objection to what has been advanced; for we do not
suppose that the children of good people, are naturally any better than others,
and the good influence of pious parents may be counteracted and subverted, by
the evil influence of wicked parents. As children are naturally inclined to
evil rather than to good, they will most naturally be pleased with that mode of
family government, which lays the least restraint upon their vicious
inclinations. Hence, if a faithful parent uses his endeavors to bring up his
children in the fear of the Lord, and to restrain them from vicious courses;
yet if neighboring parents set evil examples, and give unbounded liberty to
their children, to gratify their foolish inclinations, the children of the
faithful parent may, by degrees, be drawn away, and be led to think hard of him
for laying greater restraints than are laid upon other children; and when they
have proceeded thus far, they are in danger of proceeding farther, even to
despise parental authority, and to rush, with a feared conscience, into vice
and misery.

And is it not evident that parents, in general, have become too negligent with
regard to the morals of their children? And are there not many to be found, who
instead of training up their children for virtue and usefulness in the world,
do, by the neglect of good instruction, by setting evil examples, and by
prostituting parental affection and authority, train them up as servants for
the Devil? -- Oh! how will such parents endure the sight of their children at
the day of Judgment!

It has been observed that vicious parents counteract the influence of good
parents. And we may add, that they also counteract the influence of good
ministers and good magistrates. They teach children to despise religion, and to
despise government; and vicious ministers counteract the influence of good
magistrates, and wicked magistrates counteract the influence of good ministers.

How important is it then, that the several classes which have been named,
Rulers, Ministers, Professors and Parents, should all unite their efforts and
their influence for the suppression of vice and the reformation of morals*

Let those of us who belong to either of these classes, duly examine ourselves,
and be suitably humbled before the Lord. Probably in a greater or loss degree,
we must all plead guilty before the bar of conscience, as having had some share
in corrupting the morals of community, and levelling the high way to the
gallows: Let us all feel the importance of uniting our influence for the
future, in a cause of such consequence to the welfare of society, to the lives,
and to the souls of men.

Let us be deeply affected with the importance of good examples, and the danger
of those which are evil.

Bad example in community is like the plague in a city, if one is infected,
thousands are endangered. The contagion may spread from man to man, from family
to family; from town to town; from state to state; and it may be shipped and
wasted from land to land. -- It may also be transmitted from one generation to
another; so that in the course of ages and events, the example of one vicious
man, may have influence to hurry thousands up to the gallows, and millions down
to Hell. May we all, therefore, in this serious moment resolve, that we will
not be the imitators of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

As the rising generation are deeply interested in the events of this day, I
shall close with an address to them.

MY YOUNG FRIENDS,
HERE you see one, in the bloom of youth, to be this day cut off from the land
of the living, by the judgment of men, and the righteous judgment of GOD. The
course of wickedness which he has pursued, has led him into the snares of
death; soon he must bid adieu to all earthly objects, and what will become of
his precious soul is known only to GOD.

And think ye that this unhappy creature is a sinner above all the young people
in the land, because he suffers such things? -- I tell you nay, but except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. You may, perhaps, continue impenitent,
and escape the county prison and the gallows* but you cannot continue long in
impenitency, and finally escape the prison of despair.

This event is a solemn call to you, to flee youthful lusts, to shun vicious
courses, to repent and make your peace with GOD; and if you make a right
improvement of the event, it will be a mean of everlasting benefit to your
souls. The death of this criminal will have some influence on your minds; it
will either serve to reform or to harden. This is the requirement of God to you
this day, both by his word and his providence -- Remember now thy Creator in
the days of thy youth. And you cannot disregard it without greatly endangering
your souls.

It is natural for young people to neglect their souls, in hopes of a future
opportunity to repent. If you were satisfied that this day would be your last,
probably, you would be filled with great anxiety -- but you expect to see this
prisoner die, and still live yourselves for many years to come. However, there
may be less time between the hour of his departure, and yours, than you now
imagine. God has many ways to call mankind into eternity; and it is possible
that the most thoughtless of you will be called before this criminal.

But however long you may live, it is not now too early to secure an interest
in Christ, and to begin the service of the Lord. To delay repentance is very
hazardous, even on supposition that your lives should be long continued. For by
delay your hearts harden and become more and more opposed to repentance.

Think seriously of the fearful stupidity of the thief on the cross; how far he
was from repentance in his expiring moments; you may flatter yourselves that
you shall conduct more wisely. But what evidence can you have of it, if you are
now so foolish as to refuse to repent? One delay prepares you for another; and
the probability of your ever repenting, grows less and less every day; and the
probability of your final hardiness and remediless ruin grows greater and
greater.

It may seem hard to you to forsake your vanities, and to devote yourselves to
the service of God in so early a period of your lives. But is it not better to
do it now, than it should never be done. Such may be the determination of GOD,
respecting your repentance and salvation, that it is with you, now or never.

It is probable that you feel pretty confident that you shall never arrive to
such a pitch of wickedness, as to be exposed to an infamous death. But who can
trust your hearts? If you have hearts to disobey God now, you have hearts to
listen to the advices of satan, and how far you will fellow them, is not for
man to tell. Ask the poor criminal whether two years ago, he had any more
expectation of coming to the halter, than you have now. If not, your danger may
be greater than ever you yet apprehended.

If you wish to be secured from such crimes as expose to such a death, shun
those paths which lead to such crimes. Give up your hearts and your all to God.
This is the way of safety, and every other is a way of danger.

It is much to be lamented that young people in general have become so
regardless of God, of duty and of danger, and so devoted to carnal and
sensitive pleasures. It affords but a dismal prospect with regard to the
consequences of their living in this world, or their entering into another. For
in the time of youth they generally form the characters they sustain through
life, and with which they leave the world.

If you wish to be truly useful, truly respectable, and truly happy in this, or
a future world, it will be wisdom in you to devote this early part of life, to
forming habits of real excellence. If this course should still be neglected by
you, the probability is, that you will be the instruments of much sin and
mischief in this world, and the subjects of much wrath and woe in the world to
come.

O think to what eminence some have arrived in usefulness and honor in this
world, by an early devotion of themselves to the service of God. Think of
Joseph, of Moses, David, Josiah and Daniel. What a sweet savor have they left
behind them, and with what honor and respect will their names be still handed
down to unborn ages.

It should be the study of every one to render himself so useful in life, that
when he dies, society may feel that they have lost a valuable character. And
thus their memory will be blessed, while the name of the wicked shall rot, or
be transmitted down to posterity, loaded with infamy and contempt.

Your Fathers are dropping away, one after another, and if you live in the
world, you must be their successors in the great affairs of church and state.
And how interesting it is that, now in the time of youth, you should lay a
foundation to serve your generation by the will of God! In order to, this you
should devote your time and advantages to the noble purposes of storing your
heads with knowledge, and your hearts with the habits of piety and virtue. In
so doing you will be prepared for an early death, or a useful life, and a
blessed eternity.

This solemn scene may well excite your attention to one, which is fast
approaching, that is infinitely more solemn, the Judgment of the Great Day.
When the despised Redeemer shall descend from Heaven, and appears not as an
infamous malefactor, but, arrayed in all the majesty and splendour of God. When
all the nations shall be summoned before his bar, have all their works
displayed to public view, and every individual receive a sentence which will
fix his soul in endless joy, or endless woe. To this solemn scene you are all
hastening with every breath you draw.

Are you not then, now solemnly called to serious reflections, to serious
resolutions, and to a serious deportment. Let me entreat you, in the most
affectionate manner, to forbear, on this occasion, every appearance of
lightness and indecency, and to behave as becomes those who expect to stand at
the Judgment seat of Christ. If you should devote this day to sport and
revelling, you will greatly expose yourselves to the displeasure of Heaven; --
give satan a great advantage against you, and vastly increase tho probability
that you will finally die in your sins. To day then if you will hear the voice
of God harden not your hearts; left he swear in his wrath that you shall never
enter the mansions of rest.


