THE FLOWERS OF MODERN TRAVELS, BEING ELEGANT, ENTERTAINING AND INSTRUCTIVE
EXTRACTS, SELECTED FROM THE WORKS OF THE MOST CELEBRATED TRAVELERS: SUCH AS
LORD LYTTLETON, SIR W. HAMILTO^ (...), TOTT, DR. JOHNSON, DR. MOORE, (...)
ADDISON, BRYDONE, COX, (...) SAVARY, TOPHAM, SHERLOCK, DOUGLAS, SWINBURNE, LADY
M. W. MONTAGUE, etc. etc. Intended chiefly for Young People of both (...)

By the Rev. John Adams, A. M.

Delectando, pariterque monendo. HOR. Travels are the most instructive School
of Man. SAVARN^ Here you may range the World from Pole to Pole;
Increase your knowledge, and delight your Soul;
Travel all Nations, and inform your Sense,
With Ease and Safety at a small Expense.
ANON. VOL I.

Boston: PRINTED FOR JOHN WES^ (...) 1797.

ADVERTISEMENT.
NO books whatever are more instructive and entertaining than books of Travels.
They are particularly well adapted to young people. They satisfy that eager
thirst after knowledge, which is found very strong in early life, and they
interest the mind as much as a novel. They make it usefully inquisitive, and
furnish it with matter for reflection.

With regard to the following selection, it is only necessary to observe, that
perhaps there never was brought together, in so small a compass, in any
language, a more copious collection of rational entertainment, than will be met
with in these volumes.

CONTENTS OF VOL. I.
I. Of the Volcanos in Iceland, and particularly Mount Hecla -- Dr. Troil 7 II.
Of the Warm Baths, and Hot Spouting Springs of Water in Iceland -- Ibid. 11
III. Of the Manners of the Icelanders -- Ibid. 17 IV. Of the Food of the
Icelanders -- Ibid. 17 V. Of the Manners of the Modern Egyptians -- Savary 19
VI. Of the River Nile -- Baron de Tott 23 VII. Of the Manners and general
Characters of the French -- Dr. Moore 29 VIII. Of the Complimental Phrases used
by the French -- Ibid. 36 IX. Of Geneva -- Ibid. 40 X. Of the Glaciers of Savoy
-- Ibid. 47 XI. Of Voltaire -- Ibid. 56 XII. Of Schaff hausen in Swisserland of
the Bridge over the Rhine; and of the Fall of the Rhine Coxe 62 XIII. Of Gesner
the Author of the Death of Abel, and Lavater the Physiognomist -- Ibid. 72 XIV.
Expedition across the Valley of Ice, in the Glacier of Montanvert. A. D. 1776
-- Ibid. 76 XV. Of Berne in Swisserland -- Ibid. 86 XVI. Of the Price of
Provisions in Swisserland. A. D. 1776 -- Ibid. 91 XVII. General Reflections
upon the Thirteen Swiss Can^^^^ A. D. 1776 -- Ibid. 94 XVIII. Of Frankfort. A.
D. 1775 -- Dr. Moore 101 XIX. Of the Queen of Denmark. A. D. 1775 -- Ibid. 106
XX. Of the Palace at Potsdam, and the King of Prussia. A. D. 1775 -- Ibid. 109
XXI. Of the Hereditary Prince of Prussia -- Ibid. 124 XXII. Of the Emperor of
Germany -- Ibid. 127 XXIII. Of the Idolatry of the Roman Catholics -- lb. 133
XXIV. Of Copenhagen. A. D. 1774 -- Wraxall 138 XXV. Of the Court at Copenhagen
-- Ibid. 142 XXVI. Of Stockholm. A. D. 1774 -- Ibid. 152 XXVII. Of Petersburgh.
A. D. 1774 -- Ibid. 160 XXVIII. Of Bremen. A. D. 1774 -- Ibid. 170 XXIX.
Conversation at Courtray in ^landers, with an impatient passenger for the
Departure of a Diligence -- Douglas 177 XXX. A Sermon to English Travelers --
Ibid. 182 XXXI. Of the City of Canton, in China -- Chinese Traveller 186 XXXII.
Of the Policy and Government of China -- lb. 197 XXXIII. Of Confucius -- Ibid.
204 XXXIV. Of the Number of Inhabitants in China; and of the Chinese Language
-- Ibid. 215 XXXV. Of the Tea-Plant -- Ibid. 218 XXXVI. Of the Private Life of
the Egyptian Ladies -- Savary 221 XXXVII. Of Naples and Mount Vesuvius --
Brydone 233 XXXVIII. Of Strombolo -- Ibid. 239 XXXIX. An Account of the
Eruption of Mount Vesuvius, which happened in August, 1779 -- Sir. W. Hamilton
243 XL. Of Mount AEtna. May 29, 1770 -- Brydone 253 XLI. A View of the Stars
and Rising Sun from Mount AEtna -- Ibid. 261 XLII. Of the Descent from Mount
AEtna; of its Height; and of the Electricity of the A^^ near Volcanos -- Ibid.
273 XLIII. Of Modern Rome -- Sharp 28^ XLIV. Of the Modern Romans -- Dr. Moore
289 XLV. Description of Pompey's Pillar, in the Neighborhood of Alexandria, in
Egypt, and an Anecdote of some English Sea Officers there -- Irwin 293 XLVI. Of
the Modern Persians -- Hanway 298 XLVII. Of the Manner of ordering Silkworms
at Ghilan in Persia -- Ibid. 303 XLVIII. Of the Hot Baths at Sophia -- Lady M.
W. Montague 304 XLIX. Of the Nature of the Turkish Government; and of the Grand
Sginior's Procession to the Mosque -- Ibid. 307 L. Of the Persons and Manners
of the Turkish Ladies -- Ibid. 310 LI. Of the pleasant Situation of Adrianople,
and the Manner in which the Turks pass their Time there -- Ibid. 314 LII. Of
the Entertainment given by the Grand Vizier's Lady -- Ibid. 317 LIII. Of
Constantinople -- Ibid. 320 LIVE. Verses addressed to Lady M. W. Montague --
Pope. 324
THE FLOWERS OF MODERN TRAVELS.
SECT. I. OF THE VOLCANOS IN ICELAND, AND PARTICULARLY MOUNT HECLA.
UPON our arrival in Iceland, on the 28th of August, 1772, we saw a prospect
before us, which, though not pleasing, was uncommon and surprising. Whatever
presented itself to our view bore (...) ^^vastation and our eyes, accusto^^^
(...) the pleasing coasts of England and (...) only the vestiges of the
operation (...) ancient!

The description of a country, where, quite close to the sea, you perceive
almost nothing but craggy cliffs vetrified by fire, and where the eye loses
itself in high and rocky mountains, covered with eternal snow, cannot possibly
produce such emotions, as at first sight might entirely prepossess the thinking
spectator. It is true, beauty is pleasing both to our eyes and our thoughts,
but wonderful nature often makes the most lasting impressions.

We cast anchor not far from the dewlling place of the celebrated Sturleson,
where we found two tracks of lava, of which the last in particular was
remarkable, since we found there, besides a large field covered with lava,
which must have been liquid in the highest degree, whole mountains of turf.
Chance had directed us exactly to a spot, on which we could, better than on any
other part of Iceland, consider the operations of a fire, which had laid waste
a tract of sixty or seventy English miles. We spent several days here in
examining every thing with so much the more pleasure, as we found ourselves, as
it were, in a new world.

We had now seen almost all the effects of a volcano, except the crater from
which the fire had proceeded. In order, therefore to examine this likewise, we
undertook a journey of twelve days; to Mount Hecla itself. We traveled about
300 miles over an uninterrupted trac^ of lava, and gained the pleasure of being
the first who ever reached the summit of this celebrated volcano. The cause
that no one had been there before, is partly founded in superstition, and
partly in the extreme difficulty of the ascent, before the last eruption of
fire. There was not one of our company who did not wish to have his clothes a
little singed, only for the sake of seeing Hecla in a blaze; and we almost
flattered ourselves with this hope, for the Bishop of Skallholt had informed us
by letter, in the night between the 5th and 6th of September, the day before
our arrival, that flames had proceeded from it; but now the mountain was more
quiet than we wished. We however passed our time very agreeably before one
o'clock in the morning till two in the afternoon, in visiting the mountain. We
were even so happy, that the clouds, which covered the greatest part of it,
dispersed toward the evening, and procured us the most extensive prospect
imaginable.

The mountain is something above 5000 feet high, and separates at the top into
three points, of which that in the middle is the highest. The most
inconsiderable part of the mountain consists of lava, the rest is ashes, with
hard solid stones thrown from the craters, together with some pumice stones, of
which we found only a small piece, with a little native sulphur. A description
of the various kinds of stones to be found here, would be too prolix and partly
unintelligible.

Amongst many other craters or openings, four were peculiarly remarkable; the
first, the lava of which had taken the form of stacks of chimneys, half broken
down; another from which water had streamed; a third, all the stones of which
were red as brick; and lastly, one from which the lava had burst forth into a
stream, and was divided at some distance into three arms.

I have said before, that we were not so happy as to see Hecla vomit fire. But
there were sufficient traces of its burning inwardly: for, on the upper half of
it, covered over with snow four or five inches deep, we frequently observed
spots without any snow; and on the highest point where Farenheit's thermometer
was at 24 in the air, it rose to 153 when it was set down on the ground; and in
some little holes it was so hot, that we could no longer observe the heat with
a small pocket thermometer. It is not known whether, since the year 1693, Hecla
has been burning till 1766, when it began to vomit flames on the 1st of April,
burnt for a long while, and destroyed the country many miles round. In
December, 1771, some flames likewise proceeded from it; and the people in the
neighborhood believe it will begin to burn again very soon, as they pretend to
(...) observed, that the (...) thereabouts are drying up. It is believed that
this proceeds from the mountain's attracting the water, and is considered as a
certain sign of an impending eruption.

DR. TROIL.
SECT. II. OF THE WARM BATHS, AND HOT SPOUTING SPRINGS OF WATER IN ICELAND.
THESE waters have different degrees of warmth, and are, on that account,
divided by the inhabitants themselves into warm baths, and springs that throw
up the water to a considerable height. The first are found in several other
parts of Europe, though I do not believe that they are employed to the same
purposes in any other place; that is to say, the inhabitants do not (...) in
them here merely for their health, but they are likewise the occasion for a
scene of gallantry. (...) poverty prevents the lover from making presents to
his fair one, and nature presents no flowers of which garlands elsewhere are
made. It is (...), that instead of all this, the (...) one of these baths,
which is afterward to be honored with the visits of his bride.

The springs that throw up water in the air deserve more attention. I have seen
a great number of them, but will only say something of the two most remarkable.
Near Laugervatan, a small lake of about a mile in circumference, which is two
days journey distant from Hecla, I saw the first hot spouting spring; and I
must confess, that it was one of the most beautiful sights I ever beheld. The
morning was uncommonly clear, and the sun had already began to gild the tops of
the neighboring mountains. It was so perfect a calm, that the lake, on which
swans were swimming, was as smooth as a looking-glass, and round about it
arose, in eight different places, the steam of the hot springs, which lost
itself high in the air.

Water was spouting from all these springs; but one, in particular, continually
threw up in the air a column from 18 to 24 feet high, and from 6 to 8 feet
diameter. The water was extremely hot. A piece of mutton, and some salmon
trouts, as also a ptarmigan, were almost boiled to pieces in six minutes, and
tasted excellently. I wish it were in my power to give such a description of
this place as it deserves; but I fear it would always remain inferior in point
of expression; so much is certain at least, that nature never drew from any one
a more cheerful ho^^^ (...) to her great Creator, than I here paid him.

The description of the most remarkable water spout will appear almost
incredible; but every part of it is perfectly true, for I would not aver any
thing but what I have seen myself. At Gyser, not far from Skallhalt, one of the
Episcopal sees in Icelands a most extraordinary large spouting fountain is to
be seen, with which the celebrated waterworks at Marley and St. Cloud, and at
Cassel, and Herrenhausen near Hanover, can hardly be compared. One sees here,
within the circumference of three English miles, forty or fifty boiling springs
together, which, I believe, all proceed from one and the same reservoir. In
some, the water is perfectly clear, in others thick and clayey; in some, where
it passes through a fine ochre, it is tinged red as scarlet; and in others,
where it flows over a paler clay, it is white as milk.

The largest spring which is in the middle particularly engaged our attention
the whole day that we spent here, from 6 in the morning till 7 at night. The
aperture through which the water arose, is nineteen feet in diameter; round the
top of it is a basin, which, together with the pipe, has the form of a
cauldron. The margin of the basin is upwards of nine feet highet than the
conduit, and its diameter (...) feet. Here the water does not spout
continually, but only by intervals several times a day; and as I was informed
by the people in the neighborhood, in wet weather higher than at other times.

One day that we were there, the water spouted ten different times, between the
hours of six and eleven in the morning, each time to the height of eight or
ten fathoms. Till then the water had not risen above the margin of the pipe;
but now it began by degrees to fill the upper basin, and at last to run over.
The people who were with us, gave us to understand, that the water would soon
spout up much higher than it had done till then, and this appeared very
credible to us. To determine its height, therefore, with the utmost accuracy,
Dr. Lind, who had accompanied us on this voyage, in the capacity of an
astronomer, set up his quadrant.

Soon after four o'clock, we observed that the earth began to tremble in three
different places, as well as the top of a mountain which was about three
hundred fathoms distant from the mouth of the spring. We also frequently heard
a subterraneous noise, like the discharge of a cannon; and immediately after a
column of water spouted from the opening, which, at a great height, divided
itself into several rays, and, according to the observations made with the
quadrant, was 92 feet high. Our great surprise at this uncommon force of the
air and fire was increased, when many stones, which we had flung into the
aperture, were thrown up again with the spouting water. It is easy to conceive
with how much pleasure we spent the day here; and indeed, I am not surprised,
that a people so much inclined to superstition as the Icelanders are, imagine
this to be the entrance of hell. The idea is very natural to uninformed minds.

Dr. TROIL.
SECT. III. OF THE MANNERS OF THE ICELANDERS.
THE Icelanders are of a good honest disposition; but they are, at the same
time, so serious and sullen, that I hardly remember to have seen any one of
them laugh. They are by no means so strong as might be supposed, and much less
handsome. Their chief amusement in their leisure hours, is to recount to one
another the history of former times; so that to this day you do not meet with
an Icelander, who is not well acquainted with the history of his own country.
They also play at cards.

Their houses are built of lava, thatched with turf, and so small, that one can
hardly find room to (...) in. They have no floors; and their windows, instead
of glass are composed of thin membranes of certain animals. They make no use of
chimnies, as they never light a fire except to dress their victuals, when they
only lay the turf on the ground. It may therefore be said, that we saw no
houses except shops and warehouses; and on our journey to Hecla, we were
obliged to take up our lodgings in the churches.

Their food principally consists of dried fish, sour butter, which they
consider as a great dainty, milk mixed with water and whey, and a little meat.
They receive so little bread from the Danish company, that there is scarcely
any peasant who eats it above three or four months in the year. They likewise
boil groats of a kind of moss, which has an agreeable taste. The principal
occupation of the men is fishing, which they follow both winter and summer. The
women take care of the cattle and knit stockings. They likewise dress and dry
the fishes brought home by the men, and otherwise assist in preparing this
staple commodity of the country.

Money is very rare, which is the reason that all trade is carried on by fish
and else of coarse unshorn cloth. One ell is worth two fishes, and forty-eight
fishes are worth a rix-dollar in specie. They were better acquainted with gold
at our departure than at our arrival.

They are well provided with castle, which are generally without horns. They
have likewise sheep and very good horses. Both the last are the whole winter in
the fields. Of wild animals they have only foxes, and bears, which come every
year from Greenland with the floating ice; these, however, are killed as soon
as they appear, partly on account of the reward of ten dollars, wh^^^ the king
pays for every bear, and partly to prevent them from destroying their cattle.
The present Governor has introduced reindeer into the island; but out of
thirteen, ten died on their passage, the other three are alive with their young.

It is extraordinary that no wood grows successfully in Iceland; nay, there is
scarcely a single tree to be found on the whole island, though there are
certain proofs of wood having formerly grown there in great abundance. Corn
cannot be cultivated here to any advantage, though I have met with cabbages,
parsley, turnips, and pease, in five or six gardens, which are the only ones in
the whole island.

DR. TROIL.
SECT. IV. OF THE FOOD OF THE ICELANDERS.
THE Icelanders in general eat thr^^ ^^^ls a day; at seven in the morning, at
two in the afternoon, and at nine in the evening.

In the morning and evening they commonly eat curds mixed with new milk, and
sometimes with juniper berries; in some parts they also have pottage of
rock-grass, dried and made into flour, which is very palatable, or curdled
milk, boiled till it becomes of a red color, or new milk, boiled a long while.

At dinner their food consists of dried fish, with plenty of sour butter. They
also sometimes eat fresh fish, and, when possible, a little bread and cheese
with them. It is reported by some, that they do not eat any fish till it is
quite rotten. This report perhaps proceeds from their being fond of it when a
little tainted. However, they frequently eat fish that is quite fresh.

On Sunday, and in harvest-time, they have broth made of meat, which is often
boiled in syra, or fermented whey instead of water; and in winter they eat hung
or dried meat.

Their common beverage is milk, either warm from the cow, or cold, and
sometimes boiled. They likewise drink butter-milk, with or without water.

They seldom make use of fresh or salt butter, but let it grow sour before they
eat it. In this manner it may be kept twenty years, and even longer; and the
Icelanders look upon it as more wholesome and palatable than the butter used
amongst us. It is reckoned better the older it is; and one pound of it then is
as much valued as two pounds of fresh butter.

This is the usual manner of life in Iceland. In all countries the living of
the poor differs essentially from that of the rich; and if an Iceland gentleman
can afford to eat meat, butter, shark, and whale, the peasants are obliged to
content themselves with fish, blands, or milk mixed with water, and milk
pottage of rock-grass. Though the Icelanders cannot be said to be in want of
necessary aliment, yet the country has several times been visited by great
famines. These, however, have been chiefly owing to the Greenland floating ice,
which, when it comes in great quantities, prevents the grass from growing, and
puts an entire stop to their fishing.

DR. TROIL.
SECT. V. OF THE MANNERS OF THE MODERN EGYPTIANS.
LIFE, at Grand Cairo, is rather passive than active. Nine months of the year
the body is oppressed by heat; the soul, in a state of apathy, far from being
continually tormented by a wish to know and (...) after calm tranquillity.
Inaction, under a (...) climate, is painful; here, repose is enjoyment. The
most frequent salutation at meeting or parting (...), "Peace be with you."
Esseminate indolence is born with the Egyptian, grows as he grows, and descends
with him to the grave. It is the vice of the climate; it influences his
inclinations, and governs his actions. The sofa, therefore, is the most
luxurious piece of furniture of an apartment. Their gardens have charming
arbours, and convenient seats, but not a single walk. The Frenchman, born under
an ever-varying sky, is continually receiving new impressions, which keep his
mind as continually awake. He is active, impatient, and agitated like the
atmosphere in which he exists; while the Egyptian, feeling the same heat, the
same sensation, two-thirds of the year, is idle, solemn and patient.

He rises with the sun, to enjoy the morning air; purifies himself, and repeats
the appointed prayer. His pipe and coffee are brought him, and he reclines at
case on his sofa. Slaves, with their arms crossed, remain silent at the far end
of the chamber, with their eyes fixed on him, seeking to anticipate his
smallest want. His children, standing in his presence, unless he permits them
to be seated, preserve every appearance of tenderness and respect. He gravely
caresses them, gives them his blessing, and sends them back to the harem. He
only questions, and they reply with modesty. He is the chief, the judge, the
pontiff of the family, before whom these sacred rights are all respected.

Breakfast ended, he transacts the business of his trade or his office; and as
to disputes they are few, among a people where the voice of the hydra,
chicanery, is never heard; where the name of attorney is unknown; where the
whole cod of laws consist in a few clear and precise commands in the Koran, and
where each man is his own pleader.

When visitors come, the master receives them without many compliments, but
with an endearing manner. His equals are seated beside him, with their legs
crossed, which posture is not fatiguing to the body, unembarrassed by dress.
His inferiors kneel and sit upon their heels. People of distinction are placed
on a raised sofa, whence they overlook the company. Thus AEneas, in the palace
of Dido, had the place of honor, while seated on a raised bed ^^de toro pater
AEneas sic orsus ab al^^. AENEID. lib. (...)
, he related the burning of Troy to the queen. When every person is placed the
slaves bring pipes and coffee, and set the perfume brasier in the middle of the
chamber, the air of (...) is impregnated with its odours, and afterward
present sweetmeats and sherbet.

When the visit is almost ended, a slave bearing a (...) plate, on which
precious essences are burning goes round to the company; each in turn perfumes
the beard, and afterward sprinkles rose water on the head and hands. This is
the last ceremony, and the guests are then permitted to retire. We see,
therefore, that the ancient custom of perfuming the head and beard, as sung by
the royal prophet Psalm cxxxiii.
, is not lost. Anacreon, the father of the festive ode, and the poet of the
graces, incessantly repeats, "I delight to sprinkle my body with precious
perfumes, and crown my head with roses."

About noon the table is prepared, and the viands brought in a large tray of
tinned copper; and though not great variety, there is great plenty. In the
center is a mountain of rice cooked with poultry, and highly seasoned with
spice and saffron. Round this are harshed meats, pigeons, stuffed cucumbers,
delicious melons and fruits. The roast meats are cut small, laid over with the
fat of the animal, seasoned with salt, spitted, and done on the coals. The
guests seat themselves on a carpet round the table. A slave brings water in one
hand, and a basin in the other to wash. This is an indispensible ceremony,
where each person puts his hand into the dish, and where the use of forks is
unknown. It is repeated when the meal is ended.

After dinner they retire to the harem, where they slumber some hours among
their wives and children.

Such is the ordinary life of the Egyptians. On shows, plays, and pleasures,
are to them unknown. A monotony, which to an European would be death, I delight
to an Egyptian. Their days are passed in repeating the same thing, in following
the same customs without a wish or a thought beyond. Having neither strong
passions, nor ardent hopes, their minds know not lassitude. This is a torment
reserved for those who, unable to moderate the violence of their desires, or
satisfy their unbounded wants, are weary every where, and exist only where they
are not.

SAVARY.
SECT. VI. OF THE RIVER NILE.
THE country of Egypt is in fact so low, that were it not for a few little
hillocks, formed by the ruins of ancient Alexandria, and the prodigious height
of Pompey's Pillar, the land would not be distinguishable. The whole coast is
horizon; and it is with difficulty one perceives, from three leagues off at
sea, some palmtrees, which seem to grow out of the water. It is not to the
flatness of the country alone, however, that Egypt is indebted for its
periodical inundation.

The trade winds, from West and North, by pushing the clouds of Europe on
Abyssinia, blow in the direction of the Nile, in which mechanism of nature it
must be remarked, that the wind, by driving back the waters of the river,
becomes the principal cause of its ovarflowing. Having reached its highest
degree toward the middle of September, the winds then becoming trade-winds
from the southward, concur with the natural descent of the Nile, to accelerate
the draining of the water, to the same time that they collect the superfluous
clouds, now of no further use, over Abyssinia and Ethiopia, and carry them, for
the same beneficial purpose of a periodical inundation, toward the sources of
the Euphrates, to enrich Mesopotamia, after abundantly watering Egypt. At this
period, therefore, one sees a column of clouds pass the Red Sea, toward the
Isthmus of Suez, spread over Syria, and collect on mount Ararat, whilst the
same trade-wind blowing in the gulf of Persia, compressing the waters of the
Euphrates, produces in Mesopotamia, by the same means, the same advantages
enjoyed by Egypt.

This meteorological observation, the particulars of which I have carefully
attended to, may be verified every year, in a climate where the serenity of the
heavens cannot admit of error.

All the descriptions of Egypt hitherto, agree in considering the mud, with
which the waters of the Nile an loaded during its increase, and which are left
on the lands they overflow, as a fattener which fertilizes the country. In
analyzing it, however, no vegetative quality is discoverable before its union
with the sand, which together with the clay, composes the soil of Egypt, i^
about the same proportion as in the earthen manufactures; nor is this mud any
other than the produce o^ the crumbling of the two banks of the Nile, when i^
carries off the clayey part. Its specific lightness, joined to the motion of
the waters, keeps its particles suspended, whilst the sand settles, and forms
new island for the inhabitants after the draining of the waters. The cultivator
takes immediate possession of them, his industry supplying the barrenness of
the sand, with which he mixes pigeons dung, then sows his water-melons and
enjoys a plentiful crop, before the succeeding inundation destroys these
islands to produce others.

The whirlpools which occasion these variations, necessarily arise from the
double effort, of the descent of the waters, and the wind which counteracts
them; but the Nile, notwithstanding this agitation, is so easy to be kept
within its bounds, that many fields, situated below the surface of the water,
in its increase, are preserved from suffering from the inundation, by means
only of a dam of eight or ten inches thickness in moist grounds.

This method, which costs the husbandman but little labor, is made use of to
preserve the Delta, when it is threatened by an inundation. This island, which
produces annually three crops, is constantly watered by machines built on the
Nile, and on the canals which intersect it, but it is very seldom in danger of
being drowned; and this rich part of Egypt, which is close to the sea, would
feel the effects of the swelling still less, did not the trade-winds accumulate
the waters of the Mediterranean toward the south.

It is important to observe, that the Delta, higher than the rest of Egypt, is
bordered, toward the sea, by a forest of palm trees, called the forest of
Beleros, the ground of which is far above the highest elevation of the waters,
a topographical remark of itself, sufficient to overthrow the formation of the
Delta by a sediment. Land, which is higher than the greatest inundations, can
never owe its origin to them. It can only have occasioned the division of the
Nile into two branches. But neither this circumstance, nor the existence of the
island, which separates them, required so much labor; and Mr. Maillet might in
this respect, have spared himself the repetition of the system of Ephorus,
which was not held in estimation, even by his cotemporaries.

The vestiges of the canals, which watered the eastern and western provinces of
the Delta, prove that it was formerly the seat of the richest cultivation in
Egypt. It may also be presumed, from the extent of the ruins of Alexandria, the
structure of the canal, and the natural equality of the lands, which surround
lake Mareotis, and which extend from the westward, as far as the kingdom of
Barca, that this country, now in the possession of the Arabs, and almost
totally uncultivated, was formerly as rich in productions of every kind, as was
necessary for the subsistence of Alexandria.

One^sees, from the situation of the canal of Alexandria, that after watering
that town, and assisting its commerce, it must have fertilized the upper part
of those lands, situated on the left bank of the Nile, opposite to the Delta;
whilst a dyke, thrown up at Bequers, keeping off the sea, added a large
territory to Egypt, the cultivation of which reached to the suburbs of that
immense city, reduced at present to a small town built on the new isthmus,
formed between the two ports, and which jonis the Isle of Pharos to the
continent. This capital of the commerce of the universe, long since condemned
to serve only as a staple for the consumption of Egypt, seems to have banished
itself from its own walls; but it is impossible to throw one's eyes on the
extent and magnificence of its ruins, without feeling, that the greatest powers
have only a value proportionate to the age which employs them, and the genius
of the men entrusted with their management.

Egypt, so situated as to combine the commerce of Europe, Africa, and the East
Indies, was in want of a port, which should at once be spacious and easy of
approach. The mouth of the Nile offered none of these requisites. The only
harbor, on that coast, was in the midst of a desert, at twelve leagues from
the river, and could only be discovered by an (...) genius. A town was to be
built, and it was himself who furnished the plan of it.

To what a pitch of splendour did he not raise Alexandria, in its origin? He
joined it to the Nile by a canal at once navigable, and useful for cultivation.
It became the city of all nations, the metropolis of commerce. He is honored
even by its ashes, piled up by the barbarity of ages, and which wait only for
some beneficent hand to expand them, and cement the reconstruction of the most
stupendous edefice hitherto conceived by the human mind.

The nature of the rock, which lines the coast of Egypt, proves that the
island, on which the Pharos is built, can only have been formed by the ashes of
Alexandria, and that the shallow, which separates the two basins, arose from
the ruins brought there by the sea. This new shore further testifies the truth
of this observation; and the waves daily expose to view a number of engraved
stones, which must have belonged to the ruins of the ancient city.

Its ruins testify, at every step, its ancient splendour; and the form of its
enclosure, which represents a Macedonian cloak, seems to have awed the very
barbarians, in their different sackings of this town, by recalling the memory
of its founder. The same walls, which protected its industry and riches,
defend, at this day, its ruins, and exhibit a masterpiece of masonry.

Some historians pretend, that the Saracens built the present walls, instead of
those they had destroyed. But, if the hand of these plunderers is to be traced
at all, it is only in the repairs, which areas (...) neatness as of regularity.

BARON DE TOTT.
SECT. VII. OF THE MANNERS AND GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE FRENCH.
ONE can scarcely believe the influence which men of letters have in the gay
and dissipated city of Paris. Their opinions not only determine the merit of
works of taste and science, but they have considerable weight on the manners
and sentiments of people of rank, of the public in general, and consequently
are not without effect on the measures of government.

The same thing takes place, in some degree, in most countries of Europe; but
if I am not mistaken, more at Paris than any where else; because men of letters
are here at once united to each other by the various academies, and diffused
among private societies, by the manners and general taste of the nation.

As the sentiments and conversation of men of letters influence, to a certain
degree, the opinions and conduct of the fashionable world; the manners of these
last have a more obvious effect upon the behavior, and the conversation of the
former, which in general is polite and easy; equally purified from the awkward
timidity contracted in retirement, and the disgusting arrogance inspired by
university honors, or church dignities. At Paris, the pedants of Moliere are
to be seen on the stage only.

In this country, at present, there are many men distinguished by their
learning, who at the same time are cheerful and easy in mixed company,
unpresuming in argument, and in every respect as well bred, as those who have
no other pretension.

Politeness and good manners, indeed may be traced, though in different
proportions, through every rank, from the greatest of the nobility to the
lowest mechanic. This forms a more remarkable and distinguishing feature in the
French national character, than the vivacity, impetuosity, and fickleness, for
which the ancient as well as the modern inhabitants of this country have been
noted. It is certainly a very singular phenomenon, that politeness which, in
every other country, is confined to people of a certain rank in life, should
here pervade every situation and profession. The man in power is courteous to
his dependant, the prosperous to the unfortunate, the very beggar, who solicits
charity, does it "en homme comme il saut;" and if his request be not granted,
he is sure, at least, that it will be refused with an appearance of humanity,
and not with harshness or insult.

A stranger, quite new and unversed in their language, whose accent is, uncouth
and ridiculous in the ears of the French, and who can scarcely open his mouth,
without making a blunder in grammar or idiom, is heard with the most serious
attention, and never laughed at, even when he utters the oddest solecism or
equivocal expression.

I am afraid, said I, yesterday, to a French gentleman, the phrase which I used
just now is not French. "Monsieur," replied he, "cette expression effectivement
n'est pas Francoise, mais elle m^rite bien de l'etre." That expression really
is not French, but is well worthy of being to.


The most daring deviation from fashion, in the important article of dress,
cannot make them forget the laws of good-breeding. When a person appears at the
public walks, in clothes made against every law of the mode, upon which the
French are supposed to lay such stress, they do not stare or sneer at him; they
allow him first to pass, as it were unobserved, and do not till then turn round
to indulge the curiosity, which his uncommon figure may have excited. I have
remarked this instance of delicacy often in the streets, in the lowest of the
vulgar, or rather of the common people; for there are really very few of the
natives of Paris, who can be called vulgar.

There are exceptions to these, as to all general remarks on the manners and
character of any nation.

Loyalty, or an uncommon fondness for, and attachment to the persons of their
princes, is another striking part of the French national character.

An Englishman, though he views the virtues of his king with a jealous eye
during his reign, yet he will do them all justice in the reign of his successor.

A German, while he is silent with respect to the foibles of his prince,
admires all his talents much more than he would the same qualities in any other
person.

A Turk, or Persian, contemplates his Emperor with fear and reverence, as a
superior being, to whose pleasure it is his duty to submit, as to the laws of
nature, and the will of Providence.

But a Frenchman, while he knows that his king is of the same nature, and
liable to all the weaknesses of other men; while he enumerates his follies, and
laughs as he laments them, is nevertheless attached to him by a sentiment of
equal respect and tenderness; a kind of affectionate prejudice, independent of
his real character.

Roi is a word which conveys to the minds of Frenchmen the ideas of
benevolence, gratitude, and love; as well as those of power, grandeur, and
happiness.

They flock to Versailles every Sunday, behold him with unsated curiosity, and
gaze on him with as much satisfaction the twentieth time as the first.

They consider him as their friend, though he does not know their persons; and
as their benefactor, while they are oppressed with taxes.

They magnify into importance his most indifferent actions; they palliate and
excuse all his weaknesses; and they impute his errors or crimes, to his
ministers or other evil counselors, who (as they fondly assert) have, for some
base purpose, imposed upon his judgment, and perverted the undeviating
rectitude of his intentions.

They repeat with fond applause, every saying of his which seems to indicate
the smallest approach to wit, or even bears the mark of ordinary sagacity.

The most inconsiderable circumstance, which relates to the monarch, is of
importance. Whether he eat much or little at dinner; the coat he wears, the
horse on which he rides, all afford matter of conversation in the various
societies at Paris, and are the most agreeable subjects of epistolary
correspondence with their friends in the provinces.

If he happens to be a little indisposed, all Paris, all France, is alarmed, as
if a real calamity was threatened; and to seem interested, or to converse upon
any other subject, till this has been discussed, would be considered as a proof
of unpardonable indifference.

At mass, it is the king, not the priest, who is the object of attention. The
host is elevated, but the people's eyes remain fixed upon the face of their
beloved monarch.

Even the most applauded pieces of the theater, which in Paris create more
emotion than the ceremonies of religion, can with difficulty divide their
attention. A smile from the king makes them forget the sorrows of Andromache,
and the wrongs of the Cid.

All this regard seems real, and not affected from any motive of interest; at
least it must be so, with respect to the bulk of the people, who can have no
hopes of ever being known to their princes, far less of ever receiving any
personal favor from them.

The philosophical idea, that kings have been appointed for public convenience;
that they are accountable to their subjects for mal-administration, or for
continued acts of injustice and oppression, is a doctrine very opposite to the
general prejudices of this nation. If any of their kings were to behave in such
an imprudent and outrageous manner, as to occasion a revolt, and if the
insurgents actually got the better, I question if they would think of
new-modelling the government, and limiting the power of the Crown, as was done
in Britain at the Revolution, so as to prevent the like abuses for the future.
They never would think of going further, I imagine, than placing another prince
of the Bourbon family on the throne, with the same power that his predecessor
had, and then quietly lay down their arms, satisfied with his royal word or
declaration, to govern with more equity.

The French seem so delighted and dazzled with the luster of monarchy, that
they cannot bear the thoughts of any qualifying mixture, which might abate its
violence, and render its ardor more benign. They consider the power of the
king, from which their servitude proceeds, as if it were their own power. One
would hardly believe it; but I am sure of the fact; they are proud of it; they
are proud that there is no check or limitation to his authority.

They tell you with exultation, that the king has an army of near two hundred
thousand men in the time of peace. A Frenchman is as vain of the palaces, fine
gardens, number of horses, and all the parapharnalia belonging to the court of
the monarch, as an Englishman can be of his own house, gardens, and equipage.

When they are told of the diffusion of wealth in England, the immense fortunes
made by many individuals, the affluence of those of middle rank, the security
and easy situation of the common people; instead of being mortified by the
comparison, which might naturally occur to their imaginations, they comfort
themselves with the reflection, that the Court of France is more brilliant than
the Court of Great Britan, and that the Duke of Orleans and the Prince of Conde
have greater revenues than any of the English nobility.

When they hear of the freedom of debate in Parliament, of the liberties taken
in writing or speaking of the conduct of the king, or measures of Government,
and the forms to be observed, before those who venture on the most daring abuse
of either can be brought to punishment, they seem filled with indignation, and
say with an air of triumph, that their minister would give himself no trouble
about forms or proofs; that suspicion was sufficient for him, and without more
ado he would shut up such impertinent people in the Bastile for many years; and
then raising their voices; as if what they said were a proof of the courage or
magnanimity of the minister -- "On peut-etre il feroit condamner ces droles la
aux galeres pour la vie." Or perhaps he would have such fellows condemned to
the galleys for life.


DR. MOORE.
SECT. VIII. OF THE COMPLIMENTAL PHRASES USED BY THE FRENCH.
THE French have often been accused of insincerity, and of being warm in
professions, but devoid of real friendship.

Our countrymen in particular are led into this opinion, from the manners in
general being more obsequious here than in England. What Frenchmen consider as
common good manners, many Englishmen would call flattery, perhaps fawning.

Their language abounds in complimental phrases, which they distribute with
wonderful profusion and volubility; but they intend no more by them, than an
Englishmen means when he subscribes himself your most obedient humble servant,
at the conclusion of a letter.

A Frenchman not only means nothing beyond common civility, by the plentiful
shower of compliments which he pours on every stranger; but also, he takes it
for granted, that the stranger knows that nothing more is meant. These
expressions are fully understood by his countrymen; he imagines all the world
are as well informed; and he has not the smallest intention to deceive. But if
any man takes these expressions in a literal sense, and believes that people
are in reality inspired with friendship, or have fallen in love with him at
first sight, he will be very much disappointed; especially if he expects strong
proofs of either.

Yet (...) has no right to accuse the French of insincerity, or breach of
friendship. Friendship is entirely out of the question. They never intended to
convey any other idea, than that they were willing to receive him on the
footing of an acquaintance; and it was the business of his language-master to
have informed him of the real import of their expressions.

If the same words, indeed, were literally translated into English, and used by
one Englishman to another, the person to whom they were addressed, would have
good reason to imagine, that the other had a particular regard for him, or
meant to deceive him; because the established modes of civility and politeness
in England do not require such language.

The not making a proper allowance for different modes and usages, which
accident has established, is one great cause of the unfavourable and harsh
sentiments, which the people of the different countries of the world too often
harbor against each other.

It may be said, perhaps, that this superfluity of compliments, which the
French make use of, is a proof of the matter in question, that the French have
less sincerity than their neighbors. By the same rule we must conclude, that
the common people of every nation, who use few complimental phrases in their
discourse, have a greater regard to truth, and stronger sentiments of
friendship, than those in the middle and higher ranks. But this is what I
imagine it would be difficult to prove.

These complimental phrases, which have crept into all modern languages, may,
perhaps, be superfluous: or, if you please, absurd. But they are so fully
established, that people of the greatest integrity make use of them, both in
England and in France, with this difference, that a smaller proportion will do
in the language of the one country than in that of the other. They are,
however, indications of friendship in neither.

Friendship is a plant of slow growth in every climate. Happy the man who can
rear a few, even where he has the most settled residence. Travelers, passing
through foreign countries, seldom take time to cultivate them. If they be
presented with some flowers, although of a flimsey texture and quicker growth,
they ought to accept of them with thankfulness, and not quarrel with the
natives for choosing to retain the other more valuable plant for their own use.

Of all travelers, the young English nobility and gentry have the least right
to find fault with their entertainment while on their tours abroad; for such of
them as show a desire of forming a connection with the inhabitants, by even a
moderate degree of attention, are received upon easier terms than the
travelers from any other country; but very considerable numbers of our
countrymen have not the smallest desire of that nature. They seem rather to
avoid their society and accept with reluctance every offer of hospitality. This
happens, partly from a prejudice against foreigners of every kind, partly from
timidity or natural reserve, and in a great measure from indolence, and an
absolute detestation of ceremony and restraint. Besides, they hate to be
obliged to speak a language, of which they seldom acquire a perfect command.

They frequently, therefore, form societies or clubs of their own, where all
ceremony is dismissed, and the greatest ease and latitude allowed in their
behavior, dress, and conversation. There they confirm each other in all their
prejudice, and with united voices, condemn and ridicule the customs and manners
of every country but their own.

By this conduct, the true purpose of traveling is lost or perverted; and many
English travelers have remained four or five years abroad, and have seldom,
during all this space, been in any company but that of their own countrymen.

To go to France and Italy, and there converse with none but English people,
and merely that you may have it to say, that you have been in those countries,
i^ certainly absurd. Nothing can be more so, except to adopt with enthusiasm,
the fashions, fopperies, taste, and manners of those countries, and transplant
them to England, where they never will thrive, and where they always appear
awkward and unnatural. For, after all his efforts of imitation, a traveled
Englishman is as different from a Frenchman or an Italian, as an English
mastiff is from a monkey or a fox. And if ever that sedate and plain meaning
dog should pretend to the gay friskiness of the one, or to the subtilty of the
other, we should certainly value him much less than we do.

But I do not imagine that this extreme is by any means so common as the
former. It is much more natural to the English character to despise foreigners
than to imitate them. A few tawdry examples to the contrary, who return every
winter from the continent, are hardly worth mentioning as exceptions.

DR. MOORE.
SECT. IX, OF GENEVA.
THE situation of Geneva is, in many respects as happy as the heart of man
could desire, or his imagination conceive. The Rhone, rushing out of the
noblest lake in Europe, flows through the middle of the city, which is
encircled by fertile fields, cultivated by the industry, and adorned by the
riches and taste of the inhabitants.

The long ridge of mountains, called Mount Jura, on the one side, with the
Alps, the Glaciers of Savoy, and the Snowy head of Mont Blanc, on the other,
serve as boundaries to the most charmingly variegated landscape that ^ver
delighted the eye.

With these advantages in point of situation, the citizens of Geneva enjoy
freedom untainted by licentiousness, and security unbought by the horrors of
war.

The great number of men of letters, who either are natives of the place, or
have chosen it for their residence, the decent manners, the easy circumstances,
and humane dispositions of the Genevois in general, render this city and its
environs a very desirable retreat for people of a philosophic turn of mind, who
are contented with moderate and calm enjoyments, have no local attachments or
domestic reasons for preferring another country, and who wish, in a certain
degree, to retire from the bustle of the world, to a narrower and calmer scene,
and there for the rest of their days -- Ducere solicitate ju^unda oblivia vitae.


As education (...) is equally (...) and liberal, the citizens of Geneva of
both sexes are remarkably well instructed. I do not imagine that any country in
the world can produce an equal number of persons, (taken without election from
all degrees and professions) with minds so much cultivated as the inhabitants
of Geneva possess.

It is not uncommon to find mechanics, in the intervals of their labor,
amusing themselves with the works of Lock, Montesquieu, Newton, and other
productions of the same kind.

When I speak of the cheapness of a liberal education, I mean for the natives
and citizens only; for strangers now find every thing dear at Geneva. Wherever
Englishmen resort, this is the case. If they do not find things dear, they soon
make them so.

The democratical nature of their government inspires every citizen with an
idea of his own importance. He perceives, that no man in the republic can
insult, or even neglect him with impunity.

It is an excellent circumstance in any government, when the most powerful man
in the state has something to fear from the most feeble. This is the case here.
The meanest citizen of Geneva is possessed of certain rights, which render him
an object deserving the attention of the greatest. Besides, a consciousness of
this makes him respect himself; a sentiment which, within proper bounds, (...)
tendency (...) render a man respectable to others.

The general character of human nature forbids us to expect that men will
always act from motives of public spirit, without an eye to private interest.
The best form of government, therefore, is, that in which the interest of
individuals is most intimately blended with the public good. This may be more
perfectly accomplished in a small republic than in a great monarchy. In the
first, men of genius and virtue are discovered and called to offices of truth,
by the impartial admiration of their fellow citizens; in the other, the highest
places are disposed of by the caprice of the prince, or of those courtiers,
male or female, who are nearest his person, watch the variations of his humor,
and know how to seize the smiling moments, and turn them to their own
advantage, or that of their dependents. Montesquieu says, that a sense of
honor produces the same effects in a monarchy, that public spirit or
patriotism does in a republic. It must be remembered, however, that the first,
according to the modern acceptance of the word, is generally confined to the
nobility and gentry; whereas public spirit is a more universal principle, and
spreads through all the members of the commonwealth.

As far as I can judge, a spirit of independency and freedom, tempered by
sentiments of decency, and the love of order, influence, in a most remarkable
manner, the minds of the subjects of this happy republic.

Before I knew them I had formed an opinion, that the people of this place were
fanatical, gloomy minded, and unsociable as the Puritans in England, and the
Presbyterians in Scotland were, during the civil wars, and the reigns of
Charles II. and his brother. In this however, I find I had conceived a very
erroneous notion.

There is not, I may venture to assert, a city in Europe, where the minds of
the people are less under the influence of superstition or fanatical enthusiasm
than at Geneva. Servetus, were he now alive, would not run the smallest risk of
persecution. The present clergy have, I am persuaded, as little the inclination
as the power of molesting any person of speculative opinions. Should the Pope
himself choose this city for a retreat, it would be his own fault if he did not
live in as much security as at the Vatican.

The clergy of Geneva in general, are men of sense, learning, and moderation,
impressing upon the minds of their hearers the tenets of Christianity, with all
the graces of pulpit eloquence, and illustrating the efficacy of the doctrine
by their conduct in life.

The people of every station in this place, attend sermons and the public
worship with remarkable punctuality. The Sunday is honored with the most
respectful decorum during the hours of divine service; but as soon as that is
over, all the usual amusements commence.

The public walks are crowded by all degrees of people in their best dresses.
The different societies, and what they call circles, assemble in the houses and
gardens of individuals. They play at cards and at bowls, and have parties upon
the lake with music.

There is one custom universal here, and, as far as I know, peculiar to this
place. The parents form societies for their children, at a very early period of
their lives. These societies consist of ten, a dozen or more children of the
same sex, and nearly of the same age and situation in life. They assemble once
a week in the houses of the different parents, who entertain the company by
turns with tea, coffee, biscuits, and fruit, and then leave the young assembly
to the freedom of their own conversation.

This connection is strictly kept up through life, whatever alterations may
take place in the situations or circumstances of the individuals. And although
they should afterward form new or preferable intimacies, they never entirely
abandon this society; but to the latest period of their lives continue to pass
a few evenings every year with the companions of their youth and their earliest
friends.

The richer class of the citizens have country houses adjacent to the town,
where they pass one half of the year. These houses are all very neat, and some
of them are splendid. One piece of magnificence they possess in greater
perfection than the most superb villa of the greatest lord in any other part of
the world can boast; I mean the prospect which almost all of them command. The
gardens and vineyards of the republic, the Pais de Naux, Geneva with its lake,
innumerable countryseats, castles, and little towns around the lake; the
valleys of Savoy, and the loftiest mountains of the Alps, are all within one
sweep of the eye.

Those whose fortunes or employments do not permit them to pass the summer in
the country, make frequent parties of pleasure upon the lake, and dine and
spend the evening at some of the villages in the environs, where they amuse
themselves with music and dancing.

Sometimes they form themselves into circles, consisting of forty or fifty
persons, and purchase or hire a house and garden near the town, where they
assemble every afternoon during the summer, drink coffee, lemonade, and other
refreshing liquors, and amuse themselves with cards, conversation, and playing
at bowls, a game very different from that which goes by the same name in
England; for here, instead of a smooth level green, they often choose the
roughest and most unequal piece of ground. The player, instead of rolling the
bowl, throws it in such a manner, that it rests in the place where it first
touches the ground; and if that be a fortunate situation, the next player
pitches his bowl directly on his adversary's, so as to make that spring away,
while his own fixes itself in the spot from which the other has been dislodged.
Some of the citizens are astonishingly dexter^^^ (...) this game, which is more
complicated and interesting than the English manner of playing.

They generally continue these circles till the dusk of the evening, and the
sound of the drum from the ramparts call them to the town; and at that time the
gates are shut, after which no person can enter or go out, the officer of the
guard not having the power to open them, without an order from the Syndics,
which is not to be obtained but on some great emergency.

DR. MOORE.
SECT. X. OF THE GLACIERS OF SAVOY.
I RETURNED to Geneva, a few days since, from a journey to the Glaciers of
Savoy, the Pais de Vallais, and other places among the Alps.

The wonderful accounts I had heard of the Glaciers had excited my curiosity a
good deal, while the air of superiority assumed by some who had made this
boasted tour, piquid my pride still more.

One could hardly mention any thing curious or singular, without being told by
some of those travelers, with an air of cool contempt -- "Dear Sir -- that is
pretty well; but take my word for it, it is nothing to the Glaciers of Savoy."

I determined at last not to take their word for it, and I found some gentlemen
of the same way of thinking.

We left Geneva early in the morning of the 3d of August, and breakfasted at
Bonneville, a small town in the duchy of Savoy, situated at the foot of Mole,
and on the banks of the river Arve.

We passed the night at Sallenche, and the remaining part of our journey not
admitting of chaises, they were sent back to Geneva, with orders to the drivers
to go round by the other side of the lake, and meet us at the village of
Martigny, in the Pais de Vallais.

We agreed with a muleteer at Sallenche, who provided mules to carry us over
the mountains to Martigny. It is a good day's journey from Sallenche to
Chamouni, not on account of the distance, but from the difficulty and
perplexity of the road, and the steep ascents and descents with which one is
teazed alternately the whole way.

Some of the mountains are covered with pine, oak, beech, and walnut-trees.
These are interspersed with apple, plumb, cherry, and other fruit trees, so
that we rode a great part of the morning in shade.

Besides the refreshing coolness which this occasioned, it was most agreeable
to me on another account. The road was in some places so exceedingly steep,
that I never doubted but some of us were to fall; I therefore reflected with
satisfaction, that those trees would probably arrest our course, and hinder us
from rolling a great way.

But many pathless craggy mountains remained to be traversed, after we had lost
the protection of the trees. We then had nothing but the sagacity of our mules
to trust to. For my own part, I was very soon convinced, that it was much
safer, on all dubious occasions, to depend on their's than on my own. For as
often as I was presented with a choice of difficulties, and the mule and I were
of different opinions, if, becoming more obstinate than he, I insisted on his
taking my track, I never failed to repent it, and often was obliged to return
to the place where the controversy had begun, and follow the path to which he
had pointed at first.

It is entertaining to observe the prudence of these animals in making their
way down such dangerous rocks. They sometimes put their heads over the edge of
the precipice, and examine with anxious circumspection, every possible way by
which they can descend, and at length are sure to fix on that, which upon the
whole is the best. Having observed this in several instances, I laid the bridle
on the neck of my mule, and allowed him to take his own way, without presuming
to control him in the smallest degree.

This is doubtless the best method, and what I recommend to all my friends in
their journey through life, when they have mules for their companions.

We began pretty early next morning to ascend Montanvert, from the top of which
there is easy access to the Glaciers of that name, and to the valley of ice.

Having ascended Montanvert from Chamouni, on descending a little on the other
side, we found ourselves on a plain, whose appearance has been aptly compared
to that which a stormy sea would have, if it were suddenly arrested, and fixed
by a strong frost. This is called the Valley of Ice. It stretches several
leagues behind Montanvert, and is reckoned 2300 feet higher than the valley of
Chamouni.

From the highest part of Montanvert, we had all the following objects under
our eye, some of which seemed to obstruct the view of others equally
interesting; -- the Valley of Ice, the Needles, Mont Blanc, with the snowy
mountains below, finely contrasted with Breven, and the green hills on the
opposite side of Chamouni, and the sun in full splendour showing all of them to
the greatest advantage. The whole forms a scene equally sublime and beautiful,
far from my power of description, and worthy of the eloquence of that very
ingenious gentleman, who has so finely illustrated these subjects, in a
particilar treatise, and given so many examples of both in his parliamentary
speeches.

The Valley of Ice is several leagues in length, and not above a quarter of a
league in breadth. It divides into branches, which run behind the chain of
mountains formerly taken notice of. It appears like a frozen amphitheatre, and
is bounded by mountains, in whose clefts columns of crystal, as we are
informed, are to be found.

The hoary majesty of Mont Blanc -- I was in danger of rising into poetry, when
recollecting the story of Icarus, I thought it best not to trust to my own
waxen wings. I beg leave rather to borrow the following lines, which will
please better than any flight of mine, and prevent me from a fall.

" So Zembla's rock (the beauteous work of frost)
" Rise white in air, and glitter over the coast,
" Pale suns unfelt, at distance roll away,
" And on the impassive ice the lightnings play;
" Eternal snows the growing mass supply,
" Fill the bright mountains, prop the incumbent sky;
" As Atlas fixed, each hoary pile appears,
" The gathered winter of a thousand years."
There are five or six different Glaciers, which all terminate upon one side of
the Valley of Chamouni, within the space of about five leagues.

These are prodigious collections of snow and ice, formed in the intervals of
hollows between the mountains that bound the side of the Valley, near which
Mont Blanc stands.

The snow in those hollows being screened from the influence of the sun, the
heat of summer can dissolve only a certain portion of it. These magazines of
ice and snow are not formed by what falls directly from the heavens into the
intervals. They are supplied by the snow which falls during winter on the
loftiest parts of Mont Blanc; large beds of strata of which slide down
imperceptibly by their own gravity, and finding no resistance at these
intervals, they form long irregular roots around all the adjacent mountains.

Five of these enter, by five different embouchures, into the valley of
Chamouni, and are called Glaciers, on one of which we were. At present their
surface is from a thousand, or two thousand feet high above the valley.

Their breadth depends on the wideness of the interval between the mountains in
which they are formed. Viewed from the valley, they have, in my opinion, a much
finer effect than from their summit.

The rays of the sun striking with various force on the different parts,
according as they are more or less exposed, occasion an unequal dissolution of
the ice; and, with the help of a little imagination, give the appearance of
columns, arches, and turrets, which are in some places transparent.

A fabric of ice in this taste, two thousand feet high, and three times as
broad, with the sun shining full upon it, we must acknowledge to be a very
singular piece of architecture.

Our company ascended only the Glacier of Montanvert, which is not the highest,
and were contented with a view of the others from the valley; but more curious
travelers will surely think it worth their labor to examine each of them more
particularly.

Some people are so fond of Glaciers, that not satisfied with their present
size, they insist positively, that they must necessarily grow larger every
year, and they argue the matter thus:

The present existence of the Glaciers, is a sufficient proof, that there has,
at some period or other, been a greater quantity of snow formed during the
winter, than the heat of the summer has been able to dissolve. But this
disproportion must necessarily increase every year, and, by consequence, the
Glaciers must augment: because, any given quantity of snow and ice remaining
through the course of one summer, must increase the cold of the atmosphere
around it in son^ degree; which being reinforced by the snow of the succeeding
winter, will resist the dissolving power of the sun more the second summer than
the first, and still more the third than the second, and so on.

The conclusion of this reasoning is, that the Glaciers must grow larger by an
increasing ratio every year, till the end of time. For this reason, the authors
of this theory regret, that they themselves have been sent into the world so
soon; because if their birth had been delayed for nine or ten thousand years,
they should have seen the Glaciers in much greater glory, Mont Blanc being but
a Lilliputian at present, in compa^ison of what it will be then.

However rational this may appear, objections ^ave nevertheless been suggested,
which I am sorry for; because when a theory is tolerably consistent, well
fabricated and goodly to behold, nothing can be more vexatious, than to see a
plodding officious fellow overthrow the whole structure at once, by a dash of
his pen, as Harlequin does a house with a touch of his sword, in a pantomine
entertainment.

Such cavillers say, that as the Glaciers augment in size, there must be a
greater extent of surface for the sunbeams to act upon, and, by consequence,
the dissolution will be greater, which must effectually prevent the continual
increase contended for.

But the other party extricate themselves from this difficulty by roundly
asserting, that the additional cold, occasioned by the snow and ice already
deposited, has a much greater influence in retarding their dissolution, than
the increased surface can have in hastening it; and, in confirmation of their
system, they tell you, that the oldest inhabitants of Chamouni remember the
Glaciers when they were much smaller than at present; and also remember the
time, when they could walk from the Valley of Ice, to places behind the
mountains, by passages which are now quite choked up with hills of snow, not
above fifty years old.

Whether the inhabitants of Chamouni assert this from a laudable partiality to
the Glaciers, which they may now consider (on account of their drawing
strangers to visit the Valley) as their best neighbors; or from politeness to
the supporters of the above mentioned opinion; or from real observation, I
shall not presume to say. But I myself have heard several of the old people of
Chamouni assert the fact.

The cavillers, being thus obliged to relinquish their former objection,
attempt in the next place to show, that the above theory leads to an absurdity;
because, say they, if their Glaciers go on increasing the bulk ad infinitum,
the globe itself would become, in process of time, a mere appendage to Mont
Blanc.

The advocates for the continual augmentation of the Glaciers reply, that as
this inconveniency has not already happened, there ^needs no other refutation
of the impious doctrine of certain philosophers, who assert that the world has
existed from eternity; and as to the globe's becoming an appendage to the
mountain, they assure us, that the world will be at an end long before that
event can happen; so that those of the most timid natures, and most delicate
constitutions, may dismiss their fears on that subject.

For my own part, though I wish well to the Glaciers, and all the inhabitants
of Chamouni, having passed some days very pleasantly in their company, I will
take no part in this controversy.

DR. MOORE.
SECT. XI. OF VOLTAIRE.
SINCE I arrived at Geneva, my correspondents have made many enquiries
concerning the philosopher of Ferney, which I am not at all surprised at. This
extraordinary person has contrived to excite more curiosity, and to retain the
attention of Europe for a longer space of time than any other man this age has
produced, monarchs and heroes included. Even the most trivial anecdote relating
to him seems, in some degree, to interest the public.

I have had frequent opportunities of conversing with him, and still more with
those who have lived in intimacy with him for many years; so that the following
remarks are founded, either on my own observation, or on that of the most
candid and intelligent of his acquaintance.

He has enemies and admirers here, as he has every where else; and not
unfrequently both united in the same person.

The first idea which has presented itself to all who have attempted a
description of his person, is that of a skeleton. In as far as this implies
excessive leanness, it is just; but it must be remembered, that this skeleton,
this mere composition of skin and bone, has a look of more spirit and vivacity
than is generally produced by flesh and blood, however blooming and youthful.

The most piercing eyes I ever beheld are those of Voltaire, now in his
eightieth year. His whole countenance is expressive of genius, observation, and
extreme sensibility.

In the morning he has a look of anxiety and discontent; but this gradually
wears off, and after dinner he seems cheerful. An air of irony, however, never
entirely forsakes his face, but may always be observed lurking in his features,
whether he frowns or smiles.

When the weather is favorable, he takes an airing in his coach, with his
niece, or with some of his guests, of whom there is always a sufficient number
at Ferney. Sometimes he saunters in his garden; or if the weather does not
permit him to go abroad, he employs his leisure hours in playing at chess with
Pere Adam, or in receiving the visits of strangers, a continual succession of
whom attend at Ferney, to catch an opportunity of seeing him; or in dictating
and reading letters: for he still retains correspondents in all the countries
of Europe, who inform him of every remarkable occurrence, and send him every
new literary production as soon as it appears.

By far the greatest part of his time is spent in his study; and whether he
reads himself, or listens to another, he always has a pen in his hand, to take
notes, or make remarks.

Composition is his principal amusement. No author, who writes for daily bread,
no young poet, ardent for distinction, is more assiduous with his pen, or more
anxious for fresh fame, than the wealthy and applauded Seigneur of Ferney.

He lives in a very hospitable manner, and takes care always to keep a good
cook. He has generally two or three visitors from Paris, who stay with him a
month or six weeks at a time. When they go, their places are soon supplied; so
that there is a constant rotation of society at Ferney. These, with Voltaire's
own family, and his visitors from Geneva, compose a company of twelve or
fourteen people, who dine daily at his table, whether he appears or not. For,
when engaged in preparing some new production for the press, indisposed, or in
bad spirits, he does not dine with the company; but satisfies himself with
seeing them for a few minutes, either before or after dinner.

All who bring recommendations from his friends, may depend upon being received
if he be not really indisposed. He often presents himself to the strangers, who
assemble almost every afternoon in his antichamber, although they bring no
particular recommendation. But sometimes they are obliged to retire, without
having their curiosity gratified.

As often as this happens, he is sure of being accused of peevishness; and a
thousand ill-natured stories are related, perhaps, invented, out of revenge,
because he is not in the humor of being exhibited like a dancing bear on a
holiday. It is much less surprising that he sometimes refuses, than that he
should comply so often. In him, this compliance must proceed solely from a
desire to oblige; for Voltaire has been so long accustomed to admiration, that
the stare of a few strangers cannot be supposed to afford him much pleasure.

His niece, Madame Denis, does the honors of the table, and entertains the
company, when her uncle is not able, or does not choose to appear. She is a
well-disposed woman, who behaves with good humor to every body, and with
unremitting attention and tenderness to her uncle.

The morning is not a proper time to visit Voltaire. He cannot bear to have his
hours of study interrupted. This alone is sufficient to put him out of humor;
besides, he is then apt to be querulous, whether he suffers by the infirmities
of age, or from some acccidental cause of chagrin. Whatever be the reason, he
is less an optimist at that part of the day than at any other. It was in the
morning probably that he remarked, " That it was a pity that the Peruvian bark
is found in America and fevers in our climates.
(que c'etoit damage que le quinquina se trouvoit en Amerique, et la fievre en
nos climats.")

Those who are invited to supper, have an opportunity of seeing him in the most
advantageous point of view. He then exerts himself to entertain the company,
and seems as fond of saying, what are called good things, as ever. And when any
lively remark, or bon mot, comes from another, he is equally delighted, and
pays the fullest tribute of applause. The spirit of mirth gains upon him by
indulgence. When surrounded by his friends, and animated by the presence of
women, he seems to enjoy life with all the sensibility of youth. His genius
then surmounts the restraints of age and infirmity, and flows along in a fine
strain of pleasing, spirited observation, and delicate irony.

He has an excellent talent of adapting his conversation to his company. The
first time the D -- of H -- waited on him, he turned the discourse on the
ancient alliance between the French and Scotch nations. Reciting the
circumstance of one of his Grace's predecessors having accompanied Mary Queen
of Scots, whose heir he at that time was, to the court of France, he spoke of
the heroic characters of his ancestors, the ancient Earls of Douglas, of the
great literary reputation of some of his countrymen then living; and mentioned
the names of Hume and Robertson in terms of high approbation.

A short time afterward he was visited by two Russian noblemen, who are now at
Geneva. Voltaire talked to them a great deal of their Empress, and the
flourishing state of their country. Formerly, said he, your countrymen were
guided by ignorant priests, the arts were unknown, and your lands lay waste;
but now the a^ts flourish, and the lands are cultivated. One of the young men
replied, that there was still a great proportion of barren land in Russia. At
least, said Voltaire, you must admit, that of late your country has been "very
fertile in laurels."

Voltaire has great merit as a dramatic writer; and it is much to be wished,
that this extraordinary man had confined his genius to its native home, to the
walks which the muses love, and where he has always been received with
distinguished honor, and that he had never deviated from these, into the
thorny paths of controversy. For, while he attacked the tyrants and oppressors
of mankind, and those who have perverted the benevolent nature of Christianity
to the most selfish and malignant purposes, it is for ever to be regretted,
that he allowed the shafts of his ridicule to glance upon the Christian
religion itself.

By persevering in this, he has not only shocked the pious, but even disgusted
infidels, who accuse him of borrowing from himself, and repeating the same
argument in various publications; and seem as tired of the stale sneer against
the Christian doctrines, as of the dullest and most tedious sermons in support
of them.

DR. MOORE.
SECT. XII. OF SCHAFFHAUSEN IN SWISSERLAND; OF THE BRIDGE OVER THE RHINE; AND
OF THE FALL OF THE RHINE.
I ARRIVED here on the 22d day of July 1776, and find great pleasure in
breathing the air of liberty. Every person here has apparently the mein of
content and satisfaction. The cleanliness of the houses, and of the people, is
peculiarly striking; and I can trace in all their manners, behavior and dress,
some strong outlines which distinguish this happy people from the neighboring
nations. Perhaps it may be prejudice and unreasonable partiality; but I am more
pleased, because their first appearance very much reminds me of my own
countrymen, and I could almost think, for a moment, that I am in England.

Schaffhausen is a neat and tolerably well built town, situated upon the
nothern shore of the Rhine. It is the capital of the canton of the same name,
and ows its origin to the interruption of the navigation of that river by the
cataract at Lauffen. Huts were at first constructed here for the convenience of
unloading the merchandise from the boats; and these huts by degrees, increased
to a large town. Schaffhausen was formerly an imperial city, and was governed
by a^ aristocracy. It preserved liberties, which were attacked by the Dukes of
Austria, by entering into an alliance with several other imperial towns, and
with the Swiss cantons. In 1501, it was admitted a member of the Helvetic
confederacy, being the twelfth canton in rank. Of all the cantons it is the
least in size, being only five leagues in length, and three in breadth. Its
population is supposed to amount to 30,000 souls; of which the capital contains
about 6000.

The whole number of citizens or burgesses (in whom the supreme power ultimatey
resides) is, I am informed, about six hundred. They are divided into twelve
tribes; and from these are elected eighty-five members, who form the sovereign
council, consisting of a great and little council. To these two councils
combined, the administration of affairs is committed; the senate, or little
council of twenty-five, being entrusted with the executive power; and the great
council, comprising the senate, finally deciding all appeals and regulating the
more important concerns of govvernment.

The revenues of the state arise partly from the tithes, and other articles of
the like nature; but principally from the duties laid upon the merchandise
which passes from Germany; and I am informed, that these customs are nearly
sufficient to defray all the public expenses. These, indeed, are not very
considerable, as will appear from the salary of the burgo-master, or chief of
the republic, which barely amounts to an hundred and fifty pounds per annum.
The reformation was introduced here in 1529. The clergy are paid by the state,
but their income is literally not sufficient for their maintenance; the best
living being only about an hundred pounds, and the worst only forty pounds per
annum. The professors of literature also, who are taken from the clergy, are
paid likewise by government; and a public school is supported at the expense of
the same.

Sumptuary laws are in force here, as well as in most parts of Swisserland; and
no dancing is allowed, except upon particular occasions. Silk, lace, and
several other articles of luxury are prohibited. Even the ladies head-dresses
are regulated. How would such Gothic ordinances be received in England? They
would serve at least to lower the price of feathers.

But what is of still greater importance, all games of hazard are strictly
prohibited; and in other games, the party who loses above fix florins (about
nine shillings of our money) incurs a considerable fine. An excellent
regulation! And I was informed, that these laws are not, like ours of the same
kind, mere ciphers, but are well observed.

The principal article of exportation is wine, of which they make a large
quantity, the country abounding in vineyards. And as the canton furnishes but
little corn, they procure it from Suabia, in exchange of their wine. In the
town there are some, but not very considerable, manufactures, of linen, cotton,
and silk. Their commerce, however, is very flourishing.

Scaffhausen, although a frontier town, has no garrison; and the fortifications
are but slight. Nothing can give a better idea of the security of the Swiss
cantons; the citizens mount guard by turns; and the people of the canton being
divided into regular companies of militia, which are exercised yearly, are
always ready and prepared to take up arms in defense of their country. This
canton has some troops in the service of France, Sardinia, and Holland; the
only foreign services into which the subjects of the Protestant cantons enlist.

Before I take my leave of this city, I must not omit mentioning the famous
bridge over the Rhine, justly admired for the beauty and singularity of its
architecture. The river is extremely rapid, and had already destroyed several
bridges of stone, built upon arches of the strongest construction; when a
carpenter of Apenzel, undertook to throw a wooden one, of a single arch, across
the river, which is near three thousand feet wide. The magistrates, however,
insisted, that it should consist of two arches, and that he should make use,
for that purpose, of the middle pier of the old bridge, which remained entire.
Accordingly, the architect was obliged to obey; but he has contrived it in such
a manner, that the bridge is not all supported by the middle pier; and it would
certainly have been equally safe, and considerably more beautiful, had it
consisted solely of one arch. But how shall I attempt to give an idea of it? I
who am totally unskilled in architecture, and who have not the least knowledge
of drawing, I shall, however, venture the following description, and hope its
inaccuracy will be excused.

It is a wooden bridge, of which the sides and top are covered, and the road
over it is almost perfectly level. It is what the Germans call a haengewerk, or
hanging bridge, the road not being carried, as usual, over the top of the arch;
but, if I may use the expression, is let down into the middle of it, and there
suspended. The middle pier is not absolutely in a right line with the side ones
that rest upon the shore; as it forms with them a very obtuse angle, pointing
down the stream, being eight feet out of the linear direction. The distance of
this middle pier from the shore that lies toward the town, is one hundred and
seventy-one feet, and from the other side, one hundred and ninety-three: in all
three hundred and sixty four feet; making, in appearance, two arches of a
supprising width, and forming the most beautiful perspective imaginable, when
viewed at some distance. A man of the slightest weight walking upon it, feels
it tremble under him: yet wagons, heavily laden, pass, over it without danger.
And although, in the latter instance, the bridge seems almost to crack with the
pressure, it does not appear to have suffered the least damage. It has been
compared, and very justly, to a tight rope, which trembles when it is struck,
but still preserves its firm and equal tension. I went under this bridge, close
to the middle pier, in order to examine its mechanism; and though in no respect
a mechanic, I could not help being struck with the elegant simplicity of the
architecture. I was not capable of determining whether it rests upon the middle
pier, but most judges agree that it does not.

When one observes the greatness of the plan and the boldness of the
construction, one is astonished that the architect was a common carpenter,
without the least tincture of literature, totally ignorant of mathematics, and
not at all versed in the theory of mechanics. The name of this extraordinary
man was Ulric Grubenman, an obscure drunken fellow of Tuffen, a small village
in the canton of Apenzel. Possessed of uncommon natural abilities, and a
surprising turn for the practical part of mechanics, he raised himself to great
eminence in his profession, and may justly be considered as one of the most
ingenious architects of the present century. This bridge was finished in less
than three years, and cost 90,000 florins, or about 8000l. sterling.

A few days ago, we set out on horseback, in order to see the fall of the Rhine
at Lauffen, about a league from this place. Our road lay over the hills which
form the banks of the Rhine; from whence we had some fine views of the town and
castle of Schaffhausen. The environs are picturesque and agreeable: the river
more beautifully winding through the vale. Upon our arrival at Lauffen, a small
village in the canton of Zuric, we dismounted; and advancing to the edge of the
precipice which overhangs the Rhine, we looked down perpendicularly upon the
cataract, and saw the river tumbling over the sides of the rock with amazing
violence and precipitation. From hence we descended till we were somewhat below
the upper bed of the river, and stood close to the fall; so that I could almost
have touched it with my hand. A scaffold is erected in the very spray of this
tremendous cataract, and upon the most sublime point of view: -- the sea of
foam tumbling down, -- the continual cloud, of spray scattered around at a
great distance, and to a considerable height, -- in short, the magnificence of
the noble scenery far surpassed my most sanguine expectations, and exceeds all
description. Within about an hundred feet, as it appeared to be, of the
scaffolding, there are two rocks in the middle of the fall, that prevent one
from seeing its whole breadth from this point. The nearest of these was
perforated by the continual action, of the river; and the water forced itself
through in an oblique direction, with inexpressible fury, and an hollow sound.
After having continued some time comtemplating in silent admiration the awful
sublimity of this wonderful landscape, we descended: and below the fall we
crossed the river, which was exceedingly agitated.

Hitherto I had only viewed the car^aract sideways. But here it opened by
degrees, and displayed another picture which I enjoyed at my leisure, as I sat
myself down upon the opposite bank. The most striking objects were on the side
we came from; a castle, erected upon the very edge of the precipice, and
projecting over the river; near it, a church and some cottages; on the side
where I was sitting, a chump of cottages close to the fall; in the back ground,
rising hills, planted with vines, or tufted with hanging woods; a beautiful
little hamlet upon the summit, skirted with trees; the great body of water,
that seemed, as it were, to rush out from the bottom of these hills; the two
rocks above mentioned, boldly advancing their heads in the midst of the fall,
and in the very point of its steepest descent, their tops covered with shrubs,
and dividing the cataract into three principal branches. The color of the
Rhine is extremely beautiful, being of a clear seagreen; and I could not but
remark the fine effect of the tints, when blended with the white foam in its
descent. There is a pleasing view from an iron foundry close to the river,
which is dammed up, in order to prevent its carrying away the works and
neighboring cottages. By means of this dam, a small proportion of the river,
in its fall, enters a trough, turns a mill, and forms a beautiful little silver
current, gliding down the hare rock, and detached from the main cataract. Below
the fall, the river widens considerably into a more ample basin. At the fall,
the breadth, as well as I could judge by my eye, seemed to be about 250 feet.
As to its perpendicular height, travelers differ. Those who are given to
exaggeration reckon it an hundred feet high. But I should imagine about fifty
feet would be nearer the truth. I stood for some time upon the brink of the
cataract; beheld in admiration, and listened in silence; then crossed the
river, re-mounted my horse, and returned to Schaffhausen.

Some writers have asserted that the river precipitates itself in one sheet of
water; and, as I before observed, from a perpendicular height of an hundred
feet. In former ages this account was probably agreeable to fact; as it is
imagined, that the space between the two banks were once a level rock, and
considerably higher; that the river has insensibly worn away, and undermined
those parts, on which it broke along with the utmost violence. For, within the
memory of several of the inhabitants of this town, a large rock has given way,
that has greatly altered the view Indeed I am convinced that the perpendicular
height of the fall becomes less and less every year, by the continual friction
of so large and rapid a body of water; and have no doubt but that the two
rocks, which now rise in the midst of the river, will in time, be undermined
and carried away. The river, for some way before the fall, even near the
bridge, dashes upon a rocky bottom, and renders the navigation impossible for
any kind of vessel. A few weeks ago a countryman of ours tried an experiment
with a small boat, which he contrived to have gently pushed to the edge of the
cataract. It shot down entire to the bottom of the fall, was out of sight for a
few moments, and then rose up, dashed into a thousand splinters.

COXE.
SECT. XIII. OF GESNER THE AUTHOR OF THE DEATH OF ABEL, AND LAVATER THE
PHYSIOGNOMIST.
ON the second of August we dined luxuriously with the Capuchin friars at
Rapperschwyl, who seldom regale their guests in so sumptuous a manner. It was
one of their great feast-days; and accordingly they gave us every possible
variety of fresh water fish, with which the lake and the neighboring rivers
abound. The convent is built upon the edge of the water, and commands from some
of the apartments a very agreeable prospect. The library is by far the
pleasantest room, though not the most frequented. The cells of of the monks are
small, and yet not inconvenient; but cleanliness does not seem to constitute
any part of their moral or religious observances. Indeed the very habit of the
order is ill calculated for that purpose, as they wear no shirt or stockings,
and are clothed in a course kind of a brown drugget robe, which trails upon the
ground. Strange idea of sanctity! as if dirt could be acceptable to the Deity.
I reflected with particular satisfaction, that I was not born a member of the
Roman Catholic church; as perhaps the commands of a parent, a sudden
disappointment, or a momentary fit of enthusiasm, might have sent me to a
convent of Capuchins, and have wedded me to dirt and superstition for life.

After dinner we took leave of our hosts, and departed for Zuric by water. The
lake of Zuric is near ten leagues in length, and one in breadth. The city
stands upon a gentle eminence on the northern extremity of the lake; a
beautiful situation, and advantageous for commerce. For by means of the river
Limmat, which issues from the lake, and dividing the town, falls into the Aar,
there is a communication with the Rhine. And this advantage has not been
neglected; as the trade of the town is verey extensive. The inhabitants are
exceedingly industrious, and carry on with success several different branches
of manufacture; the principal is that of crape. Their chief traffic is with
France, Russia, Italy, and Holland.

Since the reformation many persons have flourished here, eminent for their
learning in all branches of literature: and there is no town in Swisserland,
where letters are more encouraged, or where they are cultivated with greater
success. I waited this morning upon the celebrated Gesner, author of the Death
of Abel, and several other performances, which for their delicate and elegant
simplicity are justly esteemed. They abound with those nice touches of
exquisite sensibility, which discover a mind warmed with the finest sentiments;
and love is represented in the chastest coloring of innocence, virtue, and
benevolence. Nor has he confined his subjects merely to the tender passion.
Paternal affection, and filial reverence; gratitude, humanity; in short, every
moral duty is exhibited and inculcated in the most pleasing and affecting
manner. He has for sometime renounced poetry in order to take up the pencil;
and painting is at present his favorite amusement. A treatise which he has
published on landscape-painting, shows the elegance of his taste, and the
versatility of his genius; while his compositions in both kinds prove the
resemblance of the two arts; and that the conceptions of the poet and of the
painter are congenial. I prefer his drawings in black and white to his
paintings; for, although the ideas in both are equally beautiful or sublime,
his coloring is inferior to his design. He is preparing an handsome edition of
his writings in quarto, in which every part of the work is carried on by
himself. He prints them at his own private press, and is at once both the
drawer and engraver of his plates. It is to be lamented that he has renounced
poetry; for, while ordinary writers spring up in great plenty, authors of real
genius are rare and uncommon. His drawings are seen only by a few, and will
scarcely be known to posterity. But his writings are dispersed abroad,
translated into every language, and will be admired by future ages, as long as
there remains any relish for true pastoral simplicity, or any taste for
original composition. He is plain in his manners; open, affable, and obliging
in his address; and of singular modesty. He has nothing of the poet in his
appearance, except in his eye, which is full of sense, fire, and expression.

We waited also on Mr. Lavater, a clergyman of Zuric, and celebrated
physiognomist, who has published a famous treatise on that fanciful subject. He
expressed himself badly in French; but there was an agreeable warmth and
vivacity in his countenance and manner, while he conversed upon his favorite
subject. That particular passions have a certain effect upon particular
features, is evident to the most common observer; and it may be conceived, that
an habitual indulgence of these passions may possibly, in some cases, impress a
distinguishing mark on the countenance. But that a certain cast of features
constantly denotes certain passions; and that by contemplating the former, we
can infallibly discover also the mental qualities of the owner, is an
hypothesis liable, I should think, to so many exceptions, that no general and
uniform system could be justly formed upon it. Nevertheless Mr. Lavater, like a
true enthusiast, carries his theory much farther. For he not only pretends to
discover the characters and passions by the features, by the complexion, by the
form of the hand, and by the motion of the arms, but he also draws some
inferences of the same kind even from one's handwriting. And indeed his system
is formed upon such universal principles, that he applies the same rules to all
animated nature, extending them not only to brutes, but even to insects. That
the temper of a horse may be discovered by his countenance, does not strike one
as any thing absurd. But was it ever heard before that any quality could be
inferred from the physiognomy of a Be, or of an Ant? While I give my opinion
thus freely concerning Mr. Lavater's notions, it will be readily perceived,
that I am not one of those, who are initiated into the mysteries of his art.
Nor do I mean to censure indiscriminately the system of that celebrated writer.
For, notwithstanding the extravagance of some of his tenets, the severest
critics allow, that there is a fund of good sense and a variety of fine
observations dispersed throughout his treatise; and that it is one of those
works, which, to be admired, needs only to be read with attention.

The clergy of Zuric are in general better paid than in the other Protestant
cantons; and among that body there are some who are very decently provided for;
a circumstance rather uncommon in the Reformed or Presbyterian churches.

Sumptuary laws, as well as those against immorality, are here well observed.
The former indeed may exist, and be carried into execution even among a people
much corrupted; for it may be the policy of government to enforce their
observance. But the severest penalties will not be sufficient to prevent crimes
of an immoral tendency, amidst a general dissoluteness of manners. It is the
popular principles that can alone invigorate such laws, and give them their
full operation. Among the Romans, the laws against adultery were severe; and
yet where was adultery more practiced than at Rome? In Zuric it is rigorously
punished, without any distinction of rank, by fine, by expulsion from office,
and by imprisonment. But the frequency of this crime is not so much restrained
by the penalty annexed to it, as from the general good morals of the
inhabitants. Secret crimes cannot be prevented; but it is an evident proof of
public virtue, when open breaches of morality are discountenanced. Among their
sumptuary laws, the use of a carriage in the town is prohibited to all sorts of
persons except strangers. And, it is almost inconceivable that, in a place so
very commercial and wealthy, luxury should so little prevail.

The bublic granary, on account of its admirable institution, deserves to be
particularly mentioned. Corn is purchased by government, and given out to those
who choose to buy it at the common price; but in seasons of scarcity it is sold
considerably cheaper than it can be bought at the market. The use of this
institution appeared in the late dearth; when bread, from the dearness of corn,
was sold at ten pence the pound, government delivered the same quantity for
four pence.

The arsenal is well supplied with cannon, arms, and ammunition; and contains a
reserve of muskets for thirty thousand men. We saw there, and admired, some of
the two-handed swords and weighty armor of the old Swiss warriors; as also the
bow and arrow, with which William Tell is said to have shot the apple off the
head of his son.

SECT. XIV. EXPEDITION ACROSS THE VALLEY OF ICE, IN THE GLACIER OF MONTANVERT.
A. D. 1776.
ON the 23d of August we went to see " Walls of Ice.
Les Murailles de Glace," so called from their resemblance to walls. They
consist of large ranges of ice, of prodigious thickness and solidity, rising
abruptly from their base, and parallel to each other. Some of these ranges
appeard to us about an hundred and fifty feet high; but, if we may believe our
guides, they are four hundred feet above their real base. Near them were
pyramids and cones of ice of all forms and sizes, shooting up to a very
considerable height, in the most beautiful and fantastic shapes imaginable.
From this Glacier, which we crossed without much difficulty, we had a fine view
of the value of Chamouni.

On the 24th, we proposed sallying forth very early, in order to go to the
Valley of Ice, in the Glacier of Montanvert, and to penetrate as far as the
time would admit; but the weather proving cloudy, and likely to rain, we
deferred setting out till nine, when appearances gave us the hope of its
clearing up. Accordingly we procured three excellent guides, and ascended on
horseback some part of the way over the mountain, which leads to the Glacier
abovementioned. We were then obliged to dismount, and scrambled up the rest of
the mountains, (chiefly covered with pines) along a steep and rugged path
called "the road of the chrystal-hunters." From the summit of Montanvert we
descended a little to the edge of the Glacier, and made a refreshing meal upon
some cold provision which we brought with us. A large block of granite, called
" The English Stone.
La Pierre des Anglois," served us for a table; and near us was a miserable
hovel, where those who make expeditions toward Mont Blanc, frequently pass the
night. The scene around us was magnificent and sublime; numberless rocks rising
boldly above the clouds, some of whose tops were bare, others covered with
snow. Many of these, gradually diminishing toward their summits, end in sharp
points; and from this circumstance they are called the Needles. Between these
rocks the Valley of Ice stretched several leagues in length, and is nearly a
mile broad; extending on one side toward Mont Blanc, and, on the other,
toward the plain of Chamount.

After we had sufficiently refreshed ourselves, we drepared for our adventure
across the ice. We had each of us a long pole spiked with iron; and, in order
to secure us as much as possible from slipping, the guides fastened to our
shoes crampons, consisting of a small bar of iron, to which are fixed four
small spikes of the same metal.

The difficulty of crossing these valleys of ice, arises from the immense
chasms. They are produced by several causes; but more particularly by the
continual melting of the interior surface. This frequently occasions a sinking
of the ice; and under such circumstances, the whole mass is suddenly rent
asunder in that particular place with a most violent explosion. We rolled down
large stones into several of them, and the great length of time before they
reached the bottom, gave us some conception of their depth. Our guides assured
us, that in some places they are five hundred feet deep. I can no otherwise
convey to you an image of this immense body of ice, consisting of continued
irregular ridges and deep chasms, than by resembling it to a raging sea, that
had been instantaneously frozen in the midst of a violent storm.

We began our walk with great slowness and deliberation, but we gradually
gained more courage and confidence as we advanced; and we soon found that we
could safely pass along those parts, where the ascent and descent were not very
considerable, much faster even than when walking at the rate of our common
pace. In other parts we leaped over the clefts, and slid down the steeper
descents as well as we could. In one place where we descended, and stepped
across an opening upon a narrow ridge of ice scarcely three inches broad, we
were obliged to tread with peculiar caution; for on each side were chasms of a
great depth. We walked some paces sideways along this ridge; ^^ept across the
chasm into a little hollow, which the guides made on purpose for our feet, and
got up an ascent, by means of small holes, which we made with the spikes of our
poles. All this sounds terrible; b^ at the time we had none of us the least
apprehensions of danger, as the guides were exceedingly careful, and took
excellent precautions. One of our servants had the courage to follow us without
crampons, and with no nails to his shoes, which was certainly dangerous, on
account of the slipperiness of the leather when wetted. He got along, however,
surprisingly well: though in some places we were alarmed, lest he should slip
upon the edge of one of those chasms; for had that accident happened to any of
us, we must inevitably have been lost, having neglected to provide ourselves
with long ropes in case of such an event. This man was probably the first
person who ever ventured across the Valley of Ice, without either crampons or
nails to his shoes.

We were now almost arrived at the other extremity, when we were stopped by a
chasm so broad that there was no possibility of passing it. We were obliged to
make a circuit of above a quarter of a mile, in order to get round this vast
opening. This will give you some idea of the difficulty attending excursions
over some of these Glaciers; and our guides informed us, that when they hunt
the chamois and the marmottes in these (...) regions, these unavoidable
circuits generally carry them six or seven miles about, when they would have
only two miles to go if they could proceed in a straight line.

A storm threatening us every moment, we were obliged to hasten off the Glacier
as fast as possible, for rain renders the ice exceedingly slippery; and in case
of a fog (which generally accompaneis a storm in these upper regions) our
situation would have been extremely dangerous. And indeed we had no time to
lose; for the tempest began just as we had quitted the ice, and soon became
very violent, attended with frequent flashes of lightning, and loud peals of
thunder, which being re-echoed within the hollows of the mountains, added
greatly to the awful sublimity of the scene. We now descended a very steep
precipice, and for some way were obliged to crawl upon our hands and feet down
a bare rock; the storm at the same time roaring over us, and rendering the rock
extremely slippery. We were by this time quite wet through, but we got to the
bottom, however, without much hurt. Upon observing the immense extent of these
Glaciers, I could not help remarking, (and it is a circumstance which many
other travelers have observed before) what a fund is here laid up for the
supply of rivers, and that the sources which give rise to the Rhine, the Rhone,
and the Po, will never fail. I returned at length to the inn, as dripping wet
as if I had been plunged into water, but perfectly satisfied with my expedition.

I cannot conceive any subject in natural history more curious than the
formation and progress of these Glaciers; running far into fields of corn and
rich pasture, and lying, without being melted, in a situation where the sun has
power sufficient to ripen the fruits of the field. It is literally true, that
with one hand we could touch ice, and with the other ripe corn. But as this is
a subject too important to be treated superficially, and requires much accurate
observation, and repeated experimental investigation, I shall not attempt to
enter into it. I beg leave nevertheless, to make one observation, which will
serve to prove the occasional increase and diminution of the Glaciers, contrary
to the opinion of some philosophers, who advance that they remain always the
same; and of others, who assert that they are continually increasing. I think I
may venture to assert, that both these opinions are untenable; and it happens
in this, as in many other subjects, that experience and truth are sacrificed to
the supporting of a favorite hypothesis. Indeed the fact seems to be, that
these Glaciers in some years, increase considerably in extent, while in others
they recede; and of this I am perfectly convinced from the following
circumstances.

The borders of the Valley of Ice of the Glacier of Montanvert are mostly
skirted with trees. Toward its foot a vast arch of ice rises to near an
hundred feet in height; from under which, the continued droppings from the
melting of the ice and snow are collected together, and form the Arveron, which
rushes forth with considerable force, and in a large body of water. As we
approached the extremity of this arch, we passed through a wood of firs. Those
which stand at a little distance from the ice are about eighty feet high, and
are undoubtedly of a very great age. Between these and the Glacier, the trees
are of a later growth, as is evident as well from their inferior size, as from
their texture and shape. Others, which resemble the latter, have been
overturned and enveloped in the ice. In all these several trees, respectively
situated in the spots I have mentioned, there seems to be a kind of regular
gradation in their age, from the largest size to those that lie prostrate.

These facts fairly lead, it should seem, to the following conclusions; -- that
the Glacier once extended as far as the row of tall firs; that, upon its
retiring, a number of trees have shot up in the very spots, which it formerly
occupied; that within some years the Glacier has again begun to advance, and in
its progress has overturned the trees of later date, before they have had time
to grow up to any considerable height.

To these circumstances, another fact may be added, which appears to me
convincing. There are large stones of granite, which are found only at a small
distance from the extremities of the Glacier. These are vast fragments, which
have certainly fallen down from the mountains upon the ice, have been carried
on by the Glacier in its increase, and have tumbled into the plain, upon the
melting or sinking of the ice which supported them.

COXE.
SECT. XV. OF BERNE, IN SWISSERLAND.
I WAS very much struck upon my entrance into Berne, with its singular neatness
and beauty. I do not remember to have seen any town (Bath alone excepted) the
first appearance whereof had so pleasing an effect. The principal street is
broad and long; the houses are mostly uniform, built of a greyish stone upon
arcades, which are admirably well paved. Through the middle of the street runs
a lively stream of the clearest water, in a channel constructed for its
reception. But besides this stream, it abounds with fountains, not less
ornamental to the place than beneficial to the inhabitants. The river Aar flows
close by the town, and indeed almost surrounds it, winding its serpentine
course over a rocky bottom, much below the level of the streets; and for a
considerable way forming by its banks, which are steep and craggy, a kind of
natural rampart. The cathedral church is a noble piece of Gothic architecture.
It stands upon a platform that has been raised at a great expense from the bed
of the river, and which commands as fine a view as any I have seen in
Swisserland.

The country around is richly cultivated, and agreeably diversified with hills,
lawns, wood, and water; the river flows rapidly below, and an abrupt chain of
high and rugged Alps appears at some distance, the tops whereof are covered
with eternal snow. Such an assemblage of beautiful objects would, in any view,
present a most striking prospect; but its effect becomes greatly heightened
when seen from the midst of a large town.

All the public buildings are in a most noble simplicity of style, and announce
the riches and grandeur of the republic. The arsenal contains arms for sixty
thousand men, besides a considerable quantity of cannon which were cast here.
The granary is an excellent institution, similar to that of Zuric; but it
differs from that of Geneva, as the expense does not fall chiefly upon the
poor: for the bakers are not compelled by government to purchase their corn
from the public magazine.

The hospitals, which are large, airy, and well bulit, are excellently
regulated, both with respect to the care and attention paid to the sick, and to
the cleanliness of the several wards. The town is kept neat by a number of
felons, who are sentenced to this drudgery during a certain time, according to
the nature of their offenses; and as capital condemnations are very rare, this
is the most usual manner of punishing their criminals. These culprits are
distinguished by an iron collar, with a hook projecting over their herds.

The library is a small, but well chosen collection, and contains some very
curious manuscripts. Of these, Mr. Sinner, a man of great erudition, has
published a very satisfactory and judicious catalogue. He has not only set
forth their titles, and ascertained their age, but has also given a general and
succinct account of their respective subjects; and from many of them has
published extracts equally curious and interesting. Among these manuscripts are
some of the thirteenth century, consisting of several songs and romances of the
Troubadours, written in that and the preceding ages, which merit the attention
of those who are conversant in that species of ancient poetry.

I have been much disappointed in not seeing the great Haller. His very infirm
state of health would not admit of his receiving a visit from us. I need not
mention how eminently that celebrated author has distinguished himself in every
species of polite literature, and in several branches of natural philosophy.
Unlike certain minute philosophers of the present age, whose atheistical and
infidel writings are too well known, and too widely dissemminated, this great
man is so unfashionable as to have followed the steps of a Lock and a Newton;
and to have proved himself, both in his life and his writings, a zealous friend
and able advocate of Christianity. When literature and philosophy, instead of
being employed, as they too often have been, in supporting skeptical tenets by
artful sophistry, thus lend their joint assistance to the cause of religion, it
is then only that they become an honor to the possessor, and a benefit to
society.

Learning is neither so universally encouraged, nor so successfully cultivated
here as at Zuric. The academical studies are almost solely directed to those
branches of knowledge more essentially necessary for entering into the church.
The society for the promotion of agriculture, is almost the only establishment
which directly tends to the progress of the arts and sciences; and even this
meets with no great countenance from government. There is but little trade in
the capital. Some few manufactures indeed (chiefly of linen and silk) have been
established; but they are carried on by those only who have no prospect of
being admitted into the sovereign council. For those famalies, who have any
influence on public affairs, would hold themselves degraded were they to engage
in any branch of commerce; and as offices of the state, except bailliages, are
in general not very profitable, nor indeed, numerous, many of them enter, as
their sole resource, into sovereign armies. With respect to those among them
who have sufficient interest to be chosen into the sovereign council, they must
have attained the full age of twenty-nine before they are eligible. In the mean
while, as very few of them apply their minds to literary pursuits, they
usually, from mere want of employment, waste the interval in an idle and
dissipated course of life. Nevertheless, there are several members of the
sovereign council, who are justly distinguished for their political abilities;
and, being thoroughly acquainted with the respective interests of the different
powers of Europe, they know perfectly well how to avail themselves of every
conjuncture, which may be turned to the advantage or the glory of their own
republic.

The inhabitants of Berne value themselves much upon their politeness to
strangers. And indeed, it is but doing them strict justice to acknowledge, that
they have shown us (with that peculiar frankness and unaffected affability I
have so often had occasion to admire in the Swiss) every civility in their
power.

COXE.
SECT. XVI. OF THE PRICE OF PROVISIONS IN SWISSERLAND. A. D. 1776.
The following is the ordinary price of provisions throughout the mountainous
parts of Swisserland: s. d. Butchers meat per pound 0 2 Bread, per pound 0 1
Butter, per pound 0 2 Cheese, per pound 0 2 Salt, per pound 0 1 Milk, per quart
0 1 Worst wine, per quart 0 1 Pays de Vaud wine 0 6

But this, as one may perceive, that in proportion, bread is much dearer than
the other articles, and the reason is obvious; for all these mountainous parts
consist almost entirely of pasturages, and produce little corn. The peasants of
Swisserland (I mean those who inhabit the mountainous districts) live chiefly
upon milk, and what results from it, together with potatoes, which are here
much cultivated. According to the price of provisions in England, the above
list will appear exceedingly cheap; but then it ought, at the same time, to be
considered, that money is very scarce in these parts. Nor indeed is it so much
necessary in a country, where there is no luxury; where all the peasantry have,
within themselves, more than sufficient for their own consumption; and are
tolerably well provided with every necessary of life from their own little
demesnes. I had a long conversation with one of the lads, who came with us from
Altdorf, and takes care of the horses. He lives upon the mountains of Uri; and,
as their winter lasts near eight months of the year, during some part of which
time there can be little communication between the several cottages, every
family is of course obliged to lay in their provision for the whole winter. His
own, it seems, consists of seven persons, and is provided with the following
stores; -- Seven cheeses, each weighing twenty-five pounds; an hundred and
eight pounds of hard bread, twenty-five baskets of potatoes, each weighing
about forty pounds; seven goats, and three cows, one of which they kill. The
cows and horses (if they keep any) are fed with hay, and the goats with the
boughs of firs; which in a scarcity of hay, they give also to their other
cattle. During this dreary season the family are employed in making linen,
shirts, etc. sufficient for their own use: and, for this purpose, a small patch
of the little piece of ground belonging to every cottage, is generally sown
with flax. The cultivation of the latter has been much attended to and with
increasing success, in these mountainous parts of Swisserland.

The houses are generally built of wood; and it was a natural remark of one of
our servants, as we passed through such a continued chain of rocks, that as
there was stone enough to build all the cottages in the country, it was
wonderful they should use nothing but wood for that purpose; a remark that has
been made by many travelers. But it should seem, that these wooden houses are
much sooner constructed, and are easily repaired; that they are built in so
solid and compact a manner (the rooms small, and the ceilings low) as to be
sufficiently warm even for so cold a climate. The chief objection to them
arises from the danger of fire; as the flames must rage with great rapidity,
and communicate easily from one to the other. This inconvenience however, is in
a great measure obviated by the method of building their cottages apart; all
their villages consisting of detached and scattered hamlets. But this
observation does not hold with respect to some of their largest burghs; and
these must consequently be exposed to the ravages of this most dreadful of all
calamities.

COXE.
SECT. XVII. GENERAL REFLECTIONS UPON THE THIRTEEN SWISS CANTONS. A. D. 1776.
THERE is no part of Europe which contains, within the same extent of region,
so many independent commonwealths, and such a variety of different governments,
as are collected together in this remarkable and delightful country; and yet,
with such wisdom was the Helvetic union composed, that so little have the
Swiss, of late years, been actuated with the spirit of conquest, that since the
firm and complete establishment of their general confederacy, they have
scarcely ever had occasion to employ their arms against a foreign enemy; and
have had no hostile commotions among themselves, which were not very soon
happily terminated. Perhaps there is not a similar instance in ancient or
modern history, of a warlike people, divided into little independent republics,
closely bordering upon each other, and of course having occasionally
interfering interests, having continued, during so long a period, in an almost
uninterrupted state of tranquillity. And thus, while the several neighboring
kingdoms have suffered, by turns, all the horrors of internal war, this
favored nation has enjoyed the felicity described by Lucretius, and looked
down with security upon the various tempests, which have shaken the world
around them.

But the happiness of a long peace, has neither broken the spirit, not
enervated the arm of this people. The youth are diligently trained to all the
martial exercises, such as running, wrestling, and shooting both with the
cross-bow and the musket; a considerable number of well disciplined Swiss
troops are always employed in foreign services; and the whole people are
enrolled, and regularly exercised in their respective militia. By these means
they are capable, in case it should be necessary, of collecting a very
respectable body of forces, which could not fail of proving formidable to any
enemy, who should invade their country, or attack their liberties. Thus, while
most of the other states upon the continent are tending more and more toward a
military government, Swisserland alone has no standing armies; and yet; from
the nature of its situation, from its particular alliances, and from the policy
of its internal government, is more secure from invasion than any other
European power, and full as able to withstand the greatest force that can be
brought against it.

But the felicity of Swisserland does not consist merely in being peculiarly
exempted from the burdens and miseries of war; there is no country in which
happiness and content more universally prevail among the people. For, whether
the government be aristocratical, democratical, or mixed; absolute or limited;
a general spirit of liberty pervades and actuates the several constitutions; so
that even the eligarchical states (which, of all others, are usually the most
tyrannical) are here peculiarly mild; and the property of the subject is
securely guarded against every kind of violation.

But there is one general defect in their criminal jurisprudence, which
prevails throughout this country. For although the Caroline code, as it is
styled, or the code of the Emperor Charles V. forms in each of the republics,
the principal basis of their penal laws, with particular modifications and
additions in different districts, yet much too great a latitude is allowed to
the respective judges, who are less governed in their determinations by this
code, or any other written law, than by the common principles of justice. How
far long experience may have justified the prudence of trusting them with this
extraordinary privilege, I cannot say; but discretionary powers, of this kind
are undoubtedly liable to the most alarming abuse, and can never, without the
greatest hazard, be committed to the hands of the magistrate.

I cannot forbear reflecting, upon this occasion, on the superior wisdom, in
the present instance, as well as in many others, of our own most invaluable
constitution; and indeed, it is impossible for an Englishman to observe, in his
travels, the governments of other countries, without becoming a warmer or more
affectionate admirer of his own. In England, the life and liberty of the
subject does not depend upon the arbitrary dicision of his judge, but is
secured by express laws, from which no magistrate can depart with impunity.
This guarded precision, it is true, may occasionally, perhaps, be attended with
some inconveniences; but they are over-balanced by advantages of so much
greater weight, as to be scarcely perceptible in the scales of justice. I do
not mean, however, to throw any imputation upon the officers of criminal
jurisdiction in Swisserland. As far as I could observe, they administer
distributive justice with an impartial and equitable hand.

One cannot but be astonished, as well as concerned, to find, that, in a
country where the true principles of civil government are so well understood,
and so generally adopted as in Swisserland, the trial by torture is yet
abolished. For in some particular cases, the suspected criminal is still put to
the rack. The inefficacy, no less than the inhumanity, of endeavoring to
extort the truth by the several horrid instruments, which too ingenious cruelty
have devised for that purpose, has been so often exposed by the ablest writers,
that it would be equally impertinent and superfluous to trouble the world with
any reflections of mine upon the subject. And indeed, the whole strength of the
several arguments, which have been urged upon this occasion, is comprised in
the very just and pointed observation of the admirable Bruyere, that " The
torture is a wonderful invention, and very certain of destroying an innocent
person, who has a delicate constitution; and of saying a guilty one, to whom
nature has been more kind.
la question est une invention marveilleuse et tout-a-fait sure, pour perdre un
innocent qui a la complexion foible, et sauver un coupable qui est ne robuste."
I cannot however but add, in justice to the Swiss, that zealous advocates have
not been wanting among them for the total abolition of torture. But arguments
of reason, and sentiments of humanity, have been found, even in this civilized
and enlightened country, to avail little against inveterate custom and long
confirmed prejudices.

Criminal justice is in Swisserland, as in the greatest part of Europe,
administered agreeable to the rules of the civil law. According to the maxims
of that code, the criminal's confession is absolutely requisite, in order to
his suffering capital punishment; and consequently, all those nations, who have
not established a new code of criminal jurisprudence, retain the use of torture.

The present king of Prussia, it is well known, set the example in Germany, of
abolishing this inhuman practice, but few, perhaps, are apprised, that the
first hint of this reformation was suggested to him by reading the History of
England. For, one of the principal arguments in support of this method of
extorting confession, being, that it affords the best means of discovering
plots against government, the sagacious monarch remarked, that the British
annals fully confute the fallacy of that reasoning. Few kingdoms, he observed,
had abounded more in conspiracies and rebellions than England; and yet that the
leaders and abettors of them had been more successfully traced and discovered,
without the use of torture, than in any country where it was practiced. "From
thence," added this wise politician, speaking upon the subject, "I saw the
absurdity of torture, and abolished it accordingly."

The above anecdote, which I had from very respectable authority, bears the
most honorable testimony to the efficacy as well as the mildness of our penal
laws, and to the superior excellency of the process observed in our courts of
criminal justice.

With respect to agriculture; there is, perhaps, no country in the world where
the advantageous effects of unwearied and persevering industry are more
remarkably conspicuous. In traveling over the mountainous parts of
Swisserland, I was struck with admiration and astonishment, to observe rocks,
that were formerly barren, now planted with vines, or abounding in rich
pasture; to mark the traces of the plough, along the side of the precipices, so
steep, that it must be with great difficulty, that a horse could even mount
them. In a word, the inhabitants seem to have surmounted every obstruction
which soil, situation, and climate, had thrown in their way, and to have spread
fertility over various spots of the country, which nature seemed to have
consigned to everlasting barrenness. In fine, a general simplicity of manners,
an open and unaffected frankness, together with an invincible spirit of
freedom, may justly be mentioned in the number of those peculiar qualities,
which dignify the public character of the people, and distinguish them with
honor among the nations of Europe.

Learning is less generally diffused among the catholic than the protestant
states. But in both, a man of letters will find abundant opportunities of
gratifying his researches and improving his knowledge. To the natural
philosopher, Swisserland will afford an inexhaustible source of entertainment
and information, as well from the great variety of physical curiosities, so
plentifully spread over the country, as from the considerable number of persons
eminently skilled in that branch of science. Indeed in every town, and almost
in every village, the curious traveller will meet with collections worthy of
his attention.

COXE.
SECT. XVIII. OF FRANKFORT. A. D. 1775.
AMONG the remarkable things in Frankfort, the inns may be reckoned. Two in
particular, the Emperor and the Read House, for cleanliness, convenience, and
number of apartments, are superior to any I ever saw on the continent, and vie
with our most magnificent inns in England.

At these, as at all other inns in Germany, there is an ordinary, at which the
strangers may dine and sup. This is called the Table d'Hote, from the
circumstance of the landlord's sitting at the bottom of the table and carving
the victuals. The same name for an ordinary is still retained in France, though
the landlord does not sit at the table, which was the case formerly in that
country, and still is the custom in Germany.

There are no private lodgings to be had here as in London. Strangers,
therefore, retain apartments at the inn during the whole time of their
residence in any of the towns. And travelers of every denomination in this
country, under the rank of sovereign princess, make no scruple of eating
occasionally at the table d'Hote of the inn where they lodge, which custom is
universally followed by strangers from every country on the continent of Europe.

Many of our countrymen, however, who despise economy, and hate the company of
strangers, prefer eating in their own apartments to the table d'Hote, or any
private table to which they may be invited.

It would be arrogance in any body to dispute the right which every free born
Englishman has to follow his own inclination in this particular. Yet when
people wish to avoid the company of strangers, it strikes me, that they might
indulge their fancy as completely at home as abroad; and while they continue in
that humor, I cannot help thinking that they might save themselves the
inconveniency and expense of traveling.

The manners and genius of nations, it is true, are not to be learnt at inns;
nor is the most select company to be found at public ordinaries; yet a person
of observation, and who is fond of the study of character, will sometimes find
instruction and entertainment at both. He there sees the inhabitants of the
country on a less ceremonious footing than he can elsewhere, and hears the
remarks of travelers of every degree.

The first care of a traveller certainly should be, to form an acquaintance and
some degree of intimacy with the principal people in every place where he
intends to reside; -- to accept invitations to their family parties, and attend
their societies; -- to entertain them at his apartments, when that can be
conveniently done, and endeavor to acquire a just notion of their government,
customs, sentiments, and manner of living.

Those who are fond of the study of man, which, with all due deference to the
philosophers who prefer that of beasts, birds and butterflies, is also a
pardonable amusement, will mix occasionally with all degrees of people, and
when not otherwise engaged, will not scruple to take a seat at the table
d'Hote. It is said, that low people are sometimes to be found at these
ordinaries. This, to be sure is a weighty objection; but then it should be
remembered, that it is within the bounds of possibility that men, even engaged
in commerce, may have liberal minds, and may be able to give as distinct
accounts of what is worthy of observation, as if they had been as idle as
people of the highest fashion through the whole of their lives. A man must have
a very turgid idea of his own grandeur, if he cannot submit, in a foreign
country, to dine at table with a person of inferior rank, especially as he will
meet, at the same time, with others as equal, or superior rank to himself. For
all etiquette of this nature is waved, even in Germany at the tables d'Hotes.

A knowledge of the characters of men, as they appear varied in different
situations and countries; the study of humun nature, indeed, in all its forms
and modifications, is highly interesting to the mind, and worthy the attention
of the greatest man. This is not to be perfectly attained in courts and
palaces. The investigator of nature must visit her in humbler life, and put
himself on a level with the men whom he wishes to know.

It is generally found, that those who possess real greatness of mind, never
hesitate to overleap the obstacles, and despise the forms, which may stand in
the way of their acquiring this useful knowledge.

The most powerful of all arguments against entirely declining to appear at the
public table of the inn, is, that in this country it is customary for the
ladies themselves, when on a journey, to eat there; and my partiality for the
table, d'Hote may possibly be owing in some degree to my having met at one of
them, with two of the handsomest women that I have seen since I have been in
this country, which abounds in female beauty.

There is more expression in the countenances of French women; but the ladies
in Germany have the advantage in the fairness of their skin and the bloom of
their complexion. They have a greater resemblance to English women than to
French; yet they differ considerably from them both. I do not know how to give
an idea of the various shades of expression, which, if I mistake not, I can
distinguish in the features of the sex in these three countries.

A handsome French woman, besides the ease of her manner, has commonly a look
of cheerfulness and great vivacity. She appears willing to be acquainted with
you, and seems to expect that you should address her.

The manner of an English woman is not so devoid of restraint; and a stranger,
especially if he be a foreigner, may observe a look which borders on disdain in
her countenance. Even among the loveliest features, something of a sulky air
often appears.

A German beauty, without the smart air of the one or the reserve of the other,
has generally a more placid look than either.

Dr. MOORE.
SECT. XIX. OF THE QUEEN OF DENMARK. A. D. 1775.
THE D -- of H -- having determined to pay his respects to the Queen of Denmark
before he left Hanover, chose to make his visit while the Hereditary princess
was with her sister.

I accompanied him to Zell, and next day waited on the Count and Countess Dean,
to let them know of the D -- 's arrival, and to be informed when we could have
the honor of being presented to the Queen. They both belong to the princess of
Brunswick's family, and while I was at breakfast with them, her royal highness
entered the room, and gave me the information I wanted.

Before dinner I returned with the duke to the castle, where we remained till
late in the evening. There was a concert of music between dinner and supper,
and the queen seemed in better spirits than could have been expected.

Zell is a small town, without trade or manufactures; the houses are old, and
of a mean appearance, yet the high courts of appeal for all the territories of
the Electoral House of Brunswick Lunenburg are held here. The inhabitants
derive their principal means of subsistence from this circumstance.

This town was severely harrassed by the French army at the beginning of the
late war, and was afterward pillaged, in revenge for the supposed infraction
of the treaty of Closter-Seven. The Duke de Richlieu had his head quarters
here, when Duke Ferdinand re assembled the troops who had been disarmed and
dispersed immediately after that convention.

The castle is a stately building, surrounded by a moat, and strongly
fortified. It was formerly the residence of the Dukes of Zell, and was lately
repaired by order of the King of Great Britain, for the reception of his
unfortunate sister. The apartments are spacious and convenient, and now
handsomely furnished.

The officers of the court, the Queen's maids of honor, and other attendants,
have a very genteel appearance; and retain the most respectful attachment to
their ill-fated mistress. The few days we remained at Zell were spent entirely
at court, where every thing seemed to be arranged in the style of the other
small German courts, and nothing wanting to render the Queen's situation as
comfortable as circumstances would admit; but by far her greatest consolation
is the company and conversation of her sister. Some degree of satisfaction
appears in her countenance, while the Princess remains at Zell; but the moment
she goes away, the Queen, as we were informed, becomes a prey to dejection and
despondency. The Princess exerts herself to prevent this, and devotes to her
sister all the time she can spare from the duties she ows to her own family.
Unlike those who take the first pretext of breaking connections which can no
longer be of advantage, this humane Princess has displayed even more attachment
to her sister since her misfortunes, than she ever did while the Queen was in
the meridian of her prosperity.

The youth, the agreeable countenance, and obliging manners of the Queen, have
conciliated the minds of every one in this country. Though she was in perfect
health, and appeared cheerful, yet, convinced that her gaiety was assumed, and
the effect of a strong effort, I felt an impression of melancholy, which it was
not in my power to overcome all the time we remained at Zell.

On the evening of our arrival at Hanover, we had the pleasure of hearing
Handel's Messiah performed. Some of the best company of this place were
assembled on the occasion, and we were here made acquainted with old
Field-Marshal Sporken, and other people of distinction. Hanover is a neat,
thriving, and agreeable city. It has more the appearance of an English town
than any other I have seen in Germany; and the English manners and customs gain
ground every day among the inhabitants. The genial influence of freedom has
extended from England to this place. Tyranny is not felt, and ease and
satisfaction appear in the countenances of the citizens.

Dr. MOORE.
SECT. XX. ON THE PALACE AT POTSDAM, AND THE KING OF PRUSSIA. A. D. 1775.
THE palace at Potsdam, or what they call the castle, is a very noble building,
with magnificent gardens adjacent. I shall not particularly describe either;
only it struck me as a thing rather uncommon in a palace, to find the study by
far the finest apartment in it. The ornaments of this are of massy silver. The
writing-desk, the embelishments of the table, and the accommodations of the
books, were all in fine taste.

The person who attended us, asked if we had a desire to see his Majesty's
wardrobe? On being answered in the affirmative, he conducted us to the chamber
where the monarch's clothes are deposited. The whole wardrobe consisted of two
blue coats faced with red, the lining of one a little torn; -- two yellowish
waist; coats, a good deal soiled with Spanish Snuff; -- three pair of yellow
breeches, and a suit of blue velvet, embroidered with silver, for grand
occasions.

I imagined at first, that the man had got a few of the King's old clothes, and
kept them here to amuse strangers. But, upon enquiry, I was assured, that what
I have mentioned, with two suits of uniform which he has at Sans-Souci, from
the entire wardrobe of the King of Prussia. Our attendant said he had never
known it more complete. As for the velvet suit, it was about ten years of age,
and still enjoyed all the vigor of youth. Indeed, if the moths spared it as
much as his Majesty has done, it may last the age of Methusalem.

In the same room are some standards belonging to the cavalry. Instead of the
usual square flag, two or three of these have the figures of eagles in carved
silver, fixed on a pole.

In the bedchamber where the late King died, at the lower part of the window
which looks into the garden, four p^anes have been removed, and a piece of
glass, equal in size to all the four, supplies their place. We were informed
that his late Majesty's supreme delight through life had been to see his troops
exercise, and that he had retained this passion till his late breath. When he
was confined to his room by his last illness, he used to sit and view them
through the window, which had been framed in this manner, that he might enjoy
these dying contemplations with the greater convenience. Becoming gradually
weaker by the increasing distemper, he could not sit, but was obliged to lie on
a couch through the day. When at any time he was uncommonly languid, they
raised his head to the window, and a sight of the men under arms was perceived
to operate like a cordial, and revive his spirits. By frequent repetition,
however, even this cordial lost its effect. His eyes became dim; when his head
was raised, he could no longer perceive the soldiers, and he expired.

This was feeling the ruling passion as strong in death as any man ever felt it.

When we arrived at Potsdam, there was nothing I was so eager to see, as the
Prussian troops at their exercise; but the frequent reviews have completely
satiated my curiosity. And though the gardens of the palace are just opposite
to the windows of our inn, I hardly ever go to look at the guards, who parade
there every morning. A few days ago, however, I happened to take a very early
walk about a mile out of town, and seeing some soldiers under arms, in a field
at a small distance from the road, I went toward them. An officer on
horseback, whom I took to be the Major, for he gave the word of command, was
uncommonly active, and often rode among the ranks to reprimand, or instruct the
common men. When I came nearer, I was much surprised to find that this was the
King himself. He had his sword drawn and continued to exercise the corpse for an
hour after. He made them wheel, march, form the square, and fire by divisions,
and in platoons, observing all their motions with infinite attention; and, on
account of some plunder, put two officers of the Prince of Prussia's regiment
under arrest. In short, he seemed to exert himself with all the spirit of a
young officer, eager to attract the notice of his General by uncommon alertness.

I expressed my surprise to an officer present, that the King was not willing
to take some repose, particularly from that kind of employment of which he had
had so very much of late, and that he could take so much pains with a mere
handful of men, immediately after he had come from exercising whole armies.

This gentleman told me, that on this particular day the King had been trying
some new evolutions; but though this had not been the case, he might very
possibly have been in the field: -- for his maxim was, that his troops should
display as much briskness on a common field day, as if they were to engage in
battle; and therefore it was never known when he intended to be present, or
when not; -- that as for repose, he took it between ten at night and four in
the morning, and his other hours were all devoted to action, either of body or
mind, or both; and that the exercise he had just taken, was probably by way of
relaxation, after three hours previous labor in his cabinet.

The more I see and hear of this extraordinary man, the more am I astonished.
He reconciles qualities which I used to think incompatible. I once was of
opinion, that the mind, which stoops to very small objects is incapable of
embracing great ones. I am now convinced that he is an exception; for while few
objects are too great for his genius, none seem too small for his attention.

I once thought that a man of much vivacity was not capable of entering into
the detail of business, I now see that he, who is certainly a man of wit, can
continue methodically the necessary routine of business, with the patience and
perseverance of the greatest d^nce that ever drudged in a comp^ing-house.

We have lately seen the Italians perform; but neither the plays, nor the
operas, nor any part of the entertainments, interest me half so much, or could
draw me so assiduously to Sans-Souci, as the opportunity this attendance gives
of seeing the King. Other monarchs acquire importance from their station; this
Prince gives importance to his. The traveller in other countries has a wish to
see the King, because he admires the kingdom: -- here the object of curiosity
is reversed. -- And let us suppose the palaces, and the towns, and the country,
and the army of Prussia ever so fine, yet our chief interest in them will arise
from their belonging to Frederick the Second; the man who, without any ally but
Britain, repelled the united force of Austria, France, Russia, and Sweden.

Count Nesselrode, talking with me on this subject, had an expression equally
lively and just: -- " It is in adversity that he shines; the more he is
oppressed the more irresistible he becomes.
C'est dans l'adversite qu'il brille, lorsqu'il est bien comprime il a un
ressort irresistible."

The evening of the day on which I had seen the King in the field, I was at
Sans-Souci; for I wish to neglect no opportunity of being present where this
monarch is. I like to stand near him, to hear him speak, and to observe his
movements, attitudes, and most indifferent actions. He always behaves with
particular affability to the D -- of H --. One evening, before the play began,
his Grace and I were standing accidentally with Count Finkenstein, in a room
adjoining to the great apartment where the company were. The King entered
alone, when he was not expected, and immediately began a conversation with the
D --.

He asked several questions relating to the British constitution; particularly
at what age a Peer could take his seat in parliament? When the Duke replied,
"At twenty-one." It is evident from that, said the King, that the English
patricians acquire the necessary talents for legislation much sooner than those
of ancient Rome, who were not admitted into the senate till the age of forty.

He then enquired about the state of Lord Chatham's health, and expressed high
esteem for the character of that minister. He asked me if I had received
letters by the last post, and if they mentioned any thing of the affairs in
America? He said there were accounts from Holland, that the English troops had
been driven from Boston, and that the Americans were in possession of that
place. I told him our letters informed us, that the army had left Boston to
make an attack with more effect elsewhere.

He smiled, and said, -- If you will not allow the retreat to have been an
affair of necessity, you will atleast admit, that it was " Quite apropos.
tout-a-fait a-propos."

He said he heard that some British officers had gone into the American
service, and mentioned Colonel Lee, whom he had seen at his court. He observed,
that it was a difficult thing to govern-men by force at such a distance; that
if the Americans should be beat (which appeared a little problematical), still
it would be next to impossible to continue to draw from them a revenue by
taxation; -- that if we intended conciliation with America, some of our
measures were too rough; and if we intended its subjection, they were too
gentle. He concluded by saying. " In short, Gentlemen, I do not understand
these matters, I have no colonies, I hope you will extricate yourselves well
out of trouble, but it appears to me a little difficult.
Enfin, Messieurs, je ne comprends pas ces chooses la; je n'ai point de colonie;
j'espere que vous vous tirerez bien d'affaire, mais elle me paroit un peu
epineuse." Having said this, he walked into the Princess's apartment, to lead
her to the playhouse, while we joined the company already assembled there. The
tragedy of Mahomet was performed, which, in my opinion, is the finest of all
Voltaire's dramatic pieces, and that in which Le Kain appears to the greatest
advantage.

As most people are desirous to be made acquainted with every thing which
regards the King of Prussia, I am perhaps, in danger of lengthening my
descriptions with a tedious minuteness. I do not, however, pretend to draw a
complete portrait of this monarch. That must be the work of much abler
painters, who have seen him in a more familiar, manner and whose colors can
give an expression worthy of the original. I shall only attempt to give a
faithful sketch of such features as I was able to seize during the transient
views I myself had, or which I have learnt from those who have passed with him
many of the hours, which he dedicates to free conversation and the pleasures of
the table.

The King of Prussia is below the middle size, well made, and remarkably active
for his time of life. He has become hardy by exercise and a laborious life; for
his constitution originally seems to have been none of the strongest. His look
anounces spirit and penetration. He has fine blew eyes; and, in my opinion, his
countenance upon the whole is agreeable. Some who have seen him are of a
different opinion. All who judge from his portraits only, must be so; for
although I have seen many, which have a little resemblance of him, and some
which have a great deal, yet none of them do him justice. His features acquire
a wonderful degree of animation, while he converses. This is entirely lost upon
canvas.

He stoops considerably, and enclines his head almost constantly on one side.

His tone of voice is the clearest, and most agreeable in conversation I ever
heard.

He speaks a great deal, yet those who hear him regret that he does not speak a
great deal more. His observations are always lively, very often just, and few
men possess the talent of repartee in greater perfection.

He hardly ever varies his dress, which consists of a blue coat, lined and
faced with red, and a yellow waistcoat and breeches. He always wears boots,
while hussar tops, which fall in wrinkles about his ancles, and are oftener of
a dark brown than a black color.

His hat would be thought extravagantly large in England, though it is of the
size commonly used by the Prussian officers of cavalry. He generally wears one
of the large side corners over his forehead and eyes, and the front cock at one
side.

He wears his hair cued behind, and dressed with a single buckle on each side.
From their being very carelessly put up and unequalled powdered, we may
naturally conclude, that the friseur has been greatly hurried in the execution
of his office.

He uses a very large gold snuff box, the lid ornamented with diamonds, and
takes an immoderate quantity of Spanish snuff, the marks of which very often
appear on his waistcoat and breeches. These are also ^able to be soiled by the
paws of two or three Italian gray hounds, which he often caresses.

He dresses as soon as he gets up in the morning. This takes up but a few
minutes, and serves for the whole day. It has often been said, that the King of
Prussia's hours, from four or five in the morning till ten at night, are all
dedicated methodically to particular occupations, either of business or
amusement. This is certainly true; and the arrangement has not sustained such
an interruption for many years, as since the present company came to Potsdam.

Some, who pretend to more than common penetration, assert, that at present
they can perceive marks of uneasiness in his countenance, and seem convinced,
that there will not be such another company at Sans-Souci during his reign.

All business with the King is transacted by letters. Every petition or
proposal must be made in this form, which is adhered to so invariably, as I
have been assured, that if any of his Generals wished to promote a cadet to the
rank of an ensign, he would not venture to make his proposal in any other
manner, even though he had daily opportunities of conversing with his Majesty.

The meanest of his subjects may apply to him in writing, and are sure of an
answer. His first business every morning is the perusing the papers addressed
to him. A single word written with his pencil on the margin, indicates the
answer to be given, which is afterward made out in form by his secretaries.
This method affords the King time to deliberate on the justice and propriety of
every demand, and prevents the possibility of his being surprised into a
promise, which it might be inconvenient to perform.

He sits down to dinner precisely at noon. Of safe he allows more time to his
repast than formerly. It is generally after three before he leaves the company.
Eight or nine of his officers are commonly invited to dine with him. Since our
coming to Potsdam, Count Nesselrode, and the Abbe Bastiani, two men of letters,
were the only company besides the officers, who dined with the King, while he
lived in his usual way at the Old Palace of Sans-Souci; and these two were then
of his party almost every day. The Count has now left this Court; the Abbe has
an apartment in the Palace. He is an Italian by birth, a man of wit, and an
excellent companion.

At table, the King likes that every person should appear to be on a footing,
and that the conversation should be carried on with perfect freedom. The thing,
by the way, is impossible. That confidential unrestrained flow of the heart,
which takes place in a society of equals, is a pleasure, which a despotic
Prince can never taste. However, his Majesty desires that it may be so, and
they make the best of it they can.

At one of these meetings, when the King was in a gay humor, he said to
Bastiani, -- When you should obtain the tiara, which your exemplary piety must
one day procure you, how will you receive me when I arrive at Rome to pay my
duty to your Holiness? -- I will immediately give orders, replied the Abbe,
with great readiness, " That the black Eagle be admitted -- that he may cover
me with his wings, but -- spare me from his talons.
Qu'on fasse entrer l'aigle noir, -- qu'il me couvre de ses ailes, mais --
qu'il m'epargne de son bec."

Nobody says more lively things in conversation than the King himself. Many of
his bon mots are repeated here. I shall only mention one, which is at once an
instance of his wit, and greatness of mind in rendering justice to the merit of
a man, who has caused him more vexation than perhaps any other person alive.
When the King of Prussia had a personal meeting some years since with the
Emperor, they always dined together, a certain number of their principal
officers being with them. One day General Laudohn was going to place himself at
the bottom of the table, when the King, who was at the head, called to him, "
Come, I entreat you, Mons. Laudohn, set here -- I had much rather have you on
my side than opposed to me.
Venez, je vous en pry, Monsieur Landhon, placez vous ici. J' aim infiniment
mieux vous avoir de mon cote que vis-a-vie."

Though all the cordiality of friendship, and the full charms of unreserved
society, cannot exist, where the fortune of every other individual depends on
the will of one of the company; yet the King endeavors to put every one as
much at his ease as the nature of the will admit, and I have heard of his
bearing some very severe retorts with perfect good humor. He has too much wit
himself, and is too fond of it in others, to repel its attacks with any other
weapons than those which it furnishes. None but the most absurd of dunces could
attempt to ralley, without being able to allow of raillery; and only the
meanest of souls would think of revenging the liberties taken with a companion
by the power of a King.

A very striking instance of the freedom which may be used with him occured a
little before the late reviews, and what makes it more remarkable, it happened,
not during the gaiety of the table, but on the very scene of military
strictness.

Two regiments were in the field. That of General -- was one of them. This
officer is fond of company, and passes more of his time in the society of
strangers, and with the foreign ministers, than most others in the Prussian
service. Something, it is probable, had chagrined the King that morning. While
the regiment advanced in a line, he said to the General, who stood near him, "
Your regiment is not in a line Sir -- and it is not surprising, you devote so
much of your time to playing cards.
Votre regiment n'est pas aligne Monsieur --, et ce n'est pas surprenant, vous
jouez tant aux carts." The General called out instantly with a loud voice to
the regiment, Halt.
Alte! and they immediately stopped. Then, turning to the King, he said, " My
cards' out of the question, Sir. Have the goodness to (...) if the regiment is
not in a line.
ll n'est pas question, Sire, de mes carts -- Mais, ayez la bonte de regarder
si^ce regiment n'est pas aligne," -- The regiment was in a very straightline,
and the King moved away without speaking, and seemingly displeased, not with
the General, but with himself. This manly officer never had reason afterward
to believe that the King had taken his freedom amiss.

It is absolutely impossible for any man to enjoy an office in the King of
Prussia's service, without performing the duty of it. He is himself active and
assiduous, and he makes it a point that all his ministers and servants shall be
so too. But to those who know their business, and perform it exactly, he is an
easy and equitable master.

A gentleman, who has been many years about his person, and is now one of his
aid-de-camps, assured me of this: -- The King understands what ought to be
done; and his servants are never exposed to the ridiculous or contradictory
orders of ignorance, or the mortifications of caprice.

His favorites, of whatever kind, never were able acquire influence over him
in any thing regarding business. Nobody ever knew better how to discriminate
the merit of those who serve him in the important departments of state, from
theirs who contribute to his amusement. A man who performs the duties of his
office with alertness and fidelity, has nothing to apprehend from the King's
being fond of the company and conversation of his enemy. Let the one be regaled
at the King's table every day, while the other never receives a single
invitation; yet the real merit of both is known; and if his adversary should
ever try to turn the King's favor to the purposes of private hatred or malice,
the attempt will be repelled with disdain, and the evil he intended to another
will fall on himself.

Dr. MOORE.
SECT. XXI. OF THE HEREDITARY PRINCE OF PRUSSIA.
THE Hereditary Prince of Prussia lives in a small house in the town of
Potsdam. His appointments do not admit of that degree of magnificence, which
might be expected in the heir of the crown; -- but he displays a spirit of
hospitality far more obliging than magnificence, and doubly meritorious,
considering th^^ very moderate revenue allowed him. We generally slip there two
or three times a week.

The Prince is not often of the King's parties, nor is it imagined that he
enjoys a great share of his uncle's favor. In what degree he possesses the
talants of a general is not known, as he was too young to have any command
during the late war. But he certainly has a very just understanding, which has
been improved by study. He has taken some pains to acquire the English
language, to which he was enduced by an admiration of several English authors,
whose works he had read in French and German. He is now able to read English
prose with tolerable facility, and has been of late studying Shakespeare, having
actually read two or three of his plays.

I took the liberty to observe, that as Shakespeare's genius had traced every
labyrinth, and penetrated into every recess of the human heart, his sentiments
could not sail to please his Royal Highness; but as his language was uncommonly
bold and figurative, and full of allusions to national customs, and the manners
of our island two centuries ago, the English themselves, who had not made a
particular study of his works, did not always comprehend their full energy. I
added, that to transfuse the soul of Shakespeare into a translation, was
impossible; and to taste all his beauties in the original, required such a
knowledge of the English manners and language, as few foreigners, even after a
long residence in the capital, could attain.

The Prince said he was aware of all this; yet he was determined to struggle
hard for some acquaintance with an author so much admired by the English
nation; that though he should never be able to taste all his excellencies, he
was convinced he should understand enough to recompense him for his trouble;
that he had already studied some detached parts, which he thought superior to
any thing he had ever met with in the works of any other poet.

His Royal Highness attends to military business, with as much assiduity as
most officers of the same rank in the army; for in the Prussian service, no
degree of eminence in the article of birth can excuse a remission in the duties
of that profession. He is much esteemed by the army, and considered as an
exceeding good officer. To the frankness of a soldier he joins the integrity of
a German, and is beloved by the public in general, on account of his good
nature, affability, and humane turn of mind.

Dr. MOORE.
SECT. XXII. OF THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.
THE Emperor is of a middle size, well made, and of a fair complexion. He has a
considerable resemblance to his sister, the Queen of France, which, in my
opinion, is saying a great deal in favor of his looks. Till I saw something of
his usual behavior, I did not think it possible for a person in such an
elevated situation, to put every body with whom he conversed upon so easy a
footing.

His manner is affable, obliging, and perfectly free from the reserved and
lofty deportment assumed by some on account of high birth. Whoever has the
honor to be in company with him, so far from being checked by such despicable
pride, has need to be on his guard, not to adopt such a degree of familiarity
as, whatever the condition of the one might permit, would be highly improper in
the other to use.

He is regular in his way of life, moderate in his pleasures, steady in his
plans, and diligent in business. He is fond of his army, and enclines that the
soldiers should have every comfort and necessary consistent with their
situation. He is certainly an oeconomist, and lavishes very little money on
useless pomp, mistresses, or favorites; and it is, I suppose, on no better
foundation than this, that his enemies accuse him of avarice.

I cannot help regarding economy as one of the most useful qualities in a
prince. Liberality, even when pushed to an imprudent length, may, in a private
person, proceed from a kind of greatness of mind, because his fortune is in
every sense his own, and he can injure no body but himself in lavishing it
away. He knows that when it is gone, no body will reimburse him for his
extravagance. He seems, therefore to have taken the resolution to submit to the
inconveniency of future poverty, rather than renounce the present happiness of
acting with a magnificent liberality, and bestowing on others more than he can
afford.

This is not the case with a prince. What he squanders is not his own, but the
public money. He knows that his pomp and splendor will be kept up, and that
his subjects, not himself, are to feel the inconveniences of his prodigality.
When I hear, therefore, that a king has given great sums of money to any
particular person; from the sums given, the person who receives it, the motive
for the gift, and other circumstances, I can judge whether it is well or ill
disposed of; but in either case, it cannot be called generosity.

The virtue of generosity consists in a man's depriving himself of something
for the sake of another. There can be no generosity in giving to John what
James must replace the next moment. What is called generosity in kings, very
often consists in bestowing that money on the idle part of their subjects which
they have squeezed from the industrious. I have heard a parcel of fiddlers and
opera dances praise a prince for his noble and generous behavior to them,
while men near his person, of useful talents and real worth, were distressed
for bread. The Emperor certainly has none of that kind of generosity.

His usual dress (the only one indeed in which I ever saw him, except at the
feast of the Knights of St. Stephen) is a plain uniform of white, faced with
red. When he goes to Laxenberg, Schonbrun, and other places near Vienna, he
generally drives two horses in an open chaise, with a servant behind, and no
other attendant of any kind. He very seldom allows the guard to turn out, as he
passes through the gate. No body ever had a stronger disposition to judicious
enquiry. He is fond of conversing with ingenious people. When he hears of any
person, of whatever rank or country, being distinguished for any particular
talent, he is eager to converse with him, and turns the conversation to the
subject on which the person is thought to excel, drawing from him all the
useful information he can. Of all the means of knowledge, this is perhaps the
most powerful, and the most proper that can be used by one whose more necessary
occupations do not leave him much time for study.

He seems to be of opinion, that the vanity and ignorance of many princes are
frequently owing to the forms in which they are entrenched, and to their being
deprived of the advantages which the rest of mankind enjoy from a free
comparison and exchange of sentiment. He is convinced, that unless a king can
contrive to live in some societies on a footing of equality, and can weigh his
own merit, without throwing his guards and pomp into the scale, it will be
difficult for him to know either the world or himself.

One evening at the Countess Walstein's, the conversation leading that way, the
Emperor enumerated some remarkable and ludicrous instances of the
inconveniences of etiquette, which had occurred at a certain court. One person
hinted at the effectual means his Majesty had used to banish every
inconveniency of that kind from the court of Vienna; to which he replied, it
would be hard indeed, if, because I have the ill fortune to be an Emperor, I
should be deprived of the pleasures of social life, which are so much to my
taste. All the grimace, and parade to which people in my situation are
accustomed from their cradle, have not made me so vain, as to imagine that I am
in any essential quality superior to other men; and if I had any tendancy to
such an opinion, the surest way to get rid of it is the method I take of mixing
in society, where I have daily occasions of finding myself inferior in talents
to those I meet with. Conscious of this, it would afford me no enjoyment to
assume airs of a superiority, which I feel does not exist. I endeavor
therefore to please, and to be pleased; and as much as the inconveniency of my
situation will permit, to enjoy the blessings of society like other men,
convinced that the man who is secluded from those, and raises himself above
friendship, is also raised above happiness, and deprived of the means of
acquiring knowledge.

This kind of language is not uncommon with poor philosophers; but I imagine it
is rarely held by princes, and the inferences to be drawn from it more rarely
put in practice.

A few days after this, there was an exhibition of fireworks on the Prater.
This is a large park, planted with wood, and surrounded by the Danube, over
which there is a wooden bridge. No carriages being allowed to pass, the company
leave their coaches at one end, and walk. There is a narrow path railed off on
one side of the bridge. Many people very injudiciously took this path, to which
there is an easy entrance at one end, but the exit is difficult at the other;
for only one person can go out at a time. The path, therefore, was very soon
choked up; the unfortunate passengers crept on a snail's pace, and in the most
straitened and disagreeable manner imaginable; whilst those who had kept the
wide path in the middle of the bridge, like the fortunate and wealthy in their
journey through life, moved along at their ease, totally regardless of the
wretched circumstances of their fellow passengers.

Some few of the prisoners in the narrow passage, who were of a small size and
uncommon address, crawled under the rail, and got into the broad walk in the
middle, but all who were tall, and of a larger make, were obliged to remain and
submit to their fate. An Englishman, who had been at the Countess Walstein's
when the Emperor expressed himself as above mentioned, was of the last class.
The Emperor, as he passed, seeing that those of a small size extricated
themselves, while the Englishman remained fixed in a very awkward situation,
called out, " Ah Sir! I have told you how inconvenient it is to be too great --
now you will be entirely of my opinion, but as it is not in my power to afford
you any relief, I recommend you to St. George.
Ah, Monsieur! Je vous ai bien annonce combien il est incommode d^tre trop
grand. A present vous devez etre bien de mon avis. Mais comme je ne puis rien
fair pour vous soulager, je vous recommende a Saint George."

There are people who having heard of the Emperor's uncommon affibility, and of
his total contempt of pomp and parade, of which the bulk of mankind are so much
enamoured, have asserted that the whole is affectation. But if the whole tenor
of any person's words is to be considered as affectation, I do not know by what
means we are to get at the bottom of his real character. Yet, people who have a
violent taste for any particular thing, are extremely ready to believe, that
those who have not the same taste are affected.

Dr. MOORE.
SECT. XXIII. OF THE IDOLATRY OF THE ROMAN CATHOLICS.
THE preference which is given by individuals in Roman Catholic countries, to
particular saints, proceeds sometimes from a supposed connection between the
characters of the saints and the votaries; men expect the greatest favor and
indulgence from those who most resemble themselves, and naturally admire others
for the qualities which they value most in their own character.

A French officer of dragoons, being at Rome, went to view the famous statue of
Moses, by Michael Angelo. The artist has conveyed into this masterpiece, in
the opinion of some, all the dignity which a human form and human features are
capable of receiving. He has endeavored to give this statue a countenance
worthy of the great legislator of the Jews, the favorite of heaven, who had
conversed face to face with the Deity. The officer happened to be acquainted
with the history of Moses, but he laid no great stress on any of these
circumstances. He admired him much more on account of one adventure, in which
he imagined Moses had acquitted himself like a man of spirit, and as he himself
would have done: -- " How terrible! how sublime he appears. There is a fellow
who has cudgelled and killed his man in his (...).
Volia qui est terrible! volia qui est sublime!" cried he at sight of the
statute; and after a little pause he added: -- 'On voit la un drole qui a done
des coups de baton en son tems, et qui a tue son homme."

The crucifixes, and statues, and pictures of saints, with which popish
churches are filled, were no doubt intended to awaken devotion when it became
drowsy, and to excite in the mind gratitude and veneration for the holy persons
they present. But it cannot be denied, that the gross imaginations of the
generality of mankind, are exceedingly prone to forget the originals, and
transfer their adoration to the senseless figures which they behold, and before
which they kneel. So that whatever was the original design, and whatever
effects those statues and pictures have on the minds of calm, sensible Roman
Catholics, it is certain, that they often are the objects of as complete
idolatry as ever was practiced in Athens or Rome, before the statues of Jupiter
or Apollo.

On what other principle do such multitudes flock from all the Roman Catholic
countries in Europe, to the shrine of our Lady at Loretto? Any statue of the
Virgin would serve as effectually as that to recall her to the memory; and
people may adore her as devoutly in their own parish churches, as in the chapel
at Loretto. The pilgrims therefore must be persuaded, that there is some divine
influence or intelligence in the statue which is kept there; that it has a
consciousness of all the trouble they have taken, and the inconveniences to
which they have been exposed, by long journies, for the sole purpose of
kneeling before it in preference to all other images.

It was probably on account of this tendency of the human mind, that the Jews
were forbid to make unto themselves any graven image. This indeed seems to have
been the only method of securing that superstitious people from idolatry; and
notwithstanding the peremptory tenor of the commandment, neither the zeal nor
remonstrances of their judges and prophets could always prevent their making
idols, nor hinder their worshipping them wherever they found them ready-made.

Statues and pictures of saints, which have been long in particular families,
are generally kept with great care and attention. The proprietors often have
the same kind of attachment to them, that the ancient heathens had to their Dii
Penates. They are considered as tutelary and domestic divinities, from whom the
family expect protection. When a series of unfortunate events happens in a
family, it sometimes creates a suspicion that the family statues have lost
their influence. This also is a very ancient sentiment. Suetonius informs us,
that the fleet of Augustus having been dispersed by a storm, and many of the
ships lost, the Emperor gave orders that the statue of Neptune should not be
carried in procession with those of the other Gods, from an opinion that the
God of the Sea was unwilling or unable to protect his navy, and in either case
he deemed him not worthy of any public mark of distinction.

The genuine tenets of the Roman Catholic church certainly do not authorize any
of the superstitions above mentioned, which are generally confined to the
credulous and illiterate in the lower ranks of life. Yet instances are
sometimes to be met with in a higher sphere. A Frenchman in a creditable way of
life, had a small figure of our Savior on the cross, of very curious
workmanship; he offered it for sale to an English gentleman of my acquaintance;
after expatiating on the excellency of the workmanship, he told him he had long
kept this crucifix with the most pious care; that he had always addressed it in
his private devotion, and that in return he had expected some degree of
protection and favor; instead of which he had of late been remarkably
unfortunate; that all the tickets he had in the lottery had proved blanks; and
having had a great share in the cargo of a ship coming from the West Indies, he
had recommended it in the most fervent manner in his prayers to the crucifix,
and that he might give no offense, by any appearance of want of faith, he had
not insured the goods; notwithstanding all which, the vessel had been
shipwrecked, and the cargo totally lost, though the sailors, in whose
preservation he had no concern, had been all saved. "Enfin, Monsieur," cried
he, with an accent of indignation mingled with regret, and raising his
shoulders above his ears, " In short, Sir, I am in want, and must see my God.
Enfin, Monsieur, il m'a manque, et je vends mon Christ."

Happy for Christians of every denomination, could they abide by the plain,
rational, benevolent precepts of the christian religion, rejecting all the
conceits of superstition, which never fail to deform its original beauty, and
to corrupt its intrinsic purity!

Dr. MOORE.
SECT. XXIV. OF COPENHAGEN. A. D. 1774.
I FIND hardly any inconveniency resulting from my ignorance of the Danish
language. Every person of fashion speaks French, and many of them English.

The gentlemen of the army and navy here in particular, are almost universally
used to these languages. They are, at least several of them with whom I have
fallen into company, extremely disposed to treat a stranger with every mark of
urbanity and politeness. One of them has already promised to accompany me over
the island of Zealand, and to be my conducter on a tour I propose making to see
the royal palaces.

Though the month of May will begin in a few days, the weather is still very
cold here. We have had hail almost every day since my arrival; nor are there as
yet any marks of that sweet season, which the Italians so justly denominate,
the Gioventa del anno, but which is pretty much unknown to Danish poets.
Indeed, I apprehend the year is more properly divided here into the summer and
winter, than as with us into four seasons. A short summer succeeds to the long
series of cold and darkness, which environs them from October till April; and
during this period, they often experience very great heats for a few days, or
sometimes weeks. Certainly man is much affected by physical causes, and one is
not surprised to find the elegant arts chiefly confined to luxurious and
southern climates, and faintly raising their heads amid these snowy and
inhospitable regions, where the inhabitants seem, in some degree, to partake of
the asperities of their soil, and where royal munificence, however unbounded,
can only raise a few sickly and straggling plants.

They seem to have a great turn for politics here, and as it may not be quite
so safe to inspect too deeply into the conduct of their own sovereign and
statesmen, they make themselves some amends by interesting themselves in those
of the English nation. I am asked a thousand questions here, in every company,
about the inhabitants of Boston, and relative to the East India affairs. They
are unanimous in opinion, that the colonies will be soon absolutely free; and
they give me a look of incredibility, and a significant shake of the head, when
I assure them, that Boston must submit, and that government have uniformly
embraced the most gentle, mild, and parental measures; I see they do not
believe me, and I am obliged to refer them to futurity for the test of my
assertions.

So few persons visit this metropolis or kingdom from motives of curiosity,
that they are quite surprised when I assure them I have no sort of business
here, and (...) only employed in the search of knowledge. Indeed, apprehend, a
month or five weeks is fully adequate to the completion of these purposes; and
I shall not delay my departure an hour after that time.

There is no face of industry or business here; and Copenhagen, though one of
the finest ports in the world, can boast of little commerce. The public places
are filled with officers either in the land or sea service, and they appear to
constitute three-fourths of the audience at the comedy and opera. The number of
forces are, indeed, much too large for this little kingdom, which has not been
engaged in war these fifty years. They can boast, it is true, a vast extent of
dominion; but of what importance are the barren and almost uninhabited
mountains of Norway and Lapland, stretching to the pole? or the plains of
Iceland, where the inhabitants are yet, and will probably ever remain, in the
most profound barbarism? Their German dominions in Holstein are by far the most
rich, and furnish a large part of the royal revenue. There needs, indeed, no
stronger proof of the poverty of the kingdom, than the scarcity of specie. I
have seen no gold, and hardly any silver. They pay every thing in paper; and if
you lose a single dollar at the card-table, or the billiard table, it is given
in a bill. I received two hundred rix dollars yesterday morning, and not a
single one in money.

The police of Copenhagen is exceedingly good, and one may walk through the
whole city at midnight with the most perfect safety. No robberies, no
assassinations are beard of. They wear no cloaks nor conceal any stillettoes
under their habits, as in the southern kingdoms of Europe. Indeed, it is
usually almost as quiet here at eleven o'clock at night as in a country
village, and scarce a coach rattles through the streets.

I do not apprehend this capital can be above the fourth part of the size of
London, possibly not so much. It is fortified toward the land by a fosse,
always full of water. The streets are commonly of a good breadth, and the
houses very neat and handsome. There is one very beautiful place here, which
approaches nearer to a circus than a square; each side or division of which is
only one palace, and in the center is an equestrian statue in bronze of the
late King Fredeick V. I must own I was much more pleased with this, than with
the Place de Victories at Paris, and think it has a much better effect.

WRAXALL.
SECT. XXV. OF THE COURT AT COPENHAGEN.
I HAVE not had the honor of being presented to the sovereign here, as is
customary with strangers from the other kingdoms of Europe. It is sufficient
that I am an Englishman not to wish it; and, indeed, with so jealous an eye are
we regarded, at present, in this capital, that I can assure you, because I have
it from the most respectable and incontestable authority, that so little an
individual as myself, so humble and unknown a traveller as I am, is not only
publicly talked of, but even suspected as a spy, because I came from England,
and have no avowed motive, except curiosity and knowledge. I have never,
therefore, been at the levee, which is every Friday; but I go to the drawing
room, and mingle unnoticed among the crowd. I was there last night, when his
majesty, the queen dowager, and Prince Frederick the king's brother, were
present. To give you a picture of the court as it now exists, I must carry you
back to the time of the late celebrated and unhappy favorite, Count Struensee.
I have made it my endeavor, since my arrival here, to gain the most authentic
and unprejudiced intelligence respecting him, and the late extraordinary
revolution which expelled a queen from her throne and kingdom, and brought the
ministers to the scaffold.

I shall only mention some few anecdotes, which elucidate his character, and
with which many may be unacquainted; though, as I never perused the printed
account of his life, and trial, which appeared in England, I must be excused if
I repeat what is contained there.

Struensee had not any noble blood in his veins, nor consequently any
hereditary and prescriptive title to the immediate guidance of affairs of
state. Fortune, and a train of peculiar circumstances, coinciding with his own
talents and address, seem to have drawn him from his native mediocrity of
condition, and placed him in an elevated rank. He originally practiced physic
at Altena on the Elbe, and afterward attended the present king of Denmark on
his travels into England, in quality of physician. On his return, he advanced
by rapid strides in the royal favor, and seems to have eminently possessed the
powers of pleasing, since he became equally the favorite of both the king and
queen. He was invested with the order of St. Matilda, instituted in honor of
her majesty, created a count, and possessed unlimited ministerial power. His
conduct, in this sudden and uncommon eminence, marks a bold and daring mind;
perhaps I might add, an expanded and patriotic heart. Unawed by the precarious
tenure of courtly greatness, and more peculiarly of his own, he began a general
reform. The state felt him through all her members. The finances, chancery,
army, navy, nobles, peasants -- all were sensible of his influence. He not only
dictated, but penned his replies to every important question or dispatch; and a
petition, or a scheme of public import and utility, rarely waited two hours for
an answer. At present, I am told, you may be two months without receiving any.
The civil judicature of this capital was then vested in thirty magistrates.
Struensee sent a message to this tribunal, demanding to know the annual salary
or pension annexed to each member. Rather alarmed at this enquiry, they sent an
answer, in which they diminished their emoluments two thirds, and estimated
them at 1500, instead of 4000 rix-dollars. The count then informed them, that
his majesty had no farther occasion for their services; but in his royal
munificence and liberality, was graciously pleased to continue to them the
third part of the avowed incomes, as a proof of his satisfaction with their
conduct. He at the same time constituted another court, composed only of six
persons of approved integrity, to whom the same power was delegated. He
proceeded to purge the chancery, and other bodies of the law. Then entering on
the military department, he, at one stroke, broke all the horse-guards, and
afterward the regiment of Norwegian foot-guards, the finest corpse of the
service, and who were not disbanded without a short, but very dangerous
sedition. Still proceeding in this salutary, but most critical and perilous
achievement, he ultimately began to attempt a diminution of the power of the
nobles, and to set the farmers and peasants at perfect liberty. We must not,
therefore, wonder that he fell a victim to such measures, and that all parties
joined in his destruction. These were his real crimes, and not that he was too
acceptable to the queen, which only formed a pretext. It was the minister, and
not the man, who had became obnoxious. I do not pretend, in the latter
capacity, either to excuse or condemn him; but as a politician, I rank him with
the Clarendons and the Mores, whom tyranny, or public baseness, and want of
virtue, have brought, in almost every age, to an untimely and ignominious exit;
but to whose memory impartial posterity have done ample justice. Yet I must
avow, that though I cannot think Struensee made a bad use, he certainly made a
violent and imprudent one, of his extensive power. He seems, if one may judge
from his actions, to have been in some measure intoxicated with royal favor
and such accumulated honors, and not to have adverted sufficiently to the
examples which history furnishes of Wolsey's in former days, and of Choseuls in
modern times who most strikingly evince the slippery foundation of political
grandeur. When he was even pressed only a short time before his seizure, to
withdraw from court, and pass the Belts, with the most ample security for his
annual remitment of forty, fifty, a hundred thousand dollars, an unhappy
fascination detained him, in defiance of every warning, and reserved him for
the prison and the block. The Queen Dowager, and Prince Frederic, were only the
feeble instruments to produce this catastrophe, as being by their rank
immediately about the person of the sovereign; though common report has talked
loudly of the former's intrigue, and attributed it to her imaginary abilities.
The only mark of capacity or address they exhibited, was in preserving a
secrecy, which deluded Struensee and the Queen Matilda, till the time of their
being arrested. I have been assured, that on the last levee day preceding this
event, the Count was habited with uncommon magnificence, and never received
greater homage of court servility from the crowd, than when on the verge of
ruin. On the night fixed for his seizure, there was a bal pare in the palace;
the Queen, after dancing as usual, one country dance with the King, gave her
hand to Struensee during the rest of the evening. She retired about two in the
morning, and was followed by him and Count Brandt. The moment was now come. The
Queen Dowager, and her son Prince Frederic, hastened to the King's private
chamber, where he was already in bed. They kneeded down beside it, and implored
him with tears and expostulations to save himself and Denmark from impending
destruction, by arresting those whom they called the authors of it. It Is said,
the King was no easily induced to sign the order, but did it with reluctance
and hesitation. At length, their entreaties prevailed, and he fixed his sign
manuel to the paper. Colonel Koller Banner instantly repaired to Struensee's
apartment, which, as well as Brandt's, was in the palace they were both seized
nearly at the same instant, and, a^ all defense was vain, hurried away
immediately to the citadel. When Count Struensee stepped out of the coach, he
said with a smile to the commandant, "(...) believe you are not a little
surprised at seeing m^ brought here a prisoner." "No, and please your
Excellency," replied the old officer bluntly; "I am no^ at all surprised, but
on the contrary, have long expected you." It was five o'clock in the morning
when the Count Rantzau came to the door of her Majesty's antichamber, and
knocked for admitance. One of the women about the Queen's person was ordered to
wake her, and give her information that she was arrested. They then put her
into one of the King's coaches, drove her down to Elsinoor, and shut her up in
the castle of Cronsberg.

Mean while, as they dreaded an insurrection in Copenhagen every military
precaution was taken to prevent it. The most infamous and silly reports were
circulated among the populace, to render the state prisoners odious: that they
had put poison in the king's coffee to destroy him; that they intended to
declare him incapable of governing; to send the Dowager Queen Juliana out of
the kingdom, as well as her son Prince Frederic, and to proclaim Matilda
regent. To confirm these extraordinary and contradictory reports, the King
himself and he brother appeared in a state-coach, and paraded through the
streets of the city, to show himself unhurt, and as if escaped from the most
horrid conspiracy.

During these transactions, Struensee and Brandt were detained in the most
rigourous imprisonment. They loaded the former with very heavy chains about his
arms and legs, and as he was at the same time fixed to the wall by an iron bar.
I have seen the room, which is not above ten or twelve feet square, with a
little bed in it, and a miserable iron stove. Yet here, in this abode of
misery, did he, though chained, complete with a pencil an account of his life
and conduct as a minister, which is penned as I have been assured, with
uncommon genius. A tribunal was appointed for the trial of the Queen and the
two Counts, and a council assigned for each, to preserve an appearance of
justice and equity. All the world know the result, and the winding up of the
whole on the 28th of April, 1772. I shall, however, mention some particulars
relative to Count Brandt, as they are very remarkable and equally true; nor do
I apprehend that many in England have ever heard them.

This unfortunate man rose chiefly under Struensee's auspices, though he was
originally of an honorable descent. During a residence which the court made at
one of the royal palaces, that of Hercsholm, it happened that his Majesty
quarrelled with Brandt, and, which was singular enough, challenged him. This
the Count-declined. When they met soon after, the King repeated his defiance;
called him coward; and Brandt still behaving with temper, as became a subject,
he thrust his hand into his mouth, seized his tongue, and had very nearly
choked him. In this situation can it be wondered at, that he should bite the
King's finger, or strike him, or both? Self-preservation must necessarily
supersede every other feeling at such a moment, and plead his pardon. By
Struensee's mediation the quarrel was immediately made up, and the King
promised never more to remember or resent the circumstance of his striking him.
Yet was this blow, given to preserve himself from imminent destruction, and
from the fury of an enraged man, made the pretense for his condemnation. They
said, he had listed his hand against the King's sacred person, which was death
by the laws of Denmark. His lawyer, I am told, made an excellent defense for
him, and very forcibly remarked the essential difference between assaulting the
sovereign, and defending himself from a private attack. "One of our former
monarchs, said he (Christian V.) was used frequently to unbend himself among
his nobles. On these occasions it was his custom to say, "The King is not at
home." All the courtiers then behaved with the utmost freedom and familiarity,
unrestrained by the royal presence. When he chose to resume his kingly dignity,
he said, "The King is again at home." But what, added he, must we do now, when
the King is never at home?" This seems more like the speech of an Englishman
than a Dane, and breathes a manly and unfettered spirit.

The skulls and bones of these unhappy men are yet exposed on wheels about a
mile and a half out of town. I have viewed them with mingled commiseration and
horror. They hold up an awful and affecting lesson for future statesmen.

I have been assured, that Struensee resigned himself to his own sentence
without murmuring, or attempting to deprecate the blow; but that he expressed
the utmost pity and abhorrence at the flagrant injustice committed in
sentencing Count Brandt to the same, death. They have portraits of Struensee in
all the shops, with this motto round him; "Mala multa Str^ens-se ipsum
perdidit." You see it is a miserable sort of pun upon his name. Yet, in
defiance of all the calumnies of a triumphant party, the terrors of a despotic
government, and the natural reserve among the people, there are, even here, who
dare to speak, though ambiguously, their genuine sentiments. "Sir," said a man
of sense and honor to me, a few days since, "between ourselves, all is not as
it should be; we have at present neither king nor minister. An imbecility
mingled with disorder, characterizes our government. The effects are too
visible. The blue and white ribbons are prostituted and contemptible. The
finances are in a worse state than when Struensee found them. The army devour
us. In Norway, affairs are yet worse. The king is unpopular there, and so
little is his authority respected, that the Norwegians have refused and still
refuse, to pay the capitation tax; nor can it be levied among them." I have not
amplified or exaggerated in this picture, which I really believe it too just in
most of the particulars. The King has certainly suffered much in his
intellectual capacity, and they make very little scruple in general to own it.
He can play indeed at cards; he can dance, or go to an opera; but he is
doubtless in a state of debility, which disqualifies him for the conducting or
superintending affairs of national import and public consequence. These are
left to the ministers, who tread very cautiously, and will not presently
prosecute Struensee's patriotic measures. His fall is too recent, nor have his
bones yet returned to their parent earth. There is a vacuity in his aspect,
which is strongly marked; and he is much paler and thinner than when he was on
his tour in England. The Queen Dowager and Prince Frederic live in the palace
with him, and accompany him, like his shadow, wherever he moves. The Prince has
received no other mark of bounty from nature, or fortune, than royal birth. He
is very much deformed; and this personal imperfection has gained him the
appellation of Richard III. among those who do not love the court, though it
doubtless originated among the English.

WRAXALL.
SECT. XXVI. OF STOCKHOLM. A. D. 1774.
AS I approached to this capital, the country appeared more rocky, barren, and
desert; and at the distance of a single mile from it, one is tempted to suppose
one's-self in the most unfrequented and desolate wild. Nothing marks the
vicinity of a great metropolis. Agriculture cannot exert her powers, nor labor
produce, harvests where nature has denied the means. The eye discerns nothing
on every side except firs and rugged rocks; and it would seem as if famine had
here fixed her eternal residence.

I entered Stockholm over a floating bridge of a very considerable length
across the river. I was, indeed, s^opt at the gates; but policy, and not
religion, was the cause.

I am lodged at present close to the palace; and, as my landlord informs me, in
the very apartment where his Grace the Archbishop of Upsal resided, during six
months previous to the coronation of his present Majesty, which office he
performed. You will perhaps suppose from this, that they are very elegant; that
the hangings are of tapestry, and the chairs covered with velvet. Nothing less
so, I assure you! A monk of La Trappe might almost occupy them without any
infringement of his vow of mortification; and though I pay a ducat and a half,
or fourteen shilling a week, I was scarce ever so indifferently lodged in any
city of Europe. The quality which induced the Archbishop to take them, was, no
doubt, their neig^bourhood to the palace. It would be difficult to discover any
other to recommend them.

I cannot say that I have sound many charms as yet in this city. The court are
all in the country, at their respective palaces, and there is only one public
diversion during the week, which is a Swedish opera. What kind of an
entertainment this is, and how far the language is capable of musical beauty, I
am not yet a judge, as there was no representation last Thursday, which is the
night when they usually perform. For want, therefore, of other avocation, I
have wandered over every part of the metropolis, and taken different views of
it from the numerous eminences which surround it. Perhaps I may be accused of
presumption when I assert, that in almost every point of view, the situation of
Stockholm is injudicious and improper for the capital of the kingdom. Policy,
plenty, and commerce, seem all to dictate another part of Sweden as much more
elegible. I shall endeavor to justify my opinion by a few remarks.

The inhabitants themselves assure me, that the place owed its original, only
about three centuries ago, to an accidental contingency. The viceroy, who at
that time governed the country under Christian II. of Denmark, determined to
found a city, and instead of fixing on a proper spot for the execution of his
plan, he very wisely set a large piece of wood a-float, down the M^ler Lake,
and resolved that at whatever place it should stop, there to build his
projected town. A small island arrested the stick in its progress, and the name
of Stockholm is said to have been given it from this circumstance

I was shown the exact point of land where tradition says it happened, and
where the first buildings of the city were erected. However this be, it was
hardly possible to have found a more barren desert, or a less inviting
situation in almost all respects. Even the river has a number of
inconveniences, as it winds in a surprising manner, and having no tides, ships
must have a fair wind to reach the town; and should it be contrary, it is
absolutely impossible. If I pointed out that part of Sweden, which appears to
me designed by nature and wisdom for the foundation of a capital, I should
mention Carlscrone. Its centrical situation between Copenhagen and Petersburg;
its vicinity to Pomerania and Germany; the fertile province of Scania,
accounted the finest in Sweden, behind it; a port capable of containing the
whole fleet and in which they are at this time always stationed; its climate,
more mild and southern than that of Stockholm, by some degrees; all these
circumstances seem to leave an unprejudiced person little room to dispute its
more advantageous situation.

There is somewhat uncommonly savage and inhospitable in the whole circumjacent
country here. Even in this lovely season, when all animate and inanimate nature
awakes from the long slumber of a polar winter, every thing is joyless and
unfertile, and the rays of the sun are reflected from the expanse of stone
which invests the city round on every side; and from whose bosom no verdure
springs to regale the eye. I repeat instinctively, as I gaze around, the
celebrated lines in Churchill's prophecy of Famine, which, however exaggerated
they may be for the country he intended to paint, are almost strictly and
literally true here; nor am I surprised to find a Christian flying from these
uncivilized and unlettered regions, to the abodes of art and elegance.

This kingdom has however, been move productive of immortal and sublime
spirits, than all the others of the north. I feel myself affected with a
reverential awe, as I walk through the church where repose the great names of
Gustavus Adolphus, of Torstenson, of Baner, and Charles XII. I tread with
decent humility over the vaults where their bodies are interred, and find a
melancholy satisfaction in surveying the marble raised to their deathless same.

I have conversed several times since my arrival here with Swedes on the
subject of the victories and death of the last of these heroes. They are almost
unanimous in the apprehension, or rather avowal, that he was put to death by
those about him, and did not fall by a shot from the walls of Fredericshall, as
is commonly supposed. As every circumstance relative to the fall of so
extraordinary a man interests, and as there seems great reason to imagine he
did not die by the chance of war, I hope shall not give offense, If I am
somewhat minute on this article.

Monsieur Voltaire has taken great pains to prove the contrary, and to
vindicate the engineer who accompanied him, at the time, from so foul a
suspicion. I, however, think his reasons very apocryphal, and even some of the
facts he relates, as rather tending to give rise to an opposite conclusion.
"The King," says he, "walked out to view the state of the advances made by his
forces; it was night. He kneeled down the better to inspect them, and leaned
his head on his hands. In this attitude, amid the darkness, he received a ball
into his temple, and fell on the parapet, fetching a deep sigh. He was dead in
an instant; but in that instant he had yet force and courage to put his hand to
his sword, and lay in that posture. Merget, a French engineer, immediately
said, with a coolness which distinguished his character. -- The play is over,
let us begone!" I quote by memory, and therefore ask Voltaire's pardon if I do
not exactly and literally relate it, as he has given it to the world; but
nothing material is added or omitted.

The Swedes allow most of these circumstances to be true, though they infer
very differently. Is it, say they, probable, that a ball from the fort, fired
at random, and in the night, should so exactly enter the King's brain? Or, is
it not much more natural to believe, that a pistol from some nearer hand gave
so well-aimed and decisive a blow? His attitude indicated an intention of
defense from some near attack; nor would he have laid his hand on his sword to
resist a cannon shot.

Merget's remark was such, as one can with difficulty suppose any one to make
on so disastrous and unexpected an event, as the King's death, and seems rather
that of a pre-sentiment of the winding up of this bloody catastrophe. Add to
this, that the Swedes were tired of a prince, under whom they had lost their
richest provinces, their bravest troops, their national riches; and who yet,
untamed by adversity, pursued an unsuccessful and pernicious war, nor would
ever have listened to the voice of peace, or consulted the internal tranquillity
of his country. Baron Gortz's oppressions, superadded to these, were
intolerable; and no resource remained unless to dispatch the King. It was a
very favorable opportunity, and was improved to the utmost. The Prince of
Hesse, his brother-in-law, made little enquiry into the affair, and all passed
without noise or tumult.

I have been the more inclined to give credit to this relation of Charles's
death, from my own remarks on his dress. In the arsenal they preserve with
great care, the clothes he was habited in at the time he fell. These I have
examined very minutely. The coat is a plain blue cloth regimental one, such as
every common soldier wore. Round the waist he had a broad buff-leather-belt, in
which hung his sword. The hat is torn only about an inch square in that part of
it which lies over the temple, and certainly would have been much more injured
by a large shot. His gloves are made of very fine leather, and as the lest one
is perfectly clean and unsoiled, could only have been newly put on. The right
hand glove is covered in the inside with blood; and the belt, at that part
where the handle or hilt of his sword lay, is likewise bloody; so that it seems
clear he had previously put his hand to his head on receiving the blow, before
he attempted to draw his sword and make resistance. However, as he expired in
the instant, no absolute inference can be made; and after having exhausted
conjecture, we must draw a veil over this ambiguous and dark transaction, and
rest contented with that ignorance and uncertainty which so often waits on the
death of sovereigns. Dr. Johnson has drawn the most finished and masterly
portrait of this extraordinary man, which ever fell from the pen of genius. The
four concluding lines describes his death.

" His fall was distin'd to a barren strand,
" A petty ^or^ess, and a dubious hand;
" He left the name at which the world grew pale,
" To point a moral, or adorn a tale."
WRAXALL.
SECT. XXVII. OF PETERSBURG, A. D. 1774.
THIS great capital, though only a creation of the present century, has already
grown to a vast size, and contains infinitely higher matter of entertainment
and instruction, than either of those from whence I am lately come. I am struck
with a pleasing astonishment, while I wander among havens, streets, and public
buildings, which have risen as by enchantment, within the memory of men still
alive, and have converted the marshy islands of the Neva into one of the most
magnificent cities of the earth. The imagination, aided by so many visible
objects, rises to the wondrous founder, and beholds in idea the tutelary genius
of Peter, yet hovering over the child of his own production, and viewing with a
parent's fondness, its rising palaces and temples. The names, on which ancient
story dwells with so much fondness, sink on a comparison with this immortal
man, and the fabulous legislators of Greece and Egypt never presumed to attempt
the mighty transformation which the Czar completed. The followers of Cadmus, of
Theseus, and of Romulus, were animated with the same ardour as their leader;
but the Muscovites, wrapped in the most profound barbarism, secluded by their
illiberal prejudices from an intercourse with European nations, and equally the
slaves of superstition and long prescription, were forcibly torn from this
night of ignorance, and compelled to accept of knowledge, of refinement, and of
civilization. I must own, I never consider this so recent and so wondrous an
event without being hurried away by an enthusiasm I cannot avoid feeling, and
from which I now return, to give an imperfect description of the festivities to
which I have been a witness during my stay here, and from which I am only just
returned.

I had the pleasure to accompany Sir Robert Gunning last Saturday to the palace
of Peterhoff, where the empress at present resides. It was the anniversary of
her accession, when there is generally a very brilliant court. As we arrived
early, I had an opportunity of viewing the gardens before her majesty's
appearance. They are very extensive, lying along the shore of the gulf of
Finland, and washed by its waters. In she midst of them stands the palace
itself, situate on an eminence, and commanding a fine view. The apartments are
all very splendid, but my attention was chiefly engrossed by the drawing room,
where hung five matchless portraits of the sovereigns of Russia. They are all
length pieces, but by what master I cannot say. Peter himself is the first, and
opposite to him appears the Livonian villager, whom he raised from a cottage to
the most unbounded sovereignty. I stood for some moments under this painting in
silent admiration of the woman, who had passed from so humble a station to an
imperial diadem, of which her genius, her fidelity, and her virtue made her
worthy. She is drawn by the painter as in middle life; her eyes and hair black,
her countenance open, smiling and ingratiating, and her person not exceeding
the middle size. The Empress Anne and Elizabeth fill their respective places in
this apartment, but did not long detain me from a portrait of the reigning
sovereign, which is of a singular kind. She is habited in the Russian uniform,
booted, and sits astride on a white horse. In her hat is the oaken bough, which
she wore at the memorable revolution, which placed her on the throne, and which
was likewise taken by all her adherents. Her long hair floats in disorder down
her back; and the flushing in her face, the natural effect of the fatigue and
heat she had undergone, is finely designed. It is a faithful and exact
resemblance of her dress and person, as she appeared twelve years ago, when she
came to Peterhoff, and seized the throne of Russia.

While my eyes were rivetted to this picture, and my thoughts employed on the
melancholy catastrophe of the unhappy emperor which so soon followed, the
empress's entrance was announced. She was pr^ceeded by a long train of lords
and gentlemen. I felt a pleasure corrected with awe as I gazed on this (...)
woman, whose vigor and policy, without any right of blood, has seated and
maintains her in the throne of the Czars.

Though she is now become rather corpulent, there is a dignity tempered with
graciousness in her deportment and manner, which strikingly impresses. She was
habited in a deep blue silk with gold stripes, and her hair ornamented with
diamonds. After the foreign ministers had paid her the customary compliments on
this day, I had the honor to be presented and to kiss her hand. The grand duke
and duchess of Russia followed the empress, who continued scarce a minute in
the circle, but sat down at the card table.

There is not only a magnificence and regal pomp in this court, which far
exceeds any I have beheld elsewhere, but every thing is on a vast and colossal
scale, resembling that of the empire itself. The public buildings, churches,
monasteries, and private palaces of the nobility, are of an immense size; and
seem as if designed for creatures of a superior height and dimensions to man;
"to a puny infect shivering at the breeze!"

The statue and pedestal which will soon be set up of Peter the Great, are of
the same enormous and gigantic proportions, and may almost rank with the
^^hynxes and pyramids of Egyptian workmanship. (...) Moscow, I am told, this
style is yet more common, and more universal. The palace which the present
empress has begun, is designed to be two or three English miles in
circumference; and in the mean time they have erected a tempory one of brick
for her reception. The city itself is an immense aggregate of villages, and the
Muscovite lords commonly go fifty or sixty versts which are at least forty of
our miles, to make visits to each other. There is a sort of savage and
barbarous grandeur in this taste, which never appears in the edifices and
productions of Athenian sculpture or architecture. I know it may be said, that
the difference of extent and greatness between the little republic of Attica,
and the wide empire of Russia, may give rise to a different standard of beauty
and elegance; but this is not sufficient to alter the original and invariable
criterion of nature, which is the same in every country.

Petersburg is as yet only an immense outline, which will require future
empresses, and almost future ages to complete. It stands at present on a
prodigious extent of ground; but as the houses in many parts are not
contiguous, and great spaces are left unbuilt, it is hard to ascertain its real
size and magnitude. Devotion has not been wanting to add her magnificence, and
to erect places of worship in almost every part. Curiosity and novelty have
carried me to all of them. The external architecture differs very little in
any. The Greeks seem as fond of domes, as the Mahometans are of Minarets in
their churches. They usually encircle one large with four smaller cupolas, and
cover them with copper gilt, which has a fine effect to the eye, when the sun
shines upon it. The ornaments within are costly and barbarous. A Mexican temple
can hardly be more so. They surround a daubing of the Virgin and Jesus, with
gold or silver head-dresses, and sometimes complete habits, and only leave
exposed the fingers, which the multitude very devoutly kiss. The papas or
priests are dressed in vestments which very much resemble the Romish, and are
generally composed of tissue and expensive silks. The manner in which they
perform the service rather reminds one of an incantation, than of a prayer
offered to the Deity; and they repeat much of it so incredibly fast, that one
is tempted to suppose it impossible the auditory can understand one articulate
word the priest utters, let their attention be ever so strong.

In the church of the citadel repose the body of Peter I. and the successive
sovereigns since his death, who are ranged in coffers, side by side, but have
not any of them marble monuments erected to their memories; nor is there any
other motive to induce a traveller to enter this church, except the
consciousness that he beholds the wood which contains the ashes of Peter, and
that mingled sentiments of reverence and pleasure which the mind may experience
from the contemplation of it. Only one monarch is excluded, as if unworthy to
be entombed with his progenitors and predecessors in the throne of Russia. This
is the late unhappy Peter III. who, after his death, was exposed during some
days in the monastery of St. Alexander Newfsko;, a few miles out of town, to
convince the people that he had not suffered any violence, but ended his life
naturally. He was afterward privately interred there. -- As I have mentioned
his name, I am led to make a few remarks on his life and character. Though
under the present reign it may be imagined, that few persons either dare or
choose to speak their sentiments freely with respect to him, yet I am induced to
believe from universal testimony, that he was very unworthy and unfit to reign,
and that whatever private condemnation the empress, as his wife, may undergo,
it was a most salutary and requisite policy for Russia to depose him. He
brought to Petersburg all the illiberal and pernicious prejudices of a German;
he avowed his open contempt for their religion, their manners, their laws; he
was on the point of commencing a war with Denmark for the recovery of his
Holstein dominions, and would have begun his march across the immense track of
country which separates these kingdoms in a few days; he had personally
ill-treated and injured his wife, and alienated by his imprudence and folly
every heart. The vigor and celerity with which the Empress acted in effecting
the revolution, could only be exceeded by the pusillanimity and meanness with
which Peter resigned the crown. He was himself, on the day which preceeded this
event, at the palace of Oranienbaum, and totally unprepared for such a change,
of which he entertained no suspicion. She departed from Peterhoff, where she
then was, by a postern door in the gardens, very early in the morning, Prince
Orloff conducting her in his coach, and reached Petersburg before her absence
was known. She instantly took possession of the palace without difficulty or
opposition, and putting herself in an uniform at the head of the guards,
marched toward Peterhoff. As soon as the Emperor received this intelligence,
he embarked immediately from Oranienbaum, which is situate on the shore of the
gulf of Finland, in one of the imperial yachts, in hopes to reach constadt,
which is nearly opposite, and in the fortress of which he would have been
secure. Here, however, he was disappointed, as the Empress had already
anticipated his intention, and dispatched two admirals, who secured it. When he
came near the fortress, they ordered him to keep off, or they would sink him,
and at the same time pointed the guns for that purpose. Besides his mistress,
the Countess of Voronzoff, he had a number of women and attendants in the
vessel with him. Terrified with the appearance of opposition, they knelt round
him, and rent the air with their cries, to enduce him to relinquish his
purpose: effectively he did so, and yielding to his own fears, and their
importunities, he had not the courage to attempt to land, but returned back to
Oranienbaum. It proved afterward that these guns were not loaded. The old Felt
Marechal Count Munich, who had been newly recalled from his long exile in
Siberia, was with him at this critical emergency, and gave him the only advice
which could possibly have saved him. He implored him to go boldly and meet the
empress, to charge the guards on their allegiance to obey his orders as their
sovereign, and offered to lose his own life in his defense. Peter had not
sufficient magnanimity and greatness of mind, either to perceive the absolute
necessity of this conduct, or to embrace it instantly. On the contrary,
consulting only with his terrors, he threw himself on the ground before the
empress, in the gardens Oranienbeum, covering his feet with both his hands,
burst into all the impotence of tears, and only implored in terms of the most
abject submission, that his life might be spared, and his paternal dominions of
Holstein assigned him. She commanded him to rise, and conducted him to the
palace of Peterhoff, where he signed a paper, by which he resigned all power
into her hands. Mean while covered wagons were provided, which took different
roads, that it might not be known in which was the deposed prince; and this
mighty revolution, which transferred the greatest empire on earth, was effected
in a few hours, almost without any confusion or uproar. The people accustomed
to despotism, and indifferent who was the ruler, remained silent and quiet
spectators of it, the guards being the only actors, and the whole a repetition
of the princess Elizabeth's conduct some years before, when young Ivan was
deposed, and she seized the throne. -- Over the rest of this mournful story we
must draw a veil. Such a prisoner, it is natural to suppose, could not long
remain in that condition. On the ninth day consequent to his seizure it was
reported he had a disorder in his bowels, and soon after his death was
announced. We know no more. History, in some future age, may possibly elucidate
his end; but in this century it is not likely such a secret will be divulged.

Though I would not, however indirectly, appear the apologist of crimes, yet
justice requires I should say, that it is universally allowed the empress might
plead self-defence, if not even self-preservation to justify her conduct, as it
is known that Peter had concerted and would have carried into execution the
most severe measures against her if he had not been prevented by so vigorous an
attack. If we add to this, the uniform tenor of her life and reign since that
era, during which humanity and wisdom seem scarce ever to have forsaken her,
candor will, perhaps, be induced to pass over one spot, which state policy
rendered necessary, and which, from the moment of her resistance, became
unavoidable.

WRAXALL.
SECT. XXVIII. OF BREMEN. A. D. 1774.
THIS is a great city, a rich city, and a commercial one; but I cannot say I
think it very agreeble, or that it contains much to gain a traveller's
attention. Was human life of double the limits nature has assigned to it, one
should not be tempted to visit it more than once. It must however be confessed
I saw it to some disadvantage, not being provided with letters of introduction,
as I had not intended to have included it in the plan of my tour. By the help,
however, of my landlord, to whose good offices necessity has made me a debtor,
I have seen every thing deserving attention here, and shall leave it this
afternoon perfectly well satisfied with my stay. One of these has appeared to
me so extraordinary; and is in itself, I apprehend, so very singular, that if I
had not been an eye witness of it, no testimony would have convinced me of its
reality; and if it was not of such a nature as to be universally examined, I
should fear the world would doubt my veracity.

I always apprehended that human bodies after death, if interred, or exposed to
the air without any preparation to defend them from the attacks of it, would of
necessity corrupt, become offensive and putrify. The art of embalming is very
ancient, and was invented to preserve them from this inevitable consequence of
death; but that they may remain unputrified for centuries without any sort of
artificial aid, I have seen so incontestibly proved since my arrival, that I
imagine not the shadow of doubt can remain about it.

Under the cathedral church is a vaulted apartment, supported on pillars; it is
near sixty paces long, and half as many broad. The light and air are constantly
admitted into it by three windows, though it is several feet beneath the level
of the ground. Here are five large oak coffers, rather than coffins, each
containing a corpse. I examined them severally for near two hours. The most
curious and perfect, is that of a woman. Tradition says she was an English
countess, who dying here at Bremen, ordered her body to be placed in this vault
uninterred, in the apprehension that her relations would cause it to be brought
own (...) her native country. They say it has lain here 250 years. Though the
muscular skin is totally dried in every part, yet so little are the features of
the face sunk or changed, that nothing is more certain than that she was young,
and even beautiful. It is a small countenance, round in its contour. The
cartilage of the nose and the nostrils have undergone no alteration. Her teeth
are all firm in the sockets, but the lips are drawn away from over them. The
cheeks are shrunk in, but yet less than I ever remember to have seen in
embalmed bodies. The hair of her head is at this time more than eighteen inches
long, very thick, and so fast, that I heaved the corpse out of the coffer by it.
The color is a light brown, and as fresh and glossy, as that of a living
person. That this lady was of high rank seems evident, from the extreme
fineness of the linen which covers her body; but I have in vain endeavored to
procure any lights into her history, her title, or any other particulars,
though I have taken no little pains for that purpose. The landlord of the inn,
who was with me, said he remembered it for forty years past, during which time
there is not the least perceptible alteration in it.

In another coffer is the body of a workman, who is said to have tumbled off
the church, and was killed by the fall. His features evince this most forcibly.
Extreme agony is marked in them. His mouth is wide open, and his eyelids the
same. The eyes are dried up. His breast is unnaturally distended, and his whole
frame betrays a violent death.

A little child who died of the smallpox is still more remarkable. The marks
of the pustules, which have broken the skin on his hands and head, are very
discernible; and one should suppose that a body which died of such a distemper,
must contain in a high degree the seeds of putrefaction.

The two other corpses are not less extraordinary. There are in this vault,
likewise, turkeys, hawks, weasels, and other animals, which have been hung up
here; some, time immemorial, some very lately; and are in the most complete
preservation; the skin, bills, feathers, all unaltered. The cause of this
phenomenon is, doubtless, the dryness of the place where they are laid. It is
in vain to seek for any other. The magistrates do not permit that any fresh
bodies be brought here, and there is no other subterranean chamber which has
the same property. It would have made an excellent miracle two or three
centuries ago in proper hands, but now mankind are grown too wise.

This city is celebrated for its old hock. The wine is all brought from the
banks of the Rhine by land carriage, and deposited in the public cellars. These
are wondrously capacious, running beneath the Townhouse and Exchange; but are
not comparable in magnificence to those I have seen at Oeyras in Portugal,
belonging to the Marquis de Pombal, or those of Constantia at the Cape of
Good-Hope. There is one particular room, called the Rose, where they keep wine,
as they say, of 170 years old, and for which they ask seven dollars, or
twenty-five shillings a bottle; but it is not fit at this time to drink.

Bremen stands upon the river Wesel. Vessels of burden lie twelve or fifteen
miles below the city, there not being sufficient depth of water higher up. It
contains 45,000 inhabitants. It is a free city, under the protection of the
empire, and styles itself a republic, on the (...) struck here. The king of
England, as elector of Hanover, has, however, some important rights within the
place; and not only the cathedral belongs to him, but a considerable number of
buildings, public and private. He possesses, likewise, a species of supreme
judicatorial power, as, though the magistrates take cognizance of all crimes
within the territory of Bremen, his delegate or bailiff must pronounce
sentence. The fortifications though kept in very good order, are of no
consequence or strength. The strongest army in the field is ever master; and
during the last war, French or English were alternately received into the
place, as they appeared before it.

By the municipal laws, all the race of Abraham is excluded from the capacity
of trading and (...) here; or at least there is so high a duty laid on their
persons, that a man may remain here a century, I suppose, and not see one, it
amounting to no less than a ducat a day. This exclusion has given rise to a
sarcastic remark on the inhabitants themselves, which, whether just or not, I
am no judge. Hamburg has adopted a contrary policy, and admits indiscriminately
these people, with European nations. In a lucrative view, I know not which may
be the wisest measure, but certainly the latter is the most generous, and
breathes a greater philanthropy. If every government barred its gates to these
wanderers of Palestine, already laboring under the curse of dispersion without
leaders, without political strength, where must they fly for asylum? Their
character, to be sure, as a nation is not much in their favor, and I am not at
all surprised at their ancient passion for idolatry, since there are very few
of them, I imagine, at this time, who would not bow down before a golden calf
set up in London or Amsterdam, with as much devotion as their ancestors did
before that in Horeb. The principle, indeed, might be somewhat different,
though it has always seemed to me, as if the intrinsic value of the first calf
constituted the most adorable part of his divinity in the opinion of his
worshippers; else why did not Aaron make him of brass at once?

Plutus and Mercury are the chief dieties venerated in this city, and like the
senate in Tiberius's time, they will not admit the gods of strangers. Pleasure
under every shape, of dance, of comedy, of masque, seems peculiarly hateful.
She has, indeed, lately stole in, as my landlord tells me, once a month during
the winter, in the form of a concert, to the no little terror of the
burgomasters, who have endeavored to proscribe this unprecedented refinement.
The most polite manner of spending an evening known for several centuries past
in Bremen, has been that of meeting in small-boxes about twenty feet long and
fix wide, in the public cellar, where they drink hock under a cloud of (...)
from their own pipes. One may swear these are the genuine descendants of the
ancient Saxons, who imagined the joys of heaven to consist in drinking ale out
of the skulls of their enemies! Women, the only venial object of idolatry, seem
not here to hold any rank in society, or to form the connecting charm which
binds the jarring principles of human nature together. Man, solitary man, meets
in clubs and companies, to doze, to drink, and to dispute. The very idea is
odious and disgusting.

WRAXALL.
SECT. XXIX. CONVERSATION AT COURTRAY IN FLANDARS WITH AN IMPATIENT PASSENGER
FOR THE DEPARTURE OF A DILIGENCE.
WHILE I was changing horses, I was peculiarly stricken with the singular
impatience of a passenger for the departure of the diligence. I observed him to
entreat his companions, with a gentleness and elegant courtesy, to hasten the
same; then he flew to the landlord, to give his commands to the driver, then
(...) the driver himself, then to the stable to see if the horses were
harnessed; then to the gateway biting his nails, and walking backwards, and
forward, much agitated. His countenance was urgently thoughtful; his complexion
livid; his eyes sunk into his head, and over-arched with a large circular and
black brow; his look altogether seemed hagged through fatigue, and an inward
dejection which preyed upon him. I judged him to be about five and thirty years
of age. He was genteel; above the common in his manner, but very negligently
attired. In short, his appearance touched me home, and awakened my curiosity.

Mon Dieu! cried the Flemish Whip, that there was a little more patience in the
world. -- It would be a six sous out of your pocket, if there was, I thought
within myself; for I observed the impatient passenger to give him that little
sum, as a stimulus to accelerate his motions.

A difficulty arose, which increased the passenger's impatience beyond all
bounds. He was almost mad with disappointment; for as the diligence was
preparing to set off, a female passenger was unfortunately missing, who, having
some business in the own, absented herself till the usual time of its
departure; and now the driver declared that it was impossible to set off before
the clock struck a certain hour, the stated time for its departure, unless
Madame arrived.

My barouche was, at this instant, drawing up to the door; and as curiosity was
fermenting just as strong in me as impatience in the passenger, I offered him a
feat in it; concluding, Ghent was his next station.

There was a polite gratitude in the manner with which he accompanied his
simple thanks; and he flew like an arrow to the diligence, snatching out of it
a small valise. We ascended our vehicle, and it moved in time to the
impetuosity of my companion's wishes. A cloud of melancholy soon overshadowed
his countenance; his eyes were immoveably fixed, and thought seemed busy within
him. This torpor continued upon him the greatest part of our stage to Ghent^
excepting, that now and then, it was broken by a few polite expressions, to
convince me of the greatness of his obligation.

I could not avoid puzzling my brain about the character of this man; turning
in my head over and over, the motives that could possibly ferment such great
impatience to arrive at the end of his journey.

There was education in his look; which made me address him with, Aurum per
medios ire satellites
Et perrumpere amat saxa potentius
Ictu full (...) --


But your present had not the power to procure the departure of the diligence.
Horace is certainly right, answered my companion; the bribe was only of silver;
the power of gold, doubtless, would have conquered the driver's s^^^uples about
the lady: He would have driven off without her. But when a man is in haste, I
replied, he should not travel in a Flemish diligence. But this, says my
companion, is the only convenience, when our bad fortune will not permit us to
purchase a more expeditious one. Pour moi les deniers me manque; I am as poor
as a church mouse, and this is another reason for my wishing to be at the end
of my journey; where, God be thanked! I should have -- Yes, says my stranger,
making a reflective pause, and repeating the words, "I should have some of this
world's trifles." -- Here he turned up his eyes wish a groan, shrugged up his
shoulder and pressed his hands on his knees --

And why that piteous, miserable look? -- thy home, and this world's comforts
too! -- yet this drew forth -- -- A sigh so hideous and profound,
That it did seem to shatter all his bulk,
And end his being. --


It is unique, I thought, that of all the Frenchmen I ever met with in my life,
the natural character of the nation should prevail so little in my
(...)-traveller; barring the shrug of his shoulder, and the wan meagre
countenance, there was nothing Gallic in him. The French, even in the most
awful periods of their distress, discover certain intervals, in which the
traits of their native cheerfulness are conspicuous; but the spirit of my
companion seemed enveloped in an endless gloom.

The subjects we conversed on were not much diversified, and rather confined to
the classics. He seemed well read, and his remarks were tinctured with
judgment. In the course of that natural and innocent vanity, of displaying our
little store of learning, I could not suppress the effect which the eighth Ode
of Horace had upon me, which my companion repeated (...) no small degree of
energy. He said it was his favorite Ode, when he was once in love. It was like
the protasis of ancient drama to me, where the subject of the piece became
entertaining. It suspended for some time our conversation, and proved a most
powerful advocate for the romantic feelings I was brooding upon. -- Aye, says
I, -- Cur neque militaris
Inter aequales equitet, Gallica nec lupatis
Temperet ora fraenis?


As I live, (...) is a person above the common rank of people; (...) love, at a
particular period of his life, has (...) forced into some affecting adventure;
and, perhaps, driven by the fascinating charms of a Lydia, into a desperate
path of fortune. He is certainly " Quite a different Man.
tout autre homme," than his appearance announces. So, while I was finishing my
pedantry with, Quid latet, ut marin^
Filium dicunt Thetidis sub lachrymosa Troj^
Funera, ne virilis
Cultus in caedem and Lycias p^oriperet cater vas?
and positively settled in my mind, that this was actually the true case, I
found the barouche entering Ghent.

There are ever circumstances to disappoint the wishes of those, who have the
world to run through, which, by the bye, is something like traveling through
this part of Flanders, where we find posthorses heavy and slow; and, in my
opinion, every thing cheerless and comfortless in the inns; grass growing in
the center of towns; and all the arts and sciences uncultivated, as their
streets are neglected by the industrious footsteps of men. I was flattering
myself, with learning the historic feats of my dejected companion; when I found
myself, on my arrival at Ghent, ready to be robbed of this "bon bouche" for my
curiosity. As for myself, I can scarcely reconcile these fortifications, about
which nine tenths of the wor^^ (...) care a German kruytzer.

DOUGLAS.
SECT. XXX. A SERMON TO ENGLISH TRAVELERS.
"O magnus posthac inimicis risus!"
Hor. Sat. (...). Lib. (...).
WHEN your equipages arrive in a town on the Continent, the rascals of
trades-people, and much greater knaves of innkeepers, are laying plans to
plunder you; and troops of famished wretches, devoted to (...) office that
travelers think proper to employ (...) starved Tyrolian wolves prowling for
repine, surround you on every side; for they conceive your riches to be
immense, and your ostentatious extravagance still more excessive. They first
flatter you on the known liberality of your character as Englishmen, and then
they prescribe in the most servile manner to all your absurd ridiculous
caprices. The police and shopkeepers have in pay their lay-laqueys, who
surround your hotels; the former to learn your history, perhaps, from your
English valet, who probably may smatter just enough of the language to perplex
you on all occasions; and (...) ^latter to cozen you in their boutiques, where
(...) cent. per cent. more than the natives.

The inhabitants of distinction invite you into their circles to filch you at
their card parties. A pert coquet, of some beauty and fashion, shams an
intrigue with you, to wheedle you to lose your money at piquet; who, while you
are racking your imagination to tell her some dull story, and to play off some
piece of gallant witticism, is counting her game, and under the mask of
"nonchallant badinage," studying to capot you. You suffer your purses to be
drained with a grace, in hopes of acquiring the name of Madam's bien aim^,
while the lady smiles at your bad imitation of foreign intrigue, and supremely
ridicules your English fadaise.

Men, who have been trained from their earliest infancy, under the hands of a
frisseur, to wear their bags, solitaires, and brocades, with magnanimous
dignity, look contemptuously on your affected case in the maneuvers of your
snuff boxes, and your awkward carriage in sporting your persons.

Do not, therefore, my dear countrymen, when you travel for improvement, and
when you should travel as respectable representatives of a body of people, who,
as long as ever civil society has been known to flourish, have been courted and
esteemed, do not attempt to imitate any other nation than your (...). Ye have
virtues and refinements among yourself (...) sufficient to render you
completely amiable as men; (...) understanding to put you on equality with the
most enlightened of mankind. In short, ye have talents within yourselves, when
properly exerted which command, the esteem of all the world. Let the end then
of your visits among foreigners be, to enhance the blessings of your own
country; to glean that species of information, which may teach you how to prize
the comforts ye possess at home; and by learning the distinct qualities of men,
to secure to yourselves private happiness, that may last you all your lives; to
bring back with you the laws of different empires; politics to serve your king
in a national exigency; improvement in the arts to benefit your countrymen; and
an universal benevolence to carry you through life without (...) to yourselves,
and with happiness to those who have any commerce with you.

Suffer not the light character of Frenchmen, the absurd hauteur of the German
Baron of the sixteenth generation, or the vainglorious insolence of a romantic
Italian, to brand you with ridicule. If you perceive virtues in either, that
will mend your hearts, or be of national benefit in the application (...) them
to your country at large, treasure them in your memory. But leave their vices
where they were at first engendered, to secure to you that ascendancy you have
always had over them (...) by these exotic acquisitions, you return home with a
poison more fatally administered, than by the hands of your enemies; and which,
in succeeding commotions with your neighbors, will be a remote conquest, which
you have drawn upon yourselves. Show yourselves therefore liberal, but avoid
the character of magnificent fools, whose greatness is only manifest in the
superior faculty of squandering riches, more profusely than the natives you are
associating with.

I have seen you laughed at, and my heart has bled for you. I have seen, when
your backs have been turned, an insolent foreigner speak with contempt of you,
who has flattered you with a most egregious irony of praise before your faces.
Assert your solidity of character, and even your deficiencies in the agremens,
with an Englishman's dignity. Consider your characteristic qualities in a
physical sense; balance them against those of the foreigner; and, believe me,
that your natural character, joined with your early and substantial education,
will make you ever respected. But suffer not your fame to be tarnished with the
affected imitation of foreign buffoonery, and the folly of boasted extravagance.

DOUGLAS.
SECT. XXXI. OF THE CITY OF CANTON, IN CHINA.
THE city of Canton is situate upon the east side of the large river Ta, from
the mouth of which it lies about fifty miles. It is defended toward the water
by two high walls, and two strong water-castles built in the middle of the
river Ta.

Canton is the greatest port in China, and the only one frequented by
Europeans. The city wall is about five miles in curcumference, with pleasant
walks around it. On the east side is a large ditch close to the wall.

From the tops of some adjacent hills, on which forts are built, you have a
fine prospect of the country. It is beautifully interspersed with mountains,
little (...) and valleys, all green; and these again pleasantly diversified
with small towns; villages, high towers, temples, the seats of Mandarines and
other great men, which are watered with delightful lakes, canals, and small
branches from the river Ta; on which are numberless boats and jonks sailing
different ways through the most fertile places of the country.

The city is entered by seven iron gates, and within-side of each there is a
guard-house. No European is allowed to enter these, if known; I have myself
been frequently expelled, after I had been a good way within the city, when
they discovered that I was a stranger. The soldiers, who keep guard, are armed
with spears, darts, swords; match-lock guns, but most of them with bows and
arrows, which they still esteem more than any other warlike weapon.

The streets are very straight, but generally narrow, and paved with flag
stones.

There are many pretty buildings in the city, great numbers of triumphal
arches, and temples well (...) with images.

The streets of Canton are so crowded, that it is difficult to walk in them;
yet you will seldom see a woman of any fashion, unless by chance, when coming
out of their chairs. And, were it not that curiosity in the Chinese ladies make
them sometimes peep at us, we should never get a glance at them.

Though there are no magnificent houses in Canton, most of them being built
only one, and none more than two stories; yet they take up a large extent of
ground, many of them having square courts within their walls.

They have all such a regard to privacy, that no windows are made toward the
streets, but in shops and places of pulic business. None of their windows look
toward those of their neighbors. Within the gate or entry of each house, a
screen is placed, to prevent strangers from looking in upon the opening of the
gate; and you enter the house either on the right or left side of the middle
screen, where there are little alleys to the right and left, from whence you
pass into the several courts, which are walled on all sides.

Their entertainments are held in a sort of hall at the entrance of their
houses, which have no other ornament, besides a single order of painted columns
which support the building. The roofs are open to the tiles, without any
ceiling. In these they use no looking-glasses, hangings, or fine chairs; and
their beds, which are the principal ornaments of their house, are seldom seen
by strangers, who are not permitted to go farther than the first great hall.
The Chinese, who keep shops, were less reserved, and would frequently invite us
to their houses with great freedom, as they observed it would be agreeable to
us.

The furniture of the best houses is cabinets, tables, painted screens, china,
pictures, and pieces of white taffety upon the walls, upon which are written in
Chinese characters, religious and moral sentences.

They have no chimneys; but in their stead, they place a shallow (...) pot
filled with charcoal, in the middle of the room, in winter, which is ready to
suffocate people who are not accustomed to it. They have a copper built in
brick-work in their kitchen for boiling, much about the height of our English
stoves.

The insides of their houses are never (...) nor painted, but are covered with
thin paper.

The windows are made of cane or rattan. In winter they cut oyster-shells into
diamond-shapes, and set them in wooden frames, which afford but a very dull
light.

The shops of those that deal in silk are very neat, make a fine show, and are
all in one place; for tradesmen, or dealers in one kind of goods, herd together
in the same street. For this reason, you may hear the English sailors talking
of the streets of Canton, as if they were speaking of London, or some other
English city. The streets where the china-shops are, they call China-row; the
streets where clothes are fold, they call Monmouth-street; that narrow street
where men's caps, shoes, etc. are sold, is well known by the name of Mandarine
Cap-alley; and a narrow passage close by the city-wall, where lapidary and
glass-work are sold, is called Stone-cutters alley; and so of many others. The
shops have counters, drawers, and divisions, much like our own; and there are
few of the merchants but have a person who can speak broken English or
Portuguese. So that French, Dutch, and Danes, are obliged to speak either the
one or the other when they traffic with them.

There are great numbers of marketplaces for fish, flesh, poultry, garden
herbs, and all provisions. Every thing is sold cheap. Fishmongers keep their
fishes in (...) alive. Carp, and all other fish are here in variety and plenty,
but have a muddy taste. I have seen the fishermen take great numbers of
different fishes in the ditch on the east side of the city-wall, where a
multitude of small boats or sampans are continually plying. The ditch goes
quite round the city, and some small canals run in it; and as it has a
connection with the river Ta, it is of great advantage to the city.

I was very much surprised at first, to see dogs, cats, rats, frogs, etc. in
their marketplaces for sale. But I soon found that they made no scruple of
eating any sort of meat, and have as good an appetite for that which died in a
ditch, as that which was killed by a butcher.

The dogs and cats, which they generally (...) live in baskets, were for the
most part young and fat, and kept very clean.

The rats, some of which are of a monstrous size, were very fat, and commonly
hung up with the skin upon them, on nails at the posts of the marketplace.

Frogs, which are the greatest dainty here, are sold very dear. They are black
and loathsome to an European eye; but the Chinese say they have a very fine
taste. The rats, they say, eat well; and snake broth has been in reputation
there, long before it was known to us. The frogs are strung upon a rod in the
same manner as we do fish in England.

In passing through some of their streets, I have almost been suffocated by the
stench of the houses on each side; and particularly a street about a mile above
the English factory, where there was nothing but cook's shops. They had large
hogs roasted whole, and numbers of dogs, cats, and rats on the spit, (...) the
(...) themselves, with their utensils, had such a dirty appearance, that the
sight and smell might almost satisfy even the keenest European appetite. They
send about their victuals for sale with cowleys or (...).

The common people eat four times a day; and are such ^shttons, that, if they
are ever so much engaged in (...), they will hastily leave it, and (...) hour.
I have seen one (...) follow eat six pint basins of rice at one meal. Rice they
eat greedily, and cram it down with their chop-sticks; which would probably
choke them, if they did not wash it dowd every now and then with a cup of
Shamshue standing by them.

In the streets of Canton, we often meet with blind beggars, of both sexes, a
disease which some imagine is the consequence of their living so much on rice;
but I rather think it may be occasioned by the hot winds which blow here at
certain seasons. They are indeed miserable objects, and commonly go naked,
excepting a trouser or cloth over their middle. They go sometimes in companies,
and are sure to plague and follow the Europeans; because from one of them they
^ill get more at one time than from a dozen of their own countrymen. The
Chinese are very uncharitable. I never saw them give money to a beggar; but
they generally put them off with a small handful of rice.

As it is natural for Europeans to let flip no opportunity of seeing the fair
sex, and as the women there are kept so very private, that many of us have made
several voyages thither, without having seen a woman above the lowest rank, we
were now and then induced, on proper occasions, to pry into the most retired
and unfrequented places, where we imagined the females might be less upon their
guard; as few Europeans (...) thereabouts to disturb them. In these (...)
curiosity was seldom entirely disappointed. Sometimes we would pop in upon a
percel of young boys and girls, attended by their nurses, who were all so
affrighted at the fight of Fanquay, as they called us, that they would scream
aloud, run into their houses, and, by the noise, alarm the whole street. As I
have observed already, that they have no windows to the street, and have a
screen of split cane before the door of each house, we could not see them,
though they could easily see us through that lattice: we could only very
indistinctly perceive them peeping at us, and pointing to us withinside the
screen.

Now and then, on turning a corner, or entering a private street, all of a
sudden we found ourselves in the midst of a company of young ladies conversing
o^ playing together; which immediately set them all a screeming, and made them
run for shelter into their several apartments.

These accidental opportunities made us very happy; for we frequently saw some
charming creatures, surpassing all description, and whose beauty it would
appear, most Europeans who have been here, are entirely ignorant of. Indeed we
could only be happy in the glance of one or two such in a street; for the
screaming of one caught without doors, immediately alarmed (...) the ladies,
and baffled our curiosity.

(...) indeed, we met them at a considerable distance from their houses; and as
their feet are so little that they cannot walk or run, but rather trip or
hobble along, and are often obliged to assist themselves by laying hold of the
wall as they move along; this gave us an opportunity of gazing upon them
attentively on these occasions. They seemed so affrighted, and walked so
awkwardly, that we were glad to retire, lest we should have made them stumble
and fall, for which we should certainly have been bamboo'd.

The complexion of the ladies is exceedingly fair, their hair of the finest
black, dressed up with gold and silver bodkins, adorned with flowers. Their
shape is exquisitely fine, and their dresses the most becoming, natural, easy
and splendid of any I ever saw.

It is reckoned, that there are in the city and suburbs of Canton 1,200,000
people; and you will scarce find a day in the whole year, but there are 5000
trading vessels lying before the city.

The temples and places of public worship are the most magnificent buildings in
Canton. They are well filled with images. The people pay profound adoration to
them, by falling down on their knees before them, wringing their hands, and
beating their foreheads against the ground. These tempels are decorated with a
great number of artificial flowers, embroidered hangings, curtains and fringes.
(...) of them, situated in the skirt of the north-east (...) suburbs, makes a
splendid appearance. It is four stories high, has a fine cupola, with many
outhouses and galleries. The lower part of it is built with fine hewn stone,
but the upper part is all of timber. We went first into the lower hall, where
we saw images of all sizes, of different dignities, and finely gilded, and kept
exceedingly clean by the priests. The lesser images, were placed in corners of
the wall, and one of a larger size in the middle of the hall. The large god,
who is placed in the center, sits in a lazy posture, almost naked, and leaning
on a large cushion. He is ten times larger than an ordinary man, very
corpulent, of a merry countenance, and gilt all over. We were next conducted up
stairs, where we saw a great many images of men and women; who had been deified
for their brave and virtuous actions.

Though Canton is but twenty-four degrees from the equator, and is scorching
hot in summer, yet about the months of December and January, it is subject to
high winds and very heavy rains. The sudden alteration which the climate then
undergoes, is very surprising. At this time the people of China take to their
winter dress, which is lined with furs, or quilted cotton. Instead of wearing
fans, which are used by men, women, and children, in hot weather, they hold a
live quail in their hands to keep them warm, and have the (...) sleeves of
their gowns drawn down to cover their hands. Thus equipped, they walk so stiff,
and shrug up their shoulders so much, that one would think they were freezing
to death.

The river Ta at Canton is somewhat broader than the Thames at London. But the
crowds of small vessels that ply the Ta, are vastly more numerous. For the
space of four or five miles opposite the city of Canton, you have an extensive
wooden town of large vessels and boats, stowed so closely, that there is
scarcely room for a large boat to pass. They are generally drawn up in ranks,
with a narrow passage left for vessels to pass and repass. Some of them are
large vessels of eight or nine hundred tons burden, called jonks, with which
they perform their foreign voyages. Here are also an incredible number of small
boats, in which poor families live all their life long, without ever putting a
foot on shore. In these they keep dogs, cats, hogs, geese, and other domestic
animals, both for subsistence and sale. There is nothing similar to this in
Europe; for the people in this country are so exceedingly numerous, that vast
numbers of families are obliged to betake themselves to boats on the river, for
want of room, or the means of subsistence on land, where almost every habitable
spot is occupied. These boats are very conveniently built, with arched covers
and tilts made of solid wood, or bamboo or caian leaves, so high, that the
people can walk upright under them. They manage them very nimbly, having
asculling oar at the stern, with which they make them go surprisingly fast; and
I have often been amazed to see with what ease and safety they pass one another.

CHINESE TRAVELLER.
SECT. XXXII. OF THE POLICY AND GOVERNMENT OF CHINA.
AMONGST the several models and plans of governments which the ancients framed,
we shall perhaps meet with none so perfect and exact as is that of the Chinese
monarchy. The ancient lawgivers of this potent empire formed it in their days
very little different from what it is in ours. Other states, according to the
common fate of the things of this world, are sensible of the weakness of
infancy; are born misshapen and imperfect; and like men, they owe their
perfection and maturity to time. China seems more exempted from the common laws
of nature; and as though the Supreme being himself had founded their empire,
the plan of their government was not a whit less perfect in its cradle, than it
is now after the experience and trial of four thousand years.

During all which time the Chinese had never so much as heard of the name of a
Republic; and when lately, on the arrival of the Hollanders, they heard of it,
it seemed so strange to them, that they have scarcely yet done admiring at it.
Nothing could make them understand how a state could regularly be governed
without a king. They looked upon a republic to be a monster with many heads,
formed by the ambition, headiness, and corrupt inclination of men in times of
public disorder and confusion.

As they bear an aversion to republican government, so they are yet more set
against tyranny and oppression, which they say proceeds not from the
absoluteness of the prince's power, but from his wildness, which neither the
voice of nature, nor the laws of God can ever countenance. The Chinese are of
opinion, that the obligation which is laid on their kings not to abuse their
power, is rather a mean to confirm and establish them, than to occasion their
ruin; and that this useful constraint, which they themselve lay on their
passions, does not more diminish their power or authority here on earth, than
the like constraint derogates from the majesty and power of the Almighty, who
is not the less powerful because he cannot do evil.

An unbounded authority which the laws give the Emperor, and the necessity
which the same lay upon him to use that authority with moderation and
discretion, are the two props which have for so many ages supported this great
fabric of the Chinese monarchy. The first principle, therefore, that is
instilled into the people, is to respect their prince with so high a veneration
as almost to adore him. They style him the son of heaven, and the only master
of the world. His commands are indisputable. His words carry no less authority
with them than if they were oracles. In short, every thing that comes from him
is sacred. He is seldom seen, and never spoken to but on the knees. The
grandees of the court, the princes of the blood, nay, his own brothers bow to
the ground, not only when he is present, but even before the throne; and there
are set days every week or month, on which the nobility assemble, who meet in
one of the courts of the palace to acknowledge the authority of their prince,
by their most submissive adorations, though he, perhaps, be not there in person.

When he is ill, the palace is full of Mandarines of every order, who spend
night and day, in a large court, in habits proper for the occasion, to express
their own grief, and to ask of heaven their prince's cure. Rain, snow, cold, or
any other inconveniences, excuse them not from the performance of this duty;
and as long as the Emperor is in pain, or in danger, any one that saw the
people would think that they feared nothing but the loss of him.

The towns of China are generally divided into four parts, and those again into
several smaller divisions, each of which contains ten houses, over every one of
which subdivisions an officer presides, who takes notice of every thing which
passes in his little ward, tells the Mandarine what contentions or
extraordinary things happen, and what strangers come thither or go thence. The
neighborhood is obliged to give mutual assistance, and in case of any alarm to
lend one another a helping hand; for if any theft or robbery is committed
during the night, the neighborhood must contribute toward repairing the loss.
Lastly, in every family the father is responsible for the disorders and
irregularities committed either by his children or servants.

The gates of the cities are well looked after, and even in time of peace are
shut up at the approach of night. In the day time there are guards to examine
all who come in. When they observe any thing extraordinary or suspicious, they
take the person up, or inform the Mandarine of it. So that European
missionaries, whose aspect is infinitely different from that of the Chinese,
are known at first sight; and those who have not the Emperor's approbation,
find it very difficult to make a long journey.

In certain places, as at Pekin, as soon as night comes on, they tie chains
across the streets: the guards go the patrole up and down the principal
streets, and guards and sentinels are placed here and there. The horse go the
rounds upon the fortifications; and wo^ be to him who is found then from home.
Meetings, ^^usquerades, and balls, and such like night works, are good, say the
Chinese, for none but thieves and the mob. Orderly people ought, at that time,
either to sit up providing for their family, or else to take their rest, that
they may be refreshed, and better able the next day to manage the business of
the family.

Gaming is forbidden both to the common people and the gentry. This, however,
does not hinder the Chinese from playing, sometimes even so long, as till they
had lost all their estates, their houses, their children, and their wives,
which they sometimes hazard upon a card; for there is no degree of extravagance
to which the desire of lucre and riches will not carry a Chinese.

What I have said concerning wives, that their husbands may fell them, or lose
them at play, puts me in mind to give some account of the rules which their
civil constitution, rather than their religion, has ordained concerning
marriages. Those who have a mind to marry, do not, as among us, follow their
own fancies in the choice of a wise. They never see the women they are to have,
but take her parents' word in the case; or else they have their information
from some old women, who seldom give a just description of her whom they go to
view.

The woman's parents generally give money to these emissaries, to oblige them
to give a favorable character. It is for the advantage of the parents that
their daughter should be reputed handsome, witty, and genteel; because the
Chinese buy their wives, and, as in other merchandise, they give more or less
according to the good or bad properties of them.

When the parties are agreed about the price, the contract is made, and the
money paid down. Then preparation is made on both sides for the nuptial
solemnities. When the day of marriage is come, they carry the bride in a
sumtuous chair, before which go hautboys, drums and fifes, and after it follow
her parents, and other particular friends of her family. All the portion which
she brings, is her marriage-garments, some clothes and household goods, which
her father presents her with. The bridegroom stands at his door richly attired,
waiting for her. He himself opens the sedan, which is closely shut; and having
conducted her into a chamber, delivers her to several women, invited thither
for that purpose, who spend there the day together in feasting and sporting,
while the husband in another room entertains his friends acquaintance.

This being the first time that the bride and bridegroom see each other, and
one, or both, perhaps, not liking their bargain, it is frequently a day of
rejoicing for their guests, but of sorrow for themselves. The women must
submit, though they do not like, because their parents have sold them; but the
husbands sometimes are not so complaisant; for there have been some, who when
they first opened the sedan to receive the bride, repulsed by her shape and
aspect, have shut the chair, and sent her and her parents and friends back
again, willing rather to lose their money than enter upon so bad a purchase.

Although a man be allowed but one wife, he may have as many concubines as he
pleases. All the children have an equal claim to the estate, because they are
reckoned as the children of the wife, even though they be those of the
concubines. They all call the wife mother, who is indeed sole mistress of the
house. The concubines serve and honor her, and have no manner of authority or
power but what they derive from her.

The Chinese think it a strange thing that the Europeans are not allowed to
have concubines; yet they confess it is a commendable sign of moderation in
them. But when we observed to them the troubles, quarrels, contentions, and
jealousies which many women must needs occasion in a family, they say that
there was no state without some inconvenience; but that perhaps there were more
crosses in having but one, than in having many women. The best way, they owned,
was to have none at all.

CHINESE TRAVELLER.
SECT. XXXIII. OF CONFUCIOUS.
THIS celebrated Chinese philosopher was born in the kingdom of Lou, which is
at present in the province of Chan, 551 years before the birth of Christ. He
was contemporary with Pythagoras, and a little before Socrates. He was but
three years old when he lost his father, who had enjoyed the highest offices of
the kingdom of Long.

Confucius did not grow in knowledge by degrees, as children usually do, but
seemed to arrive at reason and the perfection of his faculties almost from his
infancy.

He took no delight in playing, running about, and such amusements as were
proper for his age. He had a grave and serious deportment, which gained him
respect, and plainly foretold what he would one day be. But what distinguished
him most was his unexampled and exalted piety. He honored his relations; he
endeavored in all things to imitate his grandfather, who was then alive in
China, and a most holy man. And it was observable, that he never ate any thing
but he prostrated himself on the ground, and offered it first to the supreme
Lord of heaven.

One day, while he was a child he heard his grandfather fetch a deep sigh; and
going up to him with much reverence, "May I presume," says he, "without losing
the respect I owe you, to enquire into the occasion of your grief? Perhaps you
fear that your posterity should degenerate from your virtue, and dishonor you
by their vices." What put this thought into your head, says his grandfather to
him; and where have you learnt to speak in this manner? "From yourself,"
replied Confucius. "I attend diligently to you every time you speak; and I have
often heard you say, that a son, who does not by his virtue support the glory
of his ancestors, does not deserve to bear their name."

After his grandfather's death, Confucius applied himself to Teem-se, a
celebrated doctor of his time; and under the direction of so great a master, he
soon made a vast progress into antiquity, which he considered as the source,
from whence all genuine knowledge was to be drawn. This love of the ancients
very nearly cost him his life, when he was no more than sixteen years of age.
Falling into discourse one day about the Chinese books with a person of high
quality, who thought them obscure, and not worth the pains of searching into;
"The books you despise, says Confucius are full of profound knowledge, which is
not to be attained but by the wise and learned; and the people would think
cheaply of them, could they comprehend them of themselves. This subordination
of spirits, by which the ignorant are dependent upon the knowing, is very
useful, and even necessary to society. Were all families equally rich, and
equally powerful, there could not subsist any form of government; but there
would happen a yet stranger disorder, if all men were equally knowing; for then
every one would be for governing, and none would think themselves obliged to
obey. Some time ago, added Confucius, an ordinary fellow made the same
observation to me about the books as you have done; and from such a one indeed
nothing better could be expected; but I admire that you, a doctor, should thus
be found speaking like one of the lowest of the people.

This rebuke had indeed the good effect of silencing the Mandarine, and
bringing him to a better opinion of the learning of his country; yet it vexed
him so at the same time, as it came from almost a boy, that he would have
revenged it by violence, if he had not been prevented.

At the age of nineteen years Confucius took a wife, who brought him a son
(...) Tsou-tse, who, in imitation of his father, applied himself entirely to
the study of wisdom, and by his merit arrived to the highest offices of the
empire. Confucius was content with his wife only, so long as she lived with
him; and never kept any concubines, as the custom of his country would have
allowed him to have done, because he thought it contrary to the law of nature.
I say, so long as she lived with him; for it seems he divorced her after some
time, and for no other reason, say the Chinese, but that he migh be free from
all encumbrances and connections, and at liberty to propogate his philosophy
throughout the empire. At the age of twenty-three, when he had gained a
considerable knowledge of antiquity, and acquainted himself with the laws and
customs of his country, he began to project a scheme for a general reformation;
for then every province of the empire was a distinct kingdom, which had its
particular laws and was governed by a prince.

To say the truth, all the little kingdoms depended upon the emperor; but it
often happened that the imperial authority was not able to keep them within the
bounds of their duty. Every one of these kings was master in his dominions.
They levied taxes, imposed tributes, disposed of dignities and offices,
declared war against their neighbors when they thought proper, and sometimes
became formidable to the emperor himself.

Confucius, wisely persuaded that the people could never be happy, so long as
avarice, ambition, voluptuousness, and false policy should reign in this
manner, resolved to preach up a severe morality; and accordingly he began to
enforce temperance, justice, and other virtues, to enspire a contempt of riches
and outward pomp, to excite to magnanimity and a greatness of, soul, which
should make men incapable of dissimulation and insincerity: and to use all the
means he could think of, to redeem his countrymen from a life of pleasure to a
life of reason. He was every where known, and as much beloved. His extreme
knowledge and great wisdom soon made him known; his integrity, and the splendour
of his virtues made him beloved. Kings were governed by his wisdom, and the
people reverenced him as a saint. He was offered several high offices in the
magistracy which he sometimes accepted; but never from a motive of ambition,
which he was not at all concerned to gratify, but always with a view of
reforming a corrupt state, and amending mankind: for he never failed to resign
those offices, as soon as he perceived that he could be no longer useful in
them. Thus, for instance, he was raised to a considerable place of trust in the
kingdom of Lou, his own native country; where he had not exercised his charge
above three months, when the court and provinces, through his counsels and
management, were become quite another thing. He corrected many frauds and
abuses in the mercantile way, and reduced the weights and measures to their
proper standard. He inculcated fidelity and candor among the men, and exhorted
the women to chastity and simplicity of manners. By such methods he wrought a
general reformation, and established every where such con cord and unanimity,
that the whole kingdom seemed as if it were but one great family.

The neighboring princes began to be jealous. They easily perceived, that a
king, under the counsels of such a man as Confucius, would quickly render
himself too powerful; since noting can make a state flourish more than good
order among the members, and an exact observance of its laws. Alarmed at this,
the king of (...) assembled his ministers to consider of methods, which might
put a stop to the career of this new government; and after some deliberations
the following expedient was resolved upon. They got together a great number of
young girls, of extraordinary beauty, who had been instructed from their
infancy in singing and dancing, and were perfect mistresses of all those charms
and accomplishments, which might please and captivate the heart. These, under
the pretext of an embassy, they presented to the king of Lou, and to the
grandees of his court. The present was joyfully received, and had its desired
effect. The arts of good government were immediately neglected, and nothing was
thought of, but inventing new pleasures for the entertainment of the fair
strangers. In short, nothing was regarded for some months, but feasting,
dancing, shows, etc. and the court was entirely dissolved in luxury and
pleasure. Confucius had foreseen all this, and endeavored to prevent it by
advising the refusal of the present; and he now labored to take off the
delusion they were fallen into, and to bring men back to reason and their duty.
But all his endeavors proved ineffectual. There was nothing to be done; and
the severity of the philosopher, whether he would or no, was obliged to give
way to the overbearing fashion of the court. Upon which he immediately quitted
his employment, becoming an exile at the same time from his native country, to
try, if he could find in other kingdoms, minds and dispositions more fit to
relish and pursue his maxims.

He passed through the kingdoms of Tsi, Guci, and Tsom, but met with
insurmountable difficulties every where. He had the misfortune to live in
times, when rebellion, wars, and tumults raged throughout the empire. Men had
no time to listen to his philosophy. They had even less inclination to do it;
for as we have said, they were ambitious, avaricious, and voluptuous. Hence be
often met with ill treatment and reproachful language, and it is said, that
conspiracies were formed against his life; to which may be added, that his
neglect of his own interests had reduced him to the extremest poverty. Some
philosophers among his contemporaries were so effected with the terrible state
of things, that they had rusticated themselves into the mountains and deserts,
as the only places where happiness could be found; and would have persuaded
Confucius to follow them. But, "I am a man, says Confucius, and cannot exclude
myself from the society of men, and consort with boasts. Bad as the times are,
I shall do all that I can to recall men to virtue; for in virtue are all things,
and if mankind would but once embrace it, and submit themselves to its
discipline and laws, they would not want me nor any body else to instruct them.
It is the duty of a good man, first to perfect himself, and then to perfect
others. Human nature, said he, came to us from heaven pure and perfect; but in
process of time, ignorance, the passions, and evil examples, have corrupted it.
All consists in restoring it to its primative beauty: and to be perfect, we
must re-ascend to that point, from whence we have fallen. Obey heaven, and
follow the orders of, him who governs it. Love your neighbor as yourself. Let
your reason, and not your senses, be the rule of your conduct; for reason will
teach you to think wisely, to speak prudently, and to behave yourself worthily
on all occasions."

Confucius in the mean time, though he had withdrawn himself from kings and
palaces, did not cease to travel about, and do what good he could among the
people, and among mankind in general. He sent six hundred of his disciples into
different parts of the empire, to reform the manners of the people; and not
satisfied with benefiting his own country only, he made frequent resolutions to
pass the seas, and propagate his doctrine to the farthest part of the world.
Hardly any thing can be added to the purity of his morality. He seems rather to
speak like a doctor of a revealed law, than like a man who had no light, but
what the law of nature afforded him: and what convinces us of his sincerity is,
that he taught as forcibly by example as by precept. In short, his gravity and
sobriety, his rigorous abstinence, his contempt of riches and what are commonly
called the goods of this life, his continual attention and watchfulness over
his actions, and above all that modesty and humility, which are not to be found
among the Grecian sages; all these, I say, would almost tempt one to believe,
that he was not a more philosopher formed by reason only, but a man inspired by
God for the reformation of the world, and to check that torrent of idolatry and
superstition, which was going to overspread that particular part of it.

Confucius is said to have lived in retirement three years, and to have spent
the latter part of his life in sorrow. A few days before, his last illness, he
told his disciples with tears in his eyes, that he was overcome, with grief at
the sight of the disorders, which prevailed in the empire. "The mountain, said
he, is fallen; the high machine is demollished, and the sages are all sled."
His meaning was, that the edifice of perfection, which he had endeavored to
raise, was entirely overthrown. He began to languish from that time, and on the
seventh day before his death, "The kings, said he, reject my maxims; and since
I am no longer useful on the earth, I may as well leave it." After these words
he fell into a lethargy, and at the end of seven days expired in the arms of
his disciples, in the seventy-third year of his age. Upon the first hearing of
his death, the king of Lou could not refrain from tears: "The Tien is not
satisfied with me, cried he, as Confucius is taken away from me." In reality,
wise men are precious gifts, with which heaven blesses the earth; and their
worth is never so well known till they are taken away. Confucius was lamented
by the whole empire, which from that very moment began to honor him as a
saint; and established such a veneration for his memory, as will probably last
for ever in those parts of the world. Kings have built palaces for him in all
the provinces, whither the learned go at certain times to pay him homage. There
are to be seen upon several (...), raised in honor of him, inscriptions in
large characters; "To the great master. To the head doctor. To the saint. To
him who taught emperors and kings."

Confucius did not altogether trust to the memory of his disciples for the
preservation of his philosophy, but committed the substance of it to writing.
His books are four in number. The first is entitled, "Ta Hio the Grand Science,
or the School of the Adults." It is this that beginners ought to study, first,
because it is, as it were, the porch of the temple of wisdom and virtue. It
treats of the care we ought to take in governing ourselves, that we may be able
afterward to govern others. The second book is called, "Tchong Young, or the
Immutable Mean;" and treats of the means which ought to be observed in all
things. The third book, "Yun Lu, or the Book of Maxims," is a collection of
sententious and moral discourses; and the fourth book gives an idea of a
perfect government. They who would have a perfect knowledge of all these works,
will find it in the Latin of father Noel, one of the most ancient missionaries
of China, which was printed at Prague in the year 1711.

CHINESE TRAVELLER.
SECT. XXXIV. OF THE NUMBER OF INHABITANTS IN CHINA; AND OF THE CHINESE
LANGUAGE.
IT is remarkable that the manners of the modern differ not much from those of
the ancient Chinese. Pliny says "that silk originally came from China; that the
Chinese, whom he called Seres, (from which name is derived the Roman word
sericum, silk) like wild animals, industriously shunned any communication with
strangers; and that they were of mild dispositions." They are at this day
courteous and gentle, but will not suffer merchants of other nations to
penetrate into their country.

How admirable are their political maxims! They demonstrate by experience, that
from the natural produce of the ground the true riches and prosperity of a
country arise. By the assiduous cultivation of every inch of ground, they are
enabled to maintain an amazing multitude of people, who are said to be more in
number than all the inhabitants of Europe. It is computed that in China there
are seventy millions of people, though it does not seem to be more than three
times the size of great Britain, which does not contain above seven or eight
millions. How great a disproportion do we find with respect to the number of
inhabitants of these two countries! And indeed, if we cast our eyes upon any
neglected country, for instance the Highlands of Scotland, we shall always see
few inhabitants and even those distressed and poor. Their circumstances would
not be much happier, if they even had the rich metals of Peru, whilst they idly
refuse to till the earth, which always gratefully rewards the toil of the
husbandman. Riches ebb faster out than they flow into a country, where the
natives thereof must purchase the necessaries and conveniences of life from
strangers.

The Chinese language bears no affinity to any language, dead or living, with
which we are acquainted. All other languages have an alphabet composed of a
certain number of letters, by the various combinations of which, syllables and
words are formed. Whereas there is no alphabet of the Chinese language; but
there are as many different characters and figures as words. The number of
Chinese characters is computed to be about 80,000. A person, however, that
understands 10,000 characters is able to express himself in this language, and
to understand many books. Most of the learned do not understand above 15,000 or
20,000; and but few doctors are masters of 40,000,

A dictionary was compiled, by order of the late emperor, consisting of one
hundred and nineteen volumes, most of them written in a small character, and
very thick. It is certain that no language in the world is more copius than the
Chinese.

The sense of the Chinese language is very much varied by the different
accents, inflections, tones, aspirations, and other changes of the voice; hence
it is, that persons, who are not exceedingly well versed in this language,
often mistake one word for another. Of this father du Halde gives some
examples; such as that the world Tchu, when differently sounded, signifies a
lord, or master, a hog, a kitchen, or a column. In like manner the syllable Po,
has, according as it is sounded, the following different meanings; glass, wise,
liberal, to prepare, an old woman, to break, to cleave, inclined, a very
little, to water, a slave, a captive, to boil, to winnow rice. Likewise the
same word joined to others is capable of a variety of senses. For instance, Mou
or Moo, when single, signifies, a tree or wood; but when compounded, it has
many more significations; Moo siang, signifying a chest of drawers; Moo nu, a
kind of small orange, etc.

In this manner the Chinese, by variously combining their monosyllables, can
form regular discourses, and express themselves with clearness and elegance,
almost in the same manner as the Europeans compose all their words by the
different combinations of about twenty-four letters.

CHINESE TRAVELLER.
SECT. XXXV. OF THE TEA-PLANT.
OF all the vegetable productions of China, the tea-plant is the most valuable.
The shrub, which seems to be a species of myrtle, seldom grows beyond the size
of a rose-bush, or at most six or seven feet in height, though some have
extended it to an hundred. It succeeds best in a gravelly soil, and is usually
planted in rows upon little hills, about three or four feet distant from each
other. Its leaves are about an inch and an half long, narrow, tapering to the
point, and indented like our rose or sweet-briar leaves, and its flowers are
much like those of the latter. The shrub is an evergreen, and bears a small
fruit which contains several round blackish seeds, about the bigness of a large
pea; but scarce above one in an hundred comes to perfection. By these seeds the
plant is propagated, nine or ten of them being put into a hole together; and
the shrubs thence arising are afterward transplanted into proper ground. They
thrive best when exposed to the south-sun, and yield the best tea; but there is
a sort that grows without any cultivation, which, though less valuable, often
serves the poorer sort of people.

The Chinese know nothing of imperial tea, and several other names which in
Europe serve to distinguish the goodness and price of this fashionable
commodity. In truth, though there be various kinds of tea, they are now generally
allowed to be the produce of the same plant, only differing in the color,
fragrancy, etc. according to the difference of soil, the time of gathering it,
and the method of preparation. Bohi or Bohea tea, is so called, not from the
mountains of Bokein, where the best of that sort is said to grow, but from its
dark and blackish color. This chiefly differs from the green tea, by its being
gathered six or seven weeks sooner, that is in March or April, according as the
season proves, when the plant is in full bloom, and the leaves full of juice;
whereas the other, by being left so much the longer upon the tree, loses a
great part of its juice, and contracts a different color, taste, and virtue.

The green tea is most valued and used in China; and the Bohea seems not to
have been known there till about the conclusion of the fifteenth century; for a
judicious Hollander, who was physician and botanist to the emperor of Japan at
that period, tells us that he had heard of the Bohi or black tea being come
into vogue in China; but upon the strictest search he could make, could find no
such thing, and therefore believed it was a false report. This makes it
probable, that originally they gathered all the tea at the same time, but that,
since the discovery of the smoothness and excellence of the more juicy Bohea,
they have carried on the experiments still farther, by gathering it at
different seasons.

As to the manner of curing the tea, the Bohea is first dried in the shade, and
afterward exposed to the heat of the sun, or over a slow fire, in earthern
pans, till it is convolved or shrivelled up (as we see it) into a small
compass. The other sorts are commonly crisped and dried as soon as gathered;
though according to Dr. Cunninham, the Bohea is dried in the shade, and the
green in pans over the fire.

It is very rare to find tea perfectly pure, the Chinese generally mixing other
leaves with it to increase the quantity; though one would think the price is
too moderate to tempt them to such a cheat, it being usually sold amongst them
for threepence per pound, and never for more than nine-pence; so that it is
most probable the worst adulterations of it are made by our own retailers.

Bohea, if good, is all of a dark color, crisp and dry, and has a fine smell.

Green tea is also to be chosen by its crispness, fragrant smell, and light
color with a bluish cast; for it is not good if any of the leaves appear dark
or brownish.

As to the properties of tea, they are very much controverted by our
physicians; but the Chinese reckon it an excellent diluter and purifier of the
blood, a great strengthener of the brain and stomach, a promoter of digestion,
perspiration, and other secretions. They drink large quantities of it in
fevers, in some sorts of colics, and other accute diseases; and think it
corrects the acrimony of the humors, removes obstructions of the viscera, and
restores decayed sight. That the gout and stone are unknown in China, is
ascribed to the use of this plant. Some of the virtues attributed to tea, are
undoubtedly imaginary, and it has bad effects upon some constitutions; but
experience shows, that several advantages attend the drinking it with
discretion. It quickens the senses, prevents drowsiness, corrects the heat of
the liver, removes the headache, especially that proceeding from a crapula, and
being greatly astringent, it strengthens the tone of the stomach.

CHINESE TRAVELLER.
SECT. XXXVI. OF THE PRIVATE LIFE OF THE EGYPTIAN LADIES.
IN Europe, women act parts of great consequnce, and often reign sovereigns on
the world's vast theater: they influence manners and morals, and decide on the
most important events; the fate of nations is frequently in their hands. How
different in Egypt, where they are bowed down by the fetters of slavery,
condemned to servitude, and have no influence in public affairs. Their empire
is confined within the walls of the Harem. There are their graces and charms
entombed. The circle of their life extends not beyond their own family and
domestic duties.

Their first care is to educate their children, and a numerous posterity is
their most fervent wish. Mothers always suckle their children. This is
expressly commanded by Mahomet. "Let the mother suckle her child full two
years, if the child does not quit the breast; but she shall be permitted to
wea^^ it with the consent of her husband."

When obliged by circumstances to take a nurse, they do not treat her as a
stranger. She becomes one of the family, and passes her days amidst the
children she has suckled, by whom she is cherished and honored as a second
mother.

Racine, who possessed not only genius, but all the knowledge necessary to
render genius conspicuous, stored with the learning of the finest works of
Greece, and well acquainted with oriental manners, gives Phaedra her nurse as
her sole confidante. The wretched queen, infected by a guilty passion she could
(...) conquer, while the fatal secret oppressed a heart that durst not unload
itself, could not resolve to speak her thoughts to the tender AEnone, till the
latter had said, " Cruelle, quand ma foi vous a-telle decue
" Songez-vous, qu'en naissant, mes bras vous out recue?
" When, cruel queen, by me were you deceived?
" Did I not first receive you in these arms?


The harem is the cradle and school of infancy. The newborn feeble being is
not there swaddled and filleted up in a swathe, the source of a thousand
diseases. Laid ^naked on a mat, exposed in a vast chamber to the pure air, he
breathes freely, and with his delicate limbs sprawls at pleasure. The new
element in which he is to live, is not entered with pain and tears. Daily
bathed beneath his mother's eye, he grows apace. Free to act, he tries his
coming powers; rolls, crawls, rises, and should he fall, cannot much hurt
himself on the carpet or mat which covers the floor.

He is not banished his father's house when seven years old, and sent to
college with the loss of health and innocence. He does not, it is true, acquire
much learning. He perhaps can only read and write; but he is healthy, robust,
fears God, respects old age, has filial piety, and delights in hospitality;
which virtues continually practiced in his family, remain deeply engraven in
his heart.

The daughter's education is the same. Whalebone and busks, which martyr
European girls they know not. They are only covered with a shift till six years
old; and the dress they afterward wear, confines none of their limbs, but
suffers the body to take its true form: and nothing is more uncommon than
ricketty children and crooked people. Man rises in all his majesty, and woman
displays every charm of person in the East. In Georgia and Greece, those fine
marking outlines, those admirable forms, which the Creator gave the chief of
his works, are best preserved. Apelles would still find models worthy of his
pencil there.

The care of their children does not wholly employ the women. Every other
domestic concern is theirs. They overlook their household, and do not think
themselves debased, by preparing their own food, and that of their husbands.
Former customs still subsisting, render these cares duties. Thus Sarah hastened
to bake cakes upon the hearth, while angels visited Abraham, who performed the
rights of hospitality. Menelaus thus entreats the departing Telemachus: Yet
stay, my friends, and in your chariot take
The noblest presents that our love can make;
Mean time, commit we to our women's care
Some choice domestic viands to prepare.
Pope's Odyssey, Lib. 15.

Subject to the immutable laws by which custom governs the east, the women do
not associate with the men, not even at table Sarah, who prepared the dinner
for Abraham and his guests, sat not at table, but remained in her tent.
, where the union of sexes produces mirth, and wit, and makes food more sweet.
When the great incline to dine with one of their wives, she is informed,
prepares the apartment, perfumes it with precious essences, procures the most
dilicate viands, and receives her lord with the utmost attention and respect.
Among the common people, the women usually stand, or sit in a corner of the
room, while the husband dines, often hold the basin for him to wash, and serve
him at table I lately dined with an Italian, who had married an Egyptian woman,
and assumed their manners, having long lived in that country. His wife and
sister in law stood in my presence, and it was with difficulty I prevailed on
them to sit at table with us, where they were extremely timid and disconcerted.
. Customs like these, which the Europeans rightly call barbarous, and exclaim
against with justice, appear so natural here, that they do not suspect it can
be otherwise elsewhere. Such is the power of habit over man. What has been for
ages, he supposes a law of nature.

Though thus employed, the Egyptian women have much leisure, which they spend
among their slaves, embroidering sashes, making veils, tracing designs to
decorate their sofas, and in spinning. Such Homer painted the women of his
times.

" But not as yet the fatal news had spread
" To fair Andromache of Hector dead;
" As yet no messenger had told his fate,
" Nor even his stay without the Scaean gate,
" Far in the close recesses of the dome,
" Pensive she plied the melancholy loom;
" A growing work employed her secret hours,
" Confuss'dly gay with intermingled flowers,
" Her fair hair'd handmaids heat the brazen urn,
" The bath preparing for her lord's return."
Pope's Iliad, Lib. 22^. Telemachus, seeing Penelope speak to (...) suitors on
affairs to which he thought her incompetent, says -- O royal mother! ever
honored name!
Permit me, cries Telemachus, to claim
A son's just right, No Grecian prince but I
Has power this bow to grant, or to deny.
Of all that Ithaca's rough hills contain,
And all wide Elis' courser-breeding plain,
To me alone my father's arms descend;
And mine alone they are to give or lend.
Retire, oh queen! thy household task resume.
Tend with thy maids the labors of the loom;
The bow, the darts, and arms of chivalry,
These cares to man belong, and most to me."
Pope's Odyssey, Lib. 21.

The Queen, far from being offended at this freedom, retired, admiring the
manly wisdom of her son.

Labor has its relaxations. Pleasure is not banished the harem. The nurse
recounts the history of past times, with a feeling which her hearers
participate. Cheerful and passionate songs are accompanied by the slaves, with
the tambour de basque and castanets. Sometimes the Almai come, to enliven the
scene with their dance, and effecting recitals, and by relating amorous
romances; and at the close of the day there is a repast, in which exquisite
fruits and perfumes are served with profusion. Thus do they endeavor to charm
away the dullness of captivity.

Not that they are wholly prisoners: once or twice a week they are permitted to
go to the bath, and visit female relations and friends. To bewail the dead is,
likewise, a duty they are allowed to perform. I have often seen distracted
mothers round Grand Cairo, reciting funeral hymns over the tombs they had
strewed with odoriferous plants. Thus Hecuba and Andromache lamented over the
body of Hector; and thus Fatima and Sophia wept over Mahomet.

"O my father! (said Fatima) minister of the Most-High! Prophet of the most
merciful God! And art thou gone? With thee divine revelation is gone also! The
angel Gabriel has, henceforth, for ever taken his slight into the high heavens!
Power supreme! hear my last prayer; hasten to unite my soul to his; let me
behold his face; deprive me not of the fruit of his righteousness, nor of his
intercession at the day of judgment.

Then taking a little of the dust from the coffin, and putting it to her face,
she adds,

"Who, having smelt the dust of his tomb, can ever find odor in the most
exquisite perfumes! Alas! agreeable sensations are all extinct in my heart! The
clouds of sorrow envelope me, and will change the brightest day to dismal
night!"

This custom was not unknown to the Romans. They had their funeral urns strewed
with cypress. How charmingly does the elegant Horace shed flowers over that of
Quinctilius! How effecting, how passionate is the ode he addresses to Virgil on
the death of their common friend.

" Wherefore restrain the tender tear?
" Why blush to weep for one so dear?
" Sweet muse, of melting voice and lyre,
" Do thou the mournful song inspire.
" Quinctilius -- sunk to endless rest,
" With death's eternal sleep oppressed!
" Oh! when shall Faith, of so^^, sincere,
" Of justice pure, the sister fair,
" And Modesty, unspotted maid,
" And Truth in artless guise arrayed,
" Among the race of human kind,
" An equal to Quinctilius find?
" How did the good, the virtuous mourn,
" And pour their sorrows over his urn?
" But, Virgil, thine the loudest strain,
" Yet all thy pious grief is vain.
" In vain do you the gods implore,
" Thy loved Quinctilius to restore;
" Whom on far other terms they gave,
" By nature fated to the grave.
" What though you can the lyre command,
" And sweep its tones with softer hand
" Than Orpheus, whose harmonious song
" Once drew the listening trees along,
" Yet never returns the vital heat,
" The shadowy form to animate;
" For when the ghost compelling god
" Forms his black troops with horrid rod,
" He will not, lenient to the breath
" Of prayer, unbar the gates of death.
" It Is hard, but patience must endure,
" And soothe the woes it cannot cure."
Francis's Horace, Lib. 1. Od. 24. Among European nations, where ties of
kindred are much relaxed, they rid themselves all they can of the religious
duties which ancient piety paid the dead; but the reason why we die unregretted
is, because we have had the misfortune to live unbeloved.

The Egyptian women receive each other's visits very affectionately. When a
lady enters the harem, the mistress rises, takes her hand, presses it to her
bosom, kisses, and makes her sit down by her side; a slave hastens to take her
black mantle; she is intreat-to be at ease, quits her veil and her outward
shift A habit of ceremony which covers the dress, and greatly resembles a
shift. It is thrown off on setting down, to be more at ease, and is called in
Arabic, camis.
, and discovers a floating robe, tied round the waist with a sash, which
perfectly displays her shape. She then receives compliments according to their
manner. "Why, my mother, or my sister, have you been so long absent? We sighed
to see you! Your presence is an honor to our house! It is the happiness of our
lives! Such titles as madam, miss, or mistress, are unknown in Egypt. A woman
advanced in years is called my mother when young, my sister; and, if a girl,
daughter of the house.
"

Slaves present coffee, sherbet, and confectionary. They laugh, talk, and play.
A large dish is placed on the sofa, on which are oranges, pomegranates,
bananas, and excellent melons. Water, and rose water mixed, are brought in an
ewer, and with them a silver basin to wash the hands, and loud glee and merry
conversation season the meal. The chamber is perfumed by wood of aloes, in a
brazier; and the repast ended, the slaves dance to the found of cymbals, with
who the mistresses often mingle. At parting they sever^^ times repeat, God keep
you in health! Heaven grant you a numerous offspring! Heaven preserve your
children; the delight and glory of your family!

While a visitor is in the harem, the husband must not enter; it is the asylum
of hospitality, and cannot be violated without fatal consequences; a cherished
right, which the Egyptian women carefully maintain, being interested in its
preservation. A lover, disguised like a woman, may be introduced into the
forbidden place Harem, signifies forbidden place.
, and it is necessary he should remain undiscovered; death would otherwise be
his reward. In this country, where the passions are excited by the climate, and
the difficulty of gratifying them, love often produces tragical events.

The Turkish women go, guarded by their eunuchs, upon the water also, and enjoy
the charming prospects of the banks of the Nile. Their cabins are pleasant,
richly embellished, and the boats well carved and painted. They are known by
the blinds over the windows, and the music by which they are accompanied.

When they cannot go abroad, they endeavor to be merry in their prison. Toward
sunsetting they go on the terrace, and take the fresh air among the flowers
which are there carefully reared. Here they often bathe; and thus, at once,
enjoy the cool, limped water, the purfume of odoriferous plants, the balmy air,
and the starry host, which shine in the firmament.

Thus Bathsheba bathed, when David beheld her from the roof of his palace.

Such is the usual life of the Egyptian women. Their duties are to educate
their children, take care of their household, and live retired with their
family and their pleasures to visit, give feasts, in which they often yield to
excessive mirth and licentiousness, go on the water, take the air in orange
groves and listen to Almai. They deck themselves as carefully to receive their
acquaintance, as French women do to allure the men. Usually mild and timid,
they become daring and furious when under the dominion of violent love. Neither
Locks nor grim keepers can then prescribe bounds to their passions; which,
though death be suspended over their heads, they search the means to gratify,
and are seldom unsuccessful.

SAVARY.
SECT. XXXVII. OF NAPLES AND MOUNT VESUVIUS.
I AM persuaded that our physicians are under some mistake with regard to this
climate. It is certainly one of the warmest in Italy; but it is as certainly
one of the most inconstant; and from what we have observed, disagrees with the
greatest part of our valetudinarians; but more particularly with the gouty
people, who have all found themselves better at Rome; which, though much colder
in winter, is, I believe, a healthier climate. Naples, to be sure, is more
eligible in summer, as the air is constantly refreshed by the sea breeze, when
Rome is often scorched by the most insupportable heat.

We have some very agreeable society amongst ourselves here, though we cannot
boast much of that with the inhabitants. There are to be sure many good people
among them; but in general, there is so very little analogy betwixt an English
and a Neapolitan mind that the true social harmony, that great sweetener of
human life, can seldom be produced. In lieu of this, (the exchange you will say
is but a bad one) the country round Naples abounds so much in every thing that
is curious, both in nature and art, and affords so ample a field of speculation
for the naturalist and antiquary, that a person of any curiosity may spend some
months here very agreeably, and not without profit.

Besides the discoveries of Herculaneum and Pompeia, which of themselves,
afford a great fund of entertainment, the whole coast that surrounds this
beautiful bay, particularly that near Puzzoli, Cuma, Micenum, and Baia, is
covered with innumerable monuments of Roman magnificence. But, alas? how are
the mighty fallen! This delightful coast, once the garden of all Italy, and
inhabited only by the rich, the gay, and luxurious, is now abandoned to the
poorest and most miserable of mortals. Perhaps there is no spot on the globe
that has undergone so through a change, or that can exhibit so striking a
picture of the vanity of human grandeur. Those very walls that once lodged a
Caesar, a Lucullus, an Anthony, the richest and most voluptuous of mankind, are
now occupied by the very meanest and most indigent wretches on earth, who are
actually starving for want in those very apartments that were the scenes of the
greatest luxury. There we are told that suppers were frequently given that cost
fifty thousand pounds; and some that even amounted to double that sum.

The luxury indeed of Baia was so great, that it became a proverb, even amongst
the luxurious Romans themselves; and at Rome, we often find them unbraiding
with eff^miuacy and epicurism, those who spent much of their time in this scene
of delights. Clodius throws it in Cicero's teeth more than once: and that
orator's having purchased a villa ^here, hurt him not a little in the opinion
of the graver and more austere part of the senate. The walls of these palaces
still remain, and the poor peasants, in some places, have built up their
miserable huts within them; but at present, there is not one gentleman or man
of fashon residing in any part of this country: the former state of which,
compared with the present, certainly makes the most striking contrast
imaginable. We rode over the greatest part of it a-shooting porcupines, a new
species of diversion which I had never heard of before. We killed, several of
these animals on the Monte Barbaro, the place which formerly produced the
Falernian wine, but now a barren waste. The novelty of this sport was to me its
greatest merit; and I would not at any time give a day of patridge for a month
of Porcupine shooting. Neither, indeed is the flesh of these animals the most
delicious in the world. It is extremely luscious, and soon palls upon the
appetite.

The bay of Naples, surrounded by the most beautiful scenery in the world,
deserves a particular description. It is of a circular figure; in most places
upwards of twenty miles in diameter; so that including all its breaks and
inequalities, the circumference is considerably more than sixty miles. The
whole of this space is so wonderfully diversified, by all the riches both of
art and nature, that there is scarce an object wanting to render the scene
complete; and it is hard to say, whether the view is more pleasing from the
singularity of many of these objects, or from the incredible variety of the
whole. You see an amazing mixture of the ancient and modern; some rising to
fame, and some sinking to ruin. Palaces reared over the tops of other palaces,
and ancient magnificence trampled under foot by modern folly. -- Mountains and
islands, that were celebrated for their fertility, changed into barren wastes,
and barren wastes into fertile fields and rich vineyards. Mountains sunk into
plains, and plains swelled into mountains. Lakes drank up by volcanos, and
extinguished volcanos turned into lakes. The earth still smoking in many
places, and in others throwing out flame. In short, nature seems to have formed
this coast in her most capricious mood; for every object is a lusus natur^^.
She never seems to have gone seriously to work; but to have devoted this spot
to the most unlimited indulgence of caprice and frolic.

The bay is shut out from the Mediterranean by the island of Capre, so famous
for the abode of Augustus; and afte^wards so infamous for that of Tiberius. A
little to the west lie those of Ischia, Procida, and Misida; the celebrated
promontory of Micaenum, where AEneas landed; the classic fields of Baia, Cuma,
and Puzzoli, with all the variety of scenery that formed both the Tartarus and
Elysium of the ancients; the Campi Phlegrei, or burning Plains, where Jupiter
overcame the giants; the Monte Novo, formed of late years by fire; the Monte
Barbaro; the picturesque city of Puzzoli, with the Solfaterra smoking above it;
the beautiful promontory of Paussillippe, exhibiting the finest scenery that
can be imagined; the great and opulent city of Naples, with its three castles,
its harbor full of ships from every nation, its palaces, churches, and
convents innumerable. The rich country from thence to Portici, covered with
noble houses and gardens, and appearing only a continuation of the city. The
palace of the King, with many others surrounding it, all built over the roofs
of those of Herculaneum, buried near a hundred feet by the eruptions of
Vesuvius. The black fields of lava that have (...) from that mountain,
intermixed with gardens, vineyards, and orchards. Vesuvius itself, in the back
ground of the scene, discharging volumes of fire and smoke, and forming a broad
track in the air over our heads, extending without being broken or dissipated,
to the utmost verge of the horizon: a variety of beautiful towns and villages,
round the base of the mountain, thoughtless of the impending ruin that daily
threatens them. Some of these are reared over the very roofs of Pompeia and
Stabia, where ^liny perished, and with their foundations have pierced through
the sacred abodes of the ancient Romans; thousands of whom lie buried here, the
victims of this inexorable mountain. Next follows the extensive and romantic
coast of Castello Mare, Sorrentum, and Mola, diversified with every picturesque
object in nature. It was the study of this wild and beautiful country that
formed our greatest land scape-painters. This was the school of Poussin, and
Salvator Rosa, but more particularly of the last, who composed many of his most
celebrated pieces from the bold craggy rocks that surround this coast; and no
doubt it was from the daily contemplation of these romantic objects that they
stored their minds with that veriety of ideas they have communicated to the
world with such elegance in their works.

Now, should I say that this extensive coast, this prodigious variety of
mountains, valleys, promontories, and islands, covered with an everlasting
verdure, and loaded with the richest fruits, is all the produce of subteraneous
fire; it would require, I am afraid, too great a stretch of faith to believe
me; yet the fact is certain, and can only be doubted by those who have wanted
time or curiosity to examine it. It is strange, one may say, that nature should
make use of the same agent to create as to destroy; and that what has only been
looked upon as the consumer of countries, is infact the very power that
produces them. Indeed, this part of our earth seems already to have undergone
the sentence pronounced upon the whole of it; but, like the phoenix, has risen
again from its own ashes, in much greater beauty and splendor than before it
was consumed. The traces of these dreadful conflagrations are still conspicuous
in every corner; they have been violent in their operations, but in the end
have proved salutary in their effects. The fire in many places is not yet
extinguished, but Vesuvius is now the only spot where it rages with any degree
of activity.

BRYDONE.
SECT. XXXVIII. OF STROMBOLO.
THE Lipari Islands are very picturesque, and several of them still emit smoke,
particularly Volcano and Volcanello; but none of them, for some ages past,
except Strombolo, have made any eruptions of fire. It appears to be a Volcano
of a very different nature from Vesuvius, the explositions of which succeed one
another with some degree of regularity, and have no great variety of duration.
I cannot account for the variety of Strombolo. -- Sometimes its explosions
resemble those of Vesuvius, and the light seems only to be occasioned by the
quantity of fiery stones thrown into the air; and as soon as these have fallen
down, it appears to be extinguished, till another explosion causes a fresh
illumination. This I have observed always to be the case with Vesuvius, except
when the lava has risen to the summit of the mountain, and continued without
variety to illuminate the air round it. The light from Strombolo evidently
depends on some other cause. Sometimes a clear red flame issues from the (...)
of the mountain, and continues to blaze without interruption, for near the
space of half an hour. The fire is of a different color from the explosions of
stones, and is evidently produced from a different cause. It would seem as if
some inflammable substance were suddenly kindled up in the bowels of the
mountain.

The crater of Strombolo seems to be different from that of Vesuvius, and all
the old volcanoes that surrounded Naples. Of these, the craters are without
exception in the center, and from the highest part of the mountain. That of
Strombolo is on its side, and not within two hundred yards of its summit. From
the crater to the sea, the island is entirely composed of the same sort of
ashes and burnt matter as the conical part of Vesuvius; and the quantity of
this matter is perpetually increasing, from the uninterrupted discharge from
the mountain; for of all the volcanos we read of, Strombolo seems to be the
only one that burns without ceasing. AEtna and Vesuvius often lie quiet for
many months, even years, without the least appearance of fire, but Strombolo is
ever at work, and for ages past has been looked upon as the great light-house
of these seas.

It is truly wonderful, how such a constant and immense fire is maintained, for
thousands of years, in the midst of the ocean! That of the other Lipari islands
seem now almost extinct, and the force of the whole to be concentered in
Strombolo, which acts as one great vent to them all. We still observe Volcano
and Volcanello throwing out volumes of smoke, but during the whole night we
could not perceive the least spark of fire from either of them.

It is probable, that Strombolo, as well as all the rest of these islands, is
originally the work of subterraneous fire. The matter of which they are
composed, in a manner demonstrates this; and many of the Sicilian authors
confirm it. There are now eleven of them in all, and none of the ancients
mention more than seven. Fazzello, one of the best Sicilian authors, gives an
account of the production of Volcano, now one of the most considerable of these
islands. He says it happened in the early time of the republic, and is recorded
by Eusebius, Pliny, and others. He adds, that even in his time, in the
beginning of the sixteenth century, it still discharged quantities of fire and
of pumice stones; but that in the preceding century there had been a very
great eruption of this island, which shook all Sicily, and alarmed the coast of
Italy as far as Naples. He says the sea boiled all around the island, and rocks
of a vast size were discharged from the crater; that fire and smoke in many
places pierced through the waves, and that the navigation amongst these islands
was totally changed; rocks appearing where it was formerly deep water; and many
of the straits and shallows were entirely filled up. He observes that
Aristotle, in his book on meteors, takes notice of a very early eruption of
this island, by which not only the coast of Sicily, but likewise many cities in
Italy were covered with ashes. It has probably been that very eruption which
formed the island. He describes Strombolo to have been, in his time, pretty
much the same as at this day; only that it then produced a great quantity of
cotton, which is not now the case. The greatest part of it appears to be
barren. On the north side there are a few vineyards; but they are very meagre.

BRYDONE.
SECT. XXXIX. AN ACCOUNT OF THE ERUPTION OF MOUNT VESUVIUS, WHICH HAPPENED IN
AUGUST, 1779.
AS many poetical descriptions of this eruption will not be wanting, I shall
confine mine to simple matter of fact, in plain prose, and endeavor to convey
to my readers, as clearly and distinctly as I am able, what I saw myself, and
the impression it made upon me at the time, without aiming in the least at a
flowery style.

The usual symptoms of an approaching eruption, such as rumbling noises and
explosions within the bowels of the volcano, a quantity of smoke issuing with
force from its crater, accompanied at times with an emission of red hot scoriae
and ashes, were manifest, more or less, during the whole month of July; and
toward the end of the month, those symptoms were increased to such a degree,
as to exhibit in the night time the most beautiful fireworks that can be
imagined.

These kinds of throws of red-hot scoriae, and other volcanic matter, which at
night are so bright and luminous, appear, in broad daylight like so many black
spots in the midst of the white smoke; and it is this circumstance which
occasions the vulgar and false supposition, that volcanos burn much more during
the night than in the daytime.

On Thursday the 5th August, about two o'clock in the afternoon, I perceived
from my villa at Pausilipo, in the bay of Naples, from whence one has a full
view of Vesuvius (which is just opposite, and at the distance of about six
miles in a direct line from it) that the volcano was in a most violent
agitation. A white and sulphurous smoke issued continually and impetuously
from its crater, one puff impelling another, and by an accumulation of those
clouds of smoke, resembling bales of the whitest cotton, such a mass of them
was soon piled over the top of the volcano, as exceeded the height and size of
the mountain itself at least four times. In the midst of this very white smoke,
an immense quantity of stones, scoriae, and ashes, were shot up to a wonderful
height, certainly not less than two thousand feet. I could also perceive, by
the help of one of Ramsden's most excellent refracting telescopes, at times, a
quantity of liquid lava, seemingly very weighty, just heaved up high enough to
clear the rim of the crater, and then take its course impetuously down the
steep side of Vesuvius, opposite to Somma. Soon after the lava broke out on the
same side, from about the middle of the conical part of the volcano, and having
run with violence some hours, ceased suddenly, just before it had arrived at
the cultivated parts of the mountain above Portici, near four miles from the
spot where it issued.

During this day's eruption, as I have been credibly informed since, the heat
was intolerable at the towns of Somma and Ottaiano, that the air was darkened
in such a manner, as that objects could not be distingushed at the distance of
ten feet. Long filaments of vitrified matter, like spun glass, were mixed, and
fell with these ashes; and the sulphurous smoke was so violent, that several
birds in cages were suffocated, and the leaves of the trees in the
neighborhood of Somma and Ottaiano were covered with white salts very
corrosive. About two o'clock in the afternoon, an extraordinary globe of smoke,
of a very great diameter, was distinctly perceived by many of the inhabitants
of Portici, to issue from the crater of Vesuvius, and proceed hastily toward
the mountain of Somma, against which it struck and dispersed itself, having
left a train of white smoke, marking the course it had taken. This train I
perceived plainly from my villa, as it lasted some minutes; but I did not see
the globe itself.

A poor labourer, who was making faggots on the mountain of Somma lost his life
at this time; and his body not having been found, it is supposed that,
suffocated by the smoke, he must have fallen into the valley from the craggy
rocks on which he was at work, and been covered by the (...) of lava, that took
its course through that valley soon after. An ass, that was waiting for its
master in the valley, left it very judiciously as soon as the mountain became
violent, and arriving safe home, gave the first alarm to this poor man's family.

It was generally remarked, that the explosions of the volcano were attended
with more noise during this day's eruption, than in any of the succeeding
one's, when, most probably, the mouth of Vesuvius was widened, and the volcanic
matter had a freer passage. It is certain, however, that the great eruption of
1767, (which in every other respect was mild when compared to the late violent
eruption) occasioned much greater concussions in the air by its louder
explosions.

Friday, August the 6th, the fermentation in the mountain was less violent; but
about noon there was a loud report, at which time it was supposed that a
portion of the little mountain within the crater had fallen in. At night the
throws from the crater increased, and proceeded evidently from two separate
mouths, which, emitting red-hot scoriae, and in different directions, formed a
most beautiful and almost continued firework.

On Saturday, August the 7th, the volcano remained much in the same state; but
about twelve o'clock at night, its fermentation ^^creased greatly. The second
fever fit of the mountain (...) said to have manifested itself at this time. I
was watching its motions from the mole of Naples, which has a full view of the
volcano, and had been witness to several glorious picturesque effects produced
by the reflection of the deep red fire which issued from the crater of
Vesuvius, and mounted up in the midst of the huge clouds, when a summer storm,
called here a tropea, come on suddenly, and blended its heavy watery clouds
with the sulphurous, and mineral ones, which were already like so many other
mountains, piled over the summit of the volcano. At this moment a fountain of
fire was shot up to an incredible height, casting so bright a light, that the
smallest objects could be clearly distinguished, at any place within six miles
or more of Vesuvius.

The black stormy clouds passing swiftly over, and at times covering the whole
or a part of the bright column of fire, at other times clearing away, and
giving a full view of it, with the various tints produced by its reverberated
light on the white clouds above, in contrast with the pale flashes of forked
lightning that attended the tropea, formed such a scene as no power of art can
ever express.

That which followed the next evening was surely much more formidable and
alarming; but this was more beautiful and sublime than even the most lively
imagination can paint to itself. This great explosion did not last above (...)
minutes, after which Vesuvius was totally eclipsed by the dark clouds, and
there fell a heavy shower of rain.

Some scoriae and small stones fell at Ottaiano during this eruption, and some
of a very great size in the valley between Vesuvius and the hermitage. All the
inhabitants of the towns at the foot of the volcano were in the greatest alarm,
and preparing to abandon their houses, had the eruption continued longer.

One of his Sicilian majesty's game keepers, who was out in the fields near
Ottaiano, whilst this combined storm was at its height, was greatly surprised
to find the drops of rain scald his face and hands, which phenomenon was
probably occasioned by the clouds having acquired a great deal of heat in
passing through the above mentioned column of fire. The king of Naples did me
the honor of informing me of this curious circumstance.

Sunday, August the eighth, Vesuvius was quiet till toward six o'clock in the
evening, when a great smoke began to gather again over its c^ater, and about an
hour after, a rumbling subterraneous noise was heard in the neighborhood of
the volcano; the usual throws of red-hot stones and scoriae began and increased
every instant. I was at this time at Pausilipo, in the company of several of my
countrymen, observing with good telescopes the various phenomena in the crater
of Vesuvius, which, (...) help, we could distinguish as well as if we had been
actually seated on the summit of the volcano. The crater seemed much enlarged
by the violence of last night's explosions, and the little mountain no longer
existed. About nine o'clock there was a loud report, which shook the houses of
Portici and its neighborhood to such a degree, as to alarm their inhabitants,
and drive them (...) into the streets; and as I have since seen, many windows
were broken and walls cracked, by the confusion of the air from that explosion,
though faintly heard at Naples.

In an instant a fountain of liquid, transparent fire began to rise, gradually
increasing, arrived at so amazing a height as to strike every one who beheld
it with the most awful astonishment. I shall scarcely be credited when I
affirm, that, to the best of my judgment, the height of this stupendous column
of fire could not be less than three times that of Vesuvius itself, which rises
perpendicularly near 3700 feet above the level of the sea.

Puffs of smoke, as black as can possibly be imagined, succeeded one another
hastily, and accompanied the red-hot transparent and liquid lava, interrupting
its splendid brightness here and there by patches of the darkest hue.

Within these puffs of smoke, at the very moment of their emission from the
crater, I could perceive a bright, but pale electrical fire, briskly playing
about in zig-zag lines.

The wind was S. W. and though gentle, was sufficient to carry these detatched
clouds or puffs of smoke out of the column of fire; and a collection of them,
by degrees, formed a black and extensive curtain (if I may be allowed the
expression) behind it; in other parts of the sky it was perfectly clear and the
stars were bright.

The fiery fountain, of so gigantic a size upon the dark ground
abovementioned, made the most glorious contrast imaginable, and the blaze of
it reflected strongly on the surface of the sea, which was at that time
perfectly smooth, added greatly to this sublime view.

The liquid lava, mixed with stones and scoriae, after having mounted, I verily
believe, at the least ten thousand feet, was partly directed by the wind
toward Ottaiano, and partly falling almost perpendicularly, still red-hot and
liquid, on Vesuvius, covered its whole cone, part of that of the mountain of
Somma, and the valley between them. The falling matter being nearly as vivid
and inflamed, as that which was continually issuing fresh from the crater,
formed with it one complete body of fire, which could not be less than two
miles and a half in breadth, and of the extraordinary height above mentioned,
casting a heat to the distance of at least six miles around it.

The brush-wood on the mountain of Somma was soon in a blaze; which flame being
of a different tint from the deep red of the matter thrown out of the volcano,
and from the silvery blue of the electrical fire, still added to the contrast
of this most extraordinary scene.

The black cloud increasing greatly, once bent toward Naples, and seemed to
threaten this fair city with speedy destruction; for it was charged with
electrical matter, which kept constantly darting about it in strong and bright
zig-zags, just like those described by Pliny the younger in his letter to
Tacitus, and which accompanied the great eruption of Vesuvius that proved fatal
to his uncle. "Ab altero latere, nubes atra et horrenda, ignei spiritus tortois
vibratisque discursibus rupta, in longas flammarum figuras dehiscebat;
fulgoribus illae et similis et majores."

This volcanic lightning, however, as I particularly remarked, very rarely
quitted the cloud, but usually returned to the great column of fire toward the
crater of the volcano from whence it originally came. Once or twice, indeed, I
saw this lightning (or ferilla as it is called here) fall on the top of Somma,
and set fire to some dry grass and bushes.

Fortunately for us, the wind increasing from the S.W. quarter, carried back
the threatening cloud just as it had reached the city, and began to occasion
great alarm. All public diversions ceased in an instant, and the theaters being
shut, the doors of the churches were thrown open. Numerous processions were
formed in the streets, and women, and children, with disheveled heads filled
the air with their cries, insisting loudly upon the relics of St. Januarius
being immediately opposed to the fury of the mountain. In short, the populace
of this great city began to display its usual extravagant mixture of riot and
bigotry; and if some speedy and well-timed precautions had not been taken,
Naples would, Perhaps, have been in more danger of suffering from the
irregularities of its lower class of inhabitants, than from the angry volcano.

But to return to my subject. After the column of fire had continued in full
force near half an hour, the eruption ceased all at once, and Vesuvius remained
sullen and silent. After the dazzling light of the fiery fountain, all seemed
dark and dismal except the cone of Vesuvius, which was covered with glowing
cinders and scoriae, from under which, at times, here and there, small streams
of liquid lava had escaped, and rolled down the steep sides of the volcano.
This scene put me in mind of Martial's description of Etna.

"Cuncta jacent flammis, et tristi mersa savilla."
In the parts of Naples nearest Vesuvius, whilst the eruption lasted, a mixed
smell, like that of sulphur, with the vapors of an iron foundry, was sensible;
but nearer to the mountain that smell was very offensive, as I have often found
it in my visits to Vesuvius during an eruption.

Thus have I endeavored to convey to my readers, at least a faint idea of a
scene so glorious and sublime, as perhaps may have never before been viewed by
human eyes, at least in such perfection.

SIR W. HAMILTON.
SECT. XL. OF MOUNT AETNA. MAY 29, 1770.
A FEW days ago, we set off to visit Mount AEtna, that venerable and
respectable father of mountains. His base, and his immense declivities, are
covered over with a numerous progeny of his own; for every great eruption
produces a new mountain; and perhaps, by the number of these, better than by
any other method, the number of eruptions, and the age of AEtna itself, might
be ascertained.

The whole mountain is divided into three distinct regions, called La Regione
Culta, or Piedmontese, The Fertile Region; La Regione Sylvosa, or Nemorosa, The
Woody Region; and La Regione Deserta, or Scoperta, The Barren Region.

These three are as different, both in climate and productions, as the three
zones of the earth, and perhaps with equal propriety, might have been styled
the Torrid, the Temperate, and the Frigid zone. The first region surrounds the
foot of the mountain, and constitutes the most fertile country in the world on
all sides of it, to the extent of about fourteen or fifteen miles, where the
woody region begins. It is composed almost entirely of lava, which, after a
number of ages, is at last converted into the most fertile of all soils.

At Nicolosi, which is twelve miles up the mountain, we found the barometer at
27 1: at Catania it stood at 29 8 although the former elevation is not very
great, probably not exceeding 3000 feet, yet the climate was totally changed.
At Catania the harvest was entirely over, and the heats were insupportable;
here they were moderate, and in many places the corn is as yet green. The road
for these twelve miles is the worst I ever traveled; entirely over old lavas
and the mouths of extinguished volcanos, now converted into cornfieldsd,
vineyards, and orchards.

The fruit of this region is reckoned the finest in Sicily, particularly the
figs, of which they have a great variety. One of these of a very large size,
esteemed superior in flavor to all the rest, they pretend is peculiar to AEtna.

The great eruption of 1669, after shaking the whole country around for four
months, and forming a very large mountain of stones and ashes, burst out about
a mile above Monpelieri, and descending like a torrent, bore directly against
the middle of that mountain, and (they pretend) perforated it from side to
side. This however I doubt, as it must have broken the regular form of the
mountain, which is not the case. But certain it is, that it pierced it to a
great depth. The lava then divided into two branches; and surrounding this
mountain, joined again on its south side; and laying waste the whole country
betwixt that and Catania, scaled the walls of that city, and poured its flaming
torrent into the ocean. In its way, it is said to have destroyed the
possessions of near 30,000 people, and reduced them to beggary. It formed
several hills where there were formerly valleys, and filled up a large lake, of
which there is not now the least vestige to been seen.

As the events of this eruption are better known than any other, they tell a
great many singular stories of it; one of which, however incredible it may
appear, is well ascertained. A vineyard, belonging to a convent of Jesuits, lay
directly in its way; this vineyard was formed on an ancient lava, probably a
thin one, with a number of caverns and crevices under it. The liquid lava
entering into these caverns, soon filled them up, and by degrees bore up the
vineyards; and the Jesuits, who every moment expected to see it buried, beheld
with amazement the whole field began to move off. It was carried on the surface
of the lava to a considerable distance; and though the greatest part was
destroyed, yet some of it remains to this day.

We went to examine the mouth from whence this dreadful torrent issued; and
were surprised to find it only a small hole, of about three or four yards
diameter. The mountain from whence it sprung, I think, is little less than the
conical part of Vesuvius.

There is a vast cavern on the opposite side of it where people go to shoot
wild pigeons, which breed there in great abundance. The innermost parts of this
cavern are so very dismal and gloomy, that our landlord told us some people had
lost th^^ ^^enses from having advanced too far, imagining they saw devils and
the spirits of the damned, for it is still very generally believed here, that
AEtna is the mouth of hell.

We found a degree of wildness and ferocity in the inhabitants of this
mountain, that I have not observed any where else. It was with much difficulty
I could persuade them that we were not come to search for hidden treasures, a
great quantity of which they believe is to be found in Monpelieri; and when I
went to that mountain, they were then fully convinced that this was our
intention. Two of the men followed me, and kept a close eye on every step that
I took; and when I lifted any bit of lava or pumice, they came running up,
thinking it was something very precious; but when they observed they were only
bits of stones, and that I put them into my pocket, they laughed heartily,
talking to one another in their mountain jargon, which is unintelligible even
to Italians. However, as most of them speak Italian so as to be understood,
they asked me what I was going to make of those bits of stone? I told them they
were of great value in our country; that the people there had a way of making
gold of them. At this they both seemed exceedingly surprised, and spoke again
in their own tongue. However, I found they did not believe me. One of them told
me, if that had been true, I certainly would not have been so ready in (...)
it. But, said he, if it is so, we will serve you for ever, if you will teach us
that art; for then we shall be the richest people on earth. I assured them,
that I had not yet learned it myself, and that it was a secret known only to
very few. They were likewise a good deal surprised to see me pull out of my
pocket a magnetical needle, and a small electrometer, which I had prepared at
Catania to examine the electrical state of the air; and I was at first afraid
they should have taken me for a conjurer, (which already happened amongst the
Appenines) but luckily that idea did not strike them.

After leaving Nicolosi, and traveling for about an hour and a half over
barren ashes and lava, we arrived on the confines of the Regione Sylvosa, or
the Temperate Zone. As soon as we entered these delightful forests, we seemed
to have got into another world. The air, which before was sultry and hot, was
now cool and refreshing; and every breeze was loaded with a thousand perfumes,
the whole ground being covered over with the richest aromatic plants. Many
parts of this region are surely the most heavenly spots, upon earth; and if
AEtna resembles hell within, it may with equal justice be said to resemble
paradise without.

It is indeed a curious consideration, that this mountain should reunite every
beauty and every horror; and, in short, all the most opposite and dissimilar
objects in nature. Here you (...) a gulf that formerly threw out torrents of
fire, now covered with the most luxuriant vegetation; and from an object of
terror, become one of delight. Here you gather the most delicious fruit, rising
from what was but lately a black and barren rock. Here the ground is covered
with every flower; and we wander over these beauties, and contemplate this
wilderness of sweets, without considering that hell, with all its terrors, is
immediately under our feet; and that but a few yards separate us from lakes of
liquid fire and brimstone.

But our astonishment still increases, on casting our eyes on the higher
regions of the mountain. There we behold, in perpetual union, the two elements
that are at perpetual war; an immense gulf of fire, for ever existing in the
midst of snows which it has not power to melt, and immense fields of snow and
ice for ever surrounding this gulf of fire which they have not power to
distinguish.

The woody region of AEtna ascends for about eight or nine miles, and forms a
zone or girdle, of the brightest green, all around the mountain. This night w^
passed through little more than the half of it; arriving some time before
sunset at our lodgings, which was no other than a large cave, formed by one of
the most ancient and venerable lavas. It is called La Spelonca dal Capriole, or
the goats cavern, because frequented by those animals, (...) refuge there in
bad weather.

Here we were delighted with the contemplation of many grave and beautiful
objects; the prospect on all sides is immense; and we already seem to be lifted
up from the earth, and to have got into a new world.

After taking a comfortable nap in the cave, on a bed of leaves, we awoke about
eleven o'clock; and melting down a sufficient quantity of snow, w^ boiled our
tea-kettle, and made a hearty meal to prepare us for the remaining part of our
expedition. We were nine in number; for we had our three servants, the Cyclops
(our conductor) and two men to take care of our mules. The Cyclops now began to
display his great knowledge of the mountain, and we followed him with implicit
confidence. He conducted us over "Antres ^ast, and Deserts wild," where scarce
human (...) had ever trod. Sometimes through gloomy forests, which by daylight
were delightful; but now, from the universal darkness, the rustling of the
trees, the heavy, dull, bellowing of the mountain, the vast expanse of ocean
stretched at an immense distance below us, inspired a kind of awful horror.
Sometimes we found ourselves ascending great rocks of lava, where if our mules
should make but a false step, we might be thrown headlong over the precipice.
However, by the assistance of the Cyclops, we overcame all these difficulties;
and he managed matters so well, that in the space of two hours, we fou^^ (...)
had got above the regions of vegetation, and had left the forest of AEtna far
behind. These appeared now like a dark gloomy gulf below us, that surrounded
the mountain.

The prospect before us was of a very different nature; we beheld an expanse of
snow and ice that alarmed us exceedingly, and almost staggered our resolution.
In the center of this, but still at a great distance, we descried the high
summit of the mountain, rearing its tremendous head, and vomiting out torrents
of smoke. It indeed appeared altogether inaccessable, from the vast extent of
the fields of snow and ice that surround it. Our diffidence was still increased
by the sentiments of the Cyclops. He told us that it often happened that the
surface of the mountain being hot below, melted the snow in particular spots,
and formed pools of water, where it was impossible to foresee our danger; that
it likewise happened, that the surface of the water, as well as the snow, was
sometimes covered with black ashes, that rendered it exceedingly deceitful;
that, however, if we thought proper, he would lead us on with as much caution
as possible. Accordingly; after holding a council of war, which people
generally do when they are very much afraid, we detached our cavalry to the
forest below, and prepared to climb the snow. The Cyclops, after taking a great
draught of brandy, desired us to be of good cheer; that we had (...) of time,
and might take as many rests as we pleased; that the snow could be little more
than seven miles, and that we certainly should be able to pass it before
sunrise. Accordingly, taking each of us a dram of liqueur, which soon removed
every objection, we began our march.

BRYDONE.
SECT. XLI. A VIEW OF THE STARS AND RISING SUN FROM MOUNT AETNA.
The ascent for some time was not steep; and as the surface of the snow sunk a
little, we had tolerable good footing: but as it soon began to grow steeper, we
found labor greatly increase. However, we determined to persevere, calling to
mind in the midst of our labor, that the Emperor Adrian, and the pholosopher
Plato had undergone the same, and from the same motive too; to see the rising
sun from the top of AEtna. After incredible labor and fatigue, but at the same
time mixed with a great deal of pleasure, we arrived before dawn at the ruins
of an ancient structure, called Il Torre del Filosefo, supposed to have been
built by the philosopher Empedocles, who took up his habitation here, the
better to study the nature of Mount AEtna. By others it is supposed to be the
(...) of a temple of Vulcan, whose shop, all the world knows, (where he used to
make excellent thunderbolts and celestial armor, as well as nets to cach his
wife when she went astray) was ever kept in mount AEtna. Here we rested
ourselves for some time, and made a fresh application to our liqueur bottle,
which I am persuaded both Vulcan and Empedocles, had they been here, would have
greatly approved of after such a march.

I found the mercury had fallen to 20. 6. We had now time to pay our adorations
in a silent contemplation of the sublime objects of nature. The sky was clear,
and the immense vault of the heavens appeared in awful majesty and splendor.
We found ourselves more struck with veneration than below, and at first were at
a loss to know the cause; till we observed with astonishment, that the number
of stars seemed to-be infinitely increased, and the light of each of them
appeared brighter than usual. The whiteness of the milky way was like a pure
flame that shot across the heavens; and with the naked eye we could observe
clusters of stars that were invisible in the regions below. We did not at first
attend to the cause, nor recollect that we had now passed through ten or twelve
thousand feet of gross vapor, that blunts and confuses every ray, before it
reaches the surface of the earth. We were amazed at the distinctness of vision,
and exclaimed together, What a glorious situation for an observatory! Had
Empedocles had the eyes of Galileo, what discoveries must he not have made! We
regretted that Jupiter was not visible, as I am persuaded we might have
discovered some of his satellites with the naked eye, or at least with a small
glass, which I had in my pocket. We observed a light a great way below us on
the mountain, which seemed to move amongst the forests, but whether an Ignis
Fatuus, or what it was, I shall not pretend to say. We likewise took notice of
several of those meteors, called Falling Stars, which still appeared to be as
much elevated above us, as when seen from the plain; so that in all
probability, th^^e bodies move in regions much beyond the bounds that some
philosophers have assigned to our atmosphere.

After contemplating these objects for some time, we set off, and soon after
arrived at the foot of the great crater of the mountain. This is of an exact
conical figure, and rises equally on all sides. It is composed solely of ashes
and other burnt materials, discharged from the mouth of the volcano, which is
in its center. This conical mountain is of a very great size. Its circumference
cannot be less than ten miles. Here we took a second rest, as the greatest part
of our fatigue still remained. The mercury had fallen to 20 4 We found this
mountain excessively steep; and although it had appeared black, yet it was
likewise covered with snow; but the surface (luckily for us) was spread over
with a pretty thick layer of ashes, thrown out from the crater. Had it not been
for this, we never should have been able to get to the top, as the snow was
every where frozen hard and solid from the piercing cold of the air.

In about an hour's climbing, we arrived at a place where there was no snow,
and where a warm and comfortable vapor issued from the mountain, which induced
us to make another halt. Here I found the mercury at 19 6. The thermometer was
fallen three degrees below the point of congelation; and before we left the
summit of AEtnea, it fell two degrees more, viz. to 27. -- From this spot it
was only about three hundred yards to the highest summit of the mountain, (...)
arrived in full time to see the most wonderful and most sublime fight in nature.

But here description must ever fall short; for no imagination has dared to
form an idea of so glorious and so magnificent a scene. Neither is there on the
surface of this globe, any one point that unites so many awful and sublime
objects. The immense elevation from the surface of the earth, drawn as it were
to a single point without any neighboring mountain for the senses and
imagination to rest upon, and recover from their astonishment in their way down
to the world. This point or pinnacle raised on the brim of a bottomless gulf,
as old as the world, often discharging rivers of fire, and throwing out burning
rocks, with a noise that shakes the whole island. Add to this the unbounded
extent of the prospect, comprehending the greatest diversity, and the most
beautiful scenery in nature, with the risign sun advancing in the east to
illuminate the wondrous scene.

The whole atmosphere by degrees kindled up, and showed dimly and faintly the
boundless prospect around. Both sea and land looked dark and confused, as if
only emerging from their original chaos, and light and darkness seemed still
undivided; till the morning by degrees advancing, completed the separation. The
stars are extinguished, and the shades disappear. The forests, which but now
seemed black and bottomless gulphs, from whence no ray was reflected to show
their form or colors, appear a new creation rising to the sight, catching life
and beauty from every increasing beam. The scene still enlarges, and the
horizon seems to widen and expand itself on all sides; till the sun, like the
great Creator, appears in the east, and with his plastic ray completes the
mighty scene. -- All appears enchantment, and it is with difficulty we can
believe we are still on earth. The senses, unaccustomed to the sublimity of
such a scene, are bewildered and confounded; and it is not till after some
time, that they are capable of separating and judging of the objects that
compose it. The body of the sun is seen rising from the ocean, immense tracks
both of sea and land intervening; the islands of Lipari, Panari, Alicud^,
Strombolo, and Volcano, with their smoking summits, appear under your feet; and
you look down on the whole of Sicily as on a map, and can trace every river
through all its windings from its source to its mouth. The view is absolutely
boundless on every side; nor is there any one object within the circle of
vision to interrupt it; so that the sight is every where lost in the immensity:
and I am persuaded it is only from the imperfection of our organs, that the
coasts of Africa, and even of Greece, are not discovered, as they are certainly
above the horizon. The circumference of the visible horizon on the top of
AEtna, cannot be less than 2000 miles. At Malta, which is near 200 miles
distant, they perceive all the eruptions from the second region, and that
island is often discovered from about one half the elevation of the mountain;
so that at the whole elevation, the horizon must extend to near double that
distance, or 400 miles, which makes 800 for the diameter of the circle, and
2400 for the circumference. But this is by much too vast for our senses, not
intended to grasp so boundless a scene.

I find indeed, by some of the Sicilian authors, particularly, Massa, that the
African coast as well as that of Naples, with many of its islands, have been
discovered from the top of AEtna. Of this, however, we cannot boast, though we
can very well believe it. Indeed, if we knew the height of the mountain, it
would be easy to calculate the extent of its visible horizon, and ( vice versa)
if its visible horizon were exactly ascertained, it would be an easy matter to
calculate the height of the mountain.

But the most beautiful part of the scene is certainly the mountain itself; the
island of Sicily, and the numerous islands lying round it. All these, by a kind
of magic in vision, that I am at a loss to account for, seem as if they were
brought close round the skirts of AEtna, the distances appearing reduced to
nothing. Perhaps this singular effect is produced by the rays of light passing
from a rarer medium into a denser, which (from a well-known law in optics) to
an observer in the rare medium, appears to lift up the objects that are at the
bottom of the dense one, as a piece of money placed in a basin appears lifted
up as soon as the basin is filled with water.

The Regione Deserta, or the frigid zone of AEtna, is the first object that
calls your attention. It is marked out by a circle of snow and ice, which
extends on all sides to the distance of about eight miles. In the center of
this circle, the great crater of the mountain rears its burning head; and the
regions of intense cold, and of intense heat, seem for ever to be united in the
same point. On the north side of the snowy region, they assure us there are
several small lakes that are never thawed; and that in many places, the snow,
mixed with the ashes and salts of the mountain, is accumulated to a vast depth.
And indeed I suppose the quantity of salts contained in this mountain is one
great reason of the preservation of its snows.

The Regione Deserta is immediately succeeded by the Sylvosa, or the woody
region, which forms a circle or girdle of the most beautiful green, which
surrounds the mountain on all sides, and is certainly one of the most
delightful spots on earth. This presents a remarkable contrast with the desert
region. It is not smooth and even like the greatest part of the latter; but it
is finely variegated by an infinite number of those beautiful little mountains
that have been formed by the different eruptions of AEtna. All these have now
acquired a wonderful degree of fertility, except a very few that are but newly
formed; that is, within these five or six hundred years: for it certainly
requires some thousands to bring them to their greatest degree of perfection.
We looked down into the craters of these, and attempted, but in vain, to number
them.

The circumference of this zone or great circle on AEtna, is not less than
seventy or eighty miles. It is evry where succeeded by the vineyards, orchards,
and cornfieldsd that compose the Regione Culta, or the fertile region. This
last zone is much broader than the others, and extends on all sides to the foot
of the mountain. Its whole circumference, according to Recupero, is 183 miles.
It is likewise covered with a number of little conical and spherical mountains,
and exhibits a wonderful variety of forms and colors, and makes a delightful
contrast with the other two regions. It is bounded by the sea to the south and
south-east, and on all its other sides by the river Semetus and Alcantara,
which run almost round it. The whole course of these rivers is seen at once,
and all their beautiful winding through these fertile valleys, looked upon as
the favorite possession of Ceres herself, and the very scene of the rape of
her daughter Proserpine.

Cast your eyes a little farther, and you embrace the whole island, and see all
its cities, rivers and mountains, delineated in the great chart of Nature: All
the adjacent islands, the whole coast of Italy, as far as your eye can reach;
for it is no where bounded, but every where lost in the space. On the sun's
first rising, the shadow of the mountain extends across the whole island, and
makes a large tract visible even in the sea, and in the air. By degrees this is
shortened, and in a little time is confined only to the neighborhood of AEtna.

We now had time to examine a fourth region of this wonderful mountain, very
different indeed from the others, and productive of very different sensations;
but which has, undoubtedly, given being to all the rest; I mean the region of
fire.

The present crater of this immense volcano is a circle of about three miles
and a half in circumference. It goes shelving down on each side, and forms a
regular hollow like a vast amphitheatre. From many places of this space, issue
volumes of sulphurous smoke, which being much heavier than the circumambient
air, instead of rising in it, as smoke generally does, immediately on its
getting out of the crater, rolls down the side of the mountain like a torrent,
till coming to that part of the atmosphere of the same specific gravity with
itself, it shoots off horizontally, and forms a large track in the air,
according to the direction of the wind; which happily for us, carried it
exactly to the side opposite to that where we were placed.

The crater is so hot, that it is very dangerous, if not immoffible, to go down
into it; besides the smoke is very incommodious, and, in many places, the
surface is so soft, there have been instances of people sinking down in it, and
paying for their temerity with their lives. Near the center of the crater is
the great mouth of the volcano: That tremendous gulf so celebrated in all
ages, looked upon as the terror and scourge both of this and another life; and
equally useful to ancient poets, or to modern divines, when the Muse or when
the Spirit inspires. We beheld it with awe and with horror, and were not
surprised that it had been considered as the place of the damned. When we
reflect on the immensity of its depth, the vast cells and caverns whence so
many lavas have issued; the force of its internal fire, to raise up those lavas
to so vast a height, to support them, as it were, in the air, and even to
force them over the very summit of the crater, with all their dreadful
accompaniments; the boiling of the matter, the shaking of the mountain, the
explosions of flaming rocks, etc. we must allow, that the most enthusiastic
imagination, in the midst of all its terrors, hardly ever formed an idea of a
hell more dreadful.

It was with a mixture both of pleasure and pain, that we quitted this awful
scene. But the wind had risen very high, and clouds began to gather round the
mountain. In a short time they formed like another heaven below us, and we were
in hopes of seeing a thunder-storm under our feet; A scene that is not uncommon
in these exalted regions, and which I have already seen on the top of the high
Alps. But the clouds were soon dispelled again by the force of the wind, and we
were disappointed in our expectations.

I had often been told of the great effect produced by discharging a gun on the
top of high mountains. I tried it here, when we were a good deal surprised to
find, that instead of increasing the sound, it was almost reduced to nothing.
The report was not equal to that of a pocket-pistol. We compared it to the
stroke of a stick on a door; and surely it is consistent with reason, that the
thinner the air is, the less its impression must be on the ear; for in a vacuum
there can be no noise; and the nearer the approach to a vacuum, the impression
must always be the smaller. Where those great effects have been produced, it
must have been amongst a number of mountains, where the sound is reverberated
from one to the other.

SECT. XLII. OF THE DESCENT FROM MOUNT AETNA; OF ITS HEIGHT AND OF THE
ELECTRICITY OF THE AIR NEAR VOLCANOS.
WE left the summit of the mountain about six o'clock, and it was eight at
night before we reached Catania. We observed, both with pleasure and pain, the
change of the climate as we descended. From the regions of the most rigid
winter, we soon arrived at those of the most delightful spring. On first
entering the forests, the trees were still bare as in December, not a single
leaf to be seen; but after we had ascended a few miles, we found ourselves in
the mildest, and the softest of climates; the trees in full verdure, and the
fields covered with all the flowers of the summer; but as soon as we got out of
the woods, and entered the torrid zone, we found the heats, altogether
insupportable, and suffered dreadfully from them before we reached the city.

On our arrival at Catania, we went immediately to bed, being exceedingly
oppressed by the fatigue of our expedition; but still more by the violent heat
of the day.

AEtnea has been often measured, but I believe never with any degree of
accuracy; and it is really a shame to the society established in this place
called the AEtnean Academy, whose original institution was to study the nature
and operations of this wonderful mountain. It was my full intention to have
measured it geometrically; but I am sorry to say, although this is both the
seat of an academy and university, yet there was no quadrant to be had. Of all
the mountains I have ever seen, AEtna would be the easiest to measure, and with
the greatest certainty, and perhaps the properest place on the globe to
establish an exact rule of mensuration by the barometer. There is a beach of a
vast extent, that begins exactly at the foot of the mountain, and runs for a
great many miles along the coast. The sea-mark of this beach forms the meridian
to the summit of the mountain. Here you are sure of a perfect level, and may
make the base of your triangle of what length you please. But unfortunately
this mensuration has never been executed, at least with any tolerable degree of
decision.

Kircher pretends to have measured it, and to have found it 4000 French toises
in height; which is more than any of the Andes, or indeed than any mountains
upon earth. The Italian mathematicians are still more absurd. Some of them make
it eight miles, some six, and some four.

Amici, the last, and I believe the best who has made the attempt, reduces it
to 3 miles, 264 paces; but even this must be exceedingly erroneous; and
probably the perpendicular height of AEtna does not exceed 12,000 feet, or
little more than two miles.

I own I did not believe we should find AEtna so high as it really is. I had
heard indeed that it was higher, than any of the Alps, but I never gave credit
to it. How great then was my astonishment to find that the mercury fell almost
two inches lower than I had ever observed it on the very highest of the
accessible Alps; at the same time I am persuaded there are many inacessible
points of the Alps, (particularly Mont Blanc) are still much higher than AEtna.

The wind, and other circumstances, in a great measure prevented our electrical
experiments, on which we had built not a little; however I found that round
Nicolosi, and particularly on the top of Monpelieri, the air was in a very
favorable state for electrical operations. Here the little pith-balls, when
insolated, were sensibly affected, and repelled each other above an inch. I
expected this electrical state of the air would have increased as we advanced
on the mountain; but at the cave where we slept, I could observe no such
effect. Perhaps it was owing to the exhalations from the trees and vegetables,
which are there exceedingly luxuriant; whereas about Nicolosi, and round
Monpelieri, there is hardly any thing but lava and dry hot sand. Or perhaps it
might be owing to the evening being farther advanced, and the dews beginning to
fall. However; I have no doubt, that upon these mountains formed by eruption,
where the air is strongly impregnated with sulphurous effluvia, great
electrical discoveries might be made. And perhaps, of all the reasons assigned
for the wonderful vegetation that is performed on this mountain, there is none
that contributes so much toward it, as this constant electrical state of the
air. For, from a variety of experiments, it has been found, that an increase of
the electrical matter adds much to the progress of vegetation. It probably acts
there in the same manner as on the animal body. The circulation we know is
performed quicker; and the juices are driven through the small vessels with
more ease and celerity. This has often been proved from the immediate removal
of obstructions by electricity; -- and probably the rubbing with dry and warm
flannel, esteemed so efficacious in such cases, is doing nothing more than
exciting a greater degree of electricity in the part; but it has likewise been
demonstrated, by the common experiment of making water drop through a small
capillary siphon, which the moment it is electrified runs in a full stream. I
have, indeed, very little doubt, that the fertility of our seasons depend as
much on this quality in the air, as either on its heat or moisture.

Electricity will probably soon be considered as the great vivifying principal
of nature, by which she carries on most of her operations. It is a fifth
element, distinct from, and of superior nature to the other four, which only
compose the corporeal parts of matter. But this subtle and active fluid is a
kind of soul that pervades and quickens every particle of it. When an equal
quantity of this is diffused through the air, and over the face of the earth,
every thing continues calm and quiet; but if by any accident one part of matter
has acquired a greater quantity than another, the most dreadful consequences
often ensue before the equilibrium can be restored. Nature seems to fall into
convulsions, and many of her works are destroyed: -- All the great phenomenon
are produced; thunder, lightning, earthquakes, and whirlwinds: for, I believe,
there is little doubt, that all these frequently depend on this sole cause. And
again, if we look down from the sublime of nature to its minutiae, we shall
still find the same power acting though perhaps in less legible characters; for
as the knowledge of its operations is still less in its infancy, they are
generally misunderstood, or ascribed to some other cause. However, I have no
doubt, that in process of time these will be properly investigated; when
mankind will wonder how much they have been in the dark. It will then possibly
be found, that what we call sensibility of nerves, and many of those diseases
that the faculty have as yet only invented names for, are owing to the body's
being possessed of too large or too small a quantity of this subtle and active
fluid, that very flued perhaps, which is the vehicle of all our feelings; and
which they have so long searched for in vain in the nerves. For I have
sometimes been led to think, that this sense was nothing else than a slighter
kind of electric effect, to which the nerves serve as conductors; and that it
is by the rapid circulation of this penetrating and animating fire that our
sensations are performed. We all know, that in damp and hazy weather, when it
seems to be blunted and absorbed by the humidity; when its activity is lost,
and little or none of it can be collected; we ever find our spirits more
languid, and our sensibility less acute; but in the Sirecc wind at Naples, when
the air seems totally deprived of it, the whole system is unstrung, and the
nerves seem to lose both their tension and elasticity, till the north or west
wind awakens the activity of this animating power, which soon restores the
tone, and enlivens all nature, which seemed to droop and languish during its
absence.

It is likewise well known that there have been influences of the human body
becoming electric without the mediation of any electric substance, and even
emitting sparks of fire with a disagreeable sensation, and an extreme degree of
nervous sensibility.

About seven or eight years ago, a lady in Switzerland was affected in this
manner, and though I was not able to learn all the particulars of her case, yet
several Swiss gentlemen have confirmed to me the truth of the story. She was
uncommonly sensible of every change of weather, and had her electrical feelings
strongest in a clear day, or during the passage of thunder-clounds, when the
air is known to be replete with that fluid. Her case, like most others which
the doctors can make nothing of, was decided to be a nervous one; for the real
meaning of that term I take to be only, that the phisician does not understand
what it is.

Two gentlemen of Geneva had a short experience of the same sort of complaint,
though still in a much superior degree. Professor Saussure and young Mr.
Jalabert, when traveling over one of the high Alps, were caught amongst
thunder clouds, and to their utter astonishment, found their bodies so full of
electrical fire, that spontaneous flashes darted from their fingers with a
crackling noise, and the same kind of sensation as when strongly electrified by
art. This was communicated by Mr. Jalabert to the Academy of Sciences at Paris,
I think, in the year 1763; and you will find it recorded in their memoirs.

It seems pretty evident, I think, that these feelings were owing to the bodies
being possessed of too great a share of electric fire. This is an uncommon
case; but I do not think it at all improbable, that many of our invalids,
particularly the hypochondriac, and those we call Malades Imaginares, owe their
disagreeable feelings to the opposite cause, or the bodies being possessed of
too small a quantity of this fire; for we find that a diminution of it in the
air seldom fails to increase their uneasy sensations, and vice versa.

Perhaps it might be of service to these people to wear some electric substance
next their skin, to defend the nerves and fibers from the damp, or non-electric
air. I would propose a waistcoat of the finest flannel, which should be kept
perfectly clean and dry; for the effluvia of the body, in case of any violent
perspiration, will, soon destroy its electric quality. This should be covered
by another of the same size of silk, the animal heat, and the friction that
exercise must occasion betwixt these two substances, produce a powerful
electricity; and would form a kind of electric atmosphere around the body, and
might possibly be one of the best preservatives against the effect of damps.

As for our Swiss lady, I have little doubt that her complaints were owing in
great part, perhaps entirely, to her dress; and that a very small alteration,
would effectually have cured her. A lady who has her head ^^rounded with wires,
and her hair stuck full of metal pins, and who at the same time stands upon dry
silk, is to all intents and purposes an electrical conductor insolated, and
prepared for collecting the fire from the atmosphere. And it is not at all
surprising that during thunderstorms, or when the air is extremely replete with
electrical matter, she would emit sparks, and exhibit other appearances of
electricity. I imagine a very trifling change of dress, which from the constant
versatility of their modes may some day take place, would render this lady's
disease altogether epidemical amongst the sex. Only let the soles of their
shoes be made of an electric substance, and let the wires of their caps, and
pins of their hair, be somewhat lengthened and pointed outward; and I think
there is little doubt, that they will often find themselves in an electrified
state. But, indeed, if they only wear silk, or even worsted stockings, it may
sometimes prove sufficient; for I have often insolated electrometers as
perfectly by placing them on a piece of dry silk or flannel, as on glass.

How little do our ladies imagine, when they surround their heads with wire,
the most powerful of all conductors; and at the same time wear stockings,
shoes, and gowns of silk, one of the most powerful repellents, that they
prepare their bodies in the same manner, and according to the same principles
as electricians prepare their conductors for attracting the fire of lightning!
If they cannot be brought to relinquish their wire caps and their pins, might
they not fall upon some such preservative as those which of late years have
been applied to objects of less consequence?

Suppose that every lady should provide herself with a small chain or wire, to
be hooked on at pleasure during thunder-storms. This should pass from her cap
over the thickest part of her hair, which will prevent the fire from being
communicated to her head; and so down to the ground. It is plain this will act
in the same manner as the conductors on the tops of steeples, which from the
metal spires that are commonly placed there, analagous to the pins and wires,
were so liable to accidents. Some people may laugh at all this; but I never was
more serious in my life. A very amiable lady of my acquaintance, Mrs. Douglas,
of Kelso, had almost lost her life by one of those caps mounted on wire. She
was standing at an open window during a thunder-storm. The lightning was
attracted by the wire, and the cap was burnt to ashes; happily her hair was in
its natural state, without powder, pomatum, or pins; and prevented the fire
from being conducted to her head; for as she felt no kind of shock, it is
probable that it went off from the wires of the cap to the wall, close to which
she then stood. If it had found any conductor to carry it to her head or body,
in all probability she must have been killed. A good strong head of hair, if it
is kept perfectly clean and dry, is probably one of the best preservatives
against the fire of lightning. But so soon as it is stuffed full of powder and
pomatum, and bound together with pins, its repellent force is lost, and it
becomes a conductor. -- But I beg pardon for these surmises. I throw them in
the way of my readers only for them to improve upon at their leisure: For we
have it ever in our power to be making experiments in electricity. And although
this fluid is the most subtle and active of any we know, we can command it on
all occasions; and I am now so accustomed to its operations, that I seldom comb
my hair, or pull off a stocking, without observing them under some form or
other. How surprising is it then, that mankind should have lived and breathed
in it for so many years, without almost ever supposing that it existed! But to
return to our mountain.

So highly electrical is the vapor of volcanos, that it has been observed in
some eruptions both of AEtna and Vesuvius, that the whole track of smoke, which
sometimes extended above an hundred miles, produced the most dreadful effects;
killing shepherds and stocks on the mountains; blasting trees, and setting fire
to houses, wherever it met with them on an elevated situation. Now probably the
flying of a kite, with a wire round its string, would soon have disarmed this
formidable cloud. These effects, however, only happen when the air is dry and
little agitated; but when it is full of moist vapor, the great rare faction
from the heat of the lava generally brings it down in violent torrents of rain,
which soon convey the electrical matter from the clouds to the earth, and
restores the equilibrium.

BRYDONE.
SECT. XLIII. OF MODERN ROME.
A man, on his first arrival at Rome, is not much fired with its appearance.
The narrowness of the streets, the thinness of the inhabitants, the prodigious
quantity of monks and beggars, give but a gloomy aspect to this renowned city.
There are no rich tradesmen here, who, by their acquisitions, either ennoble
their sons, or marry their daughters into the houses of princes. All the shops
seem empty, and the shopkeepers poor. This is the first impression. But turn
your eye from that point of view to the magnificence of their churches, to the
venerable remains, of ancient Rome, to the prodigious collection of pictures
and antique statues, to the very river and ground itself; formerly the
habitation of that people, whom, from our cradles we have been taught to adore,
and with a very few grains of enthusiasm in your composition, you will feel
more than satisfied.

The surface of modern Rome is certainly more elevated than it was in ancient
times. Such an alteration must happen, in the course of ages, to every city
which has been often destroyed by time and fire, as all the rubbish is seldom
removed; but the ancient pavement, on which Trajan's pillars stands, shoes the
elevation in that place not to be above seven or eight feet; and, I am
informed, some of the triumphal arches are not above three or four feet in the
ground. The most remarkable change is this; that the Campus Martius was in the
time of the ancient Romans an open area, and now it is covered with houses. The
circuit of the city, in Pliny's time, did not, by his account, exceed the
present dimensions, but its populousness must have been amazingly different.

Were an antiquarian to lament over any fall, any metamorphosis of ancient
Rome, perhaps it might be the present state of the Forum, where, now, there is
every Thursday and Friday, a market for cows and oxen, on the very spot where
the Roman orators were accustomed to thunder out their eloquence in the cause
of their clients, their country, and their gods. Accordingly, the Forum is now
known by the name of Campo Vaccino.

Surrounding the Forum are many vestiges of antique grandeur, triumphal arches,
remains of temples, the ruins of the Imperial Palace, the Campidoglio, etc. all
bespeaking the magnificent state of Rome in the times of the Emperors. The
great Amphitheatre, called also Il Colosseo, where the spectacle of combats was
exhibited, is also in its neighborhood. In this place the spirit of modern
Rome seems to prevail over that of ancient Rome; for where the wild beasts and
gladiators formerly entertained seventy or eighty thousand spectators, you now
see a few miserable old women and beggars, who are praying at the feet of
fourteen small chapels, which represent the fourteen mysteries of our Savior's
passion.

The magnificence of the Roman Emperors, in embellishing the city, rose to such
a height, that they ransacked all the quarries of Egypt for alabaster,
granite, porphyry, and every kind of marble that country afforded; and though
time and Gothic rage must have destroyed great quantities, yet, such was the
profusion brought to Rome, that, besides the amazing number of columns,
statues, vales, and tables, still preserved entire, you see the very posts in
the streets, all of them without exception, made of granite, alabaster, or
marble. But the most stupendous sights of all, are the prodigious obelisks,
consisting of only one piece of marble. I meditate on these objects till I am
lost in wonder and confusion. We have no idea of the mechanical powers by which
they were dug out of the quarry, and brought from Egypt. We are astonished at
the enormous size of the stones at Stonehenge, and cannot comprehend by what
contrivance they were carried and laid in that form; but the largest of them is
small, when compared with the largest obelisk at Rome, which I think is one
hundred and one feet long, and proportionably thick.

The ruin of the triumphal bridge near St. Angelo is in object that cannot but
strike a man of letters. This was the bridge over which every general marched
into the city, to whom a triumph was decreed, either for the conquest of a
province, or any other signal victory. From the time of Romulus to that of the
emperor Probus, there were about three hundred and twenty of these triumphs.
There are now only a few remains of the piers. Who can behold this scene,
without ruminaring on the nature of the human heart, and recollecting to what
trials it must have been exposed in the course of so proud and so flattering a
procession?

Many of the churches in this city, and above all St. Peter's, are so very
magnificent, that they vie with ancient Rome in every article but that of
durableness, much of their beauty being derived from pictures, stucco, and
gilding, the transitory ornaments of two or three ages. I cannot forbear
remarking, in this place, that the pride of modern Rome is one of the causes of
her wretchednese. She boasts of her gold and silver lying dead in her churches;
but had that gold and silver a free circulation through the country; it would
enliven trade, and furnish property to thousands, who are now starving in the
most pressing indigence.

St. Peter's never fails to please both the learned and the unlearned eye. The
wonderful regularity and adjustment of its parts, like the beauty of a fine
face, demand no skill in drawing to taste its charms. Its colonades, fountains,
and obelisk, give it an inimitable elegance. It must be confessed, however,
that the approach to this noble edifice is confined and shabby; but they now
talk of demolishing the narrow mean street leading from St. Angelo; and should
this design take place, the avenue will be answerable to the building; though,
to render St. Peter's church still more perfect, the Vatican, with its eleven
thousand chambers, should be removed, which like an ugly excrescence,
protuberates' on one side, and destroys the symmetry of the elevation.

In the Vatican, besides a great number of Raphael's paintings, and the
excellent and celebrated statues of the Belvedere Appollo, the Laocoon, and the
Antinous. The Laocoon wants an arm. There lies on the ground one of marble,
which, it is said, Michael Angelo had begun, in order to perfect the statue,
but, perceiving how unspirited his work would appear, compared with the
original, he left the limb in the state we see it; not half executed, a
monument of his modesty and self-knowledge. It may be imagined that no one
since has been so presumptuous as to make an attempt after him, and therefore
the deficiency is supplied by an arm of terra cuota.

SHARP.
SECT. XLIV. OF THE MODERN ROMANS.
IN their external deportment, the Italians have a grave selemnity of manner,
which is sometimes thought to arise from a natural gloominess of disposition.
The French, above all other nations, are apt to impute to melancholy, the
sedate serious air which accompanies reflection.

Though in the pulpit, on the theater, and even in common conversation, the
Italians make use of a great deal of action; yet Italian vivacity is different
from French; the former proceeds from sensibility, the latter from animal
spirits.

The inhabitants of this country have not the brisk look, and elastic trip,
which is universal in France: they move rather with a slow composed pace. Their
spines never having been forced into a straight line, retain the natural bend;
and the people of the most finished fashion, as well as the neglected vulgar,
seem to prefer the unconstrained attitude of the Antinous, and other antique
statues, to the artificial graces of a French dancing master, or the erect
strut of a German soldier. I imagine I perceive a great resemblance between
many of the living countenances I see daily, and the features of the ancient
busts, and statues; which leads me to believe, that there are a greater number
of the genuine descendants of the old Romans in Italy, than is generally
imagined.

I am often struck with the fine character of countenance to be seen in the
streets of Rome. I never saw features more expressive of reflection, sense, and
genius. In the very lowest ranks there are countenances which announce minds
fit for the highest and most important situations; and we cannot help
regretting, that those to whom they belong, have not received an education
adequate to the natural abilities we are convinced they possess, and been
placed where these abilities could be brought into action.

Of all the countries in Europe, Switzerland is that, in which the beauties of
nature appear in the greatest variety or forms, and on the most magnificent
scale. In that country, therefore, the young landscape painter has the best
chance of seizing the most sublime ideas. But Italy is the best school for the
history painter, not only on account of its being enriched with the works of
the greatest masters, and the noblest models of antique sculpture; but also on
account of the fine expressive style of the Italian countenance.

Strangers, on their arrival at Rome, from no high idea of the beauty of the
Roman women, from the specimens they see in the fashionable circles to which
they are first introduced. There are some exceptions; but in general it must be
acknowledged, that the present race of women of high rank, are more
distinguished by their other ornaments than by their beauty. Among the
citizens, however, and the lower classes, you frequently meet with the most
beautiful countenances. For a brilliant red and white, and all the charms of
complexion, no women are equal to the English. If a hundred, or any greater
number, of English women were taken at random, and compared with the same
number of the wives and daughters of the citizens of Rome, I am convinced, that
ninety of the English would be found handsomer than ninety of the Romans; but
the probability is, that two or three in the hundred Italians, would have finer
countenances than any of the English. English beauty is more remarkable in the
country than in towns. The peasantry of no country in Europe can stand a
comparison, in point of looks, with those of England. That race of people have
the conveniences of life in no other country in such perfection; they are no
where so well fed, so well defended from the injuries of the seasons, and no
where else do they keep themselves so perfectly clean, and free from all the
vilifying effects of dirt. The English country girls, taken collectively, are
unquestionably, the handsomest in the world. The female peasants of most other
countries, indeed, are so hard worked, so ill fed, so much tanned by the sun,
and so dirty, that it is difficult to know whether they have any beauty or not.
Yet I have been informed, by some amateurs, since I came here, that, in spite
of all these disadvantages, they sometimes find among the Italian peasantry,
countenances highly interesting, and which they prefer to all the cherry cheeks
of Lancashire.

Beauty, doubtless, is infinitely varied; and happily for mankind, their tastes
and opinions on the subject are equally various. Notwithstanding this variety,
however a style of face, in some measure peculiar to its own inhabitants, has
been found to prevail in each different nation of Europe. This peculiar
countenance is again varied, and marked with every degree of discrimination
between the extremes of beauty and ugliness. I will give you a sketch of the
general style of the most beautiful female heads in this country, from which
you may judge whether they are to your taste or not.

A great profusion of dark hair, which seems to encroach upon the forehead,
rendering it short and narrow; the nose generally either aquiline, or continued
in a straight line from the lower part of the brow; a full and short upper lip;
(by the way nothing has a worse effect on a countenance, than a large interval
between the nose and month;) the eyes are large, and of a sparkling black. The
black eye certainly labors under one disadvantage, which is that from the iris
and pupil being of the same color, the contraction and dilatation of the
latter is not seen, by which the eye is abridged of half its powers. Yet the
Italian eye is wonderfully expressive; some people think it says too much. The
complexion, for the most part, is of a clear brown, sometimes fair, but very
seldom florid, or of that bright fairness which is common in England and
Saxony. It must be owned, that those features which have a fine expression of
sentiment and meaning in youth, are more apt than less expressive faces, to
become soon strong and masculine. In England and Germany, the women, a little
advanced in life, retain the appearance of youth longer than in Italy.

Dr. MOORE.
SECT. XLV. DESCRIPTION OF POMPEY'S PILLAR IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD OF ALEXANDRIA,
IN EGYPT, AND AN ANECDOTE OF SOME ENGLISH SEA OFFICERS THERE.
IN the afternoon a large party of us sallied out to take a view of Pompey's
Pillar, the theme of the present age, and the admiration of past times! Besides
my companions and myself we were joined by the two English commanders of the
ships in the harbor, and M^^sier Meillon, and some young gentleman of the
French factory. We mounted the first asses that presented themselves for hire,
and, attended by our Janizary, took the course we persued yesterday. We left
the convent on our right, and presently came among broken arches and long
pavements, which are the remains of an aqueduct. Several towers reared up their
dismantled heads on each side of us, whose appearance pronounces them to have
been posts of great importance and strength.

A number of stately pillars next engaged our attention. They are placed in two
parallel lines, and seem to have formerly supported some magnificent portico.
The pillars are of granite, or Thebaic marble, and about thirty feet high, of a
single stone; and we counted no less than thirty of them still standing. But
however choice these columns might be in any other place, they were but foils
to the pillar which now appeared before us. We had been buried amid the ruins
and the hills of sand which the winds have thrown up, when leaving the city by
the gate of Roseto, we came unexpectedly upon the pillar. It is impossible to
tell which is most worthy of admiration, the height, the workmanship, or the
condition of this pillar. By the best accounts we can obtain, it is an hundred
and tent feet high. The shaft, which is of a single stone of granite, is ninety
feet, and the pedestal is twenty feet more. It is of the Corinthian order,
which gives a beautiful dignity to its simplicity, rarely to be met with in
modern architecture. It has suffered little or no injury from time. The polish
upon the shaft has wonderfully withstood the buffeting of the tempest; and it
promises to hand down a patriot name to the late posterity of the ignorant
native, who has no other trace of the fame of Pompey! The pedestal has been
somewhat damaged by the instruments of travelers, who are curious to possess a
relic of this antiquity; and one of the volutes of the column was immaturely
brought down about four years ago, by a prank of some English captains which is
too ludicrous to pass over.

The jolly sons of Neptune had been pushing about the cann on board one of the
ships in the harbor until a strange freak entered into one of their brains.
The eccentricity of the thought occasioned it immediately to be adopted; and
its apparent impossibility was but a spur for putting it into execution. The
boat was ordered, and with proper implements for the attempt, these
enterprising heroes pushed a shore to drink a bowl of punch on the top of
Pompey's Pillar! At the spot they arrived, and many contrivances were proposed
to accomplish the desired point. But their labor was vain; and they began to
despair of success, when the genius who struck out the frolic, happily
suggested the means of performing it. A man was dispatched to the city for a
paper kite. The inhabitants were by this time apprized of what was going
forward, and flocked in crowds to be witnesses of the address and boldness of
the English. The Governor of Alexandria was told, that these seamen were about
to pull down Pompey's Pillar. But whether he gave them credit for their respect
to the Roman warrior, or to the Turkish government, he left them to themselves,
and politely answered, that the English were too great patriots to injure the
remains of Pompey.

He knew little, however, of the disposition of the people who were engaged in
this undertaking. Had the Turkish empire rose in opposition, it would not,
perhaps, at that moment have detered them. The kite was brought, and flown so
directly over the pillar, that when it fell on the other side, the string
lodged upon the capital. The chief obstacle was now overcome. A two-inch rope
was tied to one end of the string, and drawn over the pillar by the end to
which the kite was affixed. By, this rope one of the seamen ascended to the
top, and in less than an hour a kind of shroud was constructed, by which the
whole company went up, and drank their punch amid the shouts of the astonished
multitude.

To the eye below, the capital of the pillar does not appear capaple of holding
more than one man upon it -- but our seamen found it could contain no less than
eight persons very conveniently. It is astonishing that no accident befell these
mad-caps, in a situation so elevated, as would have turned a landman giddy in
his sober senses. The only detriment which the pillar received, was the loss of
the volute before mentioned, which came down with a thundering sound, and was
carried to England by one of the captains, as a present to a lady who
commissioned him for a piece of the pillar. The discovery which they made amply
compensated for this mischief; as without their evidence the world would not
have known at this hour, that there was originally a statue on this pillar, one
foot and ancle of which are still remaining. The statue was probably of Pompey
himself; and must have been of a gigantic size, to have appeared of a man's
proportion at so great a height.

There are circumstances in this story which might give it an air of fiction,
were it not demonstrated beyond all doubt. Besides the testimonies of many
eyewitnesses, the adventurers themselves have left us a token of the fact, by
the initials of their names, which are very legible in black paint, just
beneath the capital.

IRWIN.
SECT. XLVI. OF THE MODERN PERSIANS.
THE modern Persians are robust, warlike, and hardy, and are now become all
soldiers. They are naturally inclined to temperance; and with regard to diet,
seem to be more in a state of nature than the Europeans. By way of amusement
they use opiates, but not near so much as the Turks. They drink coffee in small
quantities with the lees, also sherbets, and an infusion of cinnamon with
sugar. Their simplicity of life generally renders their domestic expense easy.
The Persians, however, understand very little of what we call prudence and
oeconomical government.

In their common discourses they often introduce moral sentences, and poetical
narrations, extracted from their poets and other writers. It was formerly their
constant custom to entertain their guests with favorite passages out of their
poets. Reflection and repetition are the only means of strengthening or
supporting the memory. Custom has made it a kind of pedantry in Europe to be
frequent in the repetition of the wise sayings either of the ancient or modern
divines, philosophers, or poets. But if, from the nature of the human mind, we
ever stand in need of a monitor, what office is more consistent than to render
the wholesome rules of life familiar, by making them a part of our ordinary
conversation? It might be wished, that this practice were introduced among the
Europeans, rather than the barrenness of discourse we often find, or the
irksome and pernicious amusement of cards.

Now I have mentioned a circumstance so interesting to the great world in
Europe, I must acknowledge that cards, in the original use of them, are
confessedly as innocent as any other instrument of diversion, to those who are
at a loss for something more rational I have somewhere heard, that cards were
invented by a French courtier, to amuse one of the kings of that nation, who
was remarkably weak.
; yet in the manner now in fashion, they cannot but dissipate the thoughts in
some, and enervate the mind in almost every one who is closely attached to
them. They must be a great mean of feeding those passions which corrode the
heart, and warping the affections from their proper bias, oppose the
establishment of virtue in the mind. We often see this verified, though few
will confess it. Is it possible, in the nature of the thing, that those who
give a constant application to this entertainment, especially if they play
high, can support tranquillity of mind? And in proportion as the mind is
disturbed, is it not disqualified for the essential duties of life? This matter
is best understood by those very persons who play high, and consume their time
in this polite idleness. The Persians seem to fall into the contrary extreme.
They delight in sitting still and musing. I never observed any of them walk in
their apartments as the Europeans, and particularly the English, are used to
do. I remember to have heard of a Turk, who being on board an English man of
war, enquired very seriously if the people were troubled with an evil spirit?
because, says he, "they are never at rest."

The persians are polite, but extravagantly hyperbolical in their compliments.
This indeed is peculiar to the Eastern nations; and the scripture, which
partakes so much of that style, is known to be derived from that quarter. The
persians were celebrated for a particular genius to poetry, but war which has
destroyed their morals and learning, seems also to have damped their poetic
fire; though they have still many traces of that fertility and strength of
imagination, for which in past times they were deservedly famous. The ancient
Persians are recorded to have taught their children a most exact reverence for
truth; but the present generation are as notorious for falsehood. They poison
with a sweet meat, in always saying what is pleasing, without regarding the
truth. In their dispositions they are cheerful, but rather inclined to
seriousness than loud mirth. In this they are not so much the French of Asia,
as in their politeness and civility to strangers. Hospitality is a part of
their religion. On occasions of the least intercourse, men of any distinction
invite strangers, as well as their friends, to their table; and it is
remarkable how they pride themselves in other testimonies of respect.

The Persians, as well as the Turks, believe the Mosaic to have been the true
religion before Christ, whom also they acknowledge to be a true prophet, and
teacher sent from God; but that the religion he taught was contained in a book,
which, at Mahomet's coming, was taken by the angel Gabriel into heaven, and the
Koran brought down in its stead. This however they do not attempt to prove.
They say also, that Jesus Christ did not die upon the cross, but that another
person was miraculously brought there in his place; thus confessing the truth
of our Savior's mission, but confounding it with absurd fables.

The common people pray at break of day, noon, and sunset. The MULLAH, or
High Priest, when he goes to prayers, mounts a turret appointed for that
purpose, which over tops the houses; from whence at daybreak, midday, and
evening, he invokes the Supreme Being, by saying, "O God, there is but one God,
Mahomet is his prophet, and Ali his friend." After repeating these words three
times, he makes a prayer to this effect: "Glory be to the Sovereign of the
Universe, and to the Judge of the Last Day. We glorify thee. We beseech thee to
assist us in our necessities, to lead us in thy ways, and in the paths of
righteousness, and to prevent our falling into the snares of perdition."

I never observed that the Persians have any marks of that false modesty which
prevails among Christians of the best sort, who, to avoid the imputation of
affectation or hypocrisy, are as jealous to be seen on their knees, as afraid
to commit any criminal action. If a bold masculine piety, and a sincere awful
sense of the Deity are very consistent things, this false modesty must be owing
to an error in education.

The Persians have some of the Jewish rites among them; and also this
peculiarity, that when they pray, they never permit the image of any sensible
object to lie before them; nor is it permitted to pray with any thing of gold
about them, as if it was esteemed an object of idolatry. They invoke the
intercession of the departed souls of some of their prophets and pious men.
They give one proof of religion vastly superior to Chritians; for I never could
observe, that they mentioned the name of the Supreme Being except upon solemn
occasion; or at least in a respectful manner.

The Turkish language is the most common in Persia. In matters of learning they
use the Arabian language, in which is deposited the greatest part of that
knowledge, for which the Persians, were once distinguished. The learned
languages, familliar to Europeans, are not known amongst them. As time seems to
have made no change in the customs of Asia, but the same manners remain as we
read of two thousand years ago, so the language, particularly of the Persian,
has the same idiom and sublimity of expression.

They write as the Hebrews, from the right to the left, and often range their
lines in an arbitrary manner; so that upon one leaf of paper they sometimes
write in ten different directions, and this only to show the writer's ability
in observing the proportion of words and lines in each.

HANWAY.
SECT. XLVII. OF THE MANNERS OF ORDERING SILK WORMS AT GHILAN IN PERSIA.
THE silk worm, as it is well known, takes its birth from an egg no bigger than
a small pin's head. In the month of March, when the sun is already very warm, I
observed the peasants in Ghilan prepare to give life to the eggs, which they
had preserved during the winter, carrying them for the most part about them, in
the warmest part of their bodies, and particularly under their arms. In ten or
more days, according to the heat it receives, it becomes a maggot, and begins
to seed. The shrub mulberry-trees, which are annually produce the most tender
and proper leaves for their food. In about forty days the worm arrives to its
maturity, and winds itself by daily gradations into a pod of silk as big as a
pigeon's egg.

When this egg is completely formed, which is usually known by the silence of
the worm within, they suffocate it by covering it with blankets, or by the heat
of the sun; unless they wind off the silk immediately, for then warm water
answers the same purpose. Some of them, however, must be permitted to live and
perforate the pod; for when it breaks from its enclosure, it casts its seed or
eggs, by means of which the generation is preserved. From the pods thus
perforated, the silk cannot be wound off as from the others, but being prepared
by pounding, it is spun off like cotton yarn. This silk we call kedge, the
remains or refuse of which is so inferior, as to admit only of being milled and
made into silk wadding.

HANWAY.
SECT. XLVIII. OF THE HOT-BATHS AT SOPHIA.
SOPHIA is one of the most beautiful towns in the Turkish empire, and famous
for its hot baths, that are resorted to both for diversion and health. I
stopped there one day on purpose to see them, and designing to go incognito, I
hired a Turkish coach. These voitures are not at all like ours, but much more
covenient for the country, the heat being so great that glasses would be very
troublesome. They are made a good deal in the manner of the Dutch
stage-coaches, having wooden lattices painted and gilded, the inside being also
painted with baskets and nosegays of flowers, intermixed commonly with little
poetical mottos. They are covered all over with scarlet cloth, lined with silk,
and very often richly embroidered and fringed. This covering entirely hides the
persons in them, but may be thrown back at pleasure, and thus permits the
ladies to peep through the lattices. They hold four people very conveniently,
seated on cushions, but not raised.

In one of those covered wagons I went to the bathing house about ten o'clock.
It was already full of women. It is built of stone, in the shape of a dome,
with no windows but in the roof, which gives light enough. There were five of
these domes joined together, the outmost being less than the rest, and serving
only as a hall, where the portress stood at the door. Ladies of quality
generally give this woman a crown or ten shillings; and I did not forget that
ceremony. There were four fountains of cold water in this room, falling first
into marble basins, and then running on the floor in little channels made for
that purpose, which carried the streams into the next room, something less than
this, with the same sort of marble sofas, but so hot with streams of sulphur
proceeding from the baths joined to it, that it was impossible to stay there
with one's clothes on. The two other domes were the hot baths, one of which had
cocks of cold water turning into it, to temper it to what degree of warmth the
bather pleased to have.

I was in my traveling habit, which is a riding dress, and certainly appeared
very extraordinary to them. Yet there was not one of them that showed the least
surprise or impertinent, curiosity, but received me with all the obliging
civility possible. I know no European court where the ladies would have behaved
themselves in so polite a manner to such a stranger. I believe, upon the whole,
there were two hundred women, and yet none of those disdainful smiles, and
satirical whispers, that never fail in our assemblies, when any body appears
that is not dressed exactly in the fashion.

The first sofas were covered with cushions and rich carpets, on which sat the
ladies; and on the second their slaves behind them, but without any distinction
of rank by their dress, all being in the state of nature. Yet there was not the
least wanton smile or immodest gesture amongst them.

They generally take this diversion once a weak, and stay there at least four
or five hours, without getting cold by immediately coming out of the hot bath
into the cool room, which was very surprising to me.

The lady that seemed the most considerable amongst, them entreated me to sit
by her, and would fain have undressed me for the bath. I excused myself with
some difficulty. They being, however, all so earnest in persuading me, I was at
last forced to open my shirt and show them my stays; which satisfied them very
well; for I saw they believed I was locked up in that machine, and that it was
not in my own power to open it; which contrivance they attributed to my
husband. I was charmed with their civility and beauty, and should have been
very glad to pass more time with them, if I could have conveniently done it.

LADY M. W. MONTAGUE.
SECT. XLIX. OF THE NATURE OF THE TURKISH GOVERNMENT; AND OF THE GRAND
SIGNIOR'S PROCESSION TO THE MOSQUE.
THE government here is entirely in the hands of the army. The Grand Signior,
with all his absolute power, is as much a slave as any of his subjects, and
trembles at a janizary's frown. Here is, indeed, a much greater appearance of
subjection than amongst us. Administer of state is not spoke to but upon the
knee. Should a reflection on his conduct be dropped in a coffee-house (for they
have spies every where) the house would be razed to the ground, and perhaps,
the whole company put to the torture. No huzzaing mobs, senseless pamphlets,
and tavern disputes about politics: A consequential ill that freedom draws;
A bad effect, -- but from a noble cause.
None of our harmless calling names! but when a minister here dipleases the
people, in three hours time he is dragged even from his master's arms. They cut
off his hands, head and feet, and throw them before the palace-gate with all
the respect in the world; while the sultan (to whom they all profess an
unlimited adoration) sits trembling in his apartment, and dares neither defend
nor avenge his favorite. This is the blessed condition of the most absolute
monarch upon earth, who owns no law but his will.

I cannot help wishing, in the loyalty of my heart, that the parliament would
send hither a ship-load of your passive obedient men, that they might see
arbitrary government in its clearest and strongest light, where it is hard to
judge whether the prince, people, or ministers are most miserable.

I went yesterday, along with the French ambassadress, to see the Grand Signior
in his passage to the mosque. He was preceeded by a numerous guard-of
janissaries, with vast white feathers on-their heads, as also by the foot and
horse guards, and the royal gardeners, which are a very considerable body of
men, dressed in different habits of fine lively colors, so that at a distance
they appeared like a parterre of tulips. After them the aga of the janissaries,
in a robe of purple velvet, lined with silver tissue, his horse led by two
slaves richly dressed. Next to him the chief guardian of the seraglio ladies,
in a deep yallow cloth (which suited very well to his black face) lined with
fables. Last of all came his sublimity himself, arrayed in green, lined with
the sur of a black Muscovite fox, which is supposed worth a thousand pounds
sterling, and mounted on a fine horse, with furniture embroidered with jewels.
Six more horses richly caparisoned were led with him, and two of his principal
courtiers bore, one his gold, and the other his silver coffee-pot on a staff.
Another carried a silver stool on his head for him to sit on.

It would be too tedious to describe the various dresses and turbants by which
their rank is distinguished; but they were all extremely rich and gay, to the
number of some thousands; so that, perhaps, there cannot be seen a more
beautiful procession. The sultan appeared to us a handsome man of about forty,
with something, however, severe in his countenance, and his eyes were full and
black. He happened to stop under the window where we stood, and (I suppose
being told who we were) looked upon us very attentively, so that we had leisure
to consider him.

LADY M. W. MONTAGUE.
SECT. L. OF THE PERSONS AND MANNERS OF THE TURKISH LADIES.
IN this country it is surprising to see a young woman that is not very
handsome. They have naturally the most beautiful complexion in the world, and
generally large black eyes: I can with great truth assert, that the court of
England (though I believe it the fairest in Christendom) does not contain so
many beauties as are under our protection here. They generally shape their
eyebrows, and both Greeks and Turks have the custom of putting round their
eyes a black tincture, that at a distance, or by candlelight, adds very much
to the blackness of them. I fancy many of our ladies would be over-joyed to
know this secret; but it is too visible by day. They dye their nails a rose
color: but I own I cannot enough accustom myself to this fashion to find any
beauty in it.

Their hair hangs at its full length behind, divided into tresses, braided with
pearl or ribbon, which is always in great quantity. I never saw in my life so
many fine heads of hair. In one lady's I have counted one hundred and ten of
the tresses all natural; but it must be owned that every kind of beauty is more
common here than with us.

The head-dress is composed of a cap called talpock, which is in winter of fine
velvet embroidered with pearls or diamonds, and in summer, of a light shining
silver stuff. This is fixed on one side of the head, hanging a little way down,
with a gold tassel, and bound on either side with a circle of diamonds, or a
rich embroidered handkerchief. On the other side of the head the hair is laid
flat; and here the ladies are at liberty to show their fancies, some putting
flowers, others a plume of heron's feathers, and, in short, what they please;
but the most general fashion is a large bouquet of jewels, made like natural
flowers, that is, the buds of pearl, the roses of different colored rubies,
the jessamins of diamonds, and the jonquils of topazes, so well let and
enamelled, that it is hard to imagine any thing of the kind so beautiful.

As to their morality, or good conduct, I can say, like Harlequin, that it is
just as it is with you; and the Turkish ladies do not commit one sin the less
for not being Christians. Now, that I am a little acquainted with their ways, I
cannot forbear admiring either the examplary discretion, or extreme stupidity,
of all the writers that have given accounts of them. It is very easy to see
they have in reality more liberty than we have. No woman, of what rank soever,
is permitted to go into the streets without two murlins, one that covers her
face all but her eyes, and another that hides the whole dress of her head, and
hangs half way down her back. Their shapes are also wholly concealed by a thing
they call a ferigee, which no woman of any sort appears without. This has
strait sleeves that reach to their finger-ends, and it laps all round them, not
unlike a riding-hood. In winter it is of cloth, and in summer, of plain stuff
or silk. You may guess then how effectually this disguises them; so that there
is no distinguishing the great lady from her slave. It is impossible for the
most jealous husband to know his wife when he meets her, and no man dare touch
or follow a woman in the street.

This perpetual masquerade gives them entire liberty of following their
inclinations without danger of discovery. The great ladies seldom let their
gallants know who they are! and it is so difficult to find it out that they can
very seldom guess at her name, whom they have corresponded with for above half
a year together. You may easily imagine the number of faithful wives very small
in a country, where they have nothing to fear from a lover's indiscretion,
since we see so many have the courage to expose themselves to that in this
world, and all the threatened punishment in the next, which is never preached
to the Turkish damsels. Neither have they much to apprehend from the resentment
of their husbands; those ladies that are rich having all the money in their own
hands.

Upon the whole, I look upon the Turkish women as the only free people in the
empire. The very divan pays respect to them; and the Grand Signior himself,
when a bassa is executed, never violates the privileges of the harem, or
women's apartment, which remains unsearched and entire to the widow. They are
queens of their slaves, whom the husband has no permission so much as to look
upon, except it be an old woman or two that his lady chooses. It is true, their
law permits them four wives; but there is no instance of a man of quality that
makes use of this liberty, or of a woman of rank that would suffer it.

Thus you see the manners of mankind do not differ so widely as our voyage
writers would make us believe. Perhaps it would be more entertaining to add a
few surprising customs of my own invention; but nothing seems to me so
agreeable as truth, and I believe nothing so acceptable to you.

LADY M. W. MONTAGUE.
SECT. LI. OF THE PLEASANT SITUATION OF ADRIANOPLE, AND THE MANNER IN WHICH THE
TURKS PASS THEIR TIME THERE.
SOMETHING extraordinary will no doubt, be expected from me, after I have gone
a journey not undertaken by any Christian for some hundred years. The most
remarkable accident that happened to me was my being very near overturned into
the Hebrus; and if I had much regard for the glories that one's name enjoys
after death, I should certainly be sorry for having missed the romantic
conclusion of swimming down the same river, in which the musical head of
Orpheus repeated verses so many ages since: -- Caput a cervice revulsum,
Gurgite cum medio, portans Oeagrius Hebr^^
Volveret, Euridicen vox ipsa, et frigida lingua,
Ah! miceram Eury dicen! anima fugiente vocabat,
Eurydicen toto referebant flumine ripae.
Who knows but some of your bright wits might have found it a subject affording
many poetical turns, and have told the world in an heroic elegy, that, As equal
were our souls, so equal were our fates!
I despair of ever hearing so many fine things said of me as so extraordinary a
death would have given occasion for.

I am, at this present moment, writing in a house situated on the bank of the
Hebrus, which runs under my chamber-window. My garden is full of tall
cypress-trees, upon the branches of which several couple of true turtles are
saying soft things to one another from morning till night. How naturally do
boughs and vows come into my mind at this minute; And must you not confess, to
my praise, that it is more than an ordinary discretion, which can resist the
wicked suggestions of poetry in a place where truth, for once, furnishes all
the ideas of pastoral.

The summer is already far advanced in this part of the world; and, for some
miles round Adrianople, the whole ground is laid out in gardens, and the banks
of the rivers are set with rows of fruit trees, under which all the most
considerable Turks divert themselves every evening; not with walking, (that is
not one of their pleasures,) but a set party of them choose out a green spot,
where the shade is very thick, and there they spread a carpet on which they sit
drinking their coffee, and are generally attended by some slave with a fine
voice, or that plays on some instrument. Every twenty paces you may see one of
these little companies listening to the dashing of the river; and this taste is
so universal, that the very gardeners are not without it. I have often seen
them and their children sitting on the banks of the river, and playing on a
rural instrument, perfectly answering the description of the ancient fistula,
being composed of unequal reeds, with a simple but agreeable softness in the
sound.

Mr. Addison might here make the experiment he speaks of in his travels, there
not being one instrument of music among the Greek or Roman statues, that is not
to be found in the hands of the people of this country. The young lads
generally divert themselves with making garlands for their favorite lambs,
which I have often seen painted and adorned with flowers, lying at their feet
while they sung or played. It is not that they ever read romances; but these
are the ancient amusements here, and as natural to them, as cudgel-playing and
football to our British swains, the softness and warmth of the climate
forbidding all rough exercises, which were never so much as heard of amongst
them, and naturally inspiring a laziness and aversion for labor, which the
great plenty indulges. These gardeners are the only happy race of country
people in Turkey. They furnish all the city with fruits and herbs, and seem to
live very easily. They are most of them Greeks, and have little houses in the
midst of their gardens, where their wives and daughters take a liberty not
permitted in the town, I mean, to go unveiled. These girls are very neat and
handsome, and pass the time at their looms under the shade of the trees.

I no longer look upon Theocritus as a romantic writer. He has only given a
plain image of the way of life among the peasants of his country, who, before
oppression had reduced them to want, were, I suppose, all employed as the
better sort of them are now. I do not doubt, had he been born a Briton, but his
Idylliums had been filled with descriptions of threshing, and churning, both
which are unknown here, the corn being all trod out by oxen; and butter (I
speak it with sorrow) unheard of.

LADY M. W. MONTAGUE.
SECT. LII. OF THE ENTERTAINMENT GIVEN BY THE GRAND VIZIER'S LADY.
AT Adrianople I was invited to dine with the Grand Vizier's lady, and it was
with a great deal of pleasure I prepared myself for an entertainment, which was
never before given to any Christian. I thought I should very little satisfy her
curiosity, (which I did not doubt was a considerable motive to the invitation,)
by going in a dress she was used to see, and therefore dressed myself in the
court-habit of Vienna, which is much more magnificent than ours. However, I
chose to go incognito, to avoid any disputes about ceremony, and went in a
Turkish coach, attended only by my woman that held up my train, and the Greek
lady who was my interpretess.

I was met at the court-door by her black eunuch, who helped me out of the
coach with great respect, and conducted me through several rooms, where her
female slaves, finely dressed, were ranged on each side. In the innermost I
found the lady sitting on her sofa, in a sable vest. She advanced to meet me,
and introduced me to half a dozen of her friends with great civility. She
seemed a very good woman, near fifty years old. I was surprised to observe so
little magnificence in her house, the furniture being all very moderate, and
except the habits and number of her slaves nothing about her appeared
expensive. She guessed at my thoughts, and told me she was no longer of an age
to spend either her time or money in superfluities; that her whole expense was
in charity, and her whole employment praying to God. There was no affectation
in this speech. Both she and her husband are entirely given up to devotion. He
never looks upon any other woman, and what is much more extraordinary, touches
no bribes, notwithstanding the example of all his predecessors. He is so
scrupulous on this point, he would not except Mr. W -- 's present, till he had
been assured over and over, that it was a settled perquisite of his place at
the entrance of every ambassador. She entertained me with all kind of civility
till dinner came in, which was served one dish at a time, to a vast number, all
finely dressed after their manner, which I do not think so bad, as it has been
sometimes represented.

I am a very good judge of their eating, having lived three weeks in the house
of an effendi at Belgrade who gave us very magnificent dinners, dressed by his
own cooks. The first week they pleased me extremely; but I own I then began to
grow weary of their table, and desired our own cook might add a dish or two
after our manner. But I attribute this to custom, and am very much inclined to
believe, that an Indian, who had never tasted of either, would prefer their
cookery to ours. Their sauces are very high, and all the roast very much done.
They use a great deal of very rich spice. The soup is served for the last dish,
and they have at least as great a variety of ragouts as we have. I was very
sorry I could not eat of as many as the good lady would have had me, who was
very earnest in serving me of every thing. The treat concluded with coffee and
perfumes, which is a high mark of respect; two slaves kneeling, perfumed my
hair, clothes, and handkerchief. After this ceremony she commanded her slaves
to play and dance, which they did with their guitars in their hands; and she
excused to me their want of skill, saying she took no care to accomplish them
in that art, I returned her thanks, and soon after took my leave.

LADY M. W. MONTAGUE.
SECT. LIII. OF CONSTANTINOPLE.
I HAD the advantage of very fine weather all my journey from Adrianople to
this city. The Grand Signior furnished us with thirty covered wagons for our
baggage, and five coaches of the country for my women. We found the road full
of the great saphis, and their equipages, coming out of Asia to the war. They
always travel with tents; but I chose to lie in houses all the way. I will not
trouble you with the names of the villages we passed, in which there was
nothing remarkable but at Ciorlei, where there was a little seraglio, built for
the use of the Grand Signior when he goes this road. I had the curiosity to
view all the apartments destined for the ladies of his court. They were in the
midst of a thick grove of trees made fresh by fountains. But I was most
surprised to see the walls almost covered with little distichs of Turkish
verse, written with pencils. I made my interpreter explain them to me, and I
found several of them very well turned; though I easily believed him, that they
had lost much of their beauty in the translation. One was literally thus in
English: We come into this world, we ledge, and we depart;
He (...) heart.


The rest of our journey was through fine painted meadows, by the side of the
sea of Marmora, the ancient Propontis.

A certain French author says, Constantinople is twice as big as Paris. It does
not appear to me to be much bigger than London; I am apt to think it is not so
populous. The burying-fields about it are certainly much larger than the whole
city. It is surprising what a vast deal of land is lost this way in Turkey.
Sometimes I have seen burying-places of several miles, belonging to very
inconsiderable villages, which were formerly great towns, and retain no other
mark of their ancient grandeur than this dismal one.

On no occasion do they ever remove a stone that serves for a monument. Some of
them are costly enough, being of very fine marble. They set up a pillar, with a
carved turbant on the top of it, to the memory of a man; and as the turbants,
by their different shapes, show the quality or profession, it is in a manner
putting up the arms of the deceased. Besides, the pillar commonly bears an
inscription in gold letters. The ladies have a simple pillar without other
ornaments, except those that die unmarried, who have a rose on the top of their
monument. The sepulchers of particular families are railed in, and planted
round with trees. Those of the sultans, and some great men, have lamps
constantly burning in them.

The exchanges are all noble buildings, full of fine alleys, the greatest part
supported with pillars, and kept wonderfully neat. Every trade has its distinct
alley, where the merchandise is disposed in the same order, as in the New
Exchange at London. The jeweller's quarter shows so much riches, such a vast
quantity of diamonds, and all kinds of precious stones, that they dazzle the
sight. The embroiderer's is also very glittering, and people walk here as much
for diversion as business. The markets are most of them handsome squares,
admirably well provided, perhaps better than in any other part of the world.

I have taken care to see as much of the seraglio here as is to be seen. It is
on a point of land running into the sea; a palace of prodigious extent, but
very irregular. The gardens take in a large compass of ground, full of high
cypress-trees, which is all I know of them. The buildings are all of white
stone, leaded on the top, with gilded turrets and spires, which look very
magnificent; and, indeed, I believe there is no Christian king's palace half so
large. There are six large courts in it, all built round, and set with trees,
having galleries of stone; one of these for the guard, another for the slaves,
another for the officers of the kitchen, another for the stables, the fifth for
the divan, and the sixth for the apartment destined for audiences. On the
ladies side there are at least as many more, with distinct courts belonging to
their eunuchs and attendants.

The climate about Constantinople, is delightful in the highest degree. I am
now sitting, on the fourth of January, with the windows open, enjoying the warm
sunshine, while you are freezing over a sad sea-coal fire; and my chamber is
set out with carnations, roses, and jonquils, fresh from my garden.

The pleasure of going in a barge to Chelsea is not comparable to that of
rowing upon the canal of the sea here, where, for twenty miles together down
the Bosphorus, the most beautiful variety of prospects present themselves. The
Asiatic side is covered with fruit trees, villages, and the most delightful
landscapes in nature. On the European stands Constantinople, situated on seven
hills. The unequal heights make it seem twice as large at it is, (though one of
the largest cities in the world,) showing an agreeable mixture of gardens, pine
and cipress trees, palaces, mosques, and public buildings, raised one above
another with as much beauty, and appearance of symmetry, as any person ever saw
in a cabinet adorned by the most skilful hands, where jars show themselves
above jars, mixed with cannisters, babies, and candlesticks. This is a very odd
comparison, but it gives me an exact ideal of the thing.

LADY (...) MONTAGUE.
SECT. LIVE. VERSES ADDRESSED TO LADY M. W. MONTAGUE.
I
IN beauty or wit,
No mortal as yet
To question your empire has dared;
But men of discerning
Have thought that in learning
To yield to a lady was hard.
II
Impertinent schools,
With musty dull rules,
Have reading to females denied;
So Papists refuse
The bible to use,
Lest flocks should be wise as their guide.
III
'Twas a woman at first
(Indeed she was cursed)
In knowledge that tasted delight;
And sages agree,
The laws should decree
To The first possessor the right.
IV
Then bravely, fair dam^,
Renew the old claim (...)
Which to your whole sex (...) ^long,
And let men receive
From a second bright Eve
The knowledge of right and of wrong,
V
But if the first Eve
Hard doom did receive,
When only an apple had she;
What punishment new
Shall be found out for you,
Who ta^^ing have robbed the whole tree?
POPE END OF VOL. I.
THE FLOWERS OF MODERN TRAVELS, BEING ELEGANT, ENTERTAINING AND INSTRUCTIVE
EXTRACTS, SELECTED FROM THE WORKS OF THE MOST CELEBRATED TRAVELERS; SUCH AS
LORD LYTTLETON, SIR W. HAMILTON, BARON LE TOTT, DR. JOHNSON, DR. MOORE, DR.
TROIL, ADDISON, BRYDONE, COX, WRAXALL, SAVARY, TOPHAM, SHERLOCK, DOUGLAS,
SWINBURNE, LADY M. W. MONTAGUE, etc. etc. Intended chiefly for Young People of
both Sexes.

By the Rev. John Adams, A. M.

Delectando, pariterque monendo. HOR. Travels are the most instructive School
of Man. SAVARY. Here you may range the World from Pole to Pole,
Increase your knowledge, and delight your Soul;
Travel all Nations, and inform your Sense,
With Ease and Safety at a small Expense.
ANON. VOL II.

Boston: PRINTED FOR JOHN WEST, No. 75, CORNHILL, 1797.

CONTENTS OF VOL. II.
LV. Of Venice 1 Account of a dreadful Inundation of the Sea at Ingeram, on the
Coast of Coromandel, in the East Indies 18 LVI. Of the character and manners of
the Venitians -- Dr. Moore 25 LVII. Of the Situation of Venice, its Canals and
Bridges -- Ibid. 33 LVIII. Of various natural Beauties in Wales -- Lord
Lyttleton 37 LIX. Of Carnarvon, and the Isle of Anglesea -- Ibid. 46 LX. A
Traveling Anecdote at Machynlleth in Wales -- Tour through Wales 53 LXI. Of
Dublin and the Hospitality of the Irish A. D. 1774 -- Tour through Ireland 57
LXII. Of the comparative Merit of the French and English -- Sherlock 68 LXIII.
Character of the French Ladies compared with that of the English -- Ibid. 73
LXIV. Of Montpelier in the South of France. A. D. 1775 -- Wraxall 76 LXV. Of
the fertility of the Country between Bourdeaux and Again -- Ibid. 79 LXVI. An
account of the different Ways that lead into Italy -- Tour through Italy 83
LXVII. Character of the Italians. A. D. 1776 -- Sherlock 94 LXVIII. Two curious
Remarks -- Ibid. 98 LXIX. The Reasons why the French have more Wit and better
Spirits than the English -- Ibid. 95 LXX. Of Edinburgh. A. D. 1774 -- Topham 97
LXXI. A singular Anecdote -- Ibid. 105 LXXII. Of the Hospitality and
Good-Breeding of the Scotch; their Language, particular Beauties in it, and
Expressions -- Ibid. 109 LXXIII. Of the Suppers of the Scotch, and their Manner
of conducting them -- Ibid. 114 LXXIV. On the Civility of the common People in
Scotland -- Ibid. 119 LXXV. Of the public and private Diversions of the
Inhabitants of Edinburgh; and Manner of educating their young Ladies -- Ibid.
126 LXXVI. Of the Hague and Rotterdam -- Lady M. W. Montague 133 LXXVII.
Another Account of Rotterdam and the Hague, A. D. 1784 -- Tour through Holland.
134 LXXVIII. Of Leyden -- Ibid. (...) LXXIX. Of Amsterdam -- Ibid. 14^ LXXX. A
singular Head-dress: a singular Custom; Sir William Temple's Opinion of Holland
-- Ibid. 160 LXXXI. Of Antwerp and Brussels -- Ibid. 162 LXXXII. Of Barcelona
in Spain -- Swinburne 167 LXXXIII. Of the Flocks on the Pyrenean Mountains --
Young 176 LXXXIV. Of Madrid. A. D. 1778 -- Swinburne 188 LXXXV. Of the Royal
Family of Spain -- Ibid. 195 LXXXVI. Character of the Spaniards -- Ibid. 202
LXXXVII. Of the Spanish Ladies -- Ibid. 213 LXXXVIII. Anecdote of a Friar --
Ibid. 214 LXXXIX. Of the Baths of Bagneres -- Ibid. 216 XC. Journey into the
Heart of the Pyrenean Mountains -- Ibid. 220 XCI. Of Portugal in general; the
Produce of the Country, and the Customs and Manners of the People -- Tour
through Portugal 23^ XCII. Of Norway, and Bergen its Capital -- Bishop of
Bergen 238 XCIII. Of the Persons, Dress, Employments, and Customs of the
Inhabitants -- Ibid. 245 XCIV. Of the Houses of the Norwegians -- Ibid. 249
XCV. Of the Animals of Norway. -- Ibid. 251 XCVI. Of Lapland -- Travels through
Lapland 253 XCVII. The Manner of Traveling in sledges drawn by Reindeer --
Ibid. 257 XCVIII. The Ceremonies of a Lapland Funeral Ibid. 262 XCIX. Of the
intense Cold experienced by some Gentlemen, sent by the King of France to
determine the Figure of the Earth at the Polar Circle -- Maupertuis 26^ C. Of
the Beauty of the Nothern Lights in Lapland -- Ibid. 268 CI. Of St. Andrews in
Scotland -- Dr. Johnson 274 CII. Of Inverness -- Ibid. 28^ CIII. Description of
a Highland Cottage -- Ibid. 290 CIV. Of the Climate, Soil, Produce, and Animals
of the Hebrides, particularly of Sky -- Ibid. 292 CV. Of the Inhabitants and
Houses of the Hebrides Ibid. 30^ CVI. Of the Hebridian Tables -- Ibid. 307
THE FLOWERS OF MODERN TRAVELS.
SECT. LV. OF VENICE. A. D. 1703.
HAVING often heard Venice represented as one of the most defensible cities in
the world, I took care to inform myself of the particulars in which its
strength consists. And these I find are chiefly owing to its advantageous
situation; for it has neither rocks nor fortifications near it, and yet is,
perhaps, the most impregnable town in Europe. It (...) at least four miles from
any part of the Terra Firma; nor are the shallows that h^^ about it ever frozen
hard enough to bring over an army from the land-side; the constant flux and
reflux of the sea, or the natural mildness of the climate, hindering the ice
from gathering to any thickness; which is an advantage the Hollanders want;
when they have laid all their country under water.

On the side that is exposed to the Adriatic, the entrance is so difficult to
hit, that they have marked it out with several stakes driven into the ground,
which they would not fail to cut, upon the first approach of an enemy's fleet.
For this reason they have not fortified the little islands, that lie at the
entrance, to the best advantage, which might otherwise very easily command all
the passes that lead to the city from the Adriatic. Nor could an ordinary fleet
with bomb-vessels, hope to succeed against a place that has always in its
arsenal a considerable number of galleys and men of war ready to put to sea on
a very short warning. If we could therefore suppose them blocked up on all
sides, by a power too strong for them, both by sea and land, they would be able
to defend themselves against every thing but famine: and this would not be a
little mitigated by the great quantities of fish that their seas abound with,
and that may be taken up in the midst of their very streets; which is such a
natural magazine as few other places can boast of.

The city stands very convenient for commerce. It has several navigable rivers
that run up into the body of Italy, by which they might supply a great many
countries with fish and other commodities; not to mention their opportunities
for the Levant, and each side of the Adriatic. But notwithstanding these
conveniences, their trade is far from being in a flourishing condition for many
reasons. The duties are great that are laid on merchandises. Their nobles think
it below their quality to engage in traffic. Their merchants, who are grown
rich, and able to manage great dealings, buy their nobility, and generally give
over trade. Their manufactures of cloth, glass, and silk, formerly the best in
Europe, are now excelled by those of other countries. They are tenacious of old
laws and customs to their great prejudice; whereas a trading nation must be
still for new changes and expedients, as different junctures and emergencies
arise. The state is at present very sensible of this decay in their trade, and
as a noble Venetian, who is still a merchant, told me, they will speedily find
out some method to redress it: possibly by making a free port, for they look
with an evil eye upon Leghorn, which draws to it most of the vessels bound for
Italy. They have hitherto been so negligent in this particular, that many think
the Great Duke's gold has had no small influence in their councils.

Venice has several particulars, which are not to be found in other cities, and
is therefore very entertaining to a traveller. It looks at a distance, like a
great town half-floated by a deluge. There are canals every where crossing it,
so that one may go to most houses either by land or by water. This is a very
great convenience to the inhabitants; for a gondola with two oars at Venice, is
as magnificent as a coach and six horses with a large equipage, in another
country; besides that it makes all other carriages extremely cheap. The streets
are generally paved with brick or freestone, and always kept very neat; for
there is no carriage, not so much as a chair that passes through them. There is
an innumerable multitude of very handsome -- bridges, all of a single arch, and
without any fence on either side, which would be a great inconvenience to a
city less sober than Venice. One would indeed wonder that drinking is so little
in vogue among the Venetians, who are in a moist air and a moderate climate,
and have no such diversions as bowling, hunting, walking, riding, and the like
exercises to employ them without doors. But as the nobles are not to converse
too much with strangers, they are in no danger of learning it; and they are
generally too distrustful of one another for the freedoms that are used in such
kind of conversation.

There are many noble palaces in Venice. Their furniture is not commonly very
rich, if we except the pictures, which are here in greater plenty than in any
other place in Europe, from the hands of the best masters of the Lombard
school; as Titian, Paul Veronese, and Tintoret. The last of these is in greater
esteem at Venice than in other parts of Italy.

The rooms are generally hung with gilt leather, which they cover on
extraordinary occasions with tapestry, and hangings of greater value. The
flooring is a kind of red plaster made of brick ground to powder, and
afterward worked into mortar. It is rubbed with oil, and makes a smooth,
shining, and beautiful surface. These particulars are chiefly owing to the
moisture of the air, which would have an ill effect on other kinds of
furniture, as it shows itself too visibly in many of their finest pictures.

Though the Venetians are extremely jealous of any great fame or merit in a
living member of their commonwealth, they never fail of giving a man his due
praises, when they are in no danger or suffering from his ambition. For this
reason; though there are a great many monuments erected to such as have been
benefactors to the republic, they are generally put up after their deaths.
Among the many eulogiums that are given to the Doge, Pisauro, who had been
(...) in England, his epitaph says, "In Angli^ (...) Regis obitum mira
calliditate celatum, mirasagacitale rimatus, priscan benevolentiam firmavit;"
that is, "In England, having with wonderful sagacity discovered the death of
king James, which was kept secret with wonderful art, he confirmed the ancient
friendship."

The particular palaces, churches, and pictures of Venice, are enumerated in
several little books that may be bought in the place, and have been faithfully
transcribed by many voyage-writers. When I was at Venice, they were putting out
very curious stamps of the several edifices, which are most famous for their
beauty or magnificence.

The arsenal of Venice is an island of about three miles round. It contains all
the stores and provisions for war that are not actually employed. There are
clocks for their galleys and men of war, most of them full, as well as
workhouses for all land and naval preparations. That part of it, where the
arms are laid, makes a great show, and was indeed very extraordinary about a
hundred years ago; but at present a great part of its furniture is grown
useless. There seem to be almost as many suits of armor as there are guns. The
swords are old-fashioned and unweildy, and the firearms fitted with locks of
little convenience, in comparison of those that are now in use. The Venetians
pretend they could set out, in case of great necessity, thirty men of war, a
hundred galleys, and ten galeasses, though I cannot conceive how they could man
a fleet of half the number.

It was certainly a mighty error in this state to effect so many conquests on
the Terra Firma, which has only served to raise the jealousy of the Christian
princ^^ and, about three hundred years ago, had like to have ended in the utter
extirpation of the commonwealth; whereas had they applied themselves, with the
same politics and industry, to the increase of their strength by sea, they
might perhaps have had all the islands of the Archipelago in their hands, and,
by consequence, the greatest fleet, and the most seamen of any other state in
Europe. Besides, that this would have given no jealousy to the princes their
neighbors, who would have enjoyed their own dominions in peace, and have been
very well contented to have seen so strong a bulwark against all the forces and
invasions of the Ottoman empire.

The republic, however, will still maintain itself, if policy can prevail upon
force; for it is certain the Venetian senate is one of the wisest councils in
the world, though at the same time, if we believe the reports of several that
have been well versed in their constitution, a great part of their politics is
founded on maxims, which others do not think consistent with their honor to
put in practice. The preservation of the republic is that to which all other
considerations submit. To encourge idleness and luxury in the nobility, to
cherish ignorance and licentiousness in the clergy, to keep alive a continual
faction in the common people, to connive at the viciousness and debauchery of
convents, to breed dissensions among the nobles of the Terra Firma, to treat a
brave man with scorn and infamy; in short, to stick at nothing for the public
interest, are represented as the refined parts of the Venetian wisdom.

Among all the instances of their politics, there is none more admirable than
the great secrecy which reigns in their public councils. The senate is
generally as numerous as our house of commons, if we only reckon the sitting
members, and yet carries its resolutions so privately, that they are seldom
known till they discover themselves in the execution. It is not many years
since they had before them a great debate concerning the punishment of one of
their admirals, which lasted a month together, and concluded in his
condemnation; yet was there none of his friends, nor of those who had engaged
warmly in his defense, that gave him the least intimation of what was passing
against him, until he was actually seized, and in the hands of justice.

The carnival of Venice is every where talked of. The great diversion of the
place at that time, as well as on all other high occasions, is masking. The
Venetians, who are naturally grave, love to give into the follies and
entertainments of such seasons, when disguised in a false personage. They are,
indeed, under a necessity of finding out diversions that may agree with the
nature of the place, and make some amends for the loss of several pleasures,
which may be met with on the continent. These disguises give occasion to
abundance of love-adventures; for there is something more intriguing in the
amors of Venice, than in those of other countries; and I question not but the
secret history of a carnival would make a collection of very diverting novels.

Operas are another great entertainment of this season: the Italian poets,
besides the celebrated smoothness of their tongue, have a particular advantage
above the writers of other nations, in the difference of their poetical and
prose language. There are indeed sets of phrases which in all countries are
peculiar to the poets; but among the Italians there are not only sentences, but
a multitude of particular words, that never enter into common discourse. They
have such a different turn and polishing for poetical use, that they drop
several of their letters, and appear in another form, when they come to be
ranged in verse. For this reason the Italian Opera seldom sinks into poorness
of language, but, amidst all the meanness and familiarity of the thoughts, has
something beautiful and sonorous in the expression. Without this natural
advantage of the tongue, their present poetry would appear wretchedly low and
vulgar, notwithstanding the many strained allegories that are so much in use
among the writers of this nation. The English and French, who always use the
same words in verse as in ordinary conversation, are forced to raise their
language with metaphors and figures, or by the pompousness of the whole phrase,
to wear off any littleness that appears in the particular parts which compose
it. This makes our blank verse where there is no rhyme to support the
expression, extremely difficult to such as are not masters in the tongue,
especially when they write on low subjects; and it is probably for this reason
that Milton has made use of such frequent transpositions, latinisms, antiquated
words and phrases, that he might the better deviate from vulgar and ordinary
expressions.

There is a custom at Venice, which they tell me is particular to the common
people of this country, of singing stanzas out of Tasso. They are set to a
pretty solemn time, and when one begins in any part of the poet, it is odd, but
he will be answered by somebody else that overhears him. So that sometimes you
have ten or a dozen in the neighborhood of one another, taking verse after
vese and running on with the poem as far as their memories will carry them.

On Holy Thursday, among the several shows that are yearly exhibited, I saw one
that is odd enough, and particular to the Venetians. There is a set of
artisans, who, by the help of several poles, which they lay across each others
shoulders, build themselves up into a kind of pyramid; so that you see a pile
of men in the air of four or five rows rising one above another. The weight is
so equally distributed, that every man is very able to bear his part of it, the
stories, if I may so call them, growing less and less as they advance higher
and higher. A little boy represents the point of the pyramid, who, after a
short space, leaps off, with a great deal of dexterity, into the arms of one
that catches him at the bottom. In the same manner the whole building falls to
pieces. I have been the more particular on this, because it explains the
following verses of Claudian, which show that the Venetians are not the
inventors of this trick.

" Vel qui more avium sese jaculantur in auras,
" Corporaque aedificant, celeri crescentia nexu,
" Quorum compositam puer augmentatus in arcem
" Emicat, and vinctus plantae, vel cruribus haerens,
" Pendula librato figit vestigia saltu.
CLAUD. " Men, pil'd on men, with active leaps arise,
" And build the breathing fabric to the skies;
" A sprightly youth above the topmost row
" Points the tall pyramid, and crowns the show.
ADDISON. ACCOUNT OF A DREADFUL INUNDATION OF THE SEA AT INGERAM, ON THE COAST
OF COROMANDEL, IN THE EAST INDIES. [ In a Letter From Mr. William Parson, to
Alexander Dalrymple, Esquire.]
Ingeram, June 7, 1787. My dear Frind,
YOU wish to have a just and circumstantial account of the late calamity we
have sustained. It is no wonder the accounts you have seen should be incoherent
and imperfect; for while the misfortune was recent, our minds were distracted
with a thousand fears and apprehensions for the consequences: indeed, people
less alarmed and less gloomy than ourselves might have admitted the
apprehension of pestilence and famine; the former, from the air being tainted
from some thousands of putrid carcases both of men and cattle; and the latter
from the country around us being destroyed, as well as our stock of provisions
and the fruit of the earth.

From the 17th of May, it blew hard from the N. E. but as bad weather is
unusual at such a season, we did not apprehend that it would become more
serious; but on the 19th at night it increased to a hard gale; and on the 20th,
in the morning, it blew a perfect hurricane, insomuch that our houses were
presently untiled, our doors and windows beat in, and the railing and part of
the wall of our enclosures blown down. A little before eleven it came with
violence from the sea, and I presently perceived a multitude of the inhabitants
crowding toward my house, crying out that the sea was coming in upon us. I cast
my eyes in that direction, and saw it approaching with great rapidity, bearing
much the same appearance as the bar in Bengal river. As my house was situated
very low I did not hesitate to abandon it, directing my steps toward the old
Factory, in order to avail myself of the Terrace; for in that dreadful moment I
could not so far reflect upon causes or effects, as to account for the
phenomenon, or to set bounds to its increase. I had indeed heard of a
tradition among the natives, that about a century ago the sea ran as high as
the tallest Palmira trees, which I have ever disregarded as fabulous, till the
present unusual appearance called it more forcibly to my mind. In my way to the
old Factory, I stopped at the door of Mr. Boures' house, to apprise the rest of
the gentlemen of their danger, and the measures I had concerted for my safety.
They accordingly joined me; but before we attained the place of our
destination, we were nearly intercepted by the torrent of w^^^^. As the house
is built on a high spot, and pretty well elevated from the ground, the water
ran above a foot on the first floor, so we had no occasion to have recourse to
the Terrace. Between one and two o'clock the water began to subside a little,
and continued gradually decreasing till the body of it had retired; leaving all
the low places, tanks, and wells, full of salt water. I think the sea must have
risen fifteen feet above its natural level. About the time of the water
subsiding, the wind favored it by coming round to the southward, from which
point it blew the hardest. As the Factory-house was in a very ruinous state,
and shook exceedingly at every gust, we were very anxious to get back to Mr.
Boures' house. I attempted it twice, but found I had neither power nor strength
to combat the force of the wind, getting back with the greatest difficulty to
my former station. About five o'clock during a short lull, we happily effected
our remove. It blew very hard the greatest part of the night; at midnight it
veered to the westward, and was so cold, that I thought we should have perished
as we reclined in our chairs.

The gale broke up toward the morning. I shall not attempt to describe to you
the scene that presented itself to our view, when daylight appeared: it was
dreary and horrid beyond description. The trees were all blighted by the salt
water, and the face of the country covered with salt (...); yet it had more the
appearance of having suffered by a blast of wind, or by the eruption of
volcanos, than by an inundation of water, such an effect had it in destroying
the herbage and foilage of every description. Our houses were found full of the
inhabitants who had taken refuge therein, stripped of doors and windows, and
quite open to the weather at top; the go-downs Stairs at the backs of the
houses to descend, in order to take water.
mostly carried away and several substantial tiled houses so complately
leveled, as scarcely to afford a mark of their ever existing; but our
sufferings were light, when compared with those of Coringa, and the rest of the
villages nearer the sea. At Coringa, out of four thousand inhabitants, it is
said not more than twenty were saved, and those mostly on Mrs. Corsar's
Terrace, and on the beams of Captain Webster's house. Mr. Gideon Firth; Mr.
George Day, and the Portuguese Padre were, I believe, the only Europeans that
were drowned. At first the sea rose gradually, and as it came in with the tide
the people were not much alarmed; but when they found it still increase so as
to render their situation dangerous, they mounted on the top of their
Cadjan-houses, till the (...) impelled by a strong Easterly wind rushed in upon
them most furiously, when all the houses at the same awful moment gave way, and
nearly four thousand souls were launched into eternity. This tremendous scene
was visible from Mrs. Corsar's Terrace, over which the sea sometimes broke, and
they were frequently in great danger from the drifting of vessels and other
heavy bodies, which must inevitably have brought down the house, had they come
to contact. At the Dutch village of Jaggernaickporan, I hear the distress was
very great, and that about a thousand lives were lost; many of the villages in
the low country between Coringa and Jaggernaickporan were totally destroyed,
and the inundation carried its dreadful effects as far to the northward as
Apparah; but I do not hear that many lives were lost at that place. The
inundation penetrated inland about ten coss from the sea in a direct line; but
did little more damage to the westward of us than destroying the vegetation. It
would be very difficult to ascertain with any precision, the number of lives
lost in this dreadful visitation; the most intelligent people I have conferred
with on the subject, state the loss at from ten to twenty thousand souls. This
is rather an indefinite computation; but I think, if the medium be taken, it
will then rather exceed than fall short of the real loss. They compute that a
lack of cattle were drowned, and from the vast numbers I saw dead at
Nellapilla, I can easily credit their assertion. For two or three days after
the calimity, such was the languor of the inhabitants, not a Cooley or workman
was to be procured at any price; it required our utmost exertion to get the
dead bodies and the dead cattle buried with all possible speed, to prevent the
air being impregnated with putrid effluvia. This, to be sure, was a task we
could not fully execute, except just in the villages. However, no bad effects
have ensued, which I impute to the continual land winds that have blown
strongly for some time past. These have the property of drying up the juices of
dead bodies and preventing putrefaction, which must necessarily have been the
consequence in a damp air. It is extraordinary, that the vast track of low
ground on the south side Guadavery, from Gotendy to Bundarmalanka, suffered
very little from the inundation, and scarcely a person perished. This country
lies so exceedingly low, as to be flooded in many places by the common
spring-tides, and a great deal of it is in consequence covered with salt
jungle. It is probable they owe their safety to those small islands at the
mouth of the Guadavery, as well as Point Guadavery itself which must have both
contributed to break the force of the sea.

When we had recovered from our consternation on the 21st, we began to consider
how we should be able to exist in such a field of desolation, as our wells were
filled with salt water, our provisions destroyed, and we found by digging in
different places that no sweet water was to be procured; when it was discovered
that Providence had so far interfered in our favor, as to bring down the
freshes at a very early and unusual season. From what accounts we could hastily
gather, we were appehensive that the stores of rice were either much damaged or
totally destroyed, as the rice godowns and go marks are generally secured
aginst an accident less formidable than this. However, the event has happily
falsified our surmises, and proved our information fallacious, for rice has
hitherto been plentiful and not dear. The generous supplies that have been sent
us from the Presidency, will, I trust, secure us from serious want. Our markets
have not yet been attended by a person with an article for sale; but this is
not to be wondered at, as our supplies were generally furnished by the villages
at no great distance inland; and these countries have been drenched
sufficiently in salt water to destroy their produce. The fishermen, a most
useful body of people, inhabiting chiefly by the seaside, have been, almost
totally extirpated; and we are thereby deprived of a very material part of our
subsistence. Time alone can restore us to the comforts we have lost, and we
have reason to be thankful that things have not turned out so bad as we
apprehended. I have tired myself in attempting this narration, and I fear I
have almost tired you in the perusal of it. A great deal more might be said
upon the subject in a flowery garb; if it yields a moment's amusement to my
friend, my end is fully answered. The greatest part of this intelligence you
have already had in detail, but it is your desire I should bring it to one
point of view. It is hastily written, and very inaccurate; but you will
remember I was in a good deal of pain at the time of writing it, from an
inflammation in my legs, so had not sufficient ease or leisure to correct or
transcribe it.

Yours affectionately, WILLIAM PARSON.
SECT. LVI. OF THE CHARACTER AND MANNERS OF THE VENETIANS.
I AM very sensible, that it requires a longer residence at Venice, and better
opportunities than I have had, to enable me to give a character of the
Venetians. But were I to form an idea of them from what I have seen, I should
paint them as a lively ingenious people, extravagantly fond of public
amusements, with an uncommon relish for humor, and yet more attached to the
real enjoyments of a life, than to those which depend on ostentation, and
proceed from vanity.

The common people of Venice display some qualities very rarely to be found in
that sphere of life, being remarkably sober, obliging to strangers, and gentle
in their intercourse with each other. The Venetians in general are tall and
well made. Though equally robust, they are not so corpulent as the Germans. The
latter also are of fair complexions, with light gray, or blue eyes; whereas the
Venetians are for the most part of a ruddy brown color, with dark eyes. You
meet in the streets of Venice many fine manly countenances, resembling those
transmitted to ^s by the pencils of Paul Veronese and Titian. The women are of
a fine style of countenance, with expressive features, and a skin of rich
carnation. They dress their hair in a fanciful manner, which becomes them very
much. They are of an easy address, and have no aversion to cultivating an
acquaintance with those strangers who are presented to them by their relations,
or have been properly recommended.

Strangers are under less restraint here, in many particulars, than the native
inhabitants. I have known some, who, after having tried most of the capitals of
Europe, have prefered to live at Venice on account of the variety of
amusements, the gentle manners of the inhabitants, and the perfect freedom
allowed in every thing, except in blaming the measures of government. When a
stranger is so imprudent as to declaim against the form or the measures of
government, he will either receive a message to leave the territories of the
state, or one of the Sbirri will be sent to accompany him to the Pope's or the
Emperor's dominions.

The houses are thought inconvenient by many of the English. They are better
calculated, however, for the climate of Italy, than if they were built
according to the London model, which, I suppose, is the plan those critics
approve. The floors are of a red plaster, with a brilliant glossy surface,
much more beautiful than wood, and far preferable in case of fire, whose
progress they are calculated to che^k.

The principal apartments are on the second floor. The Venetians seldom inhabit
the first, which is often entirely filled with lumber. Perhaps they prefer the
second, because it is farthest removed from the moisture of the lakes; or
perhaps they prefer it because it is better lighted and more cheerful: or they
may have some better reason for this preference than I am acquainted with, or
can imagine.

Though the inhabitants of Great Britain make use of the first floors for their
chief apartments, this does not form a complete demonstration that the
Venetians are in the wrong for prefering the second. When an acute sensible
people universally follow one custom, in a mere matter of convenience, however
absurd that custom may appear in the eyes of a stranger at first sight, it will
generally ^e found that there is some rea^ advantage in it, which compensates
all the apparent inconveniences. Of this, travelers who do not hurry with too
much rapidity through the countries they visit, are very sensible: For, after
having had time to ^^^gh every circumstance, they often see reason to approve
what they had formerly condemned. Custom and fashion have the greatest
influence on our taste of beauty, or excellence of every kind. What from a
variety of causes has become the standard in one country, is sometimes just the
contrary in another. The same thing that makes a low-brimmed hat appear genteel
at one time, and ridiculous at another, has made a different species of
versification be accounted the model of perfection in old Rome and modern
Italy, at Paris, or at London. In matters of taste, particularly in dramatic
poetry, the prejudices which each particular nation acquires in favor of its
own, are difficult to be removed. People seldom obtain such a perfect knowledge
of a foreign language and foreign manners, as to understand all the niceties of
the one and the allusions to the other. In consequence of this, many things are
insipid to them, for which a native may have a high relish.

The dialogues in rhyme of the French plays, appear unnatural and absurd to
Englishmen, when they first attend the French theater; yet those who have
remained long in France, and acquired a more perfect knowledge of the language,
assure us, that without rhyme the dignity of the tragic muse cannot be
supported and that, even in comedy, they produce an addition: elegance, which
overbalances every objection. (...) French language being more studied and
better understood by the English, than our languag is by the French nation, we
find many of our countrymen who relish the beauties and pay the just tribute of
admiration to the genius of Corneille, while there is scarcely a single
Frenchman to be found, who has any idea of the merit of Shakespeare.

Without being justly accused of partiallity, I may assert, that in this
instance the English display a fairness and liberality of sentiment superior to
the French. The irregularities of Shakespeare's drama are obvious to every eye,
and would, in the present age, be avoided by a poet not possessed of an
hundredth part of his genius. His peculiar beauties on the other hand, are of
an excellence which has not, perhaps, been attained by any poet of any age or
country. Yet the French critics, from Voltaire down to the poorest scribbler in
the literary journals, all stop at the former, declaim on the barbarous taste
of the English nation, insist on the grotesque absurdity of the poet's
imagination, and illustrate both by partial extracts of the most exceptionable
scenes of Shakespeare's plays.

When a whole people, with that degree of judgment which even the enemies of
the British nation allow them to have, unite in the highest admiration of one
man, and continue, for ages, to behold his pieces with unlaced delight, it
might occur to those Frenchmen, that there possibly was some excellence in the
works of this poet, though they could not see it; and a very moderate share of
candor might have taught them, that it would be more becoming to spare their
ridicule till they acquired little more knowledge of the author against whom it
is pointed.

An accident which occured since my arrival at Venice, though founded on a
prejudice much more excusable than the conduct of the critics abovementioned,
has brought home to my conviction the rashness of those who form opinions,
without the knowledge requisite to direct their judgment.

I had got, I don't know how, the most contemptuous opinion of the Italian
drama. I had been told, there was not a tolerable actor at present in Italy;
and I had been long taught to consider their comedy as the most despicable
stuff in the world, which could not amuse, or even draw a smile from any person
of taste, being quite destitute of true humor, full of ribaldry, and only
proper for the meanest of the vulgar. Impressed with these sentiments, I went
with a party to the stage-box of one of the playhouses the very day of our
arrival at Venice.

The piece was a comedy, and the most entertaining character in it was that of
a man who stuttered. In this defect, and in the singular grimaces with which
the actor accompanied it, consisted a great part of the amusement.

Disgusted at such a pi^iful substitution for wit and humor, I expressed a
contempt for an audience which could be entertained by such buffoonery, and who
could take pleasure in the exhibition of a natural infirmity.

While we inwardly indulged sentiments of self-approbation, on account of the
refinement and superiority of our own taste, and supported the dignity of those
sentiments by a disdainful gravity of countenance, the stutterer was giving a
piece of information to Harlequin, which greatly interested him, and to which
he listened with every mark of eagerness. This unfortunate speaker had just
arrived at the most important part of his narrative, which was, to acquaint the
impatient listener where his mistress was concealed, when he unluckily stumbled
on a word of six or seven syllables which completely obstructed the progress of
his narration. He attempted it again and again, but always without success.
Though many other words might explain the meaning equally well, it is as easy
to make a saint change his religion, as prevail on a stutterer to accept of
another word in place of that at which he has stumbled. He adheres to his first
word to the last, and will sooner expire with it in his throat, than give it up
for any other you may offer. Harlequin, on the present occasion, presented his
friend with a dozen, but he rejected them all with disdain, and persisted in
his unsuccessful attempts on that which had first come in his way. At length,
making a desperate effort, when all the spectators were gaping in expectation
of his safe delivery, the cruel word came up with its broadside foremost, and
stuck directly across the unhappy man's windpipe. He gaped, and panted, and
croaked; his face flushed, and his eyes seemed ready to start from his head.
Harlequin unbuttoned the Stutterer's waistcoat, and the neck of his shirt; he
fanned his face with his cap, and held a bottle of hartshorn to his nose. At
length, fearing his patient would expire before he could give the desired
intelligence, in a fit of despair he pitched his head full in the dying man's
stomach, and the word bolted out of his mouth to the most distant part of the
house.

This was performed in a manner so perfectly droll, and the humorous absurdity
of the expedient came so unexpectedly upon me, that I immediately burst into a
most excessive fit of laughter, in which I was accompanied by my friends; and
our laughter continued in such loud, violent, and repeated fits, that the
attention of the audience being turned from the stage to our box, occasioned a
renewal of the mirth all over the playhouse with greater vociferation than at
first.

When we returned to the inn, I was asked, if I were as much convinced as ever,
that a man must be perfectly devoid of taste who could condescend to laugh at
an Italian comedy?

DR. MOORE.
SECT. LVII. OF THE SITUATION OF VENICE, ITS CANALS AND BRIDGES.
THE view of Venice, at some little distance from the town, is mentioned by
many travelers in terms of the highest admiration. I had been so often
forewarned of the amazement with which I should be struct at the first sight of
this city, that when I actually did see it, I felt little or no amazement at
all. You will behold, said those anticipators, a magnificent town; or more
frequently, to make the deeper impression, they gave it in detail; -- You will
behold, said they, magnificent palaces, churches, towers and steeples, all
standing in the middle of the sea. Well, this unquestionably is an uncommon
scene; and there is no manner of doubt that a town, surrounded by water, is a
very fine sight; but all the travelers that have existed since the days of
Cain, will not convince me, that a town, surrounded by land, is not a much
finer. Can there be any comparison, in point of beauty, between the dull
monotony of a watery surface and the delightful variety of gardens, meadows,
hills and woods?

If the situation of Venice renders it less agreeable than another city, to
behold at a distance, it must render it, in a much stronger degree, less
agreeable to inhabit. For you will please to recollect, that, instead of
walking or riding in the fields, and enjoying the fragrance of herbs, and the
melody of birds; when you wish to take the air here, you must submit to be
paddled about from morning to night, in a narrow boat, along dirty canals; or,
if you don't like this, you have one resource more, which is, that of walking
in St. Mark's Place.

These are the disadvantages which Venice labors under, with regard to
situation; but it has other peculiarities, which, in the opinion of many,
overbalances them, and render it, on the whole, an agreeable town.

Venice is said to be built in the sea: that is, it is built in the midst of
shallows which stretch some miles from the shore, at the bottom of the Adriatic
Gulf. Though those shallows, being now all covered with water, have the
appearance of one great lake, yet they are called Laguna, or lakes, because
formerly, as it is imagined, they were several. On sailing on the Laguna, and
looking to the bottom, many large hollows are to be seen, which, at some former
period have, very possibly been distinct lakes, though now, being all covered
with a common surface of water, they form one large lake, of unequal depth. The
intervals between those hollows, it is supposed, were little islands, and are
now shallows, which, at ebb, are all within reach of a pole.

When you approach the city, you come along a liquid road, marked by rows of
stakes on each side, which direct vessels, of a certain burden, to avoid the
shollows, and keep in deeper water. These shallows are a better defense to the
city than the strongest fortifications. On the approach of an enemy's fleet,
the Venetians have only to pull up their stakes, and the enemy can advance no
farther. They are equally beyond the insult of a land army, even in the midst
of winter; for the flux and reflux of the sea, and the mildness of the climate,
prevent such a strength of ice as could admit the approach of an army that way.

The lake in which Venice stands, is a kind of small inner gulf, separated
from the large one by some islands, at a few miles distance. These islands, in
a great measure, break the force of the Adriatic storms, before they reach the
Laguna; yet, in very high winds, the navigation of the lake is dangerous to
gondolas, and sometimes the gondoleers do not trust themselves, even on the
canals within the city. This is not so great an inconveniency to the
inhabitants, as you may imagine; because most of the houses have one door
opening upon a canal, and another communicating with the street; by means of
which, and of the bridges, you can go to almost any part of the town by land,
as well as by water.

The number of inhabitants are computed at 150,000; the streets in general are
narrow; so are the canals, except the grand canal, which is very broad, and has
a serpentine course through the middle of the city. They tell you, there are
several hundred bridges in Venice. What pass under this name, however, are
single arches thrown over the canals; most of them paltry enough.

The Rialto consists also of a single arch, but a very noble one, and of
marble. It is built across the grand canal, near the middle, where it is
narrowest. This celebrated arch is ninety feet wide on the level of the canal,
and twenty-four feet high. Its beauty is impaired by two rows of booths, or
shops, which are erected upon it, and divide its upper surface into three
narrow streets. The view from the Rialto is equally lively and magnificent. The
objects under your eye are the grand canal, covered with boats and gondolas,
and flanked of each side with magnificent palaces, churches, and spires; but
this fine prospect is almost the only one in Venice; for except the grand
canal, and the canal Regio, all the others are narrow and mean; some of them
have no keys; the water literally washes the walls of the houses. When you sail
along those wretched canals, you have no one agreeable object to cheer the
sight; and the smell is overwhelmed with the stench which, at certain seasons,
exhales from the water.

DR. MOORE.
SECT. LVIII. OF VARIOUS NATURAL BEAUTIES IN WALES.
ON our journey we passed through Ludlow, a fine, handsome town, which has an
old castle, now in a neglected and ruinous state; but which, by its remains,
appears to have been once a very strong fortress, and an habitation very
suitable to the power and dignity of the Lord President of Wales, who resided
there. Not far from this town is Okely park, belonging to Lord Powis, and part
of that forest which Milton, in his masque, supposed to have been inhabited by
Comus and his rout. The god is now vanquished; but, at the revolution of every
seven years, his rout does not fail to keep up orgies there, and in the
neighboring town, as Lord Powis knows to his cost, for he has spent twenty or
thirty thousand pounds in entertaining them at these seasons, which is the
reason that he has no house at this place fit for him to live in. He talks of
building one in the park, and the situation deserves it; for there are many
scenes, which not only Comus, but the lady of Milton's masque, would have taken
delight in, if they had received the improvements they are capable from a man
of good taste; but they are as yet very rude and neglected. In our way from
hence to Montgomery, we passed through a country very romantic and pleasant, in
many spots; in which we saw farms so well situated, that they appeared to us
more delightful situations than Clermont or Burleigh. At last we came by a
gentleman's house, on the side of a hill opening to a sweet valley; which
seemed to be built in a taste much superior to that of a mere country esquire.
We therefore stopped and desired to see it, which curiosity was well paid for. We
found it the neatest and best house of a moderate size that we ever saw. The
master, it seems, was bred to law, quitted the profession about fifteen years
ago, and retired into the country upon an estate of five hundred pounds per
annum, with a wife and four children; notwithstanding which encumbrances, he
found means to fit up the house in the manner we saw it, with remarkable
elegance, and to plant all the hill about him with groves and clumps of trees,
that, together with an admirable prospect seen from it, render it a place which
a monarch might envy. But, to let you see how vulgar minds value such
improvement, I must tell you an answer made by our guide, who was servant to
Lord Powis's steward, and spoke, I presume, the sense of his master, upon our
expressing some wonder that this gentleman had been able to do so much with so
small a fortune; "I do not, said he, know how it is, but he is always doing
some nonsense or other." I apprehend, most of my neighbors will give the same
account of my improvements at Hagley.

Montgomery town is no better than a village; and all that remains of an old
castle there, is about a third part of a ruinous tower: but nothing can be
finer than the situation of it and the prospect. It must have been exceedingly
strong in ancient times, and able to resist all the forces of the Welsh: to
bridle them it was built in the reign of William Rufus; three sides of it are a
precipice quit inaccessible, guarded with a deep and broad ditch! I was sorry
that more of so noble a castle did not remain, but glad to think, that, by our
incorporating union with the Welsh, this and many others, which have been
erected to s^^ure the neighboring counties of England against their
incursions, or to maintain our sovereignty over that fierce and warlike people,
are now become useless.

From hence we traveled with infinite pleasure (through the most charming
country my eyes ever beheld, or my imagination can paint) to Powis castle, part
of which was burnt down about thirty years ago; but there are still remains of
a great house, situated so finely, and so nobly, that, were I in the place of
Lord Powis, I should forsake Okely park, with all its beauties, and fix my seat
as near there, as the most eligible in every respect. About three thousand
pounds laid out upon it, would make it the most august place in the kingdom. It
stands upon the side of a very high hill; below lies a vale of incomparable
beauty, with the Severn winding thro^gh it, and the town of Welsh-Pool,
terminated with high mountains. The opposite side is beautifully cultivated
half way up, and green to the top, except in one or two hills, whose summits
are rocky, and of grotesque shapes, that give variety and spirit to the
prospect. Above the castle is a long ridge of hills finely shaded, part of
which is the park; and still higher is a terrace, up to which you are led
through very fine lawns, from whence you have a view that exceeds all
description.

The county of Montgomery, which lies within this view, is to my eyes the most
beautiful in South Britain; and though I have not been in Scotland, I cannot
believe I shall find any place there superior, or equal, to it; because the
highlands are all uncultivated, and the lowlands want wood; whereas this
country is admirably shaded with hedge-rows. It has a lovely mixture of corn
fields and meadows, though more of the latter. The vales and bottoms are large,
and the mountains, that rise like a rampart all around, add a magnificence and
grandeur to the scene, without giving you any horror or dreadful ideas, because
at Powis castle they appear at such a distance as not to destroy the beauty and
softness of the country between them. There are indeed some high hills within
that enclosure, but being woody and green, they make a more pleasing variety,
and take off nothing from the prospect. The castle has an old-fashioned garden
just under it, which a few alterations might make very pretty; for there is a
command of water and wood in it, which may be so managed as to produce all the
beauties that art can add to what liberal nature has so lavishly done for this
place.

We went from thence to see Pestill Rhaider, a famous cascade; but it did not
quite answer my expectations, for though the fall is so high, the stream is but
narrow, and it wants the complement of wood, the water falling like a spout on
an even descent, down the middle of a wide naked rock, without any breaks to
scatter the water. Upon the whole, it gave me but little pleasure.

After having seen the Velino, we lay that night at the house of a gentleman,
who had the care of Lord Powis's lead mines; it stands in a valley, which seems
the abode of quiet and security, surrounded with very high mountains on all
sides; but in itself airy, soft, and agreeable. If a man was disposed to forget
the world, and be forgotten by it, he could not find a more proper place. In
some of those mountains are veins of lead ore, which have been so rich as to
produce in time past, twenty thousand pounds per annum, to the old Duke of
Powis, but they are not near so valuable now. Perhaps you will object, that the
idea of wealth dug up in this place does not consist with that of retirement. I
agree it does not; but, all the wealth being hid under ground, the eye sees
nothing there but peace and tranquilty.

The next morning we ascended the mountain of Berwin, one of the highest in
Wales; and when we came to the top of it, a prospect opened to us, which struck
the mind with awful astonishment. Nature is in all her majesty there; but it is
the majesty of a tyrant, frowning over the ruins and desolation of a country.
The enormous mountains, or rather rocks, of Merionethshire enclosed us all
round. There is not upon these mountains a tree or shrub, or a blade of grass;
nor did we see any marks of habitations or culture in the whole place. Between
them is a solitude fit for Despair to inhabit; whereas all we had seen before
in Wales seemed formed to inspire the meditations of love. We were some hours
in crossing this desert, and then had the view of a fine woody vale, but narrow
and deep through which a rivulet ran as clear and rapid as the Scotch burns,
winding in very agreeable forms, with a very pretty cascade. On the edge of
this valley we traveled on foot, for the steepness of the road would not allow
us to ride without some danger; and in about half an hour we came to a more
open country, though still enclosed with hills, in which we saw the town of
Bala with its beautiful lake. The town is small and ill-built; but the lake is
a fine object. It is about three miles in length, and one in breadth; the water
of it is clear, and of a bright silver color. The river Dee runs through very
rich meadows; at the other end are towering high mountains; on the sides are
grassy hills, but not so well wooded as I could wish them to be. There is also
a bridge of stone built over the river, and a gentleman's house which
embelishes the prospect. But what Bala is most famous for is the beauty of its
women; and indeed I there saw some of the prettiest girls I ever beheld. The
lake produces very fine trout, and a fish called whiting, peculiar to itself,
and of a very delicate taste.

After we left the banks of the lake, where we had an agreeable day, we got
again into the desert; but less horrid than I have already described, the vale
being more fertile, and feeding some cattle. Nothing remarkable occurred in our
ride, until we came to Festiniog, a village in Merionethshire, the vale before
which is the most perfectly beautiful of all we had seen. From the height of
this village you have a view of the sea. The hills are green, and well shaded
with wood. There is a lovely rivulet, which winds through the bottom; on each
side are meadows, and above are corn fields along the sides of the hills; at
each end are high mountains, which seemed placed there to guard this charming
retreat against any invaders. With the women one loves, with the friend of
one's heart, and a good study of books, one might pass an age there, and think
it a day. If one has a mind to live long and renew his youth, let him come and
settle at Festiniog. Not long ago there died in that neighbour^ood an honest
Welsh farmer, who was 105 years of age; by his first wife he had 30 children,
10 by his second, and 4 by his third; his youngest son was 81 years younger
than his eldest, and 800 persons descended from his body, attended his funeral.

When we had skirted this happy vale an hour or two, we came to a narrow branch
of the sea, which is dry at low water. As we passed over the sands we were
surprised to see that all the cattle preferred that barren place to the
meadows. The guide said it was to avoid a fly, which in the heat of the day
came out of the woods, and infested them in the valleys. The view of the said
sands is terrible, as they are hemmed in on each side with very high hills, but
broken into a thousand irregular shapes. At one end is the ocean, at the other
the formidable mountains of Snowdon, black and naked rocks, which seemed to be
piled one above another. The summits of some of them are covered with clouds,
and cannot be ascended. They do altogether strongly excite the idea of Burnet,
of their being the fragment of a demolished world.

In the evening we rode along the sea coast, which is here very cold. The
grandeur of the ocean, corresponding with that of the mountains, formed a
majestic and solemn scene; ideas of immensity swelled and exalted our minds at
the sight; all lesser objects appeared mean and trifling, so that we could
hardly do justice to the ruins of an old castle, situated upon the top of a
conical hill, the foot of which is washed by the sea, and which has every
feature that can give a romantic appearance.

Next morning being fair, we ventured to climb up to the top of the mountain,
not indeed so high as Snowdon, which is here called Moel Guidon, that is, the
nest of the eagle; but one degree lower than that called Moel Happock, the nest
of the hawk; from whence we saw a Phenomenon, new to our eyes, but common in
Wales; on the one side was midnight, on the other bright day. The whole extent
of the mountain of Snowdon, on our left hand, was wrapped in clouds, from top
to bottom; but on the right the sun shone most gloriously over the seacoast of
Carnarvon. The hill we stood upon was perfectly clear, and the way we came up a
pretty easy ascent; but before us was a precipice of many hundred yards, and
below, a vale, which though not cultivated, has much savage beauty; the sides
were steep, and fringed with low wood.

There were two little lakes, or rather large pools, that stood in the bottom,
from which issued a rivulet, that serpentined in view for two or three miles,
and was a pleasing relief to the eyes.

But the moutains of Snowdon, covered with darkness and thick clouds, called to
my memory the fall of Mount Sinai, with the laws delivered from it, and filled
my mind with religious awe.

LORD LYTTLETON.
SECT. LIX. OF CARNARVON, AND THE ISLE OF ANGLESEA.
WHEN I arrived at Carnarvon, I had a very fine view of the sea, and one of the
finest towns I had seen in England or Wales; the old walls of which, with the
towers and bulwarks, are almost entire; they are high and strongly built. The
towers are round, and rather more of the Roman than the Gothic form of
architecture. At one end they join to the wall of the castle, which is a vast
and noble building, of which the outside is likewise well preserved, but the
inside is demolished. The people here show the remains of a chamber, where King
Edward II. was born, and received the submission of all the nobility in Wales
in his cradle. The castle itself was built by his father, and is indeed a noble
work.

As we rode from Carnarvon, the country about was softened into a ^ence of the
most pleasing kind, and was rendered more so by the contrast with that from
which we came. We traveled along the shore of Menai, an arm of the sea, as
broad as the Thames, opposite to Lord Duncannon's. Our road led us over fine
shady lawns, perfumed so with honey suckles, that they were a Paradissetto; and
over gentle hills, from whence we had a lovely view of the Menai and the isle
of Anglesea, which ^ies on the opposite side of it, and then lost them again in
agreeable valleys, like those of Reading, or the Hertfordshire vales. We
enjoyed these scenes for some miles, till we came to a ferry, by which we
passed into Anglesea, and landed at the seat of Sir Nicholas Bayley, which is
the pleasantest spot in the island. He has Gotherised an old house with good
judgment and taste. The view from it is charming. He sees the sweet country,
through which we had traveled, from Carnarvon to Snowdon above it, which
ennobles the prospect; the Menai winds in a most beautiful manner, just under
his windows; his woods shade the banks of it on each side, quite down to the
water; above which, intermixed with them, are ever-green lawns, which, if
helped with a very little art, would, together with his wood, make a garden or
park, of the most perfect beauty; but all is yet in a rude and neglected state.
From thence we went to Baronhill, the seat of Lord Bulkeley, above the town of
Beaumaris, in the same island, it has a view of the sea, and coast of
Carnarvon, which is indeed very fine, but I think inferior to that of Lord
Edgecomb's, with which I have heard it compared. The house is a bad one; the
gardens are, made in a very fine taste; but upon the whole, I like it much less
than Sir N. Bailey's, though the reputation of the former is greater in Wales.

All the rest of the isle of Anglesea is a naked and unpleasant country,
without a tree or hedge to be seen in it, uncultivated still, from the
obstinacy of the people, in adhering to the ignorance of their forefathers; so
that I am told it does not produce the tenth part of what the land is capable
if improved by the agriculture of England. From Beaumaris we rode over the
lands, at low water to Penman Mawr, a high and rocky mountain, the passage over
which must have been very frightful, before they built a wall along the edge of
the wood, which secures you from the danger of falling down the precipice that
is below it into the sea; but with this guard it is very agreeable, the
prospect of the sea and country being very fine.

I never saw any thing that struck me more than the first view of Conway
castle, to which we soon came after passing this mountain. It was built by
Edward the First, in much the same style with that of Carnarvon; but stronger
and more regular. The situation is noble, and it stands upon a rock of
considerable height; instead of a ditch, three sides of it are defended by an
arm of the sea, and four turrets that rise above the towers, besides two others
at one end standing below the others, about the middle of the rock that
over-hangs the sea. The walls between are battlements, and look very strong;
they are, in some places, fourteen or fifteen feet thick, in none less than
twelve. The whole together has the grandest appearance of any building I ever
beheld, especially as the walls of the town, which are built like those of
Carnarvon, but with bolder and handsomer towers, appear right in one view to
the eye with the castle, when first you approach it. All the outside remains,
except one tower, as in the time of Edward the first; and that was not
demolished either with battering engines or with cannons, but by the people of
the place taking stones from the foundation, for their own use, whenever they
pleased; the consequence of which was, that the greatest part of the towerfell
into the sea. But the upper part more surprisingly continues still firm in the
form of an arch; and Lord Hertford, the present proprietor, has forbid any
dilappidation for the future. We were told his grandfather would have lived in
this castle, could he have perchased any lands in the country about; but
finding none to be fold, he dropped the design.

I wish he had pursued it, for then we might have seen the inside entire; a
sight which would have given, me a great deal of pleasure: But now the floors,
cielings, and roofs, are all taken away, so that we can hardly guess at its
ancient magnificence. The ha^^ must have been a noble room; it is 100 feet
long, thirty wide, and thirty high. The roof was supported by very beautiful
arches, which still remain. There are two chimneys in it, and it was well
lighted. The stonework of the windows is exceeding handsome. Had our friend
Milla (the builder of Hagley house) been with us, he would have fallen down and
adored the architect. The eight towers seem to have contained three very good
bed-chambers each, placed one above another, besides some upper rooms. The
chambers are eighteen feet diameter, except one called the king's chamber,
which has a bow window, gained out of the thickness of the wall; and the room
is by that means extended about thirty feet. Over the arch of that window are
the arms of Edward the First.

From Conway castle, we traveled half a day's journey through a very romantic
country, to Rudland, or rather Land castle, the remains of which are less
perfect than Carnarvon or Conway; nor was it ever equal to them, either in
extent or beauty, which I am sorry for, as it was built by Henry the Second.

Not far from hence, at a place called Bodrudan, we passed a rainy day in a
very comfortable manner, with an old acquaintance of mine, who is the lady of
the castle, and has forbid all depredations, which the people of the
neighborhood used to make, by taking it down to build and repair their houses
and pigsties, which would have demolished it like the tower of Conway.

The next morning we went to the top of the hill, from whence we had a view of
the whole vase of Clwydd, from one end to the other, which is equalled by none
in England for fertility and beauty. There is neither mountain nor rock to be
seen in any part of it. After you turn your back upon Rudland, the hills on one
side of it rise very gradually by gentle ascents. Most of them are cultivated
quite to their summits, others half way up; and when the tops are not enclosed,
they are a fine grassy down, like Clent-hill, and shaded and enlivened with
wood, like the slopes in my park. But yet I prefer the scenes in Montgomery
shire to this lively vale. There is a great beauty in this, but there is no
majesty. Whereas there, as in the mind of a certain lady, with whom I have the
honor to be intimately acquainted, the soft and the agreeable is mixed with
the noble, the great, and the sublime.

About the middle of this vale, upon the brow of a hill, stands Denbigh castle,
a very fine ruin; it encloses as much ground as Conway or Carnarvon, but has
not so much building. The towers of it are standing at a very considerable
distance from one another, being fewer in number; but they are in the same
style of architecture, having been built in the reign of the same king, who by
these strong fortresses secured to himself and his postery the dominion of
North Wales. The hall is still pretty entire, and rivals that of Conway, except
that the roof does not appear to have been arched.

The towers are all in a ruinous state. I think it a pity and shame to the
owner, that more care is not taken to preserve such respectable remains of
antiquity. When we left the vale of Clwydd, we went into a barren and
mountainous country which continued from Rythin as far as Wrexham.

From Wrexham we went to Wynstay, the seat of Sir Watkin Williams Wynn. Part of
the house is old; but he had begun building a new one before his death, in a
very good taste. One wing is finished, and that alone makes a very agreeable
house. The view from it is the most cheerful I ever beheld. It stands in the
middle of a very pretty park, and looks over that to a most delightful country.
But if the park was extended a little farther, it would take in a hill, with
the view of a valley, most beautifully wooded; and the river Dee winding in so
romantic and charming a manner, that I think it exceeds that of Festiniog, or
any confined prospect I ever beheld.

Indeed the country, for five or six miles, is of another temper, exceedingly
fertile, and very romantic. While I was looking at it; I asked one of my
friends, "Whether he thought it possible for the eyes to behold a more pleasing
sight." He said, "Yes; the sight of a woman one loves." My answer was, "When I
was in love I thought so."

LORD LYTTLETON.
SECT. LX. A TRAVELING ANECDOTE AT MACHYNLLETH IN WALES.
MACHYNLLETH lies in a small verdant plain, surrounded with mountains. It
stands in the extreme west angle of Montgomery shire, and the bridge from the
town carried us into Merioneth.

I cannot omit a ridiculous circumstance which occurred to us at the inn of
Machynlleth.

A gentleman of the neighborhood politely introduced himself to us, and
hearing we traveled to satisfy our curiosity, civilly offered to gratify it,
as far as he could. It was natural for me, among other things, to enquire about
the roads, and the inns. I therefore asked him, if there was a good house at
our next stage? He answered there were many, Mr. Lloyd's Mr. Powell's, Mr.
Edwards's, etc. I still enquired which was the best. He replied, they were all
very good. But to make him explicit, I persisted in asking him, whether either
of them was as proper, as that in which we were? "Sir!" said he, with a peevish
surprise, "should you take this house for a Gentleman's?"

I quickly explained myself, and begged his pardon. We might indeed have
traveled through the whole country with a constant suite of recommendations;
and this gentleman pressed us to accept of his invitation to his hospitable
friends; but it did not agree with our plan, nor had we resolution enough to
sacrifice our time to a daily succession of jolly company.

Leaving Machynlleth we soon found ourselves in a truly Alpine valley; the
rapid torrent roaring over a bed of broken rocks, and now and then interrupted
by immense fragments, from which it fell in considerable cataracts; the woody
and exalted precipices on each side of the river, and the mountain brooks
continually rattling about us formed a romantic picture of the romantic road
between Aigues Belles and mount Cenis. Toward the extremity of this beautiful
scene, the huge mountain of Cader Idris presented its naked, craggy, and
prominent cliff, full to our front. I never saw an object more awfully sublime;
it extends more than half a mile in length, and is at least a thousand feet
high.

The road passes under part of this gloomy and tremendrous precipice, on the
right hand, within sight of a large lake on the left, and close to the brink of
a smaller. It then crosses an arm of Cader Idris, and with a quick descent of
two rocky miles, ends at Dolgelley. Part of this latter path leads through a
thin oak wood, which hangs over an impetuous torrent, foaming down a rugged
declivity, as steep as the road.

The wretched town of Dolgelley is finely situated upon the Avon's bank. The
valleys around are richly interspersed with woods and decent houses, while the
mountains bound every prospect from the town at irregular distances.

Cader Idris, from the quickness of its ascent, and the nearness of its summit,
appears much higher than it really is; many people, on this account, have
considered it as the highest mountain in Wales, but Snowdon is indisputably
higher.

I could learn no intelligence of its real perpendicular elevation; but I
should think it must be more than half a mile above the level of the river at
Dolgelley, which receives the tide at a small distance below the town.

There appears some spirit in the flannel trade in this neighborhood, which
extends its busy influence for many miles round the country.

About five miles from Dolgelly, (a few large Scotch firs on each side of the
rode marking the spot) we turned upwards on our left, to see a water-fall
behind a small house of a widow Vaugham. This cataract is broken into two broad
parts; the upper descends about thirty-five feet, upon a small craggy ridge,
and the lower about twenty feet, into a romantic bafon, encircled with
perpendicular or impending rocks. A fine wood surrounds it, and some of the
largest trees project their shady branches over the precipices of the cascade.

Returning to the high road, we soon crossed a bridge, under which the torrent
rattled from the above cascade, down a steep declivity, and through large
disjointed fragments toward the river.

We quitted the valley two miles farther, and ascended a barren and dismal
mountain. The road continued lonesome and melancholy for several miles, but at
length conducted us to a comfortable little inn.

My companion's curiosity led him to turn to the right hand from nearly the
summit of the mountain, which is called Pen-maen, toward the falls of the
rivers Mothvaye and Cayne. He found the road exceedingly bad, but his
troublesome ride was amply repaid by the object in pursuit. The cataracts were
very deep, and fell in broad sheets of water, through a varied scenery of woods
and rocks.

These remarkable cataracts are each of them the fall of a whole river, and
situated within a quarter of a mile of one another. That of the Mothvaye forms
two very broad sheets of water, divided about half way down by a ridge in the
rock, each part being also beautifully broken by frequent crags projecting
through it. This whole fall may be about seventy or eighty feet in depth.

That of the Cayne is a continued steep fall from rock to rock, not near so
wide as the former but much higher. I should imagine it must be from an hundred
and fifty or two hundred feet high, but the bottom is of very difficult access.
The scenery, which immediately surrounds them both, is noble beyond
description, producing a fine contrast to the naked hills in their
neighborhood.

TOUR THROUGH WALES. A. D. 1774. SECT. LXI. OF DUBLIN, AND THE HOSPITALITY OF
THE IRISH. A. D. 1774.
HAVING crossed St. George's Channel from Liverpool, the most prosperous
seaport town on the western coast of England, the first land we made was Houth
Heath, a point of land about eight miles east of Dublin, forming the north
point of its bay, which is about three or four miles wide, and six or seven
deep. The bar of this harbor, is very incommodious; but the entrance into the
harbor, being at least eight miles from Dublin city, is extremely beautiful
and picturesque, diversified with hills and promontories on either hand,
exhibiting a very spacious amphitheatre, bounded by a high shore, and said to
be exceeded in grandeur by none, except the bay of Naples, to whose superiority
of view, Mount Vesuvius does not a little contribute. The country all round is
sprinkled with white villas. From the entrance, the light-house on the south
side of the harbor appears to great advantage. At a little distance from it is
Irish town (two miles distant from Dublin) to which place the dyke from that
city reaches; and which, when carried on to the extent proposed, will
considerably increase the quantity of marsh ground already retrieved from the
bay, at the bottom of which the river Liffy discharges itself.

The city of Dublin is not seen to advantage from the water; yet the landscape
upon the whole is highly rich and beautiful, being horizoned in some places by
mountains, exactly conical, called the Sugar Loaf hills. I am persuaded there
are many who would not regret a journey thither for this single prospect, to
render which complete, a number of circumstances are necessary, but which can
seldom concur, such as the season of the year, the time of the day, and the
clearness of the atmosphere when you enter the bay.

The magnitude of the city of Dublin is much greater than in general imagined,
being nearer a fourth than a fifth of that of London. If you view it from any
of the towers, it seems more; but from walking the streets, you would suppose
it to be less. In 1754, there were 12,857 houses in this city; but in 1766,
they were increased to 13,194; and are now further augmented to 13,500, which
indeed is far short of one fourth of the number of houses in London; yet there
is not so great a disproportion in the number of inhabitants who are supposed,
at a moderate computation, to amount to 160,000. It is nearly circular, about
eight miles in circumference. We see it to great advantage from any of its
steeples, the blue slate having a very good effect.

The best view is from the Phoenix Park, (the Hyde Park of Dublin) but much
more extensive than ours, and would be exquisitely beautiful i^ dressed and
planted; but except some thorns and the clumps of elms planted by the late lord
Chesterfield when he was lord Lieutenant, there are very few trees upon it. In
one part of this park his Lordship raised a handsome column of freestone,
fluted, with a phoenix on the top, issuing out of a flame; it has an
inscription on the base, importing that he embellished the park at his own
expense, for the recreation of the citizens of Dublin; and his name is still
held in veneration among them. In this park there is a fort.

The greatest part of Dublin is very indifferent, but the new streets are as
elegant as the modern streets of Westminster. Lately has been added to it an
elegant square, called Merryon's square, built in a superb style. Near that is
the square called St. Stephen's Green, each side being near a quarter of a
mile, probably the largest in Europe, round which is a gravel-walk of near a
mile, where genteel company walk in the evenings, and on Sunday's after two
o'clock. This square has some grand houses, and is in general well built; and
although there is a great inequality in the houses, yet this in some respect
adds to its beauty. In the midst of it is an equestrian statue of George II. in
brass, erected in 1758. The situation is cheerful, and the buildings around it
multiply very fast. A new square has lately been begun, called Palatine square,
near the barracks, a regular fine range of buildings, which when completed,
will considerably add to the growing improvements of this city.

The quays of Dublin are its principal beauty. They lie on each side the river
Liffy, which is banked and walled in the whole length of the city; and at the
breadth of a wide street from the river on each side, the houses are built
fronting each other, which has a good effect. This embarkment, when paved, will
be superior to any part of London.

The Liffy runs for about two miles almost in a straight line through the city.
It has five bridges over it; of which Essex bridge is the most worthy of
notice. It consists of five arches of stone. The chord of the middle one is
forty-eight feet. It was begun in 1753, finished in about a year and a half,
and cost 20,000 guineas. It has raised foot-paths, alcoves, and ballustrades
like Westminster-bridge, of a white stone, coarse but hard. It fronts
Chapel-street to the north, and Parliament-street to the south. The length is
two hundred and fifty feet, and the breadth much the same as that of
Westminster. Queen's bridge was rebuilt in 1764, is exceedingly neat, and
consists of three elegant arches. The other bridges are not worth mentioning,
as they are merely conveniences to save the trouble of ferrying across the
river, and defy every order of architecture.

At the end of Essex-bridge is the elegant new building of the Exchange, which
does honor to the merchants who conducted it, the expense being mostly
defrayed by lotteries. The whole is of white stone, richly embellished with
semi-columns of the Corinthian order, a cupola, and other ornaments, with a
statue of his present Majesty George III: erected in 1779.

Near this, on a little eminence, is situated the castle, the residence of the
Lord Lieutenant, which consists of two large courts, called the upper and lower
castle-yard; in the latter of which are the Treasury, and some other public
offices. Though there is little grandeur in the outward appearance of either,
yet, upon on the whole, this castle is far superior to the palace of St.
James's, as well in the exterior, as the size and the elegance of the
apartments within.

Here are two cathedrals, eighteen parish churches, besides several chapels and
meeting houses. Neither of the cathedrals are remarkable for their
architecture; and as to the parish-churches, except on the front of 3 or 4 of
their steeples, external embellishments have been little studied, all that
seems to have been attended to was neatness and convenience within; but they
are generally destitute of every monumental decoration. In the cathedrals only,
can be seen whatever of the monumental kind is worthy of observation.

From the general badness of the streets of Dublin, hackney coaches are more
frequent in proportion than in London, and sedan chairs are every where as
common as about St. James's.

In the year 1749, it was computed, that in the city and liberties there were
two thousand alehouses, three hundred taverns, and twelve thousand
brandy-shops. At present, in this extensive place, there are but 7 or 8 coffee
houses, and they are resorted to for tea and coffee only, not like those in
London, where dinners and suppers make a very convenient addition; nor are
there above half a dozen chop-houses; such accommodations, being novel in
Dublin.

It is very extraordinary, that in this large and populous city, there should
be such an almost total want of strangers and travelers. This defect obliges
every body, who is acquainted with the place, to get into private lodgings as
soon as he arrives, or to use the hotels lately set up; some of which are
elegant.

During my stay here, I was frequently presented with the picture of a late
Tourist, at the bottom of the chamber-vessels, with his mouth and eyes open,
ready to receive the libation; and on enquiry found, that even the utensil now
is more frequently called by the name of a Twiss than any other, in contempt of
the illiberal reflections of that gentleman, who was so hospitably received
here; Indeed, hospitality holds its residence here; for it is customary for
almost every gentleman, who dines with your friend, to ask you for a day; nay,
they will sometimes invite the whole company to be of your party. This social
custom is still very prevalent, though not so much, I am told, as it has been.

With respect to drinking, I have been happily disappointed. The bottle is
circulated freely but not to the excess we have heard it was, and I of course
dreaded to find. Common sense is resuming her empire. The practice of cramming
guests is already exploded, and that of gorging them is daily losing ground.
Wherever I have yet been, I was always desired to do just as I would choose;
nay, I have been at some tables where the practice of drinking healths at
dinner was entirely laid aside. Let the custom originate whence it may, it is
now unnecessary; in many cases it is unseasonable, and in all superfluous.

The tables of the first fashion are covered just as in London; I can scarcely
see any difference, unless it be that there is more variety here. Well bred
people of different countries approach much nearer to each other in their
manners, than those who have not seen the world. This is visible in the living
of the merchants of London and Dublin. With these you never see a stinted
dinner at two o'clock, with a glass of port after it; but you find a table, not
only plentifully, but luxuriously spread, with choice wines, both at dinner and
after it; and, which gives the highest zest to the entertainment, your host
receives you with such an appearance of liberality and indeed urbanity, as is
very pleasing. Here they betray no attention to the counter, discover no
sombrous gloom of computation, but display an open frankness and social
vivacity of spirit.

If you prefer the men of this country for their hospitality, and the women for
their beauty, you are likely to live well with them.

In general, the outskirts of Dublin consist chiefly of huts, or cabins,
constructed of mud dried, and mostly without either chimney or window; and in
these miserable kind of dwellings, far the greater part of the inhabitants of
Ireland linger out a wretched existence. A small piece of ground is generally
annexed to each, whose chief produce is potatoes; and on these roots and milk
the common Irish subsist all the year round, without tasting either bread or
meat, except perhaps at Christmas once or twice. What little the men can earn
by their labor, or the women by their spinning, is generally consumed in
whisky, a spirituous liquor resembling Geneva. Shoes and stockings are seldom
worn by these beings, who seem to form a different race from the rest of
mankind. Their poverty is far greater than that of the Spanish Portugese, or
even the Scotch Peasants, notwithstanding which, they wear the appearance of
content.

The indigence of the middling class of people is visible even in Dublin; yet
from the most attentive and minute enquries, I am confident that the produce of
this kingdom, either of corn or cattle is not above two thirds, at most, of
what by good cultivation it might yield; notwithstanding which, the landed
gentlemen, I believe, make as much, or more of their estates, than any in the
three kingdoms, while the lands, for equal goodnest produce the least. The
consequences of this, with respect to the different classes are obvious; -- the
landlords first get all that is made of the land, and the tenants, for their
labor, get poverty and potatoes.

The roads i^ Ireland are generally good enough for riding, but by no means
equal to the English roads for a carriage; and though the inns are very far
from making the appearance of those in England, yet the English traveller will
universally, almost, meet with civil usage, good provisions, and, for himself,
clean decent lodging; but an English horse, could he speak as well as Balaam's
vehicle, would curse the country, whose hay and litter are worse than can be
conceived. Indeed, their oats for the most part are tolerably good, excepting
two or three countries in the East of Leinster, and one or two in Ulster.
Almost all the straw produced in the country is put upon their houses and
cabins. The furniture of the saddle-horses also, such as saddle, bridle,
stirrups, and crupper, are frequently made all of straw. Sometimes the bridle
and stirrups are of cord.

The high roads throughout the southern and western parts are lined with
beggars, who live in huts or cabins, of such shocking materials and
construction, that in hundreds of them you may see the smoke ascending through
almost every inch of their defenseless covering, for scarce one in twenty of
them has any window or chimney; and through those chasms, of course, the rain
must make its way to drip upon the half-naked, shivering, and almost
half-starved inhabitants within. Notwithstanding their ill appearance, a
traveller is frequently presented with boards at the side of the cabin door,
with "dry lodgings and tobacco;" sometimes only "good dry lodgings," or
"lodgings and snuff." As a symbol where milk is sold, they hang out a white rag
on a stick. Indeed these huts spoil the figure and appearance of the much
greater number of even their largest towns in the whole kingdom, whose
entrances are generally dirty, with long strings of these despicable hovels,
with which most of them are prefaced. Into the inland towns especially, you are
generally introduced through a line of fifty or an hundred of these habitations
of poverty and oppression on either hand. Even the metropolis itself is not
without this disgraceful deformity, which exhibits the penury and wretchedness
of the tenants, and the mean spiritedness of the landlords, who, too generally
for their own, or the reputation of their country, impose the building houses
on their lands, upon a set of people, whose abilities will not enable them to
build with materials so good as those of a swallow's nest; and to the infamy of
the proprietors may it be said, that most of the farmhouses in Ireland are
constructed in this miserable manner.

TOUR THROUGH IRELAND. SECT. LXII. OF THE COMPARATIVE MERIT OF THE FRENCH AND
ENGLISH.
"A FRENCHMAN," says the Earl of Chesterfield, "who, with a fund of learning,
virtue, and good sense, has the manners and good-breeding of his country, is
the perfection of human nature." I am not an enemy to the French; but I do not
think this assertion true. In my opinion, the following would have been juster:
"An Englishman, who joins manners and good-breeding to the solidity, energy,
and greatness of mind which characterise his country, is the perfection of
human nature." I do not mean to compliment. But sentiments and actions are upon
a more elevated scale here than they can be found in any other nation in the
world. There are no effects without causes; and the causes of this are very
obvious. We pass our youth with the Greeks and Romans. Their great examples
expand our souls; the brightness of their actions, and the splendor of their
principles, kindle the most noble passions in our minds; and, when we come to
be men, the nature of our government feeds this flame, and we glow with a
certain internal ardour, which occasionally breaks out into action, and which
is neither known nor comprehended but in the dominions of Britain.

I do justice here to my country; and my soul feels happy, that I am able to
give her, with truth, a superiority over the universe in genius and
magnanimity. But if from this I shall be understood to think meanly of the
French, because they are the rivals and enemies of this nation, it would indeed
be to misinterpret me much. Though I do not think that people equal to this in
greatness, I think them a very great people. And if the English are superior to
the French in all the more elevated qualities which dignify and ennoble
humanity; so the French surpass the English in all the milder and gentler
virtues, which grace can adorn it.

In England the French have few friends. But they have one; and that one am I
They could not, I acknowledge, have a feebler advocate; but while I have a
tongue to speak, or a pen to write, wherever I go I Will do them justice.

Let every man who knows that nation speak of it as he found it. If he lived in
their intimacy for years (as I did,) and if he found them ill-natured,
ill-mannered, treacherous, and cowardly, let him speak his mind. I quarrel with
no man who judges for himself, and who speaks the truth. But let the indulgence
I grant be granted to me again; and let me be permitted to tell the world, that
however other men may have found them, I found them good-humoured,
good-natured, brave, polished, frank, and friendly.

" They were my friends, faithful and just to me;
" But Brutus says they are perfidious;
" And Brutus is an honorable man.
" I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke;
" But here I am to speak what I do know."
I found them all animated with a desire to please, and always ready to do me
every service in their power. I owe them a thousand obligations. I had faults;
they corrected them. I wanted knowledge; they informed me. I was rough; they
softened me. I was sick; they visited me. I was vain; they flattered me. I had
need of counsel; they gave me the best advice. Every man has need of agreeable
company, and every man may be sure to find it in France.

I could be lavish in praise of this nation; but I am sorry to say, that too
many people here have prejudices against them, as ridiculous as they are
ill-founded. They despise the French as if they were beings without either
sense or sentiment; though their writings and actions show they are full of
both. Because two states have different interests, is that a reason that every
individual belonging to those states should promote, to the utmost of his
abilities, the interest and glory of the country to which he belongs? It
certainly is. And therefore, every Frenchman has the same merit in laboring
with all his might for the destruction of the British fleet, that every
Englishman has in exerting all his powers to annihilate the navy of France. If
a blast of my breath could send all the ships she has to the bottom of the sea
-- puff -- they were sunk before you could finish this period. But is it a
reason I should hate or despise the French, because I am naturally and
necessarily the enemy of France?

The best way I think to judge this matter is, to take two other rival nations;
Austria and Prussia; Athens and Sparta. Here you are dispassionate; your
judgment will be just. Do you think it the duty of a liberal-minded Prussian to
despise an Austrian? Or, should a well-born Athenian detest a Laced aemonian,
because he is equally animated by the same noble flame that warms himself --
the love of his country? The nation which is able to rival another, proves
herself worthy the admiration of that nation, even by her rivalry; and had I no
other reason to consider the French as a great people, beside their being able
to contend with England, that proof for me would be sufficient.

But the French are perfidious in politics. I deny that they can be perfidious
with the English. They may be treacherous, for aught I know, with the Austrians
and the Spaniards. There they profess friendship. They are of the same
religion, frequently intermarry, and have frequent alliances. With England
France has no connection. She may over reach her in politics, but she never can
deceive her by perfidy; because she is her uniform enemy. There is not an
infant that does not know, that France ever was, and ever will be, the enemy of
England. The making a peace is not making a friendship; and the French will not
be more the friends of England when this peace is made, than they were five
years before the war began, or than they are now. The rivalry between the two
nations will last while the nations last. They are littora littoribus
contraria, opposite in every thing. It is the duty of France to depress England
as much as she can. It is the duty of England to keep down France as much as is
in her power. It is the duty of both to do justice to the other. This justice
the French do render the English. I am sorry I cannot say the English do the
same by them. Every class of men in France praise the people of this country:
some the solidity of their understanding, and the extent of their genius;
others the energy and vigor of their character; many their magnanimity and
benevolence; and all, their courage and good faith. While here -- but I blush
for numbers, and am ashamed to finish my period.

SHERLOCK.
SECT. LXIII. CHARACTER OF THE FRENCH LADIES, COMPARED WITH THAT OF THE ENGLISH.
WOMEN are a subject upon which so much has been said and written by so many
men of abilities, that it is not easy to imagine a new light, in which they
have not been already placed. But, talking of a nation, if one did not say
something about so considerable a part of it, the subject must appear mutilated
and imperfect.

As brevity is the soul of wit, I shall be brief; and I shall only touch on the
principal points in which the women of France differ from those of other
countries.

When a French lady comes into a room, the first thing that strikes you is,
that she walks better, holds herself better, has her head and ^eet better
dressed, her cloth^^ better fancied, and better put on, than any woman you have
ever seen.

When she talks, she is the part of pleasing personified. Her eyes, her lips,
her words, her gestures, are all prepossessing. Her language is the language of
amiableness; her accents are the accents of grace. She embellishes a trifle;
she interests upon a nothing; she softens a contradiction; she takes off the
insipidness of a compliment, by turning it elegantly; and when she has a mind,
she sharpens and polishes the point of an epigram better than all the women in
the world.

Her eyes sparkle with spirit; the most delightful sallies flash from her
fancy; in telling a story, she is inimitable; the motions of her body, and the
accents of her tongue, are equally genteel and easy; an equal flow of softened
sprightliness keeps her constantly good-humoured and cheerful; and the only
objects of her life are to please, and to be pleased.

Her vivacity may sometimes approach to folly; but perhaps it is not in her
moments of folly she is least interesting and agreeable. English women have
many points of superiority over the French; the French are superior to them in
many others. I have mentioned some of those points in other places. Here I
shall only say, there is a particular idea in which no woman in the world can
compare with a French woman; it is in the power of intellectual irritation. She
will draw wit out of a fool. She strikes with address the cords of self-love,
that she gives unexpected vigor and agility to fancy; and electrifies a body
that appeared non-electric.

I have mentioned here the women of England; and I have done wrong. I did not
intend it when I began the letter. They came into my mind as the only women in
the wolrd worthy of being compared with those of France. To settle the
respective claims of the fair sex in these two countries, requires an abler pen
than mine. I shall not dare to examine it even in a single point; nor presume
to determine whether, in the important article of beauty, form and color are
to be preferred to expression and grace; or whether grace and expression are to
be considered as preferable to complexion and shape. I shall not examine
whether the piquant of France is though to be superior to the touchant of
England; or whether deep sensibility deserves to be preferred to animation and
wit. So important a subject requires a volume. I shall only venture to give a
trait. If a goddess could be supposed to be formed, compounded of Juno and
Minerva, that goddess would be the emblem of this country. Venus, as she is,
with all her amiablenesses and imperfections, may stand, justly enough, for an
emblem of French women. I have decided the question without intending it; for I
have given the preference to the women of England.

One point I had forgotten; and it is a material one. It is not to be disputed
on; for what I am going to write is ^he opinion and sentiment of the universe.
The English women are the best wives under heaven -- and shame be on the men
who make them bad husbands.

SHERLOCK.
SECT. LXIV. OF MONTPELIER IN THE SOUTH OF FRANCE. A. D. 1775.
MONTPELIER is a delightful place of residence. I staid there four days, and
left it with excessive regret. The town itself is by no means beautiful, the
streets being almost all narrow, winding, and badly laid out; but nature seems
to have chosen the hills on which it stands, to enrich with her choicest
favors. The ascent is easy and gradual on every side; and the states of
Languedoc have ornamented the summit of it at a vast expense, in a manner where
taste and magnificence are equally blended.

The prospect from this happy spot I cannot describe, though I studied it every
day with an enthusiastic pleasure. Raphael's pencil, or that of Lorraine, might
paint it, but not even Shakespeare's powers of description could do justice to
its beauties. The vales of Languedoc, covered with olives or laid out in
vineyards, are finely contrasted with rude rocks to the north, and melt away
into the sea of the south. Though winter has almost stripped the trees of their
verdure, there is nothing melancholy or desert which presents itself to the
eye. A sky serene and unclouded, an invigorating sun, a keen and wholesome air
spread a gaiety over November itself, which here is neither accompanied with
fogs or rain. Montpelier has, notwithstanding, lost, within these last thirty
years, that reputation for salubrity which conduces more to the support of a
place, than any real advantages it may possess; and the number of strangers who
visit it from motives of health diminishes annually. Some trade is still
carried on from thence by a small river called the Les, which empties itself
into the sea at the distance of a league; but the Mediterranean has been
retiring these three centuries from the whole coast of Languedoc and Provence.
Frejus, which is situated between Toulon and Antibes, where the Emperor
Augustus laid up his galleys after the battle of Actium, is now become an
inland city.

The country from Montpelier to Nismes, is a garden, level, and every where
cultivated. The peasants are just beginning to gather olives, which are very
numerous, and the trees are planted with the same regularity as our orchards in
England. I cannot but envy the inhabitants this genial climate and these
fertile plains, and am ready to accuse Nature of partiality in the infinite
difference which she has placed between the peasants of Languedoc and of
Sweden. In vain will you tell me that the A^^r Patrioe, the attachment we
naturally bear to that country where we were born, renders them equally happy,
and extinguishes all other distinctions. I know the force of this principle; I
feel and cultivate it with the greatest ardour -- but it cannot blind me to the
infinite superiority with which certain countries of the earth are endowed;
above other less favored latitudes and regions.

I passed three days at Nismes in the survey of those magnificent and beautiful
remains of Roman greatness which yet subsist there. They have been described a
thousand times, and it is not my intention to fatigue you with a repetition of
them. The Amphitheatre, and the "maison quarree," are known throughout every
kingdom of Europe. The first of these impresses the beholder with the deepest
veneration; the latter excites the most elegant and refined delight.
Indignation against the barbarians who could violate and deface these glorious
monuments of antiquity, will mix with the sensations of every spectator.

One can scarce believe that Charles Martel, from hatred to the Roman name, had
the savage fury to fill the corridores of the amphitheatre with wood, to which
he set fire with an intent to injure, though it surpassed his power to demolish
so vast an edifice. Yet notwithstanding these attempts of the barbarous
nations, notwithstanding the lapse of so many ages, and the effects of time,
its appearance at present is the most august and majestic which can be
presented to the mind, or to the senses. The prodigious circumferance of the
amphitheatre, the solidity and strength of its construction, the awful majesty
of so vast a pile, half perfect, half in ruin, impress one with a tumult of
sentiments which it is difficult to convey to you by any description.

The "maison quarree," is in the most complete preservation, and appears to me
to be the most perfect piece of architecture in the world. The order is the
Corinthian, and all the beauties of that elegant style seem to be exhausted in
its construction. This superb temple is now converted into a chapel dedicated
to the Virgin, ornamented with gilding and other holy finery, suitable to such
an alteration.

WRAXALL.
SECT. LXV. OF THE FERTILITY OF THE COUNTRY BETWEEN BOURDEAUX AND AGAIN.
WHEN I left Bourdeaux I took the road to Again, along the southern bank of the
Garonne. The country through which I passed from Langon, where I crossed the
Garonne, to the gates of that city, is fertile beyond any I have seen in
Europe. The hills are all covered with vineyards to the summit, and the valleys
scarce require the industry of the peasants to produce in plenty whatever is
necessary for their subsistence. The climate at this season is delicious; and
no marks of winter appear in any of the productions of nature. Cherry-trees,
figs, acacias, poplars, and elms, are in full verdure. In many places, where
they border on the side of the road, the vines have run up, and mixed their
clusters among the boughs. This is truly beautiful and picturesque. Milton, in
his divine flights of imagination, could employ our first parents in no more
delightful occupation, even in Paradise.

-- " Or they led the vine
" To wed her elm; she round about him throws
" Her marriageable arms; and with her brings
" Her dower, the adopted clusters, to adorn
" His barren leaves.
In the midst of this charming country, in a plain, close to the Garonne,
stands the city of Again. Behind it, to the north, rises a very high hill,
called "Le Bocher de la belle Vue." I went up to the summit, on which there is
a convent. The chapel and some of the adjoining cells are hallowed out of the
rock. It is said that these apartments are very ancient, and were made many
centuries ago by hermits, who retired thither from motives of devotion and
austerity. The prospect is beautiful. Beneath lies the city of Again, and
through the meadows which surround it rolls the Garonne.

One of the monks showed me the apartments of the convent; and in the recesses
of the rock heled me to a spring which is never dry, and which he assured me
had been opened by miracle, at the intercession of some holy recluse in ages
past. Their little refectory was hung with portraits of the same monastic
heroes, among which was St. William, duke of Aquitaine; and at the upper end,
in golden letters, was written, "Silentium."

Again is a very mean and disagreeable place, the houses are ill built, the
streets narrow, crooked, and dirty. I saw only one building in it which
appeared to me deserving of notice. It is a chapel belonging to a nunery of
Carmelites. The walls are exquisitely painted in chiaro oscuro, and the
deception of the roof, which is executed in the same manner, is admirable. The
high altar is magnificent, and adorned with a piece of painting, the subject of
which is very interesting. It is a nun, sinking under the transports of holy
contemplation. She appears as if incapable of supporting the divine effulgence
of her celestial lover, with eyes half closed, and arms expanded. Above,
descends a radiant figure, with looks of tenderness and pleasure, surrounded
with the glories of the skies, too strong for motal sight. If it had not been a
religious edifice, I should have supposed it to be the story of Jupiter and
Semele, to which it bears the most apt resemblance. Near the piece is this
inscription.

" Quid non conatur Amor!
" Coelos in Terris adumbrare
" Carmeli Filiae tentarunt,
" Anno salutis 1773."
Here one cannot help being struck with the justice of a remark, which has
often been made on the intimate alliance between love and devotion, when
carried to an excess. The same enthusiasm, the same melting language, the same
overpowering delights, are common to both passions. Love, says Rousseau, in
extreme, borrows the language of Devotion; and Devotion, in her flights, adopts
the expressions of attachment and fondness.

We are used to apprehend the condition of a young women who has taken the veil
to be very miserable. Where convenience, or chagrin, or melancholy, are the
motives to this act of self-dedication, I fully concur in that opinion; but
there are women, I doubt not, who, in the gloom of a convent, amid shrines and
crucifixes, are yet supremely happy. Married to a heavenly spouse, and
dedicated to the embraces of a superior and invisible being, Enthusiasm has
ample room to exert her powers, and raise her votary above the poor
gratifications of earth.

" To sounds of heavenly harps she dies away,
" And melts in visions of eternal day."
WRAXALL.
SECT. LXVI. AN ACCOUNT OF THE DIFFERENT WAYS THAT LEAD INTO ITALY.
IF you enter Italy by the way of France, you will probably go to Lion. From
thence you have your choice, either to go by land through Savoy, and across
Mount Cenis to Turin; or passing through Provence, to embark at Antibes or
Nice, for Genoa or Leghorn. From Swisserland you may pass Mount S. Gothard;
from the Valais, Mount S. Bernard; and from Germany you may go through the
Tyrol. Carriages can pass only by the first and last of these routes. In
crossing Mount Cenis they must be taken to pieces; but the whole road through
the Tyrol is not merely practicable, but even excellent for a carriage.

From Lion to Turin they reckon thirty-five posts, sixty-four leagues, or one
hundred and ninety-three English miles; the time, fifty-six hours. The road
passes through the Lyonnois, Savoy, and Peidmont, by Pont-Beauvoisin and
Chambery over Mount Cenis.

Pont-Beauvoisin, which is fifteen leagues or nine posts from Lion, is on the
frontier; a little river separates it into two parts, one of which belongs to
France, and the other to Savoy:

No sooner have you passed the frontiers of France, than you perceive a change
of country, climate, and people. The mountains of Savoy afford a new scene.
Woods, rocks, precipices, cascades and torrents, form views that charm an eye
fond of rude nature. Others find this journey dreary and disagreeable. The
road, however, is safe and good, and in many places even beautiful. From
Pont-Beauvoisin you go to Chambery, which, though the capital of Savoy, affords
nothing worth seeing. The situation indeed is fine, in a wide delightful
valley, where there is the greatest variety of objects that a fine country and
mountains can produce: but it is a poor dirty town; the houses dark, the
streets narrow, the convents and other public buildings miserable. The
remainder of the ducal palace is a castle; over the gate-way are the governor's
lodgings, commanding the town and adjacent country. During the carnival they
have plays and masked balls.

If instead of taking the direct route you go by Geneva, you will find it
nineteen posts, or ninety-five miles three furlongs from Lion to that place,
the time twenty one or twenty-two hours. From Geneva to Chambery it is seven
posts, or forty-six miles and a half; and the time thirteen or fourteen hours.
This therefore is seventy-two miles out of the way, and will take sixteen or
seventeen hours more in time. But if you have already seen Paris and Lion,
there is a road from Calais to Dijon, by S. Omer, Arras, Cambray, Laon, Rheims,
Chalon sur Marne, Joinville, and Langres, which is sixty-six posts, or three
hundred and fifty-one English miles; and from Dijon to Geneva, by Auxone, Dole,
Poligny, and from Morey across Mount Jura to Nyon, twenty-one posts: the time
of the whole route about eighty-one hours. Whereas by Paris and Lion, it will
cost you one hundred and two hours; but during four or five months Mount Jura
is impracticable.

From Geneva, your best way is to hire horses to convey you to Chambery, there
being very few horses on the road till you come into the direct way fram
France. It is seven posts from Geneva to Chambery, and the voiturier will be at
least twelve hours in going them, unless your carriage is light. If you think
this too much for one day, you may set out in the afternoon from Geneva, lay at
Frangy, and arrive easily at Chambery the next day, time enough to see that
place.

Montmelian, which is only a post and a half, or nine miles from Chambery, is
also most delightfully situated at the head of three valleys. The inn is not in
the town, but half a league on this side of it, and the ascent from it is very
steep. Having passed the mountain, the road lies in a very narrow valley which
winds incessantly. The wine made about Montmelian is much esteemed. After this
you meet with nothing but wretched towns and villages, and a country of
terrible poverty and filth. The honest, plain, and thrifty Savoyards have very
little land to cultivate, and look extremely unhealthy. Aiguebelle lies in a
bottom closely surrounded by mountains. It is but a poor straggling village.
The water is clear, light, and sparkling.

After you have passed Aiguebelle, goitres or swelled necks become frequent.
St. Jean de Maurienne was formerly the residence of the counts of this country.
It is situated in the middle of the highest Alps, in a valley tolerable wide.
The roads are pretty good, except through the towns, where they are ill paved,
and barely wide enough for a carriage to pass. Indeed they are in general
narrow, which is no wonder, where there is so little land to spare. Frequently
you find no more than room for this confined way between the steep mountain and
the torrent; and in some places they are obliged to hew it out of the rock
itself. Whenever the valley widens a little, you find a miserable village; and
some of these, as if it were to spare their useful land for cultivation, are
placed in the very bed of the torrent, which occupies so large a portion of all
that is not barren rock. The road is almost a continued ascent and descent by
the side of the Arche, a river which rises in Mount Iserau, and joins the Isere
near Montmelian. As you advance, the mountains grow higher and more steep, till
at length the road closes in a narrow gorge, and a very long and heavy ascent
to Lannebourg, which is at the foot of Mount Cenis. There are about two hundred
and twenty houses in this village, and about one hundred porters on the
Syndic's list, who are employed in their turns.

The inns on this road are very bad; it is therefore advisable, if you can
bear the fatigue, to go through without stopping. You should by all means have
the whole day before you to cross Mount Cenis, that you may not be hurried in
the double operation of taking your carriage to pieces, and putting it together
again; and that you may have time in the evening to arrive at Suze; in which
case the next day you will easily reach Turin to dinner. The whole passage of
the mountain from Lannebourg to Novalize may easily be accomplished in four or
at most five hours; and has nothing terrible in it; at least from May to
October. In a deep snow, in a violent tempest, and especially in a great thaw,
there is certainly some danger; at all other times there is nothing but the
inconvenience of taking the carriage in pieces, to send it over the mountain on
mules; but the people are so adroit in this operation, and restore it to its
primitive state so easily, that the whole rather furnishes amusement than gives
pain to the traveller.

You have it in your option to pass over on muses or in chaises-a-porteurs,
which is rush-bottomed elbow chairs, without legs. Two men carry them by means
of two poles, and they have a foot-board. These fellows are very strong and
nimble, never missing a step, but treading firm in the roughest ways with the
agility of goats. They relieve each other at proper intervals. In descending,
they show great dexterity in the frequent windings of the mountain. From six to
ten of these men are assigned to each person, in proportion to his size. Their
pay is fifty sols of Savoy each, that is about two shillings and seven-pence
halfpennny. The price of a mule to carry the baggage is the same: of a mule to
ride, forty sols, or two shillings and a penny. A mule is not obliged to carry
above 350lb. so that if the body of your carriage exceeds that weight, they may
demand what they please. There is also one sedan chair at Suze, which may
generally be had by sending notice before hand to the other side of the
mountain; and lately they have provided other covered chairs. The ascent is not
bad, and is easily performed in an hour and a half. At the top is a plain,
about five miles in length; it is a fine turf, and may be galloped over, not
only with perfect safety, but with pleasure. There is a beautiful lake on this
plain, with excellent trout in it.

It is often related, as a wonderful circumstance, that there should be a lake
on the top of Mount Cenis; but the truth is, that this plain is no more than a
very high valley or gorge of the mountain; and though it be indeed the highest
part which travelers pass over, yet there are lofty pikes which rise at least
three thousand feet above it. The lake is supplied from the snow that melts on
these, and trickles through the crevices. It gives rise to the river Dora, and
therefore may be looked upon as one of the sources of the Po. You may stop at a
public house by the hospital to refresh the men; and having traversed the
plain, you begin to descend into Piedmont. The prospect on each side of tall
firs, larches, and chestnuts, of natural water-falls and roaring mountain
rivers, affords a variety at once awful and pleasing. From the plain of S.
Nicholas you have a view of a beautiful cascade; and half way between the great
cross and Novaleze you pass a wretched village, called La Ferriere. You will be
two hours at least in getting to Novaleze. The descent is steep, but no where
dangerous.

Some adventurous people, who return from Italy by the way of Mount Cenis in
winter, when the mountain is covered with snow, slide down on sledges. The
descent toward Lannebourg is very steep, and it takes almost an hour to go
down it, on account of the many turnings and windings you are obliged to make;
but the whole side of the mountain being then covered with one solid smooth
crust of snow, at the proper place you may put yourself on a sledge, with a
guide on the fore part of it, who will conduct it, and change the direction of
it with his foot, whenever it is necessary, and thus bring you to the bottom in
ten or twelve minutes very safe; or if the sledge now and then overturns, they
say it is without any bad consequence. This is called in French, "se fair
ramasser," and the place whence you set out, "les ramasses." Novaleze is a poor
place, with an indifferent inn, where is the first custom-house for Piedmont;
and a stranger must take care not to have snuff, or any new foreign commodities.

You will quit this place if you had not time to reach Suze the evening before,
by nine or ten in the morning, that you may have the day before you, and be
sure to arrive at Turin before ten o'clock, after which hour the gates are not
opened. The road to Suze is rough and bad, with a steep ascent and descent, and
the town is not considerable. You will pass the formidable fortress of the
Brunetta, along a narrow gorge of the mountain. This is the barrier of Italy,
and the key of Piedmont. The fortifications are said to be well worth seeing,
but it is difficult to obtain the permission. At Suze, in the gardens of the
castle, is a triumphal arch, erected in the time of Augustus.

At Rivoli, which is only two leagues from Turin, the King of Sardinia has a
country house. From hence to the capital is a handsome broad straight road,
bordered by double rows of fine elms. There are some wild and magnificent views
between Mount Cenis and Turin; and the meadows in some seasons are equal in
point of verdure to any in England. They are watered by the Dora, which
descends with vast impetuosity from the Alps.

TOUR THROUGH ITALY. SECT. LXVII. CHARACTER OF THE ITALIANS. A. D. 1776.
MEDIOCRITY is rare here; everything is in extremes. No where is so fine music
to be heard; no where (except at the opera of Paris) are the ears so cruelly
tortured. The eyes are charmed and tormented alternately by the most superb and
most detestable pictures and statues. No citizens; and excessive luxury amongst
individuals; and the people in the most abject misery.

It is the same with regard to religion; you will see nothing but a blind
superstition, or determined atheists. But of all the extremes, the most
striking are those which are observed in the character of the nation. The
Italian, in general, is exceedingly good or wicked to a degree. There are
excellent hearts in this country; but like the great pictures they are scarce.
Men are born there with strong passions, and not receiving any education, it is
not astonishing that they often commit great crimes. Under a cold exterior they
conceal burning hearts; and the exterior is cold only to conceal their hearts.
Love, jealousy, and revenge are their ruling passions. As they think only of
the sensual part of love, and know well the constitutions of their women, and
the wiles of their rivals, their jealousy is always awake and their revenge is
implacable.

As to understanding, it is nearly the same; men of talants form the large
class; there are few fools; and middling men are very rare. "Why then, you will
ask, do not these men produce nothing excellent?" Because they have ungoverned
imaginations, and no philosophy; and because good taste has not yet penetrated
into their country. And why has not good taste entered Italy? Because Italy has
neither a London nor a Paris, and because she never had a Lewis the Fourteenth.

Travelers are often mistaken in judging of the Italian, especially the
Neapolitan. They think he has no sense, because he wants ideas. A man can have
but few ideas when he has never been out of his own country, and when he has
read nothing; but examine the Neapolitan on all the subjects with which he is
acquained, and you will see whether he wants natural capacity. He resembles the
soil of his own country. A field well tilled in Naples produces the most
plentiful crops; neglected, it yields but briars and thistles. It is the same
with the genius of the inhabitants; cultivated, it is capable of every thing;
untilled produces only folly and vice.

SHERLOCK.
SECT. LXVIII. TWO CURIOUS REMARKS.
I MADE two observations in my travels; one that the people of every country
make something well; the other, that every nation has a peculiar manner of
ruining itself. The English ruin themselves by play; the French, by women; the
Irish by a hospitality; the Swiss, by drinking; and the Germans, by a multitude
of servants. I should not have said every I should have sad almost every. The
Italians don't ruin themselves, because they are ruined already. However,
individuals among them do; some Milanese, for example, by eating; some
Venetians, by gallantry and gaming; some Neapolitans by equipages and
embroidery; and several Romans, by every species of impurity. Neither do the
Dutch ruin themselves; it is not, however, because they are already ruined, but
because they are too phlegmatic to ruin themselves any way. The few who do
destroy themselves, do it by avarice, by lending money at exorbitant interest
on bad securities.

There are Dutchmen too who ruin themselves by flowers. I do not guaranty the
truth of this anecdote, though I heard it from persons of veracity in Holland.
A man, whose passion was for flowers, and who had an uncommon fine tulip-root
of a very particular kind, heard that another florist had one as fine as his.
He purchased it from him for a sum of money so large, I dare not mention it;
and when he had got it into his possession, he broke it to pieces with his
heel, saying, "Now there is not in the world another tulip-root equal to mine."

Every nation excells too in making something. The French make gold and silver
stuffs, and political lies better than any people in the world. The Italians
make ices, maccaroni, and religious lies to admiration. The Saxons make
excellent porcelaine. The Dutch are famous for making sea-landscapes. The
Flemish for making lace. And the English -- why the English, I, think, make men
and women better than any nation I know.

There is a better race of men and women in England then I have ever seen in
any other country. If any one asks me why it is so? I answer, I cannot tell. If
he asks me how I know that it is so? I answer, by looking at them. There is
also a better race of dogs Not to speak of a great many promising puppies.
and horses here than in any other country I have seen; but there are too a
great many garrons and curs.

SHERLOCK.
SECT. LXIX. THE REASONS WHY THE FRENCH HAVE MORE WIT AND BETTER SPIRITS THAN
THE ENGLISH.
SIR, says a man to Swift, I have a mind to set up for a Wit. Sir, says Swift,
I advise you to sit down again. This was very good advice, particularly in this
country, where that same author has observed, not one man in ten thousand has
wit. Almost every body is witty in France. Why then there, and not here? The
reasons are purely physical; for Englishmen ought to have twenty times more wit
than Frenchmen.

Ideas are the matter of which wit is made, and the English have infinitely
more ideas than the French. This arises from their early education, from their
being a more reading people, etc. You see this is a very strong reason why the
English ought to be superior to the French in this point.

But if ideas are the materials, fancy is the instrument which operates on
those materials; and here comes in the superiority of the French. Their fancies
are livelier, brighter, and quicker.

The force of the imagination depends a great deal on the influence of the
animal spirits; its brightness on the refinement of those spirits: and its
quickness on the celerity of their movement. Now, in point of copiousness of
spirits, the English, I believe, have the advantage of the French. A bull has
more spirits in him than an ape; but the ape's spirits are always in motion,
and it is very difficult to move the bull's. This, you see, is a case in point:
and John Bull, I am persuaded, has a greater quantity of spirits than Jack
Singe. But the Frenchman's spirits are more refined and quicker in their
motions than ours, and this for a number of reasons. I shall here mention some
of the principal.

A Frenchman never tastes malt liquor, he eats no butter, and his bread is
light. The meat in France is not near so fat as it is here, and it is much
better dressed. The sauces are poignant and not greasy. He eats a great deal of
soup and light vegetables. He drinks in moderation as much wine and water as is
necssary to dilute his dinner, and then he takes as much good wine, coffee, and
liqueurs, as is necessary to heat his stomach, and quicken the circulation of
his blood, and no more. Add to this, the pureness of the air, and the light
society of the most amiable women in the world, in which he passes so much of
his time; and you will see reasons enough why his spirits should be quicker in
their motion, and more refined than ours.

I need not mention how opposite our manner of living is; the quantities of
blood-food we eat, the quantity of bad wine we drink, the grossness of our
atmosphere, nor many other causes that hinder the celerity of our fancies, and
consequently impede considerably the vivacity of our wit.

However, the English do not think much of the superiority of the French in
this article. They pique themselves on having better sense and more learning
than their neighbors; and they have more sense and learning. The French allow
this, and it does not give them any uneasiness. They value themselves on being
wittier and more amiable than the English. When a Frenchman has knowledge, and
is grown a little steady, his company is delightful; when an Englishman has
fancy and good manners, his society is enchanting. I always thought that those
two nations, blended together, would produce perfection in every thing.

SHERLOCK.
SECT. LXX. OF EDINBURGH. A. D. 1774.
THE situation of Edinburgh is probably as extraordinary an one as can well be
imagined for a metropolis. The immense hills, on which great part of it is
built, though they make the views uncommonly magnificent, not only in many
places render it impassable for carriages, but very fatiguing for walking. The
principal or great street runs along the ridge of a very high hill, which,
taking its rise from the palace of Holyrood house, ascends, and not very
gradually, for the length of a mile and a quarter, and after opening a spacious
area, terminates in the castle. On one side, far as the eye can reach, you view
the sea, the port of Leith, its harbor and various vessels, the river of
Forth, the immense hills around, some of which ascend above even the castle;
and on the other side you look over a rich and cultivated country, terminated
by the dark, abrupt, and barren hills of the Highlands.

The famous street at Lisle, la Rue Royale, leading to the port of Tourney,
which is said to be the finest in Europe, is not to be compared, either in
length or breadth, to the High Street at Edinburgh; and would they be at the
expense of removing some buildings which obstruct the view, by being placed in
the middle of the street, nothing could be conceived more magnificent. Not
content, however, with this, they suffer a weekly market to be held, in which
stalls are erected nearly the whole length of it, and make a confusion almost
impossible to be conceived. All sorts of iron and copper ware are exposed to
sale; here likewise the herb market is held, and the herb women, who are in no
country either the most peaceable or the most cleanly beings upon earth, throw
about the roots, stalks, etc. of the bad vegetables, to the great nuisance of
the passengers.

The style of building here is much like the French. The houses, however, in
general are higher, as some rise to twelve, and one in particular to thirteen
stories in height. But to the front of the street nine or ten stories is the
common run. It is the back part of the edifice, which, by being built on the
slope of an hill, sinks to that amazing debth, so as to form the above number.
This mode of dwelling, though very proper for the turbulent times to which it
was adapted, has now lost its convenience. As they no longer stand in need of
defense from the castle, they no more find the benefit of being crowded
together so near it. The common staircase, which leads to the apartments of the
different inhabitants, must always be dirty, and is in general very dark and
narrow. It has this advantage, however, that as they are all of stone they have
little to apprehend from fire, which in the opinion of some, would more than
compensate for every other disadvantage. In general, however, the highest and
lowest tenements are possessed by the artificers, while the gentry and better
sort of people dwell in fifth and sixth stories.

In London such an habitation would not be deemed the most elegible, and many a
man in such a situation would not be sorry to descend a little lower. The style
of building here has given rise to different ideas. Some years ago, a Scotch
gentleman, who went to London for the first time, took the uppermost story of a
lodging-house, and was very much surprised to find what he thought the
genteelest place in the whole at the lowest price. His friends who came to see
him, in vain acquainted him with the mistake he had been guilty of: "He ken'd
very weel," he said, what gentility was, and when he had lived all his life in
a sixth story, he was not come to London to live upon the ground."

From the right of the High Street you pass over a very long bridge to the New
Town. Before this bridge was built, you had a very steep hill to descend and to
ascend, which was found extremely inconvenient. A subscription therefore was
entered into to build one: and a most stupendous work it is indeed. It is
thrown over this immense valley; and as no water runs under it, you have the
whole effect of its height. From it you have a fine view up and down the vale,
and the prospect through the middle arch is inconceivably beautiful. Not long
ago a part of this bridge gave way and many people who were upon it sunk into
the chasm, and were buried in the ruins. Many others, who were likewise upon
the bridge, saw the fate of their unfortunate companions, without being able to
assist them. All was terror and consternation. Every one fled from this scene
of death as fast as possible, expecting the bridge to sink under them at every
step, and themselves to be crushed to pieces. When the bridge was cleared, and
the general consternation had a little subsided, it was found that only a small
part had given way, which they are now repairing, and making stronger than
ever. But so great was the fear it occasioned amongst all ranks of people, that
many of them look upon it with terror even to this day, and make it an
objection to residing in the New Town, that they must necessarily pass over it.

The New Town has been built upon one uniform plan, which is the only means of
making a city beautiful. Great part of this plan as yet remains to be executed,
though they proceed as fast as their supplies of money will allow them: The
rent of the houses in general amounts to an hundred pounds per annum, or
upwards, and are most of them let to the inhabitants by builders, who buy the
ground, and make what advantage they can of it. The greatest part of the New
Town is built after the manner of the English, and the houses are what they
call here "houses to themselves." Though this mode of living, one would
imagine, is much preferable to the former, yet such is the force of prejudice,
that there are many people who prefer a little dark confined tenement on a
sixth story, to the convenience of a whole house. One old lady fancies (...)
should be lost if she was to get into such an habitation, another, that she
should be blown away in going over the new bridge; and a third lives in the old
style, because she is sure that these new fashions can come to "nae good." But
different as these sentiments are in regard to living, they are not more
different than the buildings themselves. In no town that I ever saw can such a
contrast be found betwixt the modern and ancient architecture, or any thing
that better merits the observation of a stranger.

The pavement of the whole town is excellent. The granite, which long supplied
London, till Jersey and Guernsey robbed them of those advantages, is dug from
the hills close to the town, and brought at very small expense. Maitland, in
his history of this town, calls it "gray marble;" but without disputing about
the propriety of the name, every one must allow it the very best stone possible
for the purpose. They finish it with an exactness which the London workmen are
indifferent about, and which indeed London would not admit of, from the number
of weighty carriages that continually go over it.

From the left of the High Street you pass down by a number of different
allies, or as they call them here, wynds and closses, to the different parts of
the old town: They are many of them so very steep, that it requires great
attention to the feet to prevent falling; but so well accustomed are the Scotch
to that position of body required in descending these declivities, that I have
seen a Scotch girl run down them with great swiftness in pattens.

This town has long been reproached with many uncleanly customs. A gentleman,
who lately published his travels through Spain, says, "that Madrid, some years
ago, might have vied with Edinburgh in filthiness." It may probably be some
pleasure to this author, and to those who read him, to learn that his remarks
are now very erroneous.

But if a stranger may be allowed to complain, it would be, that in these
wynds, which are very numerous, the dirt is sometimes suffered to remain two or
three days without removal, and becomes offensive to more senses than one. The
magistrates by imposing ^^^es and other punishments, have long put a stop to
the throwing any thing from the windows into the open street. But as these
alleys are unlighted, narrow, and removed from public view, they still continue
these practices with impunity. Many an elegant suit of clothes has been
spoiled: many a powdered well-dressed maccaroni sent home for the evening; and
to conclude this period in Dr. Johson's own simple words, "Many a full-flowing
periwig moistened into flacidity."

Such particulars, however, as these, scarce merit observation. They are
circumstances resulting from the peculiar inconveniency of the buildings, and
not from the natural disposition of the Scotch, who love cleanliness, and
practice it. They lament the impropriety of these customs, and join in the
laugh at the accidents they occasion.

It has been the misfortune of almost every nation to be prejudged at a
distance, or to be visited by a number of men whose resolutions are too strong
for conviction. They come with a fixed idea, that the Scotch are a dirty
people. They probably meet with some person who is so, and would be so in any
country; and away they hurry back and give, as they think, the just character
of the whole nation. It has been the peculiar fortune of the Scotch to have
been thus treated, but they are a sensible and ingenious people, and look upon
these hasty censures in the manner they deserve. But to every man, who is
"Nullius addict us jurare in verba magistri," and who is biggoted to no
particular customs, I make no scruple of declaring, that this metropolis is
not, as some of our countrymen please to say, dirty and disagreeable; but
adorned with many elegant and beautiful structures, the seat of several of the
most ingenious men in Europe; and who are an honor to the age they live in
abounding in many of the politer embellishments (...), and well deserving the
attention of a traveller.

TOPHAM'S LETTERS FROM EDINBURGH. SECT. LXXI. A SINGULAR ANECDOTE.
ON our first arrival at Edinburgh, my companion and self, after the fatigue of
a long day's journey, upon enquiring for an inn, were taken to a house, where
we were conducted by a girl without shoes or stockings, and with only a single
linsey-woollen petticoat, which just reached halfway to her ancles, into a
room where about twenty Scotch drovers had been regaling themselves with whisky
and potatoes. You may guess our amazement, when we were informed, "that this
was the best inn in the metropolis -- that we could have no beds, unless we had
an inclination to sleep together; and in the same room with the company, which
a stage, coach had that moment discharged." Well, said I to my friend, (for I
have more patience on these occasions, than wit on any other) there is nothing
like seeing men and manners; perhaps we may be able to repose ourselves at some
coffee house. Accordingly, on enquiry, we discovered that there was a good dame
by the Cross, who acted in the double capacity of pouring out coffee, or
letting lodgings to strangers as we were. She was easily to be found out; and
with all the conciliating complaisance of a Maitresse d'Hotel, conducted us to
our destined apartments, which were indeed six stories high; but so infernal to
appearance, that you would have thought yourself in the regions of Erebus. The
truth of this, I will venture to say, you will make no scruple to believe, when
I tell you, that in the whole we had only two windows, which looked into an
alley five feet wide, where the houses were at least ten stories high, and the
alley itself was so sombre in the brightest sunshine, that it was impossible
to see any object distinctly.

And now I am in the story-telling humor, I cannot omit giving an account of
an adventure which happened here very lately to a friend of mine; as it tallies
in some measure with what I have already related, and serves to confirm the
wretchedness of accommodation which must be put up within this city. A
gentleman from London, who had been appointed to some duty in a public office,
came to Edinburgh, and having no friends to furnish him with a bed, and few
acquaintances to give him any assistance, found himself obliged to conceal
himse^^ in one of these dark abodes, in order to be nigh the center of the
town, where his employment compelled him to pass most part of the day. As he
perceived his lodgings as good as his neighbors, it induced him to continue
there until he discovered himself extremely weak and emaciated, occasioned by
constant violent perspirations, in which be waked every morning. The
observation which some of his associates made on the alteration of his
embonpoint, and the situation to which he was reduced, (for from a stout and
lusty man he was now become a mere shadow) persuaded him to think himself
really ill, and in a consumption. Accordingly he sent for the Professor, and
another or two of the learned fraternity, who, with all the significancy of
pompous physic, pronounced him to be in a very declining state, and
administered every restorative which the AEsculapian art could suggest or
supply. But all without effect. He still continued to grow worse; and at
length, almost totally exhausted, and giving himself a prey to despair, he sent
up for his landlady to be a witness to his will; who, much concerned for the
melancholy event, and with tears in her eyes, said, "How unfortunate she had
been since she kept house; that her two former lodges had died with her; that
she was sure she did every thing to serve them all; that for her part, she
always took care that their linen was well aired; and as for her rooms, nothing
could be drier or more free from dampness; that her neighbor, good man, was a
baker, and his oven was directly under them; that she was sure; therefore, they
must be warm, and it was impossible to catch cold in her house." -- "Good God,"
cried the gentleman, "an oven under my room! no wonder I am in a consumption
after having been baked for th^se (...) months." Upon which he sent for the
baker, and found what she said was really true; that the oven was immediately
under his bed, and that the decrease of his health had been in proportion to
the increase of the baker's business. The discovery, therefore, being a much
better medicine than any the professors could prescribe, he quitted this enfer,
by degrees recovered his strength and constitution, and lives now to ridicule
the oddity of the accident.

After all this, I am sure every one will agree with me, that it is extremely
strange, that a city, which is a thorough fare into all Scotland, and now
little inferior in politeness to London in many respects, should not be better
furnished with conveniences for strangers, or have a public lodging-house where
you can find tolerable entertainment. But it really has not; and I am the more
surprised at it, as, in their manner of living, and many customs, I think the
inhabitants much resemble the French. But in this particular, what a difference
between this place and Paris! where in a minute you may be provided with a
house equal to one of the greatest nobility, with servants, equipage, and all
the luxuries of elegance and taste; whilst at Edinburgh, without an inn to put
your head into, and without a lodging that you can breath in, you are obliged
to bless your stars to get any place to repose yourself, till better fortune,
or better acquaintance, have interest enough to procure it in some private
house. -- It is a pity, -- it is a disgrace to the country; and I should hope,
ere long, the pride or good sense of Scotland will so far prevail, as to
establish an hotel There are now two elegant hotels in the New Town, and a
tavern on the new bridge. There are also several coffee-houses and apartments
in the Old Town in the English taste.
in some suitable part of the town, to obviate the inconvenience of the want of
these necessaries.

TOPHAM.
SECT. LXXII. OF THE HOSPITALITY AND GOOD-BREEDING OF THE SCOTCH; THEIR
LANGUAGE, PARTICULAR BEAUTIES OF IT, AND EXPRESSIONS.
THIS country has long been celebrated for its hospitality to strangers; and I
am sure I can with great truth add my humble suffrage to this general
observation. They do not think they have paid you all the attention that is
necessary, when they have invited you once to dinner, and then take no more
notice of you. They are eager to show you repeated civilities. They are happy
to explain, to inform you of what is really curious in their country. They give
you a general invitation to their houses. They beg of you to visit them
familiarly, and are sorry if you do not do so. I am ashamed to say that many of
my countrymen seem to have forgot all their kindness the moment they returned
over the Tweed. I trust those waters will never wash away my remembrance, but
that I shall always be proud to own the hospitality of the Scotch, and the
civilities I received in Scotland.

I know of no quality more conspicuous in the inhabitants of this country, than
complaisance; which is common to every age and sex, but more particularly to
the women, who seem to make it a study to oblige, and endeavor to emulate each
other in good breeding; which, I think, is the art of showing people, by
external signs, the inward regard which we have for them. As nothing indicates
the judgment of a nation more than good breeding, so it likewise discovers
their good nature. For politeness is, in my opinion, the result not only of
good nature, but of good sense. It gives a luster to every other charm, and
conceals, in a great degree, every disadvantage which women may lie under in
their persons. But I assure you, the Scotch ladies have no need of this
enchanting accomplishment on the last account. Nature has been as liberal to
them in decorating their external parts, as in ornamenting their minds; and I
believe as few nations excel them in beauty, as in advantages derived from
disposition and education. No women understand better the rules of decorum, nor
are they rivalled by the French in the talent of agreeable conversation; for
which they seem to be better calculated, as well from their superior knowledge
of the world, as from their more extensive acquaintance with books and
literature.

When you are told, that on the first introduction to a lady in this country,
you are favored with a salute, which immediately discovers the fragrance of
her breath, the downy velvet of her skin, and pearly enamel of her teeth; that
the first words she utters to you is either My good friend, or My dear sir,
which softened by the sweetness of her voice, and affability of her manner,
must receive an additional degree of warmth and kindness; can you wonder that I
am so enamoured with their company? or rather, do you not wonder that I can
think of leaving them? But alas! alas! the time approaches for my departure;
and if it was not for one dear object, who attracts me, like the faithful
steel, to the magic circle of her arms, it would be with the utmost regret I
should bid farewell to a country, which is the land of pleasure, rapture, and
delight.

But suppose you should say, that these words, though very pleasing at first on
account of their novelty, must soon lose their charm, when we come to be
acquainted that they are mere words of custom, and ceremony, and uttered
without any intention of good will or sincerity; and that expressions of
kindness, when they are not known to be the marks and effects of kindness, are
empty sounds; I must grant, that by degrees they become habitual, and do not
operate so strongly by use, as on a stranger. But surely, at any time they are
the highest signs of complaisance; and giving the appearance of truth to
actions, and a strong desire to please and oblige, certainly produce a
partiality for the speaker: not by the words, which in common speech signify
scarce any thing; but because by these words he shows that he thinks you worth
notice. Expressions of this nature are ingenious flattery. It makes those, to
whom it is paid, flatter themselves, whilst they look on it as a declaration of
merit in themselves: and pray, what mortal man does not love to be flattered by
a lady; For my own part, if it is a fault, I must plead guilty; and though I
detest it as much as hypocrisy in the male part of our species, I am not proof
against it when assisted by the fire of sparkling eyes, and delivered by female
eloquence. A staunch philosopher would derive this credulity from the orig^nal
perverseness of human nature; and in the same manner as Adam swallowed the
forbidden fruit, though he knew it contained none of those excellent qualities
ascribed to it by Eve; so we, his progeny, are tempted by the flattery of the
fair sex, and sure to give it credit, notwithstanding we are conscious of its
untruth and insincerity.

The Scotch language has one beauty, in which it greatly excels the English,
and in which also it conforms to the Italian; that of diminutives, which are
created at pleasure, and expressed in one word, by the addition of a letter or
syllable. Thus, they say, "manny, doggy, catty," for a little man, dog, or cat:
"wifey" for a little wife; and if it was necessary to speak of an inanimate
thing, they do it in the same manner; as "a buckley, knifey, booky, housey,"
for a little buckle, knife, book, and a house. I need not tell you how
emphatical this makes their tongue, and what an improvement it is on ours. But
their pronunciation and accent is far from being agreeable. It gives an air of
gravity, sedateness, and importance to their words; which though of use
sometimes in an harrangue or public discourse, in common conversation seems
dull, heavy, stupid, and unharmonious. On which account I scarcely ever heard a
Scotchman tell a good story in all my life: for notwithstanding he might put in
all the circumstances to work it to a point, he would be sure to spoil it by
his deficiency in manner, and remove the sting, which ought to tickle the
imagination of the hearer, by appearing not to feel it himself. The inhabitants
of this place, who are acquainted with the English, are sensible of this, and
endeavor to speak like them, especially the politer sort of people, and the
Professors of the College, who, in their lectures, strive to shake off the
Scotch pronunciation as much as possible. The literary productions of this
country being well known, it is unnecessary for me to make any observations on
their style. I shall only say, that they appear to me, from their conversation,
to write English as a foreign tongue; their mode of talking, phrase, and
expression, but little resembling the language of their works; though I cannot
but add, that even some of them, in their conversation are fond of showing
their learning, by making use of words derived from ancient languages. Amenity
is a favorite word of a celebrated historian, who is truly the boast of his
country; who, in private reputation has as few equals, as in public, superiors;
and whose works may be justly said to be "non ludicra cantilena ad momentum
temporis, sed monumentum ad aeternitatem."

TOPHAM.
SECT. LXXIII. OF THE SUPPERS OF THE SCOTCH, AND THEIR MANNER OF CONDUCTING
THEM.
A MAN who visits this country, after having been in France, will find, in a
thousand instances, the resemblance, which there is betwixt these two nations.
That air of mirth and vivacity, that quick and penetrating look, that spirit of
gaiety which distinguishes the French, is equally visible in the Scotch. It is
the character of the nation; and it is a very happy one, as it makes them
disregard even their poverty. Where there is any material difference, I
believe, it may be attributed to the difference of their religion; for that
same catholic religion, to say the truth of it, is a most comfortable one. The
article of absolution is certainly a blessed invention, and renders the spirits
free and unclouded, by placing all the burden of our sins upon another man's
back. A poor Englishman goes fretting and groaning, and carrying his miserable
face into all companies, as contagious as an epidemical disorder, without one
soul to take compassion on him, or pity his weakness: and should he not have a
wife or family at home who cannot avoid him, he finds no person who will bear
his infirmities, or look as sad as he does; but is constrained to wander about
an unsociable being, till the month of November, and the malady Angloise
relieve him from his distresses.

But though the Scotch have no absolution, they have something very like it --
a superstitious reliance on the efficacy of going constantly to church. Many of
them may be said to pass half their lives there; for they go almost without
ceasing, and look as sorrowful at the time as if they were going, not only to
bury their sins, but themselves. At other hours, they are as cheerful and as
gay as possible; and probably, from hence arises that ease, that spirit in
their conversation, which charms in every company, and which is the life of
every society. They see no harm in innocent familiarity. They think a frank and
unrestrained behavior the best sign of a good heart; and agree with Lord
Shaftesbury, "that gravity is the very essence of imposture."

Whenever the Scotch of both Sexes meet, they do not appear as if they had
never seen each other before, or wished never to see each other again. They do
not sit in sullen silence, looking on the ground, biting their nails, and at a
loss what to do with themselves; and if some one should be hardy enough to
break silence, start, as if they were shot through the ear with a pistol. But
they address each other at first sight, and with an impressement that is highly
pleasing. They appear to be satisfied with one another, or at least, if they
really are not so, they have the prudence to conceal their dislike. To see them
in perfection, is to see them at their entertainments.

When dinners are given here, they are invitations of form. The entertainment
of pleasure is their suppers, which resemble the petit soupers of France. Of
these they are very fond; and it is a mark of their friendship to be admitted
to be of the party. It is in these meetings that the pleasures of society and
conversation reign, when the restraints of ceremony are banished, and you see
people really as they are: and I must say, in honor of the Scotch, that I
never met with a more agreeable people, with more pleasing or more insinuating
manners, in my life. These little parties generally consist of about seven or
eight persons, which prevents the conversation from being particular, and which
it always must be in larger companies.

During the supper, which continues some time, the Scotch ladies drink more
wine than an English woman could well bear; but the climate requires it and
probably in some measure it may enliven their natural vivacity. Without quoting
foreign authorities, you will allow that a certain degree of wine adds great
life to conversation. An Englishman, we know, is sometimes esteemed the best
companion in the world after the second bottle; and who, before that, would not
have opened his lips for the universe. After supper is removed, and they are
tired of conversing, they vary the scene by singing, in which many of the
Scotch excel. There is a plaintive simplicity in the generality of their songs,
to which the words are extremely well adapted, and which, from the mouth of a
pretty Scotch girl, inconceivably attracting. You frequently feel the force of
those very expressions, that at another time you would not understand, when
they are sung by a young person, whose inclinations and affections are
frequently expressed in the terms made use of, and which the heart claims as
its own. The eye, the whole countenance, speak frequently as much as the voice;
for I have sometimes found that I had a very just idea of the tenor of a song,
though I did not comprehend three words in the whole. Formerly it was the
custom for the bagpipe to play during their entertainments, and every family
had their bard. In these songs were rehearsed the martial and heroic deeds of
their ancestors, as incentives to their own courage; but in these piping times
of peace, "our stern alarms are changed to merry meetings," and tales of love
and gentleness have succeeded to those of war. Instead of the drowsy hum of a
bagpipe, which would certainly have laid my noble courage asleep, the voice of
some pretty girl claims your attention, which in my opinion, is no bad change.
I must confess, I have not much opinion of those feasts "of other times," where
your ears were continually stunned with the murders such a man had committed,
and where he was continually told of what he had already done, that he might
perform the same again. His modesty must certainly be put out of the question,
otherwise he could never have sat to hear a detail of his own deeds.

It is observed of a Welsh hero, "that he was a devout man, a great warrior,
and an excellent piper; and that he could play with great (...), the songs of
all his actions." This is still better -- With such authority, ought any man to
be blamed for talking of himself, and being the hero of his own tale? While
every one is railing at the present times, it is some consolation to find, that
in many instances our forefathers were as absurd as we are; and that if we
possess little, we have at least the negative merit of not boasting of what we
have. I own I feel a pleasure in reconciling us to ourselves; for as some
ingenious writers have proved that we are every way inferior to our ancestors,
since we cannot rise to them, the only way left is to bring them down to us.

TOPHAM.
SECT. LXXIV. ON THE CIVILITY OF THE COMMON PEOPLE IN SCOTLAND.
I FIND the vulgar inhabitants of this country as varying in their disposition
from those of the southern parts of Great Britain, as the AEthiopians from the
natives of Mexico, and as unlike, as if they were Antipodes. Though Scotland
and England together are very minute in comparison with any of the countries on
the European Continent, yet you cannot conceive a greater dissimilarity of
manners; and so wide is the difference, that you would think the distance
between them, was from heaven to earth. I speak of the common people only; for
the polished and polite are nearly the same in many respects.

Instead of that stubborn rudeness, and uncouth mind, that shyness and
barbarism, which is even cultivated by our peasants, you find in the lowest
kind in Scotland a compliant obsequiousness and softness of temper, an ambition
to oblige, and a sociability which charms you. They are naturally, grave,
hospitable, and friendly; and have such a peculiar attachment to their own
country and families, that, were I to relate to you the wonderful accounts
which I have listened to with astonishment, you could not but think that I was
bordering on romance.

But what distinguishes them from the vulgar inhabitants of almost any nation,
is that peculiar desire to oblige and instruct, a philanthropy which they
discover, on all occasions, to be of service and to do good, and which never
can fail of rendering their intercourse and conversation most agreeable, and of
the greatest utility to the traveller.

In a wild and uncultivated country, in a miserable hovel, destitute of every
convenience of life, exposed to all the inclemencies of climate, without common
necessaries to drag on a wretched, uncomfortable being, it is here you meet
with souls, generous, contented, and happy, ever ready to the call of humanity,
religious and charitable.

In a short tour that I lately made to the highlands, an opportunity presented
itself of making my observations on the minds of this people; since I mixed
with them, conversed on variety of subjects, lived in their families, and
passed with them many a happy hour. As I frequently wandered over the mountains
with my gun, I often found a sequestered village, which had little
communication with the rest of mankind, that had received scarce any form or
fashion from art and human invention; and, consequently, not far remote from
its original simplicity. One day a storm drove me to seek shelter in a small
cottage, which I by chance espied in a deep valley at the foot of one of their
mountains; and on entering, I saw a venerable old woman, with another about
thirty, and five or six pretty infants, which, by their resemblance, I easily
discovered to be her children, all employed in some domestic concer^, and
waiting the return of the master of the family, who, I afterward found, was
gone to provide fish and other necessaries, from a small town on the banks of
the neighboring lake. When they perceived me at the door, the mother of the
little ones came immediately to meet me, and, with a countenance full of
benevolence and hospitality, saluted me in the Earse language; which, though I
did not understand it, seemed to welcome to whatever they could afford, or I
could expect to find there. She then reached me a stool, which was made of
rushes, seeing I did not comprehend her tongue, and was pointing to me to sit
down by the fire, when I addressed myself to the old lady in the corner, and
demanded whether she could speak English; but they all shook their heads and
were silent. I then unloaded my game-bag, which contained a white hare, and
some ptarmigan, and began to court their good opinion, by presenting them to
the children, and endeavoring to divert them, by showing them my shooting
implements and other things which I had in my pocket, and which seemed to give
them much delight: the woman in the mean time, making signs to me to pull off
my wet clothes, and holding out a played which they had warmed by the fire. On
my seeming to refuse their kind offices, they shook themselves and looked
sorrowful, which meant as I since learned, if I did not change my dress, I
should catch an ague: a disorder to which they were extremely subject.

As the weather continued to threaten, and night was not far off, I sat myself
down by the hearth and amused myself by pulling off the feathers of one of the
birds, which I made them comprehend would be very acceptable, as I had eat
nothing almost the whole day; and just as I was preparing to broil it, the
highlander opened the door, and, expressing his surprise at finding a stranger
had taken possession of his household goods, in a free and good-natured tone of
voice, in the Scotch language, begged of me to proceed in my employ, and
enquired the reason of this visit; adding, with a smile, "that I must have
entertained his wife and mother extremely well during his absence, to become so
familiar with them; especially as they did not understand me, and had never in
their lives beheld the face of any human person, except a few of their own
Clan, who inhabited the other side of the hill."

When I had told him my story, and entreated pardon for the freedom I had
taken, he embraced me with the highest degree of rapture, and ordering the
others to do the same, told me, "the gentleman with whom I had been, and to
whose house I wished to return the next day, was the head of his Clan; that he
respected him, and would die for him; and since I was a visitor to the Lord, I
claimed from him every kind of hospitality and convenience, which his poor
pittance could supply; though he added, as a stranger, who had lost my way, I
had a right to civility and assistance from every man."

When I had finished my ptarmigan, of which they would none of them partake, he
produced on the table some dried fish, cheese, and oat-cake, of which they all
eat with an appetite that discovered their poverty, and that brought to my
remembrance the saying of the philosopher, that "He that eats with an empty
stomach needs no variety of food; he that drinks only for thirst desires least
change of liquor; and he that wants least, comes nearest to the gods." On our
being satisfied, he gave some to the infants, and said a grace in the
presbyterian form, praising God with more fervent devotion than ever I met with
in an English bishop at the administration of the sacrament.

The rest of the night we spent in conversation, whilst they plied me heartily
with whiskey; and I answered a number of questions which were demanded of me by
the women, through him as interpreter; till at length, overpowered by fatigue, I
reposed myself in a played by the fire, and enjoyed as sound a slumber, as if my
head had been pillowed on down, Under a canopy of costly state.


The morning arose, and I took farewell of my kind hostesses, who parted with
me, with many expressions of friendship; and, if I may judge from their
countenance, wished that the stormy weather had continued, that I might have
been detained longer. The highlander accompanied me across the mountains in my
progress homeward, cheating the dreariness of the way by his entertaining
discourse, concerning the antiquity of his family, and the ancestors of his
Lord, whom he had followed in the rebellion, and under whose banners he had
ventured his life and fortune. We had now arrived within sight of the house of
my friend, when he wished me health and success through life, and that I might
never go further out of my right way than when I wandered to his habitation. I
paid this kindness with all the coin I was then master of, and parted with a
thousand thanks and gratitude for his civilities.

I have detained you all this while with this length of story, in order to
paint to you the true character of a Scotch peasant; and I dare say you will be
astonished to find so many virtues in a family in the Highlands, where the
inhabitants are thought by us to be in a state of barbarism. But such, I assure
you, they all are, Extrema per illos,
Justitia excedens terris vestigia fecit.
Even in Edinburgh, the same spirit runs through the common people, who are
infinitely more civil, humanized, and hospitable, than I ever met with. Every
one is ready to serve and assist a stranger; they show the greatest respect to
a person superior to them, and you never receive an impertinent answer. As to
their country, it is beautiful and grand to a miracle, and though far from
being temperate, is so healthy, that you hear of fewer disorders than amongst
any other people; and I declare, in every part that I have been, I never saw
either an exceedingly deformed person, or an aged, toothless, paralytic
highlander. They eat a great quantity of fish dried in the sun, and a cake made
of oatmeal, baked hard and flat. Their constant liquor is whisky, which is also
made from oats, has a quick taste, extremely heady, but comfortable to the
stomach; unpalatable to strangers, though hot and nourishing to those who are
used to it.

TOPHAM.
SECT. LXXV. OF THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE DIVERSIONS OF THE INHABITANTS OF
EDINBURGH; AND MANNER OF EDUCATING THE YOUNG LADIES.
THEY have at Edinburgh an elegant playhouse, and tolerable performers:
assemblies, concerts, public gardens, and walks, card parties, and a hundred
other diversions, which in some degree keep me from pining for your Festino,
Bach's concert, or Almack's.

As the genius of any people is not more easily discovered in their serious
moments, than when they give a loose to freedom and pleasure; so the Scotch
nation is peculiarly characterized by the mode of their diversions. A sober
sedate elegance pervades them all, blended with an ease and propriety which
delights, and is sure to meet with approbation. A Scotchman does not relax
himself for amusements, as if to pass away the hour. He seems even in the
height of pleasure, busy and intent, and as he would do, were he about to gain
some advantage. His diversions are not calculated to seduce the unwary, or
recreate the idle, but to unbend the mind, without corrupting it. He seems as
if in his infancy he had been taught to make learning his diversion, and was
now reversing it, and making his diversion his study.

But besides the public entertainments of this city, which are derived from
company, the inhabitants have more resources of pleasure within themselves than
in many other places. The young people paint, draw, are fond of music, or
employ their hours in reading, and acquiring the accomplishments of the mind.
Every boarding-school Miss has something of this kind to recommend her, and
make her an agreeable companion; and instead of a little smattering of French,
which is the highest ambition to attain in Queen's Square, you find them in
Edinburgh entertaining in conversation, sentimental, and well-informed. The
mode of education of the young ladies, is here highly to be commended, and
admirably calculated to make them good wives. Besides needle work, and those
trifling arts, which are the principal part of their instruction in England,
the precepts of morality, virtue, and honor, are taught them from their
earliest infancy, whilst they are instructed to consider themselves as beings
born for society, for more than outside appearance, and transitory pleasure,
and to attend to the knowledge of what is useful, rather than the economy of a
tambourframe.

The ladies also who undertake this arduous task of instruction, are persons
much better qualified in general than in other countries. They likewise
introduce them into the politest company, and give them a taste for elegant and
proper amusements; so that when they leave school, they are not only mistresses
of those accomplishments which are necessary to command a family, but have the
deportment and behavior of experienced women of fashion.

No ladies in Scotland ever murder the precious moments in what is called
"work," which is neither entertainment nor profit, merely because they must
have the appearance of doing something, whilst they see every one employed
around them. They let no minute escape without its respective office, which may
be of utility to themselves or others; and after a proper sacrifice to reading
and literature, gain instruction from society and conversation.

I have often thought it a principal defect in the education of the English
ladies, that they are taught to pay so much attention to the practice of sewing
work, and other needle operations, whilst they neglect learning of greater
importance and pleasure. Since they have minds equally capable of instruction
with the other sex, why should they not be enlightened with the same kind of
knowledge? especially as they seem more suited to it, as well from their
superior sensibility, as their greater leisure and domestic life. Why should
the characterestic which distinguishes us from brutes, be so strongly
cultivated in the male, and have so little attention paid to it in the female
species? Wisdom and science are not perfections in us merely because we are
men; but as reasonable creatures, who have the pre-eminence over the rest of
the creation. It is indeed necessary for the ladies to know these things, in
order to qualify them for domestic economy; but I have no idea of any woman,
except her whose circumstances cannot afford the expense of paying a servant,
making them her employ, or putting them in practice.

The married ladies of this city seldom entertain large sets of company, or
have routs as in London. They give the preference to private parties, and
conversaziones, where they play at cards for small sums, and never run the risk
of being obliged to discharge a debt of honor at the expense of their virtue
and innocence. They often frequent the theater, and show great taste and
judgment in the choice of plays, where Mr. Digges performs a principal
character.

As to exercise, they seldom ride on horseback; but find much pleasure in
walking, to which the soil and country is peculiarly adapted, being dry,
pleasant, and abounding in prospects and romantic scenes. It is likewise
customary for them to drive in their carriages to the sands at Leith and
Musselburgh, and parade backwards and forwards, after the manner of
Scarborough; and other public places of sea-bathing resort. For vivacity and
agility in dancing, none excel the Scotch ladies. Their execution in reels and
country-dances is amazing; and the variety of steps which they introduce, and
the justness of their ear is beyond description. They are very fond also of
minuets, but fall greatly short in the performance of them, as they are
deficient in grace and elegance in their motions. Many of them play on the
harpsicord and guitar, and some have music in their voices, though they rather
love to hear others perform than play themselves.

I do not think the Scotch ladies are great proficient in the languages. They
rarely attempt any thing further than the French; which, indeed, they speak
with great propriety, fluency, and good accent; but they make up for it by
their accurate and just knowledge of their own. They talk very grammatically,
are peculiarly attentive to the conformity of their words to their ideas, and
are great critics in the English tongue. They chiefly read history and
plaintive poetry; but elegies and pastorals are their favorites. Novels and
romances they feel and admire; and those chiefly which are tender, sympathetic,
soothing, or melancholy. -- Their hearts are soft, and full of passion, and a
well told story makes a deep impression on them. Like virgin wax, a gentle heat
mollifies their minds, which reflects the finest touches of art and sentiment.

Nor are the gentleman in Edinburgh less rational in their diversions than the
ladies. There is only one in which I can censure their conduct. They rather pay
too much respect to the divinity of Bacchus, and offer too copious libations at
the shrine of that jovial deity. Their wines, indeed, of all kinds are
excellent, and their climate not the most comfortable; so that some allowance
ought to be made them in that respect. But as they are, they are by no means so
intemperate as the Germans; and, perhaps, their appearing to me in the least
intemperate, may be occasioned by my peculiar aversion to, and abstinence from
all intoxicating liquors. I have neither taste to relish, nor head to bear
them. I have no idea of a man extending the pleasure of drinking beyond thirst,
or forcing, in imagination, an appetite artificial, and against nature.

The youths in this country are very manly in their exercises and amusements.
Strength and agility seem to be most their attention. The insignificant
pastimes of marbles, tops, etc. they are totally unacquainted with. The
diversion which is peculiar to Scotland, and in which all ages find great
pleasure, is golf. They play at it with a small leathern ball, like a fives
ball, and a piece of wood, flat on one side, in the shape of a small bat, which
is fastened at the end of a stick, of three or four feet long, at right angles
to it. The art consists in striking the ball with this instrument, into a hole
in the ground, in a smaller number of strokes than your adversary. This game
has the superiority of cricket, and tennis, in being less violent and
dangerous; but in point of dexterity and amusement, by no means to be compared
with them. However, I am informed that some skill and nicety are necessary to
strike the ball to the proposed distance and no further, and that in this there
is a considerable difference in players. It requires no great exertion and
strength, and all ranks and ages play at it. They instruct their children in
it, as soon as they can run alone, and gray hairs boast their execution. As to
their other diversions, they dance, play at cards, love shooting, hunting, the
pleasures of the field; but are proficients in none of them. When they are
young, indeed, they dance, in the manner of their country, extremely well; but
afterward (to speak in the language of the turf) they train off, and are too
robust and muscular to possess either grace or agility.

TOPHAM.
SECT. LXXVI. OF THE HAGUE AND ROTTERDAM.
NOTHING can be more agreeable than traveling in Holland. The whole country
appears a large garden; the roads are well paved, shaded on each side with rows
of trees, and bordered with large canals, full of boats passing and repassing.
Every twenty paces gives you the prospect of some villa, and every four hours
that of a large town, so surprisingly neat, I am sure you would be charmed with
them. The Hague is certainly one of the finest villages in the world. Here are
several squares finely built, and (what I think a particular beauty) the whole
set with thick large trees. The Voor-hout is, at the same time, the Hyde-Park
and Mall of the people of quality: for they take the air in it both on foot and
in coaches.

The appearance of Rotterdam gives one very great pleasure. All the streets are
paved with broad stones, and before many of the meanest artificers doors are
placed seats of various colored marbles, so neatly kept, that I assure you I
walked almost over the town yesterday, incognito, in my slippers, without
receiving one spot of dirt; and you may see the Dutch maids washing the
pavement of the streets with more application than ours do our bed chambers.

The town seems so full of people, with such busy faces, all in motion, that I
can hardly fancy it is not some celebrated fair; but I see it is every day the
same. It is certain no town can be more advantageously situated for commerce.
Here are seven large canals, on which the merchants ships come up to the very
doors of their houses. The shops and wharehouses are of a surprising neatness
and magnificence, filled with an incredible quantity of fine merchandise, and
so much cheaper than what we see in England, that I have much ado to persuade
myself I am still so near it. Here is neither dirt nor beggary to be seen. One
is not shocked with those loathsome cripples so common in London, nor teazed
with the importunity of idle persons that choose to be nasty and lazy. The
common servants and little shop-women here are more nicely clean than some of
our Ladies; and the great variety of neat dresses (every woman dressing her
head after her own fashion) is an additional pleasure in seeing the town.

LADY M. W. MONTAGUE.
SECT. LXXVII. ANOTHER ACCOUNT OF ROTTERDAM AND THE HAGUE. A. D. 1784.
ROTTERDAM lies on the north side of the Maese, about fifteen miles from the
sea, is of a triangular form, and, in point of trade, inferior only to
Amsterdam; in the spaciousness of the streets, and elegance of the houses,
infinitely beyond it. The canals are so large as to admit ships of two or three
hundred tons, even to the very doors of the merchants; and I know not so
romantic a sight, as to see from the environs, the chimnies, masts of ships,
and the tops of trees, so promiscuously huddled together, that it would acquire
a degree of divination to tell whether it is a town, a fleet, or a forest.

The grandest, as well as most agreeable street in Rotterdam, is the Bomb Quay,
which lies parallel with the Maese. On one side it is open to the river, and
the other is ornamented with a grand facade of the best houses in the city,
inhabited chiefly by the English. They are five or six stories high, massy, and
very clumsy. Wherever there is any attempt at ornament, it is the worst that
can be conceived. One sees no Grecian architecture, except Doric entablatures,
stuck upon the top of the upper story, without pilasters; Ionic volutes, turned
often the wrong way, and an attempt at Corinthian capitals, without any other
part of the order. The doors are large, and stuck with great knobs and clumsy
carving. You ascend to them, not in front, but by three or four steps going up
on each side, and you are assisted by iron rails of a most immense thickness.
These houses are almost all window, and the window shutters and frames being
painted green, the glass has all a green cast, which is helped by the
reflection from the trees that over-shadow their houses, which, were it not for
this circumstance, would be intolerably hot, from their vicinity to the canals.
Most of the houses have looking-glasses placed on the outsides, of the windows,
on both sides, in order that they may see every thing which passes up and down
the street. The stair-cases are narrow, steep, and come down almost to the
door. The Bomb Quay is so broad, that there are distinct walks for carriages
and foot passengers, lined and shaded with a double row of trees. You look over
the river on some beautiful meadows, and a fine avenue of trees, which leads to
the Pesthouse. It seems to be an elegant building, and the trees round it are
so disposed as to appear a thick wood.

This street is at least half a mile in length, and extends from the Old to the
New Head, the two places where the water enters to fill the canals of this
extensive city. I must observe, that when water runs through a street, it then
assumes the name of a canal, of which kind the Heerenfleet has the
pre-eminence. The houses are of freestone, and very lofty; the canal is
spacious, and covered with ships. At one end stands the English church, a neat
pretty building, of which the bishop of London is Ordinary.

Upon the Great Bridge, in the Grand Marketplace, is the statue of that
wonderful man Era^^us. It is bigger than the life, in brass, and clad in a
Doctor's gown. He was born in 1467, and died at Friburg in Alsace, in the year
1536.

Near to the market place is the great church of St. Laurence. From the tower I
had as extensive a view as my eye could command, there being neither hill nor
wood to interrupt my sight. I saw Delft and the Hague to the north; Dort, to
the south; Brill, to the west; Amsterdam, to the east, and Utrecht lies off to
the south-east.

There are four churches in Rotterdam of the established religion, which is
Calvinism, and twelve clergymen to attend them, whose stipends are one hundred
and seventy pounds per au^um each, which is paid out of the revenues of the
city. St. Laurence is like all other Dutch churches, divested of ornament;
gloomy and dark, by reason of the numberless achievements; which are hung
every where round the walls, and which are in general of black velvet, with the
arms blazoned, encompassed in a heavy black frame.

I look on the exchange, which was finished in 1736, to be the finest building
in Rotterdam. It is a quadrangle of freestone, with a light cloister. It is
much neater, though not so large as our Royal Exchange. There is, however, no
merit in the architecture.

We last night hired a coach, which is fixed at a guilder an hour, to take us
to Delfts-Hagen, a little village about half an hour's distance. The road was
very pleasant, being planted on each side with trees. There was nothing
sufficiently curious in the place itself to drag us from Rotterdam; but it
being a public fair, we wished to see the humors of a Dutch Wake. Children's
toys and women's slippers seemed to make the chief figure, there being little
else to be fold.

We followed the sound of a fiddle into a little alehouse, and walked up stairs
into a room full of peasants and tobacco. There were four girls jumping about
which they called dancing, and thirty or forty men sitting round with their
pipes and tobacco, admiring the activity of the nymphs, and rolling out such
clouds of smoke, that we were soon obliged to withdraw to avoid suffocation.
From thence we went to a barn to see a Dutch tragedy and farce. Two of the
actresses were tolerably pretty. But Dutch, even from the mouth of beauty,
would be an antidote to love.

Leaving Rotterdam, we went to Delft in the treckschuyte, and walked through
the town to the Haguegate, where we found the boat just ready to push off. The
canal from thence to Ryswick is skirted with rows of elms. Instead of going on
to the Hague, we got out at the bridge, and walked down to the village, at
about half a mile's distance. The palace is old, unrepaired and unfurnished;
famous only for the peace made there, so advantageous to the Dutch, by the
confederate powers of Europe, with Lewis XIV. in 1697. The Prince now and then
comes there for half an hour, and amuses himself with coursing hares in the
court yard, which is within a wall about fifty yards square. A very princely
recreation!

We dined at the Strack-huis, and met with a comfortable repast, which we
little expected in such a place. In the cool of the evening we walked to the
Hague, at the distance of two short miles, under the shade of a row of elms.

The Hague in French, la Hay, the Hedge, is only a village, not being walled,
nor sending deputies to the states. Nevertheless, it is the residence of all
the foreign ambassadors, the seat of government, and, without dispute, the most
beautiful place on earth. On the south side lies Delft, on the north the house
in the Wood, Scheveling, and the sea to the west, and the great canal to Leyden
on the east.

The Hague is totally surrounded with a canal, over which are many bridges, and
a row of lofty trees borders the water's edge. The streets are so spacious, and
so much adorned with trees and water, that you can scarce conceive yourself in
a town; and there are so many squares and public places laid out in shady
walks, and surrounded with such magnificent buildings, that it beggars all
description.

I will mention two or three of the most striking parts of the Hague, among
which I think the Vyverburg has the pre-eminence. It is a kind of square,
consisting of several shady walks; on one side, a row of magnificent houses; on
the other, the Vyver, which is a large basin of water faced with stone, two
hundred yards in length, and near one hundred in breadth. In the center of it
is an island planted with trees. One end of the Vyverburg opens to the
Voor-hout, which is a large plantation of trees, in the Middle of which is the
Mall, railed in on both sides. It is strewed with shells, as are all the walks
in Holland, there being neither stone nor gravel in the whole country. The
walks are consequently unpleasant, as the shells never bind, but crumble into
dust, and feel like loose sand under your feet.

The New Princess Graft is a row of palaces, rather than of houses, which front
the wood, from which they are divided by a broad pavement and a canal.
Casuaristreet is adjoining, in which is the French Playhouse, a neat little
theater. We were at the Comedy on Friday evening. The actors were tolerably
good.

I must not omit mentioning the Prince Graft, which is half a mile in length,
proportionably broad, and perfectly straight, with a canal shaded with trees,
running through the midst of it, over which are thrown many fine stone bridges,
with iron rails on them.

One of the greatest curiosities in the Hague, is the Prince's cabinet, which
is open at twelve o'clock on Fridays, and accessible to all strangers, who
previously send their names. This house was purchased of the Countess of
Albemarle, faces the Vyver, and is situated at the corner of the Outer Court,
where the horseguards parade.

In the first room you see a small, but most excellent collection of Chinese
swords, knives, and other instruments in gold, richly inlaid with precious
stones; and earrings, bracelets, and much female ornament and apparel. In the
next apartment is a good collection of shells, among which the Concha Veneris
did not escape my notice; the shape being entirely analagous to the name.

In the third room is a brilliant show of precious stones, fossils, minerals,
and petrifactions. The fourth apartment is filled with various kinds of
serpents and small animals; and the last room is ornamented with a large
collection of birds extremely well preserved.

These are the best part of the Cabinet, and there are many rare species among
them; but the collection is now eclipsed by that which has been since collected
by Sir Ashton Lever, and is now exhibited at London by Mr. Parkinson.

The disposition and neatness of the whole is admirable, and well worthy of a
stranger's attention.

The palace of the stadtholder is situated in the center of the town,
surrounded by a moat. Its external appearance is not very striking, being an
old irregular building; but a finer collection of pictures by the Dutch and
Flemish masters I have never seen; especially in a little room called the
Study, filled by the most capital painters.

The Virgin, with the blessed Infant in her arms, by Raphael; Adam and Eve in
Paradise, surrounded with birds and beasts, by Brughel; Portraits, by
Rembrandt, Vandyke, and Hans Holbein. A Dutch kitchen full of game, fish, and
flesh, most admirably done, by Teniers. Many landscapes and fancy pieces, by
Gabriel Metzu, Jan-Steen, Potter, and Wouvermans. I look on this room to be
complete. There is not a picture, but may be dwelt on with delight.

In the other apartments among many fine pieces, you will find a very large one
by Potter, painted in 1647. The design is a peasant looking at his cattle. The
flies on the cows seem alive, and a toad sitting on the grass has equal
excellence.

Abraham sacrificing Isaac, in ivory, is inimitably carved.

There are some fruit and game pieces by Weeninx, well done; and some excellent
pieces on copper, by Rothenamer.

At a church near the Hague we saw many storks walking about as tame as our
turkies. They are some. what in shape like a heron. Their color is white, and
their wings are tipped with black. They live upon the offal of the fish-market,
which is near the church. I have seen numbers of them in the meadows, though
they are esteemed birds of passage, and in autumn they are not very common. The
vulgar error is, that these birds are so fond of liberty, that they will live
only in a republic. I am sure, in point of policy, they cannot live in a more
desirable country, as they have fish and frogs in abundance for their food, and
the utmost security for themselves, it being deemed a crime to mal-treat or
kill them.

TOUR THROUGH HOLLAND. SECT. LXXVIII. OF LEYDEN.
WE went in the treckschuyte to Leyden with a Dutch General we had lived with
at the Table d'Hote at the Hague. The distance was only ten miles; but the
whole canal being edged with summer-houses and gardens belonging to the
inhabitants of those towns, who in the summer retire to these little boxes,
made the scene appear most beautiful, and the distance nothing.

When we arrived at the inn we were recommended to, we found it filled by the
French Ambassador and his train; and for want of an interpreter we wandered
about the town till it was dark, and met with two or three disagreeable
circumstances, which made me lament my ignorance of the Dutch language; but at
length we found the Golden Ball, an English house, and with my wants vanished
my desire of talking Dutch.

Leyden is esteemed, in point of size, the second city in Holland, but its
trade is now inconsiderable, which in the woollen manufactory was formerly very
extensive. The city is surrounded with a rampart and a wide canal. The most
elegant street is the Broadstreet, which runs from the Hague-gate to the
Utrechtgate. It is a little on the curve, which adds, I think, much to its
beauty. The pavement is extremely fine, and the street rises in the center like
the new paved streets in London. It is very spacious, as indeed are most of the
streets in Leyden.

Among the canals the Rapinbury is the most beautiful. The houses are
magnificent; the bridges stone, with iron rails; and there are trees on each
side of the canal. It is said that there are 145 bridges, and 180 streets in
the city of Leyden. The Old Rhine runs through this town, and loses itself in
the little village of Catwick, which lies in the neighborhood.

The university is the most renowned of the five which are in the United
Provinces, The five Universities are, A. D. 1. Leyden in Holland, 1575 2.
Utrecht, 1636 3. Fran^ker in Friesland, 1584 4. Groninghen, 1614 5. Harderwick
in Guelderland, 1648


and is the most ancient, being founded in 1575, by the States as a reward to
the inhabitants for defending themselves against the Spaniards during a six
mo^ths siege, in which they suffered all the horrors of war, and extremities of
famine.

The Academy abounds with many curiosities. It is there the professors read
lectures to the students who lodge in the town, and are not distinguished by
any academical habit. It is there that the learned Scaliger, Lipsius,
Salmasius, and Boerhaave gained so much reputation by their lectures, and
brought students from all parts of Europe to attend them.

The Botanic Garden has always been one of the most respectable in Europe, both
on account of the famous professors who have presided over it, and the number
of curious exotics growing in it as may be seen in Boerhaave's and Van Royen's
catalogues. It is nicely arranged, and kept in excellent order.

On one side of these gardens is a very curious collection of antique marbles,
given by Gerard Papenbrochius, a burgo-master of Amsterdam. I cannot omit
mentioning the statues of Hercules, of Bacchus leaning on a fawn, attended by a
tiger, of an Abundantia as big as the life, and of a naked Apollo; all which
have especial merit.

Adjoining to the statues is the Natural Philosophy School, in which lectures
are read. You will find in it a good collection of natural curiosities; some
very fine petrifactions; in particular, a piece of oak, one side of which has
been polished, and vies both in hardness and color with an agate. Some curious
pieces of crystal, formed by nature to an apex, with six angles, as exact and
as finely polished as if the production of art. A fish called the Medusa's
Head, from a thousand little fibers darting out from its body in a circle like
twisted rays. This, in itself, is very curious; but the exact representation of
it in a natural agate, is much more so.

But I think one of the greatest curiosities is the asbestos from Transylvania.
It is a stone with a soft down on it like velvet, of a dove color. Of this is
made both paper and linen; we saw samples of both. The very peculiar property
of it is, that fire has no effect on it, for it still continues its form
unchanged and unconsumed.

Among the beasts was an ermine, about the size and shape of a weasel. This
little animal is so fearful of dirtying its skin, that it would sooner lose its
liberty than its cleanliness.

There was a kind of toad which brings forth its young from its back. On
observing it, we perceived infinite numbers of young toads adhering to the
back, which appeared like the broken scales of a fish.

The toad-fish from America is an extraordinary creature. It is for the first
six months a toad, then changes by degrees into a fish. This had half completed
its transformation, having the tail of a fish, with the head and fore parts of
a toad.

The Penna Marina belongs to the animal species. It is the production of the
ocean, looks like a plant, and is nothing more than a stem of about two inches
long with a kind of feather at the end of it, not unlike a quill with part of
the feathers cut off.

Among the feathered race, the most curious was the Hydracorax Indicus; the
only one in Europe; larger than a turkey -- black -- "Rostro unicorni, cornu,
recurvo," -- if I may express myself in the technical terms of Ornithology.

There was an immense beast, called the Hippopotamus, as large as an elephant,
its color black, with a row of grinders in the interior part of its mouth,
besides a good number in front.

TOUR THROUGH HOLLAND. SECT. LXXIX. OF AMSTERDAM.
AMSTERDAM is situated on the river Amstel, and an arm of the sea called the Y,
at the mouth of the Zuyder Sea, and is built in the form of a crescent. It is
fortified with a fosse of great depth and width, with a rampart of earth faced
with brick, strengthened with twenty-six bastions, in each of which stands a
windmill, ornamented with eight magnificent gates of freestone, built either in
a semi-circular or octagonal shape. In all the chief streets are canals shaded
with trees, the grandest of which is the Heere-grast, or canal of Lords. This
is the place of residence for the bankers and chief merchants; for here every
one is in trade. The few nobles of Holland reside always at the Hague. Those
streets in which there are no canals, are vilely narrow. The Ness, in which we
live, I had the curiosity to measure, and it is only sixteen feet wide. The
houses are lofty, and the bridges are chiefly of stone.

The squares are neither spacious nor elegant. The dam is the largest, in which
the stadt-house is situated; but it is irregular, and vi^ely disfigured by a
weighing house. The others no more deserve the name of squares, than
Clare-market or Palace yard, Westminster.

This populous city contained 26,035 houses in 1732, and is supposed, according
to the best calculation, to contain at present 250,000 inhabitants, though it
was at the beginning of the thirteenth century, an inconsiderable fishing
village on the edge of a morass, which is now covered with buildings, erected
upon piles of timber, driven into the earth, at immense labor and expense. For
the foundation only of one tower, 6000 trees were rammed into the ground.
Notwithstanding these precautions, the magistrates are so apprehensive of the
foundations, that very few coaches are licensed. The carriages in general are
fixed on sledges, drown by one horse, the driver attending on foot.

There are fifteen churches of the established, that is, the Calvinistic
religion, which are served by thirty ministers, equal in authority and revenue.
They are allowed two hundred and forty pounds per annum each, which is paid by
the city.

The most stupendous undertaking in this city is the Stadt house, which you
enter by seven small gates parallel to each other, instead of one magnificent
portal, equal to a front, which extends itself 282 feet, whose height is 116,
and the breadth 232 feet. The building is of stone, with pillars of the
Corinthian order. It is erected on 13,659 piles of timber, and was finished in
1655. On the top is a statue of Alas in brass, bearing on his shoulders a
copper globe, said to be larger than that of St. Peter's at Rome; and on the
center is a cupola, from whence is an extensive view of the city and its
environs. The piles cost 100,000l. The whole expense was computed at two
millions. Versailles cost only 800,000l; the Escurial, one million; and St.
Paul's, one million five hundred thousand pounds. It is upon record, that St.
Peter's at Rome, with all that is contained in it, has cost near thirteen
millions sterling.

The cornices of the rooms are finely carved, the floors laid with marble, and
the sides of the apartments ^ined either with marble or valuable paintings.
Over the doors and chimney-pieces are several historical pieces in basso
relievo, inimitably executed in Italian marble. And there are some deceptions
in a kind of gray painting, to imitate basso relievo, (especially of some
children) by De-Wit, so finely touched, that the most critical eye at half the
distance of the room would be deceived.

A large piece, by Vanderhelst, is deservedly esteemed. It is a feast given to
the Spanish Ambassador by the burgo-masters of Amsterdam, on the making peace
between the two countries in 1648. But the best piece is by Vandyke, which
represents an entertainment, where you see the portraits of all the
considerable persons of the city. An old gray haired man is so much admired in
this wonderful picture, that seven thousand guilders were offered to cut out
the head.

The Stadt-house is admirably contrived for public utility. Here is the bank,
supposed to be the richest in Europe; here are the courts of justice, the
prisons for criminals and debtors, the chambers of the Senate, the Treasury,
the magazine of arms, and in short, all the public offices, with eight large
cisterns of water on the top, with pipes to every room to extinguish fires. The
citizens hall is the grandest, being one hundred and twenty feet by
fifty-seven, and ninety feet high: It is paved with marble, in which are
stained the terrestrial and celestial globes. The sides, the roof, and the
pillars, are all of marble; but there always is something wanting; -- there is
not light enough to admire with accuracy the wonderful magnificence of this
apartment.

From the Stadt-house you cross the Dam to the Exchange, which is not to be
compared with that of Rotterdam in beauty, nor to our Royal Exchange in size.
The building is of brick, and at full change, if appearances may be relied on,
was crowded with the most blackguard fellows on the face of the earth. In the
afternoon I paid a second visit to the Exchange, to see the city militia
perform their exercise; to which every man is subject, unless he makes a
pecuniary compensation. Those, therefore, who from their poverty cannot, or
from their avarice, will not pay the fine, are obliged to serve. Here penury
and parsimony were collected together in such various habits (for they have no
regular uniform) as to make the most ludicrous group imagination can suggest. A
giant and a dwarf, a Falstaff and a slender, a bob wig and shock head of hair,
in coats of all the colors of the rainbow, joined most heterogeneously
together to form a rank, in which every man followed his own invention, in as
many different attitudes and maneuvers, as there were men to make them.

In the evening we went to the theater, which, like all playhouses, our own
excepted, is dark, long, and small. The pit is excellent, having seats with low
backs, and marked with numbers, to distinguish the sea^ of each person, by
which, both crowding and disputes are prevented. This is the only house I ever
saw abroad, in which there are seats in the pit, or parterre, as it is called.
It is under the contro^l and direction of the city. The magistrates receive the
money, defray the charges, and pay the actors. The residue is applied to the
maintenance of the poor, and to the support of the different hospitals.

Every rope dancer, puppet-player, as well as all others who pretend to
entertain the public, are obliged to contribute one third of their profits
toward the maintenance of the poor.

On Friday we looked into the Rasp house, which is a prison for criminals, as
well as for children who are profligate or disobedient. The former are confined
in a small room, chained to a block, and spend their whole time in fawing or
rasping Brazil wood, or in other work equally laborious. I was shocked at the
sight of so many of my species, naked to the waist, worn out with labor, pale
with confinement, and emaciated by want. Yet how much wiser this method than
the English law, which, for thirteen pence deprives a man of his life, and the
king of a subject, whom the Dutch show us may be made useful to the public.

From thence we went to the Spin-house, for the correction, but not, I think,
for the amendment of loose women, as every one is permitted to see and converse
with them through the rails, which can only harden them in impudence. We walked
into the New Church to see a burial. In this nation of industry, time is too
precious to be complimented away on the dead, who can make them no return;
therefore the ceremony of prayers is laid aside as superfluous. The coffin is
instantly put into the grave, which is immediately filled up. The relations
bow, and return to their avocations. The organ in this church is inferior only
to the organ at Harlem. The partition which divides the chancel from the nave,
is of Corinthian brass. The sounding board over the pulpit is justly admired
for the inimitable carving with which it is ornamented. From thence we
proceeded to the Admiralty and Dock-yard, which are situated at the extremity
of the quay. The Admiralty forms three sides of a square, in the middle of
which is the yard for building of the men of war; the fourth side is open to
the water. Here is not an appearance to be feared by the English, though much
to be admired for the excellent order in which the arms and stores are disposed.

Among the number of hospitals in this city, the Gast-house for the sick is the
most worthy a stranger's visiting. It is an elegant stone quadrangle, at the
end of which are some neat little shops for toys, lace, etc. The revenue of
this hospital is computed at eight thousand pounds sterling a year, which is a
large sum; but the General hospital for men at Madrid, contains one thousand
five hundred iron beds, and its revenue amounts to forty thousand doubloons;
about thirty thousand pounds sterling.

There is an hospital where all poor travelers without distinction are lodged
and entertained for three nights and no longer.

It is computed that twenty thousand souls are maintained in the different
hospitals, which are either endowed or supported out of the public revenue,
assisted by the contributions of the charitable: for which purpose, men
belonging to the hospitals go twice a week to every house begging for alms.

On Saturday morning we went to the Portuguese Synagogue; which is a large
spacious building filled with a numerous congregation. The women sit together
in a gallery, with lattices before them. The men sit below on benches with
tawlises The Taulis i^^ kind of veil, generally thrown over the shoulders,
sometimes over the face.
on, which they throw over their shoulders; and I declare, at first sight, I
took the whole assembly to be old-clothes men, with their bags over their arms.

There are some regulations in the police of Amsterdam, which would be well
worthy of imitation in London. You never meet a watchman alone; two always walk
together, by which means they add strength as well as give courage to each
other. Many a house is broke open in London, and many a sober citizen is
knocked down in the presence of a watchman, who either from fear or knavery
suffers the ^illains to escape.

There is another admirable custom to prevent the spreading of fire, by giving
almost an immediate alarm. On the tops of four churches, situated at four
different quarters of the city, watchmen are fixed during the night, who are
obliged to sound a trumpet every half hour, as a signal of their being awake
and on their duty. On the breaking out of a fire they ring the alarm bell,
which calls their brethren to the spot in a moment. Of what service would a
plan something similar to this be in our metropolis!

There are few general conveniences which carry not a mischief along with them.
Canals, for instance, are great ornaments to the streets, and of infinite use
to the inhabitants; but the mischief is, that many an honest man looses his
life in Amsterdam, who in London would only lose his money; for the villains
first rob him, and then push him into the canal, to prevent his telling tales;
thus charitably easing him of his money, lest the weight of it should sink him.

I must not omit mentioning the neatness of the people; but in this they have
no merit: for the neatness of their houses and cleanliness of their towns
proceed from necessity. Such is the moisture of the air, that were it not for
these customs, pestilential diseases would be the consequence, which, careful
as they are, now often happen. This perpetual dampness in the atmosphere rusts
metals and moulds wood, which obliges the inhabitants, not from a principle of
neatness, but of economy, by scouring the one and painting the other, to seek
a prevention or a cure. Hence arises the neatness, which by people who judge
only by appearances is called natural; but indeed most national customs are the
effects of unobserved causes and necessities. In this country the mind is
perpetually struck with wonder and admiration. If mathematicians are to be
credited, on the measure of the two elements, they found the sea even in a
calm, above half a foot higher than the land. The waves are checked by an
infinity of sand-hills, which lie along the coast. Add to this natural defense,
a dyke of twenty feet high, twenty-five feet broad at the bottom, and about ten
at top, running parallel to the high water mark. This is made of clay,
strengthened toward the land with planks and stone, toward the water with
rushes, sea-weeds, and flags staked down, which give way to the force of the
waves, and resume their place again, when they retire. Goldsmith has drawn a
very elegant picture of this country in his admirable poem of the Traveller.

" While the pent ocean rising over the pile,
" Sees an amphibeous world beneath him smile;
" The slow canal, the yellow blossomed vale,
" The willow turfed bank, the gliding sail,
" The crowded mart, the cultivated plain,
" A new creation rescued from his reign."
It is wonderful, that in a country without a stone or pebble, there should be
stone edifices the most magnificent. Without forests, or an oak-tree (two
little woods excepted) the Dutch navy is the second in the world. Without
arable land, they supply half Europe with corn; and with a tract of country,
scarce larger than an English county, they can raise men and money to make
themselves of importance in the eyes of the first power in Christendom.

Facts so extraordinary require explanation. Let it then be remembered, that
this state was founded on Liberty and Religion; was reared by Industry and
Economy, and has flourished by its situation and commerce. The bigoted maxims
of Philip II, the introduction of the inquisition, and the erecting of fourteen
new bishoprics in the Low Countries, the unrelenting rigor of the Cardinal
Granville, and the succeeding cruelty of the Duke of Alvah, together with the
Council of Twelve, called the council of Blood, and the execution of Count
Egmont and Horn, were the causes which drove the people to shake off the yoke,
and gave rise to the union of Utrecht. Persevering valor, joined to the
political assistance of other powers, has been the means of their preserving
their independence, while the decline of the Venetian navy has made them the
common carriers of Europe, and the wars in Flanders and situation of Holland
have conspired to render Amsterdam the seat of universal commerce.

Till the beginning of the sixteenth century, Venice by its shipping, and
Florence by its manufactories, possessed the whole trade of Europe, Persia, and
the Indies; but the discovery of a passage to the East, by the Cape of
Good-Hope, and the settlements of the Portuguese in India, proved fatal to the
republic of Venice. Lisbon then became the staple of the trade to the
East Indies, and the Easterlings who inhabited the Hans Towns were the great
merchants of the North. -- They brought commerce first to Bruges, and from
thence to Antwerp, which the revolt of the Netherlands drew afterward to
Holland. The Dutch likewise, by their success against the Portuguese in India,
and by their treaties with the natives, in process of time drew the whole trade
of India from Lisbon.

Their country is most admirably situated for the trade of the Baltic, which
includes Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Russia, Poland, and the North coast of
Germany, while they send merchandise into the interior parts of the Empire and
the Austrian Netherlands, by the Rhine, Maese, and Scheld. It must likewise be
considered, that each town values itself upon some particular branch of trade,
by which it is improved to the utmost: as for instance, Delft, for the Dutch
porcelain, Sardam for ship building; Rotterdam for the Scotch and English
trade; Amsterdam for that of the Streights, Spain, and the East Indies; and the
whole province for the Herring Fishery, which supplies the southern parts of
Europe. Thus the greatness of this country has arisen from a wonderful
concurrence of circumstances; from a long course of time; from the confluence
of strangers, driven either by persecution, or invited by the credit of their
government; from the cheapness of carriage by the convenience of the canals;
from the low interest of money and dearness of land, which consequently turn
specie into trade; from particular traffic carried on at particular places;
from their intense application to their navy; from the vast nurseries for their
sailors, and from their amazing acquisitions in the East Indies. All these
circumstances have conspired to make this little republic the envy and
admiration of the world.

TOUR THROUGH HOLLAND. SECT. LXXX. A SINGULAR HEAD-DRESS -- A SINGULAR CUSTOM
-- SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE'S OPINION OF HOLLAND.
THE head-dress of the women in North Holland is very extraordinary. They have
a little hair cut short and thin, which is combed down on the forehead and
powdered. The cap sticks close to their ears, under which are two little pieces
of silver or gold which appear at each temple, and a large piece like a broad
ribbon is under the cap on the back part of the head.

A singular custom is likewise retained in this country of having a door in
every house, which is never opened but when a corpse is carried out, which must
be brought through that door, and no other. I think there is something
uncommonly solemn in it; and such a door in every house would be an admirable
memento to the family.

Having made the tour of the whole Province of Holland, and suffered nothing
curious to escape me, my head, at present, is a confused medley of dykes and
pictures, churches and canals, bridges and stadthouses, but a void in respect
to the customs, police, and manners of the people, the only useful knowledge to
be acquired by traveling.

I have seen enough to confirm me in the justness of Sir William Temple's
opinion, who, in speaking of Holland, if my memory misleads me not, says, "That
it is a country where the earth is better than the air, and profit more in
request than honor; where there is more sense than wit, more goodnature than
good humor, and more wealth than pleasure; where a man would choose rather to
travel than to live; shall find more things to observe than desire; and more
persons to esteem than to love."

TOUR THROUGH HOLLAND. SECT. LXXXI. OF ANTWERP AND BRUSSELS.
THE approach to the city of Antwerp is noble, by a straight paved road
bordered with oaks. It is the capital of the province whose name it bears,
belonging to the Austrian Netherlands, and under the dominion of the Emperor.
It is situated on the eastern shore of the Scheld, a noble river, twenty feet
deep at low water; so that ships of great burden may unload upon the quays, or
enter the town by eight canals, which communicate with the river, some of which
are large enough to contain an hundred ships at the same time.

The city is much decayed from its ancient grandeur though it still remains a
beautiful place. It is built in the form of a cresent, about seven miles in
circumference, surrounded with a wall and bastions faced with stone. The top of
the wall is an hundred feet broad, with a double row of trees, between which is
a most agreeable walk. The streets are well paved, very spacious and uniform.
The houses in general are seven or eight stories high, but old, and in that
miserable style of building which disgraces the towns in Holland. At the
distance of a quarter of a mile is the citadel, built by the Duke of Alva, to
keep the city in subjection. It stands on the banks of the Scheld, and commands
at once the river, the city, and the adjacent country. It is built in a
pentagonal form, with five bastions, which defend each other, surrounded with
double ditches.

To this citadel is only one entrance, which is over a drawbridge. It is about
a mile in circumference, and well supplied with arms, ammunition, and all
warlike stores, with barracks for three thousand men. This fortress has been of
such repute for strength and regularity, that it has been a model for
subsequent engineers; notwithstanding which the French in 1746 took it in seven
days.

The trade of Antwerp is now confined to very narrow limits, though so late as
the middle of the sixteenth century, there were two hundred thousand (...) two
thousand five hundred ships lying often in the river at a time; and it was far
from unfrequent for five hundred vessels to come in or go out of the harbor in
a day.

The trade of Antwerp in the year 1550, if the annals of their city can be
relied on, amounted to one hundred and thirty-three millions of gold, without
including the bank.

As an instance of the amazing opulence of the merchants, there is a story upon
record, of John Daens, a merchant, who lent a million of gold to Charles V. to
carry on his wars in Hungary. The Emperor on his return dined with the
merchant, who gave him a most sumptuous entertainment, and at the close of it
burnt the contract by which the emperor was bound to pay him a million of gold,
in a fire of cinnamon, which was the only fire during the repast.

The rise of their trade was as rapid as the decline, and both proceeded from
the same causes. At the beginning of the sixteenth century Bruges was the mart
of Europe; but the war at that time breaking out in Flanders, the merchants
withdrew from Bruges, and were invited to Antwerp, as a place of greater
safety, whose situation was happily calculated for commerce. But this did not
last long, for the civil wars breaking (...) in the Low Countries, and Antwerp
having twice been sacked, drove trade to seek a more peaceful refuge in
Amsterdam.

The established religion is the Catholic; the language Low Dutch! but a
bastard kind of French is spoken by most of the inhabitants.

We have been so fortunate as to see a grand procession in honor of St.
Rocque. The whole Mer, the most magnificent street in Antwerp, was illuminated
with torches, and many hundred people in procession with flambeaux, followed by
the Virgin Mary, precious relics, the Host, and an infinity of such kind of
trumpery, amidst the chorus of voices, serpents, Le Serpent is a wind
instrument which is used in all Roman Catholic churches, where the voices are
accompanied with music.
and trumpets.

The whole road from Antwerp to Brussels is delightful. Brussels is the capital
of Brabant and of all the Austrian Netherlands. It is the residence of the
Governor-General of the Low Countries. It is twenty-four miles south of
Antwerp, and thirty south-east of Ghent, situated on the Senne, an
inconsiderable river. The site of this city resembles Guildford, being built
on the brow of a hill. Its figure is oval, about four miles in circumference,
surrounded with a wall and tolerably fortified. The Low Town has the benefit of
canals, which admit boats of cosiderable burden.

The upper town is magnificent, and has lately been much improved by new
buildings, and by enclosing a piece of waist ground, planting it, and laying it
out in walks.

The arsenal stands on the top of the street called Montagne a la Cour. There
is some old armor in it of neither curiosity nor use; except an iron shield,
which no sword can pierce, and a steel shield so finely engraved that the
figures seem reflected from the polish, not to be etched in the steel. The
nicest touch cannot perceive the least scratch; notwithstanding which the
figures appear to be strongly marked, when the shield is held obliquely.

Just below the arsenal is the Palace of the governor of the Austrian
Netherlands. The present palace is not more than half finished. There was upon
this spot an old one, which was bought of the Prince of Orange, at the time the
grand palace was burnt, in which was a most capital collection of pictures,
especially of Rubens's, which with many valuable curiosities perished in the
flames.

The staircase of the present palace is very magnificent. The steps are of
marble, and the balustrade of iron, gilt, and adorned with compartments of
birds and beasts, nicely executed in polished steel by Trieste. The ceiling is
painted of Fresco.

The apartment of the Princess is hung with the Brussels tapestry, which is
brought to great perfection. The floors are all inlaid with mahogany and box.
The Princess's cabinet is much admired, being covered throughout with the
finest Japan. The late Prince was a great mechanic, and had a cabinet of
curiosities trifling enough, among which were two boxes, containing all the
common trades in miniature.

TOUR THROUGH HOLLAND. SECT. LXXXII. OF BARCELONA IN SPAIN.
THIS city is a sweet spot. The air equals in purity, and much excels in
mildness, the boasted climate of Montpelier. Except in the dog days, you may
have green pease all the year round. The situation is beautiful, appearance
both from land and sea remarkably picturesque. A Great extent of fruitful
plains, bounded by an amphitheatre of hills, backs it on the west side; the
mountain of Montjuich defends it on the south from the unwholesome winds that
blow over the mashes at the mouth of the Llobregat; to the northward, the coast
projecting into the sea forms a noble bay; it has the Mediterranean to close
the prospect to the east. The environs are in a state of high cultivation,
studded with villages, country houses, and gardens.

The form of Barcelona is almost circular, the Roman town being on the highest
ground in the center of the new one. The ancient walls are still visible in
several places; but the sea has retired many hundreds of yards from the
portgates. One of the principal Gothic churches, and a whole quarter of the
city, stand upon the sands that were once the bottom of the harbor. The
immense loads of sand hurried down into the sea by the rivers, and thrown back
by wind and current into this haven, will in all probability, choke it quite
up, unless greater diligence be used in preventing the gathering of the shoals.
A southerly wind brings in the sand, and already a deep-loaded vessel finds its
dangerous to pass over the bar. Some years ago a company of Dutch and English
adventurers offered to bring the river into the port by means of a canal, if
government would allow them a free importation for ten years. This project
might have cleared away the sand-banks, but might also have given a fatal check
to the infant manufactures of the country; for which reason the proposal was
rejected. The port is handsome; the mole is all of hewn stone, a masterpiece
of solidity and convenience. Above is a platform for carriages; below, vast
magazines, with a broad key reaching from the city gates to the light house.
This was done by the orders of the late Marquis de La Mina, captain general of
the principality, where his memory is held in greater veneration than at the
court of Madrid. He governed Catalonia many years, more like an independent
sovereign, than like a subject invested with a delegated authority. Great are
the obligations Barcelona has to him. He cleansed and beautified its streets,
built useful edifices, and forwarded its trade and manufactures, without much
extraordinary expense to the province; for he had more resources, and made
money go father than most other governors can do, or indeed wish to do.

The citadel has six strong bastions, calculated to overawe the inhabitants, at
least as much as to defend them from a foreign enemy. The lowness of its
situation renders it damp, unwholesome, and swarming with musquitos. The major
of this fortress owes his promotion to a singular circumstance. When the
present king arrived at Madrid in 1759, a magnificent bull-feast was given in
honor of that event. As it is necessary, upon such occasions, that those who
fight on horseback should be gentlemen born, the managers of the exhibition
were greatly at a loss; till this man, who was a poor, starving officer,
presented himself, though utterly ignorant both of bull-fighting and
horsemanship. By dint of resolution, and the particular favor of fortune, he
kept his seat, and performed his part so much to the public satisfaction that
he was rewarded with a pension and a majority.

The streets of Barcelona are narrow but well paved. A covered drain in the
middle of each street carries off the filth and rain water. At night they are
tolerably well lighted up, but long before daybreak every lamp is out. The
houses are lofty and plain. To each kind of trade a particular district is
allotted.

Catalonia, of which Barcelona is the capital, is almost throughout extremely
mountainous. The nature of the country appears to have great influence on that
of the inhabitants, who are a hardy, active, and industrious race, of a middle
size, brown complexion, and strong features; their limbs well knit together,
and by education and practice well inured to the greatest fatigues. There are
few lame or distorted persons, or beggars, to be met with among them. Their
mocos or muleboys are stout walkers. Some of them have been known to go from
Barcelona to Madrid and back again, in nine days, which by the high road is six
hundred miles.

The loss of all the immunities, the ignominious prohibition of every weapon,
even a knife, and an enormous load of taxes, have not been able to stifle their
independent spirit, which brakes out upon the least stretch of arbitrary power.
Within these few years, many of their ancient privileges have been gradually
restored; and this is at present one of the most flourishing provinces of
Spain. Their taxation is still very high. All trade is assessed according to
the business you are supposed to transact in the course of the year; without
regard to your loss or gain.

Amongst other restrictions, the use of slouched hats, white shoes, and large
brown cloaks is forbidden. Till of late, they durst not carry any kind of
knife; but in each public house there was one chained to the table for the use
of all comers. The good order maintained by the police, and the vigilance of
the thief-takers, supply the place of defensive weapons, robberies and murders
being seldom heard of. You may walk the streets of Barcelona at all hours
unarmed, without the least apprehension, provided you have light; without it
you are liable to be carried to prison by the patrol.

The Catalonians cannot brook the thought of being menial servants in their own
country, but will rather trudge it all over with a pedlar's pack on their
shoulders, or run about upon errands, than be the head domestic in a Catalonian
family. Far from home they make excellent servants, and most of the principal
houses of Madrid have Catalonians at the head of their affairs.

They are the general muleteers and calessieros of Spain. You meet with them in
every part of the kingdom. Their honesty, steadiness and sobriety, entitle them
to the confidence of travelers, and their thirst after lucre makes them bear
with any hardships. With good words you will always find them docile, but they
cannot bear hard usuage or approbrious language.

Those that remain at home for the labors of the field, are exceedingly
industrious. Their corn-harvest is in May or early in June; but, as these crops
are liable to frequent burstings and mildews, they have turned their attention
more to the vine, which they plant even to the summits of their most rugged
mountains. In many places they carry up earth to fix the young set in; and in
others have been known to let one another down from the brow of the rock by
ropes, rather than suffer a good patch of soil to remain useless. Their
vintages are commonly very plentiful. This autumn, there was such a super
abundance of grapes in the valley of Talarn, in the neighborhood of Pallas,
that whole vineyards were left untouched for want of vessels to make or hold
the wine in. Notice was pasted upon the church-doors, that any one was at
liberty to take away any quantity he pleased, on paying a small acknowledgement
to the proprietors. The best red wine of Catalonia is made at Mataro, north of
Barcelona, and the best white at Sitges, between that city and Tarragona.

The scarcity of corn is sometimes very great, the principality not producing
above five months provision. Without the importation from America, Sicily, and
the north of Europe, it would run the risk of being famished. From four hundred
thousand to six hundred thousand quarters of wheat are annually imported.
Canada alone sent this year about eighty thousand quarters. There are public
ovens, where the bakers are bound by contract to bake every day into bread one
thousand bushels of flour, or more, at a stated price, and in case the other
bakers should refuse to work, they are under the obligation of furnishing the
city with bread.

The number of the inhabitants of Barcelona, is made to amount to one hundred
and fifty thousand souls, and those of Barceloneta to ten thousand. But
although trade and population have increased surprisingly in the course of a
few years, I doubt there is some exaggeration in this reckoning.

The great export commerce consists in wine, brandies, Salt, and oil, which are
mostly taken in by foreign ships at the little ports and roads along the coast,
and not brought to be shipped off at the capital.

There are mines of lead, iron, and coal, in the mountains, but they are ill
wrought, and turn to poor account. The manufactures are of more importance.
Barcelona supplies Spain with most of the clothing and arms for the troops.
This branch of business is carried on with much intelligence. They can equip a
battalion of six hundred men completely in a week.

A great trade is driven in silk handkerchiefs and stockings; in woollens of
various qualities: in silk and thread lace; in fire arms. The gun-barrels of
Barcelona are much esteemed, and cost from four to twenty guineas; but about
five is the real value; all above is paid for fancy and ornament. They are made
out of the old shoes of mules. Several manufactures of printed linens are
established here, but have not yet arrived at any great elegance of design or
liveliness of color.

The imports are, besides corn, about eighty thousand hundred weight of
Newfoundland cod, which pays three persettas per hundred-weight duty, and sells
upon an average at a guinea; beans from Holland for the poor people, and an
inferior sort from Africa for the mules; English bale goods, and many foreign
articles of necessity or luxury. House-rent and living are dear; provisions but
indifferent. The fish is flabby and insipid; the meat poor, but the vegetables
are excellent, especially brocoli and cauliflower. I believe their meet and
fish are much better in summer than at this season of the year.

The devotion of the Catalonians seems to be pretty much upon a par with that
of their neighbors in the southern provinces of France, and, I am told, much
less ardent than we shall find it as we advance into Spain; but they still
abound with strange practices of religion and local worship. One very odd idea
of theirs is, that on the first of November, the eve of All Souls, they run
about from house to house to eat chestnuts, believing that for every chestnut
they swallow, with proper faith and unction, they shall deliver a Soul out of
purgatory.

The influx of foreigners, increase of commerce, and protection granted to the
liberal arts begin to open the understanding of this people, who have made
great strides of late toward sense and philosophy.

There are now but one or two churches at most in each city, that are allowed
the privilege of protecting offenders; and murderers are excluded from the
benefit of the sanctuary. The proceedings of the inquisition are grown very
mild. If any person leads a scandalous life, or allows his tongue unwarrantable
liberties, he is summoned by the holy office and privately admonished; in case
of non-amendment, he is committed to prison. Once a year you must answer to
that tribunal for the orthodoxy of your family, even of every servant, or they
must quit the country. But the foreign Protestant houses are passed over
unnoticed. Avoid talking on religion, and with a little discretion you may live
here in what manner you please.

Every Jew that lands in Spain must declare himself to be such at the
Inquisition; which immediately appoints a familiar to attend him all the time
he stays ashore, to whom he pays a pistole a day: Were he to neglect giving
this information, he would be liable to be seized. Yet I have been assured by
persons of undoubted credit, that a Jew may travel incognito from Perpignan to
Lisbon, and sleep every night at the house of a Jew, being recommended from one
to another; and that you may take it for granted, that wherever you see a house
remarkably decked out with images, relics, and lamps, and the owner noted for
being the most enthusiastic devotee of the parish, there it is ten to one but
the family are Israelites at heart.

SWINBURNE.
SECT. LXXXIII. OF THE FLOCKS ON THE PYRENEAN MOUNTAINS.
ON the 10th of July, 1787, we left Bagnere de Luchon, and crossed the
mountains to Vielle, the first town on the Spanish side. The Pyrenees are so
great an object of examination, in whatever light they are considered, but
especially in that of agriculture, that it would be adding a great deal too
much to the length of this paper to speak of them here; I shall on another
occasion be particular in describing the husbandry practiced in them, and at
present stop no longer than to mention the pasturage of Catalonian sheep in
them. By a little detour out of our direct road, and by passing Hospital, which
is the name of a solitary wretched inn, we gained the hights, but free from
snow, which the Spaniards hire of the French for the pasturage of their flocks.
I must observe, that a considerable part of the mountains belong in property to
the communities of the respective parishes, and are disposed of by what we
should call the Vestry. They hire a very considerable range of many miles. The
French mountains, on which they pasture, are four hours distant from Bagnere de
Luchon, and belong to that town. Those hours are more than twenty English
miles, and are the most distant part of the parish. To arrive at them we
followed the river Pique, which upon the maps is sometimes called the Neste.
The whole way it runs in a torrent, and falls in cascades of many stories,
formed either by large pieces of rock, or by trees carried down and stopped by
stones. The current, in process of ages, has worn itself deep glens to pass
through, at the bottom of which the tumbling of the water is heard, but can be
seen only at breaks in the wood, which hang over and darken the scene. The
road, as it is called, passes generally by the river, but hangs, if I may use
the expression, like a shelf on the mountain side, and is truly dreadful to the
inhabitants of plains, from being broken by gullies, and sloping on the edges
of precipices. It is, however, passable by mules, and by the horses of the
mountains. The vale grows so narrow at last, that it is not above an hundred
yards wide in some places. The general scene at last has little wood.

The mountains on the south side finish in a pyramidical rock of micaceous
schistus, which is constantly tumbling into the plain, from the attacks of the
frost, and the melting of the snows, the slope to the river being spread with
fragments. We met here with pieces of lead ore and manganese.

On the nothern ridge, bearing to the West, are the pastures of the Spanish
flocks. This ridge is not, however, the whole. There are two other mountains,
quite in a different situation, and the sheep travel from one to another, as
the pasturage is short or plentiful. I examined the soil of these mountain
pastures, and found it in general stony; what in the West of England would be
called a stone brash, with some mixture of loam, and in a few places a little
peaty. The plants are many of them untouched by the sheep. Many ferns,
narcissus, violets, and the narrow-leaved plantain, were eaten, as may be
supposed, close. I looked for trefoils, but found scarcely any. It was very
apparent, that soil and peculiarity of herbage had little to do in rendering
these heights proper for sheep. In the nothern parts of Europe, the tops of
mountains half the height of these, (for we were above snow in July) are bogs.
All are so which I have seen in our islands: or at least, the proportion of dry
land is very trifl^ng to that which is extremely wet. Here they are in general
very dry. Now a great range of dry land, let the plants be what they may, will
in every country suit sheep. The flock is brought every night to one spot,
which is situated at the end of the valley on the river I have mentioned, and
near the port or passage of Picada. It is a level spot sheltered from all
winds. The soil is eight or nine inches deep of old dung, not at all enclosed;
and from the freedom from wood all around it, seems to be chosen partly for
safety against wolves and bears. Near it is a very large stone, or rather rock,
fallen from the mountain. This the shephards have taken for a shelter, and have
built a hut against it. Their beds are sheepskins, and their doors so small
that they crawl in. I saw no place for fire, but they have it, since they dress
here the flesh of their sheep, and in the night sometimes keep off the bears,
by whirling firebrarnds. Four of them, belonging to the flock mentioned above,
lie here. We viewed their flock very carefully, and by means of our guide and
interpreter, made some inquiries of the shepherds, which they answered readily,
and very civily. A Spaniard at Venasque, a city in the Pyrenees, gives six
hundred livres French (the livre is ten pence halfpenny English) a year, for
the pasturage of this flock of two thousand sheep. In the winter he sends them
into the lower parts of Catalonia, a journey of twelve or thirteen days, and
when the snow is melted enough in the spring, they are conducted back again.
They are the whole year kept in motion, and moving from spot to spot, which is
owing to the great range they every where have of pasture. They are always in
the open air, never housed or under cover, and never taste of any food, but
what they can find on the hills.

Four shepherds, and from four to six large Spanish dogs have the care of this
flock. The latter are in France called of the Pyrenees breed. They are black
and white, of the size of a large wolf, a large head and neck, armed with
collars stuck with iron spikes. No wolf can stand against them; but bears are
more potent adversaries. If a bear can reach a tree he is safe. He rises on his
hind legs, with his back to the tree, and sets the dogs at defiance. In the
night the shepherds rely entirely on their dogs, but on hearing them bark are
ready with firearms, as the dogs rarely bark if a bear is not at hand. I was
surprised to find that they are fed only with bread and milk. The head shepherd
is paid one hundred and twenty livers a year wages and bread; the others eighty
livers and bread. But they are allowed to keep goats, of which they have many,
which they milk every day. Their food is milk and bread, except the flesh of
such sheep or lambs as accidents give them. The head shepherd keeps on the
mountain top, on an elevated spot, from whence he can the better see around,
while the flock traverses the declivities. In doing this the sheep are exposed
to great danger in places that are stony; for some of them, especially the
goats, by walking among the rocks, move the stones, which rolling down the
hills, acquire an accelerated force enough to nock a man down; and sheep are
often killed by them. Yet we saw how alert they were to avoid such stones, and
cautiously on their guard against them. We examined the sheep attentively. They
are in general polled, but some have horns; which in the rams turns backward
behind the ears, and project half a circle farwards; the ewes horns turn also
behind the ears, but do not project: the legs white or reddish; speckled faces,
some white, some reddish: they would weigh, fat, I rekon, on an average, from
fifteen to eighteen pounds a quarter. There are a few black sheep among them;
and some with a very little tuft of wool on their foreheads. On the whole they
resemble those on the South Downs. Their legs are as short as those of that
breed; a point which merits observation, as they travel so much and so well.

Having satisfied ourselves with our examination of this flock, we returned to
the direct road for Vielle, which also leads to one of the most woody regions
of the Pyrenees, and at the same time the most romantic. The road is so bad
that no horse but those of the mountains could pass it; but our mules trod
securely amidst rolling stones on the edges of precipices of a tremendous
depth; but sure-footed as they are, they are not free from stumbling; and when
they happen to trip a little in those situations, they electrify their riders
in a manner not altogether so pleasant as Mr. Walker. These mountains are
chiefly rocks of micaceous schistus, but there are large detached fragments of
granite.

We pass the frontier line which divides France and Spain; and rising on the
mountains, we see the Spanish valley of Aran, with the river Garonne winding
through it in a beautiful manner. The town of Bososte is at the foot of the
mountains, where is the Spanish custom-house. Mules imported into Spain pay
here sixteen livers. A four year old horse the same. A six year old one
thirteen ditto. An ox five; and a sheep one and a half sol. This vale of Aran
is richly cultivated, and without any fallows. Nothing scarcely can be finer
than the view of the valley from heights so great as to render the most common
objects interesting. The road leads under trees, whose arching boughs present
at every ten paces new landscapes. The woods here are thick, and present fine
masses of shade; the rocks large, and every outline bold: and the verdant vale
that is spread far below at your feet, has all the features of beauty, in
contrast with the sublimity of the surrounding mountains.

We descend into this vale, and bait at our first Spanish inn. No hay, no corn,
no meat, no windows; but cheap eggs and bread, and some trout for fifteen sous.
(Seven pence halfpenny English.)

We followed from hence the Garonne, which is already a fine river, but very
rapid. On it they float many trees to their saw-mills, to cut into boards. We
saw many at work. The vale is narrow, but the Hills to the left are cultivated
high up. There are no fallows. They have little wheat, but a great deal of rye;
and much better barley than in the French mountains. Instead of fallows they
have maize and millet, and many more potatoes than in the French mountains.
They have also French beans, and a little hemp. We saw two fields of vetches
and square pease. The small potatoes they give to their pigs, which do very
well with them; and the leaves to their cows, but assert that they refuse the
roots. Buck-wheat also takes the place of fallow. Many crops of it were good,
and some as fine as possible.

The whole valley of Aran is well cultivated and highly peopled. It is eight
hours long, or about forty miles English, and has in it thirty-two villages.
These villages, or rather little towns, have a very pretty appearance, the
walls being well built, and the houses are well slated. But on entering these
towns the spectacle changes at once. We found them the abodes of poverty and
wretchedness; not one window of glass to be seen in a whole town; scarcely any
chimnies, both ground floor and the chimnies vomiting the smoke out of the
windows.

We arrive at Vielle, the capitol of this valley, and the passage from this
part of France to Barcelona; a circumstance which has given some trifling
resources to it. We were informed here, that we could not go into Spain without
a passport; we therefore waited on the governor, who presides over the whole
valley and its thirty-two towns. His house was the only one we had seen with
glass windows. He is a lieutenant colonel, and knight of Calatrava. In his
ante-room was the king's picture, with a canopy of state over it. The governor
received us with the Spanish formality, and assured us that a few months ago,
there was an order ^o send every foreigner, found without a passport, to the
troops. Such orders show pretty well the number of foreigners here. On each
side of his bed was a brace of pistols, and a crucifix in the middle. We did
not ask in which he put the most confidence.

We made enquiries concerning the agriculture. They have no farmers. Every one
cultivates his own land, which is never fallowed. They have no species of
manufactures, but spinning and weaving for the private use of every family.

The mountains belong, as in the French Pyrenees, to the parishes. Each
inhabitant has a right to cut what wood he pleases for fuel and repairs, in the
woods assigned for that purpose. Others are let by lease at public auction for
the benefit of the parish, the trees to be cut being marked; and in general,
the police of their woods is better than on the French side. When woods are cut
they are preserved. Their mountain pastures not used by themselves, they let to
the owners of large flocks, who bring them from the lower part of Catalonia.
These flocks rise to four thousand sheep, the rent, in general, being from five
to seven sous a head for the summer food. Every inhabitant possesses cattle,
which he keeps in the common mountains in what quantity he pleases; but others,
who do not belong to the parish, pay five to seven sous a head for the sheep,
and ten sous for a cow; which disproportion they explain, by saying, that sheep
must have a much greater range. In summer they make cheese, which we tasted and
found good. In winter their cattle are kept at home, and their cows fed on
buck-wheat straw, which they assert to be good food; also that of maize and
millet, and a little hay; most of it being assigned to their mules. They have
good sheep, but all are sent to Saragosa or Barcelona. They have scarce any
oxen; what few they kill, they salt for winter.

Taxes are light; the whole which the town is assessed at being only two
thousand seven-hundred livers, which they pay by the rent of their woods and
pastures let. When the principles of a government tend to despotism and the
very pictures of kings are treated with reverence, the consequence is light
taxation. The only effectual means of insuring a great revenue, is to extend
the principles and the exercise of liberty. The change is, and ever will be, as
much for the benefit of the prince as of the subject.

At Bagnere de Luchon we were told that the inn at Vielle was good. We found
the lower floor a stable, from which we mounted to a black kitchen, and through
that to a baking-room with a large batch of loaves making for an oven which was
heating to receive them. In this room were two beds for all the travelers that
might come. If too numerous, straw is spread on the floor, and you may rest as
you can. There was no glass in the windows. One of the beds was occupied, so
that my companion slept on a table. The house, however, afforded eggs for an
omelet, good bread, thick wine, brandy, and fowls, killed after we arrived. The
people were very dirty, but civil.

On the eleventh of July we reached Scullo. The inn was so bad, that our guide
would not permit us to enter it, but conducted us to the house of the Cure. A
scene followed so new to English eyes, that we could not refrain from laughing
very heartily. Not a pane of glass in the whole town, but our reverend host had
a chimney in his kitchen. He ran to the river to catch trout. A man brought us
some chickings, which were put to death on the spot. For light they kindled
splinters of pitch-pine, and two merry wenches, with three or four men
collected to stare at us, as well as we at them, were presently busy in
satisfying our hunger. They gave us red wine so dreadfully putrid from the
borachio, that I could not touch it; and brandy, but poisoned with aniseed.
Then a bottle of excellent rich white wine was produced, resembling good
mountain, and all was well. But when we came to examine our beds there was only
one. My friend would again do the honors, and insisted on my taking it. He
made his on a table; and what with bugs, fleas, rats, and mice, slept not. I
was not attacked; and though the bed and a pavement might be ranked in the same
class of softness, fatigue converted it to down. This town and its inhabitants
are, to the eye, equally wretched. The smoke-holes instead of chimneys; the
total want of glass windows, the cheerfulness of which, to the eye, is known
only by the want; the dress of the women, all in black, with cloth of the same
color about their heads, and hanging half down their backs; no shoes; no
stockings; the effect upon the whole dismal; savage as the rocks and mountains.

YOUNG.
SECT. LXXXIV. OF MADRID. A. D. 1778.
IN the afternoons, we spent our time in visiting the most remarkable edifices
of this city. If you except the royal palaces, there are few buildings worthy
of attention, nor do I believe there is in Europe a capital that has so little
to show as Madrid. Having never been the sea of a bishop, it has of course no
cathedral, nor indeed any church, that distinguishes itself much from the
common herd of parishes and convents. Allowing some few exceptions, I think I
may safely pronounce the outward artchitecture of them all to be barbarous, and
their manner of ornamenting the inside as bad as that of the worst ages. Most
of them were erected or retouched during the term of years that elapsed between
the middle of the seventeeth century and the year 1759, a period in the history
of Spain when all arts and sciences were fallen to the lowest ebb; the effects
of the degeneracy of manners, the want of public spirit, and the disorder and
weakness of a decaying monarchy. These vices in the political system under the
three last princes of the Austrian line, could not be removed immediately on
the accession of another family. The wars that shook the very foundations of
their throne for the first ten years of this century, kept all polite arts
grovelling in the dust; and when they ventured to raise their heads again, and
court the favor of the sovereign, there seems to have been a total want of
able professors to second their efforts, and assist them in returning to the
paths of good sense and true taste.

No mad architect ever dreamed of a distortion of members so capricious, of a
twist of pillars, cornices, or pediments, so wild and fantastic, but what a
real sample of it may be produced in some or other of the churches of Madrid.
They are all small, and poor in marbles as well as pictures. Their alters are
piles of wooden ornaments, heaped up to the ceiling, and stuck full of wax
lights, which more than once have set fire to the whole church.

The convents, which may be said to possess a good collection of pictures, are
those of Saint Pasqual, and of the barefooted Carmelite nuns. The former has a
fine Titian, a capital Guerchino, and many other pieces by esteemed Italian
masters. In the sacristy of the latter, is a numerous collection of paintings
by various hands, many of which are of superior merit. The tombs of Ferdinand
the Sixth, and of his queen Babara, in the church of the Visitation, are almost
the only sepulchral monuments of any consequence.

The royal palace is all of white stone. Each of the fronts being four hundred
and seventy feet in length, by one hundred high, this pile towers over all the
country, where nothing intercepts the view for many miles. The entrances and
ground-floor appear more like those of some mighty fortress, than of the
peaceable habitation of a powerful monarch, an hundred leagues removed from his
frontiers. The range of large glazed arches round the inner court, resembles
the inside of a manufactory. This is the more unpardonable, as they had at no
great distance, in the Alcazar of Toledo, as elegant a colonnade as the nicest
critic could desire. The beautiful circular court of Granada might have
suggested noble ideas to the architect; but perhaps at that time the very
existence of such a thing was a secret at Madrid.

The staircase was meant to be double, but it was afterward judged more
convenient to shut up one ^^ight, as the remaining half answered every purpose.
At the foot of the stairs I shall leave all my spleen, and prepare myself with
unfeigned satisfaction to describe to you the beauty and grandeur of the upper
apartments.

I know no place in Europe fitted up with so much true royal magnificence. The
richest marbles are employed with great taste in forming the cornices and
^ocles of the rooms, and the frames of the doors and windows. What enhances the
value of these marbles, is the circumstance of their being all produced in the
quarries of Spain, from whence it is the opinion of a learned writer, that
ancient Rome was supplied with many of the precious m^terials that enriched her
porticoes and temples. At least, there is no presumption in asserting, that the
bowels of the earth in Spain contain most of those species of marbles, that are
to be seen in the ruins of the mistress of the world, whatever might be the
countries from which they were drawn. Porphyry is found near Cordova; the
finest jasper near Aracena; the mountains of Granada furnish a beautiful green,
those of Tortosa a variety of brown marbles. Leon and Malaga send alabaster;
Toledo, Talavera, Badajoz, and Murviedro, abound in marbles of different
colors, and most parts of the kingdom afford some specimen or other of jasper,
besides the amethyst and its radix, for which Spain is celebrated above most
other countries.

The great audience chamber is one of the richest I know. The ceiling, painted
by Tiepolo, represents the triumph of Spain. Round the cornice the artist has
placed allegorical figures of its different provinces distinguished by their
productions, and attended by several of their inhabitants in the provincial
habit. These form a most uncommon picture, and a curious set of Costumi. The
walls are incrustated with beautiful marble, and all around hung with large
plates of looking glass in rich frames. The manufactory of glass is at Saint
Ildefonso, where they cast them of a very great size; but I am told they are
apt to turn out much rougher, and fuller of flaws, than those made in France.

A collection of pictures, by the greatest masters of the art, adorns the walls
of the inner apartments; but even this vast fabric does not afford room for all
the riches his Catholic Majesty possesses in this branch. The detail and
catalogue of a number of paintings, is sure to fatigue a reader who has never
seen, nor can ever rationally expect to see them; therefore it is incumbent on
me to select only a few of my favorites from my memorandums.

Of the works of Titian, the most remarkable are, a bacchanalian woman lying on
her back asleep. The liquor has diffused a glow over her beautiful face, and
her body is divinely handsome. One of the greatest painters of the age has
often declared, he never passed before this picture without being struck with
admiration; some boys playing, full of grace, and a charming variety of
attitudes.

Rubens -- Christ and St. John Baptist, lovely children. A priest on horseback,
carrying the viaticum to a sick person, accompanied by Rodolph earl of
Hapsburgh, one of the masterpieces of his pencil.

Murillo -- A vintager, wine-seller, holy family, two boys; all in their
different characters, excellently painted with a rich mellow color.

Vandyke -- The seizing of Christ in the garden, a strong composition; several
portraits absolutely alive.

Spagnolet -- Isaac feeling Jacob's hands; very capital.

In the shallow vale between the Retiro and the town, which has not the least
suburb of any kind belonging to it, the present King has finished the Prado,
which in a few years, provided they manage the trees properly, will be one of
the finest walks in the world. Its length and breadth are great, the avenues
drawn in an intelligent, noble style, the foot-paths wide and neat, the iron
railing and stone seats done in a grand expensive manner. All the coaches of
Madrid drive in the ring here; and though the absence of the court lessens the
appearance more than two thirds, yet last night I counted two hundred carriages
following each other. On the declivity of the Retiro, they mean to plant a
botanical garden.

The view from this walk is, as it should be, confined; for the winds are so
sharp and boisterous, and the landscape so horrid all round the city, that no
place of public resort could be comfortable, unless it were, like this, shut in
from all distant views, and sheltered by the hills from the blasts that sweep
over the highlands of Castile.

To the west, it has the town, the three principal streets of which terminate
in the Prado. These are three noble openings, excellently paved, and clean even
to a nicety; indeed so are most of the streets of Madrid since the edict for
paving and cleaning them. The foreigners that resided here before that time,
shudder at the very recollection of its former filth.

Some of the natives regret the old stinks and nastiness; as they pretend that
the air of Madrid is so subtle as to require a proper mixture of grosser
effluvia, to prevent its pernicious effects upon the constitution. The extremes
of cold and heat are astonishing in this place, and the winds so searching,
that all the Spaniards wear leathern under waistcoats, to preserve their
chests; for they pervade every other kind of clothing. In summer the dust is
intolerable.

SWINBURNE.
SECT. LXXXV. OF THE ROYAL FAMILY OF SPAIN.
WE have just finished our round of presentations, which in so numerous a royal
family, is a work of more days than one. As I know you expect a minute account
of each of those that compose it, I am sorry I am incapable of satisfying your
curiosity, in as ample a manner as I could wish. You shall have a description
of their persons, and as much of their characters as I have learned from
well-informed people, in whose judgment I can confide. I beg you will consider
how hard it is to discern the true character of the great, as your intelligence
can only flow to you through the suspicious channel of many jarring passions
and interests. It is impossible for a stranger to seize a good likeness in so
short a time, and to transmit to others a faithful representation of a prince
that does not admit him to a familiar intercourse.

I don't know but sovereigns are the most difficult characters to define in a
who nation; for all princes appear pretty nearly alike. Their mode of life is
uniform. By seeing none but inferiors about them, they (...) a great
indifference in their manner, and seldom betray in their countenance any of
those strong emotions that mark the various feelings of men obliged to bustle
through the world. Their passions lack the relish which arises from delays and
difficulties. What the French call Ennui, wearisomeness is, methinks, the grand
malady of princes, and therefore amusement is their main pursuit in life.

In the princess of the house of Bourbon, the passion of fowling predominates:
yet in the Spanish royal family, there are some who toil at the gun with more
reluctance than the farmer's boy does at the plough; have a taste for arts and
sciences, and wish for nothing more than to be freed from the obligation of
following the diversion.

The ceremony of presentation is performed as the king rises from table.
Charles the Third is a much better looking man than most of his pictures make
him. He has a good natured laughing eye. The lower part of his face, by being
exposed to all weathers, is become of a deep copper color. What his hat covers
is fair, as he naturally has a good skin. In stature he is rather short,
thickly built about the legs and thighs, and narrow in the shoulders. His dress
seldom varies from a large hat, a plain gray Segovia frock, a buff waistcoat, a
small dagger, black breeches, and worsted stockings. His pockets are always
stuffed with knives, gloves, and shooting tackle. On Gala days a fine suit is
hung upon his shoulders, but as he has an eye to his afternoon sport, and is a
great oeconomist of his time, the black breeches are worn to all coats. I
believe there are but three days in the whole year that he spends without going
out a-shooting, and those are noted with the blackest mark in the callender.
Were they to occur often, his health would be in danger, and an accident that
was to confine him to the house, would infallibly bring on a fit of illness. No
storm, heat, cold, or wet, can keep him at home; and when he hears of a wolf
being seen, distance is counted for nothing. He would drive over half the
kingdom rather than miss an opportunity of firing upon that favorite game.

Besides a most numerous retinue of persons belonging to the hunting
establishment, several times a year, all the idle fellows in and about Madrid
are hired to beat the country, and drive the wild boars, deer, and hares, into
a ring, where they pass before the royal family. A very large annual sum is
distributed among the proprietors of land about the capital, and near the
country palaces, by way of indemnification for the damage done to the corn. I
was assured that it cost seventy thousand pounds sterling for the environs of
Madrid, and thirty thousand for those o^ Saint Ildefonso. In order to be
entitled to this reimbursement, the farmers scatter just as much seed-corn over
their grounds, as will grow up into something like a crop; but they do not
always give themselves the trouble of getting in the scanty harvest, being
sufficiently paid for their labor by the royal bounty.

Being naturally of an even phlegmatic temper, the king is sure to see events
on their favorable side only; and whenever he has determined in his own mind,
that a measure is proper to be persued, he is an utter enemy to alteration. As
far as I can judge, by comparing the different accounts I have had, he is a man
of the strictest probity, incapable of adopting any scheme, unless he is
perfectly satisfied in his conscience that it is just and honorable; -- of
such immovable features, that the most fortunate or the most disastrious
occurrences, are alike unable to create the smallest variation in them; --
rigid in his morals, and strenuously attached to his religion; but he does not
suffer his devotion to lay him open to the enterprises of the court of Rome, or
the encroachments of his own clergy; on the contrary, they have frequently met
with rougher usage at his hands than they might have expected from a
freethinker.

The regularity of his own life renders him very strict about the conduct of
his children, whom he obliges to be out fishing or shooting as long as he is
absent on the same business. This he does to prevent their having time or
opportunity to harbor bad thoughts; and truly I believe he goes out so
constantly himself, in order to keep down the vigor of his own constitution.
He seldom addresses himself to any young men of his court; but delights in
conversing and joking with elderly persons, and such as are of his own age,
especially monks and friars. He is very partial to Naples, and always speaks of
that country with great feeling.

Since his accession, many great works have been completed; noble roads made to
all the palaces round the metropolis; several others undertaken in more remote
provinces. He has finished the palace at Madrid, and added considerably to
those of the Prado and Aranjuez; built new towns at Aranjuez, and Escurial, and
St. Ildefonso; and planted a great deal at Aranjuez. The Marquis of Grimaldi
has the merit of having suggested and conducted most of these improvements, and
of having urged on the king, who although he has naturally no great relish for
the arts, thinks it the duty of a sovereign to encourage them.

The Prince of Asturias is of an athletic make, his countenance rather severe,
and his voice harsh. He seemed in a great hurry to get away from us; but the
princess stayed chatting a great while, She is not handsome, being very sickly,
but seems lively and genteelly shaped, with a very fine hand and arm. If she
lives to be a queen, I dare say she will render this court a very gay one; for
she appears to like to go abroad, and converse with strangers. When she walks
out, all persons that have been presented, and chance to be in the way, are
expected to join her company, and escort her as long as she thinks proper. Her
mildness and goodnature have softened much of her husband's roughness of
manner; and of late he seems to have more pleasure in sitting with her in a
domestic way, than in trudging over the heath in quest of game.

Don Gabriel is a tall well looking man, but timid to excess. He possesses many
talents, but his constant avocations out of doors prevent his applying to study
as much as he could wish. I have seen some good pictures done by him, and have
heard much of his classical learning, and turn for mathematics.

Don Antonio appears to be very well pleased with the active life of a
sportsman.

The Infanta Maria Josepha has reason to envy every country wench she sees
roaming at liberty; for confinement, etiquette, and celibacy, are likely to be
her lot during life.

Don Lewis, the king's brother, after having been a cardinal and an archbishop,
is now on the eve of matrimony with a pretty Arragonese girl, whom he took a
fancy to last year, as she was running across the fields after a butterfly. As
he has made a collection of natural history, the similarity of taste made a
great impression upon him. This wedding, which the king has consented to with
reluctance, has produced a total revolution in the marriage-laws of Spain. A
new pragmatica or edict is published, to prevent all matches betwixt persons of
unequal rank and quality. By this decree the old custom is abrogated.
Heretofore it was out of the power of parents to hinder their children from
marrying whom they liked, and the church interposed to oblige them to make a
suitable settlement upon the young couple.

Don Lewis's bride is not to be allowed the title or rank of a princess of the
blood, nor are her children to be deemed qualified to succeed to the crown. He
is to reside near Talavera, where I make no doubt but he will lead a happy
life, as he has a great taste for music and natural history. His cabinet
already contains a very valuable collection of rarities, especially such as are
found in the Spanish dominions. This prince is cheerful, humane, affable, and
full of pleasantry: good qualities that render him the darling of the nation.

The king and all the males of his family wear the ensigns of a great variety
of military orders. On their left breast is a row of stars like the belt of the
constellation of Orion. They are also decorated with the blue ribband of the
French order of the Holy Ghost, and the insignia of the Burgundian golden
fleece. They have besides the Neapolitan red sash of St. Januarius, the red
crosses of Calatrava, founded in 1158, of St. Jago, dated from 1175, and of
Montesa, instituted in 1317, and the green cross of Alcantaria, invented in
1176. After all these badges, comes the blue and white ribband of the
Conception of Carlos Tercero, established by the present king, on the birth of
the late son of the Prince of Asturias.

SWINBURNE.
SECT. LXXXVI. CHARACTER OF THE SPANIARDS.
IT has been my constant study, during our tour round Spain, to note down and
transmit to you every peculiarity that might throw light upon the distinctive
turn and genius of the nation. Experience has taught me to look upon this
method as the best, and indeed the only sure guide to the knowledge of a
people; but at the same time has made me sensible how imperfect an idea is to
be acquired by a transitory view, in a progress of a few months. Customs that
struck me at first as unaccountable, from my ignorance of motives and
situations, have frequently since appeared to me not only proper and rational,
but absolutely so much in the common course of things, that I have wondered how
I came to put them down as extraordinary.

The mistakes I have found myself guilty of in several little remarks made, in
the first part of my journey, have rendered me very cautious of deciding upon
matters, where I could not come at a knowledge of their causes. I therefore
very early learned to mistrust my senses, and applied where I expected to have
my doubts resolved, and the reasons of modes and usages explained to me.

Accordingly I omitted no opportunity of drawing information from the natives
of all ranks; from strangers long established in Spain, and from those who,
having resided but a few years there, were more likely to be sensible of the
singularities of the national disposition. I cannot say my endeavors have been
crowned with much success.

Were I to draw the picture of the Spaniards from the manifold sketches traced
by their countrymen, every province in the kingdom would in its turn appear a
Paradise, and a Pandoemonium, a seat of holy spirits, and a receptacle of
malicious devils. The most contradictory accounts, enforced by the most
positive asseverations, have been repeatedly given me of the same places. I
have often found the virtue one province prides itself in, as being the
specific mark of its inhabitants, not only refused them by a neighboring
country, but the very opposite vice imposed upon them as their characteristic.
The English, French, and other foreigners, living in Spain, are in general but
indifferently qualified to decide upon these matters. As long as they retain
the prejudices they brought from home against every thing that clashes with
their native customs, they are but partial judges; and when once they fall into
the ways of the place where commerce has fixed their lot, they become such
thorough paced Spaniards, that they can neither perceive the particularities
you speak to them of, nor assign reasons for uses that are grown habitual to
them.

As I am not ashamed to acknowledge my insufficiency, I frankly confess it is
not in my power to give what you may think a satisfactory character of the
Spaniards. Were I inclined to flatter my self-love, I might add, that I do not
esteem any of those who have already written on the subject, much better
qualified than myself. What I can venture to say amounts to very little.

The Catalonians appear to be the most active, stirring set of men, the best
calculated for business, traveling and manufactories. The Valencians are a
more sullen sedate race, better adapted to the occupations of husbandmen, less
eager to change place, and of a much more timid, suspicious cast of mind than
the former. The Andalusians seem to me the great talkers and rhodomontadoes of
Spain. The Castillians have a manly frankness, and less appearance of cunning
and deceit. The new Castillians are perhaps the least industrious of the whole
nation; the old Castillians are laborious, and retain more of an ancient
simplicity of manners; both are of a firm, determined spirit. I take the
Arragonese to be a mixture of the Castillians and Catalonians, rather inclining
to the former. The Biscayners are acute and diligent, fiery and impatient of
control; more resembling a colony of republicans, than a province of an
absolute monarchy. The Galicians are a plodding, pains-taking race of mortals,
that roam over Spain in search of an hardly-earned subsistence.

The listless indolence equally dear to the uncivilized savage, and to the
degenerate slave of despotism, is no where more indulged than in Spain.
Thousands of men in all parts of the realm are seen to pass their whole day,
wrapped up in a cloak, standing in rows against a wall, or dozing under a tree.
In total want of every excitement to action, the springs of their intellectual
faculties forget to play, their views grow confined within the wretched sphere
of mere existence, and they scarce seem to hope or foresee any thing better
than their present state of vegetation. They feel little or no concern for the
welfare or glory of a country, where the surface of the earth is engrossed by a
few overgrown families, who seldom bestow a thought on the condition of their
vassals. The poor Spaniard does not work, unless urged by irresistible want,
because he perceives no advantage accrue from industry. As his food and raiment
are purchased at a small expense, he spends no more time in labor, than is
absolutely necessary for procuring the scanty provision his abstemiousness
requires. I have heard a peasant refuse to run an arrand because he had that
morning earned as much already as would last him the day, without putting
himself to any further trouble.

Yet I am convinced that this laziness is not essentially inherent in the
Spanish composition. For it is impossible, without seeing them, to conceive
with what eagerness they pursue any favorite scheme, with what violence their
passions work upon them, and what vigor and exertion of powers they display
when awakened by a bull-feast, or the most constant agitation of gaming, a vice
to which they are superlatively addicted. Were it again possible, by an
intelligent spirited administration, to set before their eyes, in a clear and
forcible manner proper incitements to activity and industry, the Spaniards
might yet be roused from their lethargy, and led to riches and reputation; but
I confess the task is so difficult, that I look upon it rather as an Utopian
idea, than as a revolution likely ever to take place.

Their soldiers are brave, and patient of hardships. Wherever their officers
lead them, they will follow without flinching, though it be up to the mouth of
a battery of cannon; but unless the example be given them by their commander,
not a step will they advance.

Most of the Spaniards are hardy; and when once engaged, go through
difficulties without murmuring, bear the inclemancies of the seasons with
firmness, and support fatigue with amazing perseverance. They sleep every night
in their cloaks on the ground; are sparing in diet, perhaps more from a sense
of habitual indigence, than from any aversion to gluttony. Whenever they can
riot in the plenty of another man's table, they will gormandize to access, and,
not content with eating their fill, will carry off whatever they can stuff into
their pockets. I have more than once been a witness to the pillage of a supper,
by the numerous beaux and admirers which the ladies lead after them in triumph,
wherever they are invited. They are fond of spices, and scarce eat any thing
without saffron, pimento, or garlic. They delight in wine that tastes strong of
the pitched skin, and of oil that has a rank smell and taste. Indeed, the same
oil feeds their lamp, swims in their pottage, and dresses their sallad. In inns
the lighted lamp is frequently handed down to the table, that each man may take
the quantity he chooses. Much tobacco is used by them in smoking and chewing.
All the^e hot, drying kinds of food, cooperating with the parching qualities
of the atmosphere, are assigned as causes of the spare make of the common
people in Spain, where the priests and the inn keepers are almost the only
well-fed, portly figures to be met with.

The Spanish is by no means naturally a serious melancholy nation. Misery and
discontent have cast a gloom over them, increased no doubt, by the long habit
of distrust and terror inspired by the inquisition; yet every village still
resounds with the music of voices and guitars; and their fairs and Sunday wakes
are remarkable noisy and riotous. They talk louder, and argue with more
vehemence than even the French or Italians, and gesticulate with equal, if not
superior eagerness. In Catalonia the young men are expert at ball; and every
village has its pelota, or ground for playing at fives; but in the South of
Spain I never perceived that the inhabitants used any particular exercise. I am
told, that in the island of Majorca they still wield the sling, for which their
ancestors, the Baleares, were so much renowned.

Like most people of Southern climates, they are dirty in their persons, and
overrun with vermin.

As their constitution may be said to be made up of the most combustible
ingredients, and prone to love in a degree that natives of more northen
latitudes can have no idea of, the custom of embracing persons of the other
sex, which is used on many occasions by foreigners, sets the Spaniards all on
fire. They would as soon allow a man to pass the night in bed with their wives
or daughters, as suffer him to give them a kiss.

I was surprised to find them so much more lukewarm in their devotion than I
expected; but I will not take upon me to assert, though I have great reason to
believe it, that there is in Spain as little true moral religion as in any
country I ever traveled through, although none abounds more with provincial
protectors, local Madonnas, and altars celebrated for particular cures and
indulgencies. Religion is a topic not to be touched, much less handled with any
dgree of curiosity, in the dominions of so tremendous a tribunal as the
Inquisition. From what little I saw, I am apt to suspect, that the people here
trouble themselves with very few serious thoughts on the subject; and that,
provided they can bring themselves to believe that their favorite Saint looks
upon them with an eye of affection, they take it for granted, that under his
benign influence, they are freed from all apprehensions of damnation in a
future state; and indeed, from any great concern about the moral duties of this
life. The burning zeal which distinguished their ancestors above the rest of
the Catholic world, appears to have lost much of its activity, and really seems
nearly extinguished. It is hard to ascribe bounds to the changes of a crafty,
steady, and popular monarch might make in ecclesiastical matters. The unconcern
betrayed by the whole nation at the fall of the Jesuits, is a strong proof of
their present indifference. Those fathers, the most powerful body politic in
the kingdom, the rulers of the palace, and the despots of the cottage, the
directors of the conscience, and disposers of the fortune of every rank of men,
were all seized in one night, by detachments of soldiers, hurried like
malefactors to the seaports, and banished forever from the realm, without the
least resistance to the royal mandate being made, or even threatened. Their
very memory seems to be annihilated with there power.

We found the common people inoffensive, if not civil; and having never had an
opportunity of being witnesses to any of their excesses, can say nothing of
their violent jealousy or revenge, which are points most writers on Spain have
expatiated upon with great pleasure. I believe in this line, as well as in many
others, their bad as well as good qualities have been magnified many degrees
above the truth.

The national qualities, good and bad, conspicuous in the lower classes of men,
are easily traced, and very discernible in those of higher rank; for their
education is too much neglected, their minds too little enlightened by study or
communication with other nations, to rub off the general rust, with which the
Spanish genius has, for above an age, been as it were incrustated. The public
schools and universities are in a despicable state of ignorance and
irregularity. Some feeble hope of future reformation is indulged by patriots;
but time must show what probabilities they are grounded on.

The reigns of Charles V. and Philip II. were the times of great men and good
authors, the Spanish Augustan age, and continued a few years under Philip III.
Since those days, it is difficult to point out any orig^nal work of learning or
merit, except those of Cervantes and La Vega, who survived the rest of the
geniuses of that period.

The common education of an English gentleman would constitute a man of
learning here; and should be understand Greek, he would be quite a phenomenon.

As to the nobility, I wonder how they ever learned to read or write: or having
once attained so much, how they contrive not to forget it. It is difficult to
say what they pass their time in; or by what means, besides inattention to
business, they employ in running through their immense incomes.

In the great houses one custom may contribute to extravagance. A servant once
established, is never discharged, unless for some very enormous offense. He and
his family remain pensioners as long as they live. The Duke of I -- pays near
ten thousand pounds sterling a year in wages and annuities to servants.

SWINBURNE.
SECT. LXXXVII. OF THE SPANISH LADIES.
THE Spanish women are in general little and thin. Few are strikingly
beautiful, but almost all have sparkling black eyes, full of expression. It is
not the fashion here, as in France, to heighten their eclat with paint. They
are endowed by nature with a great deal of wit and lively repartee, but for
want of the polish and succors of Education, the wit remains obscured by the
rudest ignorance, and the most ridiculous prejedices. Their tempers having
never been fashioned by polite intercourse, nor softened by necessary
contradiction, are extremely pettish and violent. They are continually about
something or other, and put out of humor by the merest trifles.

Most of the ladies about court are the reverse of handsome, and do not seem to
have any ambition of passing for clever or accomplished. Not one talent do they
possess; nor do they ever work, read, write, or touch any musical instrument.
Their Cortejo, or gallant, seems their only plaything. I believe no country
exhibits more bare faced amor, and such an appearance of indelicate debauchery
as this.

The account given me of their manner of living in the family way, as soon as
they come out of the convent, and before they have fixed upon a lover, to fill
up their time more agreeably, is as follows: -- They rise late, and loiter away
the remains of the morning among their attendants, or wear it out at church in
a long ^ead-roll of habitual unmeaning prayers. They dine sparingly, sleep and
then dress to saunter for a couple of hours on the Prado. They are never
without some sort of sugar-plum, or high spiced comfit in their mouths.

As soon as it is dark, they run to the house of some elderly female relation,
where they all huddle together over a pan of coals, and would not for the world
approach the company that may occasionally drop in. It would throw them into
the greatest confusion were they to be requested to join in the conversation.
The hour of assembly passed, they hurry home to their maids, and with their
help, set about dressing their own suppers by way of amusement.

SWINBURNE.
SECT. LXXXVIII. ANECDOTE OF A FRIAR.
A VERY furious example of passion and cruelty happened while I was in Spain. A
Carmelite friar fell desperately in love with a young woman to whom he was
confessor. He tried every art of seduction his desires could suggest to him:
but to his unspeakable vexation, found her virtue or indifference proof against
all his machinations. His despair was heightened to a pitch of madness, upon
hearing that she was soon to be married to a person of her own rank in life.
The furies of jealousy seized his soul, and worked him up to the most barbarous
of all determinations, that of depriving his rival of the prize, by putting an
end to her existence. He chose Easter-week for the perpetration of his crime.
The unsuspecting girl came to the confessional, and poured out her soul at his
feet. Her innocence served only to inflame his rage the more, and to confirm
him in his bloody purpose. He gave her absolution and the sacrament with his
own hands, as his love deterred him from murdering her before he though it she was
purified from all stain of sin, and her soul fit to take its flight to the
tribunal of its Creator; but his jealousy and revenge urged him to pursue her
down the church, and plunge his dagger in her heart, as she turned round to
make a genuflection to the altar. He was immediately seized, and soon condemned
to die; but lest his ignominious execution should reflect dishonor on a
religious order, which boasts of having an aunt of the king of France among its
members, his sentence was changed into perpetual labor among the galley-slaves
of Porto Rico.

SWINBURNE.
SECT. LXXXIX. OF THE BATHS AT BAGNERES.
BAGNERES derives its name from the mineral baths which were known and
frequented by the ancient Romans, as many inscriptions and monuments still
existing on the spot, satisfactorily demonstrate.

The peasants of the neighborhood are a lively race, and often assemble in a
shady walk near the gates to dance. One of the queens of Navarre remitted all
fines upon alienation of property at Bagneres, on condition that a small sum
should be levied upon each person admitted to his freedom, and spent in
bonfires and other merry expenses at Midsummer.

The situation of this place is happily calculated for all exercises that tend
to the recovery of health. It is built on a flat and very dry soil. Every part
of it enjoys an easy communication with the fields, the banks of the river, or
the high-roads, where the weaker sort of visitants may breathe the fresh air,
and regain strength by moderate exertions; while the more vigorous, who repair
to Bagneres for the sake of amusement, may climb delightful hills, and wander
among shady groves, through a variety of landscapes. The plains and eminences
are traversed by innumerable paths accessible to horsemen as well as
foot-passengers. The high grounds are not like those in the Alps, broken and
precipitous, but easily sloped, and clothed with soft and pleasant verdure. The
timber that crowns their summits is of the noblest size. In the heart of
cultivation, and near the foot of the mountains, the Spanish chestnut
predominates, intermingled with cherry, walnut, and other fruit trees, round
which the vine entwines its tendrils. Higher up the extent of pasture becomes
more considerable. The middle regions of the mountains are darkened with woods
of beech overhung by forests of silver fir, and above all, black pinnacles of
rocks shoot up to a frightful height, with here and there a wreath of snow
preserved unmelted through the summer by the protection of their shade.

That side of the mountains which faces the noontide sun is richly covered with
wood; but the opp^site slope is seldom so beautiful, for it produces fewer
trees, and those of a stinted growth. The greatest part of these forests is the
common property of the neighboring villages, and as high as carriage can be
easily contrived, is cut after a regular but careless manner, for the supply of
fuel, and the purposes of husbandry.

The medicinal waters at Bagneres have alone rescued this valley from the
obscurity which involves so many neighboring beautiful districts. A great
number of boiling, lukewarm, and cold streams issue out of the sides of the
mountain that covers the town on the western aspect. All of them possess, or
are supposed to possess, very strong healing qualities, which each patient
applies with great confidence to his particular disorder, under the directions
of the physicians of the place. The summit of this mountain is indented with a
large hollow, similar to the crater of a volcano, and I have no doubt but fire
has been emitted from this cup at some period beyond the reach of history. The
fire which was then sufficient to produce explosions, and to cast forth
torrents of lava, still retains the power in its weaker state, of imp^rting
virtue in various degrees to the mineral springs that flow from the mountain
where its focus is established.

The number of wells and baths amount to thirty. Some are covered in for the
use of patients, who can afford to pay for their cures. Others are open pools
where the poorer class gargle their ulcerous throats, or lave their sores,
gratis. The heat of some spouts is at first almost insupportable, but gradually
grows less painful. I have seen people expose their deceased limbs to the
boiling stream for more than a quarter of an hour at a time. The hottest spring
raises the quicksilver in Farrenheit's thermometer to 123 degrees, while the
coolest causes it to ascend no higher than 86. Out of the thirty different
sources two are exactly equal in heat to that of the human body, ten below, and
eightteen above it. Their medicinal qualities differ no less essentially than
their degrees of heat; for the waters of the Queen's bath are strongly
purgative, those of Salut and Le Pre*diuretic and cooling.

The bath of Salut is situated about a mile from the town, among the mountains.
A pleasant winding road leads to it, through beautiful fields planted with
clumps of chestnut trees. The houses and groves on the surrounding hills cheer
the prospect; but in so hot a season, and in this latitude, an avenue would be
a greater improvement and relief to the patients.

The spring is copious, and equal to the demands of the crowds that flock round
it on hollidays, when every person may drink his fill for the value of three
farthings English. The vogue is so great, that two guineas have been taken in
one morning, at this low price.

From the drinking place the waters are conveyed into two marble troughs, which
are in constant use during the whole season. Seniority of residence constitues
the right of bathing, and therefore many late comers, who foresee but a distant
prospect of being accommodated with an hour of Salut, take up with the other
baths of inferior reputation, but perhaps equal efficacy. The degree of heat of
Salut is ^8. When evaporated by a slow equal fire, the surface of its water is
covered with a pellicle formed by small insipid chrystals, which toward the
completion of the evaporation acquire considerable acritude. These waters
contain no particles of iron, but small parallelopiped pyrites are frequently
found in them, of a bright golden color, and about an inch long.

SECT. XC. JOURNEY INTO THE HEART OF THE PYRENEAN MOUNTAINS.
I RETURNED yesterday to Bagneres from a journey on horseback, through the most
romantic and curious part of the Pyrennees, and hasten to impart my
observations, while each idea is still impressed with force on "the tablet of
my memory."

I set out on the sixth of August with some friends, and traveled up the
valley. The low grounds are finely cultivated. Numberless streams pour across
the road, and hurry to blend their waters with those of the Adour, which is
here confined to a narrow bed. Beyond it eastward, the mountains are covered
with beautiful verdure. At their foot stands Aste, a village belonging to the
family of Crammont.

A peasant who resides here, earns a livelihood by supplying the apothecaries
with medicinal plants, which he gathers on the adjacent mountains, particularly
that of Lieris, justly celebrated for the immense and variegated show of
flowers, that cover its elevated pastures, before sheep and cattle are let in
to graze.

The convent of capuchins, at Medous, opposite to Aste, is placed so closely
under a mountain, that in winter it enjoys but two hours sun shine in the whole
day. Its garden is remarkable for a large volume of water, that issues out of
the rocks. Trouts are often seen swimming down the stream, but if disturbed,
they retire into the bowels of the mountain, to some subterraneous lake.

The populousness of this vale is scarce credible. In the extent of three miles
I reckoned near five hundred houses or barns. The burgh of Campan gives name to
the upper district, and is famous for the excellency of its butter. It
acknowledges no lord but the king, and has considerable woods and cultivated
lands, appertaining to its community.

At a small distance above the town, (...) conducted to a celebrated grotto, in
the side of a bare mountain. The entrance is narrow and sloping, but at the
depth of ten feet, the floor of the cavern lies nearly on a level. The vault
seldom exceeds nine feet in height. Its length is an hundred and four yards.
The path is wet and rugged. The walls and roof are incrustated with
chrystalisations; but all that were curious for size, shape, or beauty of
color, had been broken off and carried away by pr^ceeding travelers. At the
end of the grotto we found a marble slab, fixed up by order of the countess of
Brionne, to commemorate that after infinite labor, she, with her family and
servants, whose names are all consigned to immortality on this subterraneous
monument, penetrated thus far into the bowels of the earth, in the year 1766.

Above Campan the valley grew more confined. The hills on the right hand were
studded with trees and barns, and covered with lively verdure; those on the
left, were rocky, barren, and savage. At the chapel of St. Mary, two branches
of the Adour flow from different glens and join their waters. We rode up the
more western stream to Grip, where all level ground terminates. Noble groves of
fir overhang the river, which dashes successively down three romantic falls.
Having taken some refreshment we proceeded up the mountain by a winding, steep,
and rugged path, through a forest of silver and spruce firs. We occasionally
caught views of the river foaming among the rocks and trees, and in one spot
darting over a vast precipice in a full, magnificent sheet.

Upon leaving the woods we crossed a large naked plain, at the foot of the Pi^
du midi, the highest mountain on the Pyrenees. The Adour issues out of a
pyramidical hill, a few miles farther up, and winds in a small stream through
the rushy pastures. Abundance of flowers animate the face of this otherwise
dull scene of nature. We were now arrived in the highest point of land we had
to surmount, when we were surprised by a very heavy fall of snow, that whitened
all the surrounding eminences, but soon melted into rain and wetted us
thoroughly

When the storm abated, and the atmosphere grew clear, a horrible view opened
down the valley of Bareges. Rude and barren mountains shade it on both sides,
and the (...) a foaming torrent, fills the intermediate hollow. We descended by
the edge of the blackest and most desolute places in nature, where not a tree
was to be seen: but the heights were seamed with yawning crevices, and the
passages blocked up with quarries of stone, tumbled from the cliffs by the
irresistible force of the waters.

In this frightful chasm stands the village of Bareges, consisting of a single
street built along the south side of the torrent. The situation is so dangerous
and horrid; that the inhabitants dare not abide here in winter. They remove all
their furniture, even doors and windows, to such houses as are supposed most
out of the way of mischief. A few invalid soldiers alone remain, to preserve
the springs from being buried under the earth that slides down from the
mountains. Sometimes a large volume of water busts out of its side, the
overplus of a lake on the summit, and sweeps off all before it. Every year some
houses are washed away by the floods, or crushed under the weight of snow. The
avelanches, or heaps of snow that are detached from the mountains, are often so
prodigious as to fill up the whole bottom of the glen; and the river has been
known to roll for several weeks through an arch of its own forming under this
immeasurable mass.

The mineral waters, for which Bareges is famed, issue out of the hill in the
center of the village, and are distributed into three baths. They are very
fetid, but clear in the glass. Their degrees of heat rise from 89 to 112 They
are greasy to the touch, tinge silver black, and are esteemed sovereign in the
cure of ulcers, wounds, and scrophulous humors. The baths belong to the king,
and are entirely under the direction of his surgeons.

The poor have the use of a large bath covered with boards, and are fed by a
tax of six livres imposed upon all new comers. With this fund a comfortable
dinner is provided for them, and distributed in presence of the governor, a
worthy veteran, who solicited this command from a motive of gratitude, having
been cured of a dangerous wound by bathing it with these waters.

No company resorts hither merely for amusement. Disorders only, and those
severe and inveterate ones, can induce people to inhabit these wild regions.
There is an assembly-room and regular bath, when it is, I know not whether a
melancholy or a ludicrous sight, to behold several couples dancing together,
some with a leg bound up, others with an arm in a sling, and all with a feeble
body and a sickly aspect.

In these mountainous scenes nature exhibits her boldest features. Here every
object is extended upon a vast scale, and the whole assemblage impresses the
spectator with awe as well as admiration. I wish it were possible for me to
communicate, by means of words or of paintings, the rapturous sensations
excited in my mind by the sight of those sublime works of the Creator.

As we advanced on our journey we found ourselves immured in a narrow valley,
with the Ga^e roaring below us, between walls of immense, (...) and frequently
hidden from our view by thick (...) of lime and oak trees. The path was wide
enough for our mountain horses, but very alarming to some unexperienced
travelers in our company. On one hand a perpendicular rock, without any
parapet, laid open the deep gloomy bed of the river almost under our feet, and
a shivery mountain pressed so close upon us on the other, as to leave no room
for a retreat. The turns in the road, where torrents have heaped stones, and
choked the pass with rubbish, are particularly distressing; but our horses
were so unconcerned and surefooted, that they soon inspired their riders with
equal indifference fot the surrounding perils.

The whole valley is occupied by the river and the road, with vast piles of
mountains rising on each side, and almost closing together. Now and then level
spots occur at the angles of the river. We crossed a bridge romantically
clothed with ivy, which hid the tremendous chasm from our eyes. Huge rocks rear
up their perpendicular points, and torrents rush over them on all sides. The
mountain-ash, and service-tree, blushing with clustered berries, bend over the
precipices, and soften the harshness of the wild prospect. After this the
valley rather swells out, and more room is allowed for the indefatigable
industry of the inhabitants to exert itself; but great part of the level, and
all the lower regions of the mountains, are overgrown with wood, interspersed
with a charming variety of flowering shrubs. Many of the favorite denizons of
our English gardens flourish ^here in all their native luxuriancy.

This dale terminates at Gecres, a rambling village on the side of the
mountain. The road is afterward cut through the rock, and leads to a situation
that gave us an idea of confusion and desolation, the effects of some violent
earthquake. The mountain is split and torn to pieces. Its sides and foot are
strewed with innumerable huge blocks of stone, detached from the impending
ridge that forms its bare summit. The passage through this rocky labyrinth
opened to a magnificent amphitheatre. On the top waved thick forests of firs,
through which several streams forcing their way, dashed down the lofty
precipice, but almost vanished away in mist before they could reach the bottom.
The field below was beautifully overspread with purple monkshood.

Our morning's expedition ended at Gabarnie, where we found good accommodations
prepared for us by a messenger we had dispatched the preceding day. This is a
village consisting of a church and thirty houses, in the midst of bare hills,
shaded by very high mountains, and traversed in several directions, by foaming
torrents. The curate partook of our dinner, after we had removed the table to
the door of the inn* for he durst neither eat nor drink within the walls of a
public house. We found him a modest conversable man, worthy of a richer
settlement.

After dinner we traveled toward the head of the Gave, the object of our
journey. We had long had in view the snow-capped-cliffs from which its waters
issue, but were surprised to find them still so distant from us. We spent an
hour and a half in riding across a bare tract of pasture, closed in with
immense forests of evergreens on the French side along the Spanish frontier,
which lies on the right hand confined by bare rocky mountains. This plain is
called the Prade. The river follows a serpentine course through it. In winter
it is generally covered with snow forty feet deep.

Our guide having now brought us to his ne plus ultra, pressed us earnestly to
alight, as no horse had ever advanced beyond this pass. But as we were not
contented with so distant a view, we rejected his timid advice, and clambering
over several rocky eminences, plunged into the river, which by its limpidity
deceived our eye, both as to the debth of water, and the size of the rocks at
the bottom. It required our utmost exertions to extricate out houses, and bear
them safe through to the opposite bank. This difficulty being overcome, all
others appeared contemptable, and we soon reached the center of a most
stupendous amphitheatre. Three sides of it are formed by a range of
perpendicular rocks: the fourth is shaded with wood. Above the upright wall,
which is of a horrible height, rise several stages of broken masses, each
covered with a layer of everlasting snow. The mountain eastward ends in sharp
pinnacles, and runs off to the west in one immense bank of snow. From these
concealed heaps the Gave derives its excellence. Thirteen streams rush down the
mighty precipice, and unite their waters at its foot.

The whole western corner of the area below is filled with a bed of snow, which
being struck by few rays of the sun at any season, receives a sufficient volume
of fresh snow every winter to balance the loss occasioned by the warmth of the
atmosphere in summer. Two of the torrents fell upon this extensive frozen
surface. They have worn a huge chasm, and extending from it, a vaulted passage
five hundred yards in length, through which their waters roll. We boldly rode
over this extraordinary bridge, and alighting at the foot of the rocks, walked
down the passage. The snow lies above it near twenty feet thick. The roof is
about six feet above the ground, and finely turned in an arch, which appears as
if it had been cut and chisseled by the hand of man. In some places there are
columns and collateral galleries. The whole glittered like a diamond, and was
beautifully pervaded by the light. The only inconvenience we felt, arose from
the dripping occasioned by the extreme heat of the day by which even this great
body of snow was strongly affected.

As we emerged with the river from this singular grotto, we unharboured three
chamoy goats, that had taken refuge in the mouth of the cave, against the
burning rays of noon. They darted across the plain, and ascended the steepest
parts of the rocks, where we soon lost sight of them. These animals are called
Ysards in this country. They are rather smaller than the fallow deer, of a
muddy reddish yellow color, with snubbed nose, and short black horns. In shape
they resemble a deer, walking with their heads upright, and skipping away with
admirable swiftness. But they do not bound; they run when at full stretch. No
beast of the forest is of more difficult access. They seldom quit the highest
and most inaccessible parts of the mountains. During the wintry storms they
have been seen fixed on the brow of a precipice, with their faces toward the
wind, probably to prevent the rain and snow from lodging under their hair.

Notwithstanding their suspicious, wild nature, and their extreme velocity, the
hardy mountaineers find means to destroy them. They lie out whole days and
nights watching their opportunity, and making good use of it when it offers;
for they are excellent marksmen. They have frequently as much difficulty in
reaching the dead prey, as in approaching it while living. The flesh of the
Ysard is much esteemed. Its skin makes soft and useful gloves.

The setting of the sun roused us from the ecstacy in which the contemplation
of these awful scenes had enwrapped every sense, and warned us to retire before
the want of light should render those passages doubly dangerous, which we had
found very difficult even in the glare of day. The sun sunk behind the snowy
cliffs in admirable beauty, tinging the mountains with a rich variety of fiery
hues, which died away into the most tender tints of purple.

The mountains abound with game, the rivers with fish. Here are no lords of
manorial rights, and therefore game is the property of every member of the
community that can catch it. Except some tracts of wood reserved for the use of
the navy, all the forests are held in common.

SWINBURNE.
SECT. XCI. OF PORTUGAL IN GENERAL; THE PRODUCE OF THE COUNTRY, AND THE CUSTOMS
AND MANNERS OF THE PEOPLE.
THE kingdom of Portugal is situated to the west of Spain, from which it is
separated on the north and the east by the river Minho, and some small rivers
and hills: on the south and west it is washed by the sea. Its whole extent from
north to south is three hundred miles, and its breadth from east to west, where
broadest, is about one hundred and twenty. It is in the same climate with
Spain, and as well as that country, is very mountainous; but the soil is in
general worse, and never produces corn enough for the support of its
inhabitants. As to wheat, it has always produced less of that valuable grain,
than what the people require. In the southern parts pasture is always scarce,
and the cattle small and lean, though the flesh is generally well tasted. But
to make amends for this want of corn and pasture, here are made vast quantities
of wine, which is indeed the best commodity of this kingdom. Oil is also made
here in great abundance, but it is far inferior to that of Spain and Italy.
Lemons and oranges likewise grow here; and are exported in great quantities,
though the acidity of the latter is not near so pleasant, as those that come
from Seville; nor indeed are their raisins, figs, almonds, and chestnuts either
so large, or so well tasted as those of Spain. However, their sweet oranges,
which they have introduced from China, and are thence called China oranges, are
the best of the kind in Europe. Herbs and flowers of all sorts are here
commonly very good, and abundance of perfumed waters are distilled from those
of the odoriferous kind, which are here in great request, they being used in
almost every thing that is eat, drank or worn.

The woollen manufactures of this country are so indifferent and coarse, that
they are only worn by the meaner sort; and though their silks are in some
places much better, they are far inferior in beauty and goodness to those made
in Spain.

The modern Portuguese retain nothing of that adventurous enterprizing spirit
that rendered their forefathers so illustrious three hundred years ago. They
have, ever since the house of Braganza mounted the throne, degenerated in all
their virtues; though some noble exceptions are still remaining among them, and
no people are so little obliged as the Portuguese are to the reports of
historians and travelers. The degeneracy is evidently owing to the weakness of
their monarchy, which renders them inactive; and that inactivity has proved the
source of pride, and other unmanly vices. Treachery has been laid to their
charge, as well as ingratitude, and above all, an intemperate passion for
revenge. They are, if possible, more superstitious, and, both in high and
common life, affect more state than the Spaniards themselves. Among the lower
people, thieving is commonly practiced; and all ranks are accused of being
unfair in their dealings, especially with strangers. It is hard, however, to
say what alteration may be made in the character of the Portuguese, by the
expulsion of the Jesuits, and the diminution of the papal influence among them,
but above all, by that spirit of independency, with regard to commercial
affairs, upon Great Britian, which, not much to the honor of their gratitude,
though to the interest of their own country is now so much encouraged by their
court and ministry.

The Portuguese are neither so tall nor so well made as the Spaniards, whose
habits and customs they imitate; only the quality affect to be more gaily and
richly dressed.

The women are mostly beautiful when young, though their complexion is
inclinable to the olive; but the indiscreet use of paint renders their skins
shrivelled as with old age, before they are turned of thirty. Their eyes,
however, which are generally black and sparkling, retain their luster after
their other charms are withered. The quick decay of beauty is in some measure
recompensed by the vivacity of their wit, in which they are said to excel the
women of all other nations. They are extremely charitable and generous, and
remarkable for their modesty.

Spectacles are commonly worn here as well as in Spain, as a mark of age and
gravity; for it is observable of these two nations, that old age, with a grave
and solemn behavior, procure such respect, that the young affect to imitate
the solemnity of the old.

Lisbon, the capital of Portugal, is built upon seven hills, and is thought to
contain 200,000 inhabitants. Some of the hills rise up above the rest: and some
again are so interwoven and contrasted, that they form an agreeable diversity
of hills and vales; so that, from the opposite sides of the Tagus, it looks
like an immense amphitheatre, which has all the charms that can be produced by
a variety of the most sumptuous edifices, reflecting uncommon beauties upon
each other by the happiness of their situation. Nor do the fine prospects of
the country give less pleasure when they are viewed from the eminences in the
city; for what can be a finer sight than a beautiful country, and such a river
as the Tagus, covered with forests of ships from all nations? Its situation
certainly, renders its appearance at once delightful and superb, and it is
deservedly accounted the greatest port in Europe, next to London and Amsterdam.

The city, before the great earthquake, afforded still a nobler prospect when
viewed from the river, than it does at present, on account of the gradual
ascent of the buildings. But this dreadful earthquake, which began on the first
of November, 1775, at about ten in the morning, laid the finest buildings of
Lisbon in ruins, and reduced that city to a scene of the most terrible
desolation. To complete the public distress, a fire soon after broke out and
spread among the ruins; and by these disasters the King's Palace, the
Customhouse, St. Dominic's church, St. Nicholas's, and many others, were either
thrown down or consumed, together with a great number of private houses. But
happily some whole streets escaped the general calamity, and were left standing
entire.

All that part of the city which was demolished by the earthquake, is now
planned out in the most regular and commodious form. Some large squares and
many streets are already built. The streets form right angles, and are broad
and spacious. The houses are lofty, elegant, and uniform; and being built of
white stone, make a beautiful appearance.

The air here is so soft, and the sky so clear, that it is quite delicious;
which joined to the excellence of the water, makes the inhabitants so extremely
healthy, that they have the happiness of living to a very great age, without
being oppressed with infirmities, and continually attacked by fresh disorders,
as is usual in other climates. The climate is so temperate, that they have
roses and many other sorts of flowers, even in the winter.

The second city in this kingdom is Oporto, which is computed to contain 30,000
inhabitants. The chief article of commerce in this city is wine; and the
inhabitants of half the shops in the city are coopers. The merchants assemble
daily in the chief street, to transact business, and are protected from the sun
by sailcloths hung across from the opposite houses. About thirty English
families reside here, who are chiefly concerned in the wine trade.

TOUR THROUGH PORTUGAL. SECT. XCII. OF NORWAY, AND BERGEN ITS CAPITAL.
THE climate of Norway is much more various than in most other European
countries. In the summer-nights, the horizon when unclouded, is so clear and
luminous, that at midnight one may read, write, and do all kinds of work as in
the day; and in the extremity of this country, toward the islands of Finmark,
the sun is continually in view in the midst of summer, and is observed to
circulate day and night round the north pole, contracting its orbit, and then
gradually enlarging it, till at length it leaves the horizon. On the other
hand, in the depth of winter, the sun is invisible for some weeks; all the
light perceived at noon being a faint glimmering of about an hour and a half's
continuance; which, as the sun never appears above the horizon, chiefly
proceeds from the reflection of the rays on the highest mountains, whose
summits are seen more clearly than any other objects. But the wise and
bountiful Creator has granted the inhabitants all possible assistance; for
besides the moonshine, which by reflection from the mountains is exceedingly
bright in valleys, the people receive considerable relief from the Auror^
Borealis, or nothern lights, which often afford them all the light necessary to
their ordinary labors.

On the east side of Norway, the cold of winter generally sets in about the
middle of October, and lasts till the middle of April. The waters are congealed
to a thick ice, and the mountains and valleys covered with snow. However, this
is of such importance to the welfare of the country, that in a mild winter, the
peasants who live among the mountains are considerable sufferers; for without
this severe frost and snow, they can neither convey the timber they have
felled, to the rivers, nor carry their corn, butter, furs and other
commodities, in their sledges, to the market towns; and after the sale of them
carry back the necessaries they are supplied with. For the largest rivers, with
their roaring cataracts are arrested in their course by the frost, and the very
spittle is no sooner out of the mouth than it is congealed, and rolls along the
ground like hail. But the wise Creator has given the inhabitants of this cold
climate a greater variety of preservatives against the weather than most other
countries afford. Extensive forests supply them with plenty of timber for
building, and for fuel. The wool of the sheep, and the furs and skins of wild
beasts, furnish them with warm lining for their clothes, and covering for their
beds. Innumerable flights of wild fowl supply them with down and feathers. The
mountains themselves serve them for fences against the north and east winds,
and their caverns afford them shelter.

In the summer months, the weather is not only warm but very hot. These violent
heats, which are, however, of short duration, may be partly derived from the
valleys being enclosed within high mountains, where the reverberation of the
rays of the sun on all sides heat the hair; and as there is almost no night,
neither the atmosphere nor the mountains have time to cool. Indeed there cannot
be a more decisive proof of the summer's heat in Norway, than that several
vegetables, (and particularly barley) grow up and ripen within six weeks or two
months.

The air is pure and salubrious, especially in the middle of the country about
the mountains where the inhabitants know little of sickness. Physicians are
only to be found in the chief towns, where they are established with a public
salary, but have generally very little employment.

Norway contains a vast number of mountains, some of which extend themselves in
a long chain fro^^ north to south, while others are scattered about and
surrounded by a level country.

The inhabitants of a mountainous country may be said to labor under more
inconveniences than others. Thus the arable ground is here but little in
comparison of the wastes and deserts, which obliges the inhabitants to procure
half their subsistence from the sea. The villages are small, and the houses
scattered among the valleys. But in some places the peasant's houses stand so
high, and on the edge of steep precipices, that ladders are fixed to climb up
to them; so that when a cleryman is sent for, who is unpractised in the road,
he risks his life in ascending them, especially in winter, when the ways are
slippery. In such places the bodies of the dead must be let down with ropes, or
be brought on people's backs before they are laid in a coffin; and, at some
distance from Bergen, the mail must likewise in winter be drawn over the
steepest mountains.

Another evil resulting from the mountains, is the shelter they afford in their
caverns and clefts to the wild beasts, which render it difficult to extirpate
them. It is not easy to describe the havoc made by the lynxes, foxes, bears,
and especially wolves, among the cattle, goats, hares, and other useful animals.

Another evil is, that the cows, sheep, and goats belonging to the peasants,
often fall down the precipices and are destroyed. Sometimes they make a false
step into a projection, called a mountain-hammer, where they can neither ascend
nor descend. On this occasion a peasant cheerfully ventures his life for a
sheep or a goat; and descending from the top of a mountain by a rope of some
hundred fathoms in length, he slings his body on a cross stick, till he can set
his foot on the place where his goat is, when he fastens it to the rope to be
drawn up along with himself. But the most amazing circumstance is, that he runs
this risk with the help of only a single person, who holds the end of the rope,
or fastens it to a stone if there be one at hand. There are instances of the
assistant himself having been dragged down, and sacrificing his life from
fidelity to his friend, on which both have perished. On these melancholy
accidents, when man or beast falls some hundred ^athorns down the precipices,
it is observed, that the air presses with such force against their bodies thus
falling, that they are not only deprived of life long before they reach the
ground, but their bellies burst and their entrails gush out, which is plainly
the case when they fall into deep water.

The country produces wheat, rye, barley, white, gray and green pease; vetches,
used as provender for horses; hops, flax, and hemp; many kinds of roots and
greens for the kitchen, with a considerable number of hardy flowers. In Norway,
as well as in Denmark, are several kinds of cherries, of which the peasants
sell great quantities dried. There are also many sorts of wholesome and
well-tasted berries, as red and white currants, sunberries, raspberries, red
and white gooseberries, barberries, bilberries, cramberries, strawberries,
blackberries, and many other kinds. Several sorts of plums attain to a
tolerable ripeness, which can very seldom be said of peaches, apricots, or
grapes. However, apples and pears of several kinds are found all over the
country; but the greatest part of these are summer-fruits, which ripen early;
for the winter-fruit seldom comes to perfection, unless the summer proves
hotter, and the winter sets in later than usual.

But though, with respect to fruit trees, Norway must be acknowledged inferior
to most countries in Europe, yet this deficiency is liberally compensated in
the blessings of inexhaustible forests; so that in most provinces immense sums
are received from foreigners for masts, beams, planks, boards, etc. not to
mention the home consumption for houses built entirely of beams of wood, ships,
bridges, and an infinite number of founderies, which require an^ immense
quantity of charcoal, in the fusion of metals, besides the demands for fuel and
other domestic uses; to which must be added, that in many places the woods are
felled only to clear the ground and be burnt, the ashes serving for manure.

Bergen, the capital of Norway, has one of the finest ports in Europe, and is
divided into the upper and lower town, the one built on the rocks, and the
other on the sea shore. It is a large trading town, full of merchants, and was
formerly an archbishopric; but has not been acknowledged such since the
reformation. The Archbishop's palace was given to the Hans Towns, for their
ancient merchants to live in, and the greatest part of the houses were turned
into warehouses, which still bear the name of cloisters, and the merchants are
called monks, though they do not wear a cowl, nor observe the rules of any
order. The king has, however, obliged them so far to keep up the form of a
religious house, that none of the merchants who live in it are allowed to marry
without removing. The principal branch of trade carried on at Bergen, are
herrings, cod, and stock fish, for which there is a great vent in Muscovy,
Sweden, Poland, Denmark, Germany, Holland, and other parts of Europe.

BISHOP OF BERGEN.
SECT. XCIII. OF THE PERSONS, DRESS, EMPLOYMENTS, AND CUSTOMS OF THE
INHABITANTS OF NORWAY.
THE Norwegians are generally tall, well made, and lively; yet those on the
coast are neither so tall nor so robust as those who inhabit the mountains; but
are remarkable for being fatter, and having rounder faces. The people in
general are brisk and ingenious; which appears from the peasants not employing
any hatters, shoemakers, tailors, tanners, weavers, carpenters, smiths, or
joiners; for all these trades are exercised in every farmhouse; and they think
a boy can never be a useful member of society, nor a good man, without making
himself master of all these arts. They are remarkable for their civility and
willingness to serve every one, and a traveller is seldom suffered to pay for
his lodging; for they think it their duty to treat the stranger as well as it
is in their power, and look upon it as an honor done them, if he accepts of
their civilities. The peasant, however, never gives the upper end of the table
to the greatest guest that ever comes under his roof; for he thinks that place
belongs only to himself.

They keep open house for three weeks at Christmas, during which their tables
are spread and loaded with the best provisions they can afford. At
Christmas-eve their hospitality extends to the very birds; and, for their use,
they hang on a pole at the barn-door, an unthreshed sheaf of corn, which draws
thither the sparrows and other small birds.

The inhabitants of the trading towns live, with respect to provisions, much in
the same manner as the Danes; but the peasants keep close to the manners of
their forefathers. Thin oat-cakes are their common bread; but upon particular
occasions, as weddings or entertainments, they have rye-bread. If grain be
scarce, which generally happens after a severe winter, the peasants have
recourse to a disagreeable method of preserving life, by boiling and drying the
bark of fir-trees, mixing it with a little oatmeal, and making it into a kind
of bread. Even in times of plenty they eat a little of it, that they may think
it less disagreeable in a time of scarcity.

The lakes and rivers furnish the people with plenty of fresh water fish, and
the mountains with game. For their winter stock they kill cows, sheep, and
goats; part of which they pickle and smoke, and some of it they cut in thin
slices, sprinkle it with salt, then dry it in the wind, and eat it like hung
beef. They are fond of brandy, and of smoking and chewing tobacco.

The Norwegians who live in towns, have nothing remarkable in their dress; but
the peasants do not trouble themselves about fashions. Those called
strile-farmers have their breeches and stockings of one piece. They have a wide
loose jacket, made of coarse woollen cloth, as are also their waistcoats: and
those who would appear fine, have the seams covered with cloth of a different
color. The peasants of one parish are remarkable for wearing black cloths
edged with red; another for wearing all black. The dress of another parish is
white edged with black. Others wear black and yellow. And thus the inhabitants
of almost every parish vary in the color of their clothes. They wear a flapped
hat, or a little brown, gray, or black cap, made quite round, and the seams
ornamented with black ribbons. They have shoes of a peculiar construction
without heels, consisting of two pieces; the upper leather fits close to the
foot, to which the sole is joined by a great many plaits and folds. When they
travel, and in the winter, they wear a sort of half boots that reach up to the
calf of the leg, and are laced on one side; and when they go on the rocks in
the snow, they put on snow shoes. But as these are troublesome when they have a
great way to travel, they put on skaits about as broad as the foot, but six or
eight feet long, and pointed before. They are covered underneath with
seal-skin, to that the smooth grain of the hair turns backward to the heel.
With these snow skaits they slide about on the snow as well as they can upon
the ice, and faster than any horse.

The peasant never wears a neck cloth, or any thing of that kind, except when
he is dressed; for his neck and breast are always open, and he lets the snow
beat into his bosom. On the contrary, he covers his veins, binding a woollen
fillet round his wrists. About their body they wear a broad leathern belt,
ornamented with unequal brass plates; to this hangs a brass chain, which holds
their large knife, gimblet, and other tackle.

The women at church, and in genteel assemblies, dress themselves in jackets
laced close, and have leathern girdles, with silver ornaments about them. They
also wear a silver chain three or four times round the neck, with a gilt medal
hanging at the end of it. Their handerchiefs and caps are almost covered with
small silver, brass, and tin-plates, buttons, and large rings, such as they
wear on their fingers, to which they hang again a percel of small ones, which
make a jingling noise when they move. A maiden-bride has her hair plaited and
hung as full as possible with such kind of trinkets, as also her clothes. For
this purpose they get all the ornaments they can.

The peasants are generally busied in cutting wood, felling and floating
timber, burning charcoal, and extricating tar. Great numbers are employed in
the mines, and at the furnaces and stamping mills; and also in navigation and
fishing, besides hunting and shooting; for every body is at liberty to pursue
the game, especially in the mountains, where every peasant may make use of what
arms he pleases.

BISHOP OF BERGEN.
SECT. XCIV. OF THE HOUSES OF THE NORWEGIANS.
THEIR houses are, in general, built of fir and pine-trees, the whole trunks of
which are only chopped even to make them lie close, and then laid one upon
another, and fastened with mortices at the corners. These trunks are left round
as they grew, both on the inside and outside of the houses, and are frequently
boarded over and painted, especially in the trading towns, which gives them a
genteel appearance.

In the country villages the houses are built at a distance from each other,
with their fields and grounds about them. The storehouse for the provisions is
generally at a distance from the dwelling house, for fear of fire, and placed
high upon poles, to keep the provisions dry and preserve them from mice and all
kinds of vermin. The kitchen stands also separate, as do the barns, hay-loft,
cow-houses, stables, and the like. A farm has likewise commonly a mill
belonging to it, situated by some rivulet, besides a smith's forge; for every
farmer, as has been observed, is his own smith. Up the country, where timber
for building is but of little value, there is many a farm-house as large as a
nobleman's seat. It is frequently two stories high, and has a raised balcony in
the front. The additional building resemble a little village. The common
farmhouses have, however, only the ground-floor, and no other window but a
square hole in the wall, which is left open in summer; but in winter, or in wet
weather, is filled up with a wooden frame, covered with the inward membrane of
some animal. This is very strong, and as transparent as a bladder. This hole,
which is as high as it can be placed, also answers the purpose of a chimney, by
serving to let out the smoke.

Under the light hole generally stands a long thick table, with benches of the
same wood, and at the upper end is the high seat which belongs to the master
only. In towns these houses are covered with tiles; but in the country, the
people lay over the boards the (...) bark of birch-trees, which will not decay
in many years. They cover this again three or four inches thick with turf, on
which good grass always grows.

BISHOP OF BERGEN.
SECT. XCV. OF THE ANIMALS OF NORWAY.
AMONG the animals we shall begin with the horses, which are better for riding
than drawing. Their walk is easy, they are full of spirit, and are very sure
footed. When they mount or descend a steep cliff, on stones like steps, they
first tread gently with one foot, to try if the stone they touch be fast; and
in this they must be left to themselves, or the best rider will run the risk of
his neck. But when they are to go down a very steep and slippery place, they,
in a surprising manner draw their hind legs together under them, and slide
down. They show a great deal of courage in fighting with the wolves and bears,
which they are often obliged to do; for when the horse perceives any of them
near him, and has a mare or gelding with him, he places them behind him,
attacks his antagonist by striking at him with his forelegs, and usually comes
off conqueror.

The Norway cows are generally of a yallow color, as are also the horses. They
are small, but their flesh is fine grained, juicy, and well tasted.

The sheep here are small, and resemble those of Denmark. The goats, in many
places, run wild, winter and summer, in the fields, till they are ten or twelve
years old; and when the peasant, who owns them, is to catch them, he must
either do it by some snare or shoot them. They are so bold, that if a wolf
approaches them, they stay to receive him, and if they have dogs with them,
they will resist a whole herd. They frequently attack the snakes, and when they
are bit by them, not only kill their antagonists, but eat them: after which
they are never known to die of the bite, though they are ill for several days.
The owner warms their own milk, and washes the sore with it.

Near Rostad, is a flat and naked field on which no vegetable will grow. The
soil is almost white, with gray stripes, and has somewhat of so peculiarly
poisonous nature, that though all other animals may safely pass over it, a goat
or a kid no sooner sets its foot upon it, than it drops down, stretches out its
leg, its, tongue hangs out of its mouth, and it expires if it has not instant
help.

There are a few hogs in Norway, and not many of the common deer; but the
hares, which in the cold season change from brown or gray to a snow white are
very cheap in winter.

The hurtful beasts are the bears and wolves, the lynx, vast numbers of white,
red and black foxes, and the glutton, a creature which few other countries know
any otherwise than by report. This animal receives its name from its voracious
appetite. In size and shape ^e has some resemblance to a long-bodied dog, with
thick legs, sharp claws and teeth. His color is black, variegated with brown
and yallowish streaks. He has the boldness to attack every beast he can
possibly conquer; and if he finds a carcass six times as big as himself, he
does not leave off eating as long as there is a mouthful left. When thus
gorged, he presses and squeezes himself between two trees that stand near
together, and thus empties himself of what he has not time to digest. As his
skin shines like damask, and is covered with soft hair, it is very precious. It
is therefore well worth the huntsman's while to kill him without wounding his
skin, which is done by shooting him with a bow and blunt arrows.

The marten is also hunted on account of its skin, as are likewise the squirrel
and the ermine, both of which are therefore shot with blunt arrows. I am in
doubt whether the ermine be different in kind from the Danish weasel. Its
valuable skin is of a beautiful white, and it has a black spot on the tail. The
ermines run after (...) like cats, and drag away what they catch, particularly
eggs, which are their nicest delicacy.

As to the reptiles, there are neither land-snakes nor toads beyond the
temperate zone; and even those snakes on the extremities of the temperate
climate, are less poisonous than in more southern countries. Lizards are here
of various colors, as brown, green, and striped. Those that are green are
found in the fields, and the others in the cracks and holes of rocks.

Among the fowls are most of those seen in the west of Europe, and some that
seem peculiar to this country; of which last, the most remarkable is the
farncolin, an excellent land bird, which serves the Norwegians instead of the
pheasant, its flesh being white, firm, and of a delicious taste.

In short, there are here such incredible numbers of sea and land fowls near
the rocks on the seashore, that they sometimes obscure the sight of the
heavens for many miles out at sea; so that one would imagine all the fowls of
the universe were gathered together in one flock.

BISHOP OF BERGEN.
SECT. XCVI. OF LAPLAND.
WE took a journey from the town of Varanger into the country of Lapland, to
try whether any trade could be carried on with the peasants there. Setting out
early in the morning, we took with us some cloth and tobacco to trade with, and
salt beef and pork for our provisions. We engaged three of the inhabitants of
Varanger to attend us, both to show us the way, and to help to carry our goods
and provisions to the next village. We followed them through woods, mountains,
and valleys, without meeting any living creature, till about four o'clock in
the afternoon, when we perceived two white bears of a prodigious size approach,
as we thought, to devour us; but our guides observing the terror we were in,
bid us not be afraid, but only to have our arms ready for defense, in case they
approached too near us. Upon which we cocked and primed our pieces, and
prepared our flints. But whether the bears were frightened at the fire which
struck from our flints, or smelt our powder, they soon fled away so (...) they
were presently out of sight.

As we were descending a mountain about an hour before night, we perceived at
the foot of it a dozen houses at a considerable distance from each other, and a
little beyond them a heard of beasts like stags, which our guides told us were
reindeer. On our arrival at the village, our guides conducted us to a hut,
when being very weary, we were glad to rest ourselves; for we had made a long
journey in a very bad way, with our luggage on our backs, which tired and
encumbered us.

We presented our host with a piece of roll tobacco, and he received it with
extraordinary joy, assuring us, he had not had so valuable a present in nine
months before; and in return he brought out his brandy bottle, some rein-deer's
flesh dressed without salting, and some dried fish, which we gave to our
guides, and supped ourselves upon the provisions we had brought with us. Having
made a hearty meal we went to sleep upon bear's skins, after the fashion of the
country.

In the morning we asked our host if he had nothing to barter with us for cloth
and tobacco. To which he answered, that he had some skins of wolves, foxes, and
white squrrils, and that his neighbors had some of the same commodities, which
they would gladly exchange with us. We bid him, by our interpreters, bring out
his skins; and if he had any clothes made of reindeer skins, we told him we
would deal with him for four suits, which we wanted to keep us warm.
Accordingly he brought forth his merchandise, which we bought, and paid him
part in tobacco, and part in cloth. We also trucked with his neighbors as long
as they had any thing worth buying.

TRAVELS THROUGH LAPLAND. SECT. XCVII. THE MANNER OF TRAVELING IN SLEDGES
DRAWN BY REINDEER.
BEING desirous of continuing our journey, we begged our host to lend us some
reindeer to carry us farther up the country, to which he readily consented;
and taking down a horn that hung up in his cottage, went out and blew it. Upon
which fourteen or fifteen of those animals came running toward the hut, six of
which he immediately yoked to six sledges. In one of them we put our
merchandise and provisions; another we assigned to one of our guides who
understood the language of the Muscovite Laplanders, and that of ^he Kilops,
dismissing the two other inhabitants of Varanger, after having first paid them
in tobacco for their trouble. We then put on our Lapland clothes, and each of
us lying down in his sledge, was covered with a bear's skin. At the back of the
sledge were two girths made of rein-deer's skin leather, in which we thrust our
arms up to the shoulders to keep ourselves steady; and we had each a stick with
a strong ferrel, in order to support the sledge, if it should be in danger of
overturning against the stumps of trees, or stones lying in the way.

We were no sooner ready to set out, than our host muttered some words in the
ear of the reindeer; and when I afterward enquired of the guide what he meant
by it, he gravely replied with the utmost simplicity, that it was to tell them
whither they should carry us. Custom, however, had made this muttering so
familiar to them, that when our host had gone to all the six, they set off with
amazing swiftness, and continued their pace over hills and dales without
keeping any beaten path, till seven o'clock in the evening; when they brought
us to a lage village situated between two mountains, on the borders of a great
lake. Stopping at the fourth house in the place, and beating the ground with
their feet, the master of the house came with some of his servants to take us
out of the sledges, and unharness our cattle, one of them bringing out a little
juniper can filled with brandy, of which he gave each of us a brimmer out of a
larger vessel that was also made of juniper wood. This it seems was to revive
our spirits, our guide having informed him, that we were frightened at our
being drawn so swiftly by these animals, having never been used to that way of
traveling.

The reindeer is of the color of the stag, and is not much bigger. The horns
of this animal are somewhat higher than those of the stag, but more crooked,
hairy, and not so well furnished with branches. Of the milk of the females they
make good butter and cheese. These animals, indeed, constitute the greatest,
and almost the only riches of the Finlaplanders. In Finmark, their are vast
numbers of them both wild and tame, and many a man there has from six or eight
hundred to a thousand of these useful creatures which never come under cover.
They follow him wherever he is pleased to ramble, and, when they are put to a
sledge, transport his goods from one place to another. They provide for
themselves, and live chiefly on moss, and on the buds and leaves of trees. They
support themselves on very little nourishment, and are neat, clean, and
entertaining creatures.

It is remarkable, that when the reindeer sheds his horns, and others rise in
their stead, they appear at first covered with a skin; and till they are of a
finger's length, are so soft, that they may be cut with a knife like a sausage,
and are delicate eating even raw; therefore the huntsmen, when far outin the
country, and pinched for want of food, eat them, and find that they satisfy
both their hunger and thirst. When the horn grows bigger, there breeds within
the skin a worm which eats away the root.

The reindeer has over his eyelids a kind of skin, through which he peeps,
when otherwise, in the hard shows, he would be obliged to shut his eyes
entirely; a singular instance of the benevolence of the great Creator, in
providing for the wants of each creature, according to its destined manner of
living.

When we got out of our sledges, our host conducted us into his hut, which,
like the rest of the cottages in the place, was very small, low, and covered
with the bark of trees, the light entering in at a hole at the top. The people
here were clothed much like those of Varanger, their apparel being of the same
materials and make, but longer. The women were also dressed in reindeer skins,
with the hair outward.

We gave our host a piece of our roll tobacco, about two inches long, with
which he was highly pleased, and in the most hearty manner returned us his
thanks. We also gave a piece, not quite so long, to each of the inhabitants of
the place to make them our friends, and the better to secure ourselves against
their attempts; for they seemed more uncivilized than those we last dealt with.
We again supped on the provisions we had brought with us, and our guide ate
some of our host's ^alt fish and fresh reindeer venison. The inhabitants
talked a language very different from that used at Varanger; but our guide had
been often in the country and understood them.

TRAVELS THROUGH LAPLAND. SECT. XCVIII. THE CEREMONIES OF A LAPLAND FUNERAL.
OUR landlord asked us whether we would accompany him to the funeral of one of
his neighbors who had been dead about four hours. We were glad of this
opportunity of seeing their funeral ceremony, and therefore went with him to
the house of the deceased; when we saw the corpse taken from the bear's skins
on which it lay, and removed into a wooden coffin, by six of his most intimate
friends, the body being first wrapped in linen, and the face and hands only
left bare. In one hand they put a purse with money in it, to pay the fee of the
porter of the gate of (...), and in the other a certificate signed by a priest,
directed to St. Peter, to certify that he was a good Christian, and ought to be
admitted into heaven. At the head of the coffin was placed a picture of St.
Nicholas, who was one of the seven deacons mentioned in the Acts of the
Apostles, a Saint greatly reverenced in all parts of Muscovy, where he is
supposed to be a particular friend of the dead. On which account his picture is
always fixed near a corpse, instead of a crucifix. He is represented in a
pilgrim's habit, with a long robe, a broad girdle about his waist, and a staff
in his hand.

They also put into the coffin a rundlet of brandy, some dried fish and
reindeer venison to support the deceased on his journey. They then lighted
some fir tree roots, piled up at a convenient distance from the coffin, wept,
howled, and made a variety of strange gestures, assuming a thousand different
attitudes to show the extravagance of their sorrow.

When this noise and these gesticulations were over, they marched round the
corpse several times in procession, asking the deceased why he died? Whether he
was angry with his wife? Whether he stood in need of meat, drink, or clothes?
Whether he had not succeeded when fishing, or had lost his game when hunting?
They then resumed their howling, and stampted with all the signs of distraction.

One of the priests who assisted at the solemnity frequently sprinkled holy
water upon the corpse, as did all the mourners.

Being now almost deafened with noise, and wearied with looking on these
barbarous rites, we left our landlord behind us, and returned to his cottage,
where we found his wife at home. She had made a sally from the place in which
her husband had confined her on our arrival, and no sooner saw us, than
supposing he was in our company, would have retired to her corner; but our
interpreter letting her know that the goodman was at the funeral, and would not
return for some time, she staid and viewed us all round, one after another,
drew her seat near us, and showed us a bonnet of her own embroidering, very
curiously performed with tinsel thread. The wives of the Muscovite Laplanders
make clothes for themselves, their husbands, and their children, and at the
edges they are all embroidered with that thread. She was handsome, well shaped,
and appeared to be good-humoured, and well pleased with us.

While our host was busied about the funeral, we pulled out some of our
provisions, and gave our landlady some of every sort to taste. She liked them
all, especially the gingerbread; but having drank two or three glasses of
brandy, withdrew to her place of confinement, for fear of her husband's return.
Had he found her among us it would have raised his jealousy.

When he came home, he obliged us to take a cup or two more, to smoke a pipe,
and to sup with him; for he brought such provisions as he thought would be most
grateful to our palates, particularly salt butter which we eat with bread; and
as our guide would not taste any thing that was salt, he got him some dried
fish, and some bear's flesh, which he broiled on the coals.

All the cottages in this village were, like those we had observed in other
places, built of wood and covered with turf, but they were handsomer than any
we had yet seen, being both within and without adorned with fish bones,
curiously inlaid.

TRAVELS THROUGH LAPLAND. SECT. XCIX. ON THE INTENSE COLD EXPERIENCED BY SOME
GENTLEMEN, SENT BY THE KING OF FRANCE, TO DETERMINE THE FIGURE OF THE EARTH AT
THE POLAR CIRCLE.
IN order to ascertain the distance between the two signals we had erected last
summer, we were under the necessity of being upon the ice of a river in
Lapland, at the distance of above three leagues in a country where the cold was
growing every day more intense. On the twenty-first of December this work was
begun. In this season the sun but just showed itself above the horizon toward
noon; but the long twilights, the whiteness of the snow, and the meteors
continually blazing in the sky, furnished us light enough to work four or five
hours every day.

We lodged at the house of the Curate of Oswer-Tornea, and at eleven in the
forenoon began our survey, attended by so great an equipage, that the
Laplanders, drawn by the novelty of the sight, came down from the neighboring
mountains. We separated into two bands, each of which carried our rods of fir,
each thirty feet long. I shall say nothing of the fatigues and dangers of this
operation. Judge what it must be to walk in snow two feet deep, with heavy
poles in our hands which we were obliged to be continually laying on the snow,
and lifting again, -- in a cold so extreme, that whenever we would taste a
little brandy, the only thing that could be kept liquid, our tongues and lips
froze to the cup, and came away bloody; -- in a cold that congealed the fingers
of some of us, and threatened us with still more dismal accidents. While the
extremities of our bodies were thus freezing, the rest, through excessive toil,
was bathed in sweat. Brandy did not quench our thirst; we must have recourse to
deep wells dug through the ice, which were shut almost as soon as opened, and
from which the water could scarcely be conveyed unfrozen to our lips. Thus were
we forced to run the hazard of the dangerous contrast which ice-water might
produce in our heated bodies.

Our work however advanced apace; for six days labor brought it to within
about five hundred toises, where we had not been able to plant our stakes soon
enough. Three of the Gentlemen therefore undertook this office, while the Abb^
Outhier and I went upon a pretty extraordinary adventure.

We had last summer omitted an observation of small moment. This was taking the
height of an object that we made use of in measuring the top of Avasaxa: and to
perform this, I undertook to go with a quadrant to the top of the mountain, so
scrupulously careful were we that nothing should be wanting to the perfection
of the work. Imagine a very high mountain, full of rocks, that lie hid in a
prodigious quantity of snow, as well as their cavities, wherein you may sink
into a crust of snow as into an abyss, and the undertaking will scarce appear
possible. Yet there are two ways of performing it; one by walking, or rather
sliding along upon two strait boards, eight feet in length, which the
Finlanders and Laplanders use to keep them from ^inking into the snow. But this
way of walking requires long practice. The other is by trusting yourself to a
reindeer used to such journeys.

This first part of our journey was performed in a moment; for our ^light over
the plain beaten road from the curate's house to the foot of the mountain can
be compared only to that of birds. And though the mountain, where there was no
track, greatly abated the speed of our reindeer, they got at length to the top
of it, where we immediately made the observation for which we came. In the mean
while our reindeer had dug deep holes in the snow, where they browzed on the
moss that covers the rocks; and the Laplanders had lighted a great fire, and we
presently joined them to warm ourselves. The cold was so extreme, that the heat
of the fire could reach only to a very small distance. As the snow just by it
melted, it was immediately froze again, forming a hearth of ice all round.

Our journey up hill had been painful; but now our concern was lest our return
should be too rapid. We were to proceed down the steep in conveyances, which
though partly sunk in the snow, slid on notwithstanding, drawn by animals,
whose fury in the plain we had already tried, and who, though sinking to their
bellies in the snow, would endeavor to free themselves by the swiftness of
their flight. We very soon found ourselves at the bottom of the hill. The next
day we finished our survey, and made all possible haste back to Tornea, to
secure ourselves in the best manner we were able from the increasing severity
of the season.

The town of Tornea, at our arrival on the 30th of December, had really a most
frightful aspect. Its little houses were buried to the tops in snow, which, had
there been any daylight, must have effectually shut it out. But the snow
continually falling, or ready to fall for the most part hid the sun the few
moments he might have appeared at midday.

In the month of January the cold was increased to that extremity, that Mr.
Reaumur's mercurial thermometers, which at Paris, in the great frost of 1709,
it was thought strange to see fall to 14 degrees below the freezing point, were
now got down to 37. The spirit of wine in the others was frozen. If we opened
the door of a warm room, the external air instantly converted all the vapor in
it into snow, whirling it round in while vortexes. If we went abroad, we felt
as if the air was tearing our breasts in pieces; and the cracking of the wood,
of which the houses are built, as if it split by the violence of the frost,
continually alarmed us with an increase of cold. The solitude of the streets
was as great as if the people had been all dead. In this country you may often
see people who have lost an arm or a leg by the frost. The cold, which is
always very great, sometimes increases by such violent and sudden fits, as are
almost infallibly fatal to those who are so unhappy as to be exposed to it; and
sometimes there rise sudden tempests of snow, which are still more dangerous.

The winds seem to blow from all quarters at once, and drive about the snow
with such fury, that all the roads are in a moment rendered invisible. Dreadful
is the situation of a person surprised in the fields by such a storm. His
knowledge of the country, and even the mark he may have taken by the trees,
cannot avail him. He is blinded by the snow; and if he attempts to find his way
home, is generally lost.

In short, during the whole winter the cold was so excessive, that on the 7th
of April, at five in the morning, the thermometer was fallen to twenty
divisions below the point of freezing, though every afternoon it rose two or
three divisions above it; a difference in the height not much less than that
which the greatest heat and cold felt at Paris usually produce in that
instrument. Thus, in the space of twenty-four hours, we had all the variety
felt in the temparate zones in the compass of a whole year.

MAUPERTUIS.
SECT. C. OF THE BEAUTY OF THE NORTHERN LIGHTS IN LAPLAND.
THOUGH in this climate the earth is horrible, the heavens present most
beautiful prospects. The short days are no sooner closed, than fires of a
thousand colors and figures sight up the sky, as if designed to compensate for
the absence of the sun in this season. These fires have not here as in the more
southerly climates, any constant situation. Though a luminous arch is often
seen fixed toward the north, they seem more frequently to possess the whole
extent of the hemisphere. Sometimes they begin in the form of a great scarf of
bright light, with its extremities upon the horizon, which with a motion
resembling that of a fishing-net, glides swiftly up the sky, preserving in this
motion a direction nearly perpendicular to the meridian; and most commonly
after those preludes, all the lights unite at the zenith, and form the top of a
kind of crown. Ar^s, like those seen in France toward the north, are here
frequently situated toward the south, and often toward both the north and
south, at once. Their summits approach each other, and the distance of their
extremities widens toward the horizon. I have seen some of the opposite arcs,
whose summits almost join at the zenith; and both the one and the other have
frequently several concentric arcs beyond it. Their tops are all placed in the
direction of the meridian, though with a little declination to the west, which
I did not find to be constant, and which is sometimes sensible.

It would be endless to mention all the different figures these meteors assume,
and the various motions with which they are agitated. Their motion is most
commonly like that of a pair of colors waved in the air, and the different
tints of their light gives them the appearance of so many vast streamers of
changeable (...). Sometimes they line a part of the sky with scarlet.

On the 18th of December, I saw a phenomenon of this kind, that in the midst
of all the wonders to which I was now every day accustomed, raised my
admiration. To the south a great space of the sky appeared tinged with so
lively a red, that the whole constellation of Orion looked as if it had been
dipped in blood. This light, which was at first fixed, soon moved, and changing
into other colors, violet and blue, settled into a dome, whose top stood a
little to the south-west of the zenith. The moon shone bright, but did not in
the least efface it.

In this country, where there are lights of so many different colors, I never
saw but two that were red; and such are taken for presages of some great
misfortune. After all, when people gaze at these phenomenon with an
unphilosophic eye, it is not surprising if they discover in them armies
engaged, fiery chariots, and a thousand other prodigies.

During the winter we repeated many of our observations, and calculations, and
found the most evident proofs of the earth's being flatted at the poles. Mean
time the sun came nearer, or rather no more quitted us. It was now May, when it
was curious enough to see that great luminary enlighten for so long a time a
whole horizon of ice, and to see summer in the heavens, while winter still kept
possession of the earth. We were in the morning of that long day of several
months; yet the sun, with all his power, wrought no change either upon the ice
or snow.

On the 6th of May it began to rain, and some water appeared on the ice of the
river. At noon a little snow melted, but in the evening winter resumed his
rights. At length, on the 10th, the earth which had been so long hid, began to
appear; some high points that were exposed to the sun showed themselves, as the
tops of the mountains did after the deluge, and all the fowls of the country
returned. At the beginning of June, winter yielding up the earth and sea, we
prepared for our departure back to Stockholm, and on the 9th, some of us set
out by land, and others by sea.

MAUPERTUIS.
SECT. CI. OF ST. ANDREWS IN SCOTLAND.
I HAD desired to visit the Hebrides, or Western Islands of Scotland so long,
that I scarcely remember how the wish was originally excited; and was in the
Autumn of the year 1773 induced to undertake the journey, by finding in Mr.
Boswell a companion, whose accuteness would help my enquiry, and whose gaiety
of conversation and civility of manners are sufficient to counteract the
inconveniences of travel, in countries less hospitable than we have passed.

On the 18th of August we left Edinburgh, a city too well known to admit
description, and directed our course northward, along the eastern coast of
Scotland, accompanied the first day by another gentleman, who could stay with
us only long enough to show us how much we lost at separation.

As we crossed the Frith of Fourth, our curiosity was attracted by Inch Keith,
a small island, which neither of my companions had ever visited, though, lying
within their view, it had all their lives solicited their notice. Here, by
climbing with some difficulty over shattered crags, we made the first
experiment of unfrequented coasts. Inch Kieth is nothing more than a rock
covered with a thin layer of earth, not wholly bare of grass, and very fertile
of thistles. A small herd of cows graze annually upon it in the summer. It
seems never to have afforded to man or beast a permanent habitation.

We left this little island with our thoughts employed a while on the different
appearance that it would have made if it had been placed at the same distance
from London, with the same facility of appoach; with what emulation of price a
few rocky acres would have been purchased, and with what expensive industry
they would have been cultivated and adorned.

When we landed, we found our chaise ready, and passed throug Kinghorn,
Kirkaldy, and Cowpar, places not unlike the small trading market towns in those
parts of England where commerce and manufactures have not yet produced opulence.

Though we were yet in the most populous part of Scotland, and at so small a
distance from the capital, we met few passengers.

The roads are neither rough nor dirty; (...) it affords a southern stranger a
new kind of pleasure to travel so commodiously without the interruption of
tollgates.

At an hour somewhat late, we came to St. Andrews, a city once archiepiscopal;
where that university still subsists in which philosophy was formerly taught by
Buchanan, whose name has as fair a claim to immortality as can be conferred by
modern latinity, and perhaps a fairer than the instability of vernacular
languages admits.

We found, that by the interposition of some invisible friend, lodgings had
been provided for us at the house of one of the professors, whose easy civility
quickly made us forget that we were strangers; and in the whole time of our
stay we were gratified by every mode of kindness, and entertained with all the
elegance of lettered hospitality.

In the morning we arose to perambulate a city, which only history shows to
have once flourished, and surveyed the ruins of ancient magnificence, of which
even the ruins cannot long be visible, unless some care be taken to preserve
them; and where is the pleasure of preserving such mournful memorials? They
have been, till very lately, so much neglected, that every man carried away the
stones who fancied that he wanted them.

The (...), of which the foundation may be still traced, and a small part of
the wall is standing, appears to have been a spacious and majestic building,
and not unsuitable to the primacy of the kingdom. Of the architecture, the poor
remains can hardly exhibit, even to an artist, a sufficient specimen. It was
demolished, it is well known, in the tumult and violence of Knox's reformation.

Not far from the Cathedral, on the margin of the water, stands a fragment of
the castle, in which the archbishop anciently resided. It was never very large,
and was built with more attention to security than pleasure. Cardinal Beatou^
is said to have had workmen employed in improving its fortifications, at the
time when he was murdered by the ruffians of reformation, in the manner of
which Knox has given what he himself calls a merry narrative.

The change of religion in Scotland, eager and vehement as it was, raised an
epidemical ^nthusiasm, compounded of sullen scrupulousness and warlike
ferocity, which, in a people whom idleness resigned to their own thoughts, and
who conversing only with each other, suffered no dilution of their zeal from
the gradual influx of new opinions, was long transmitted in its full strength
from the old to the young, but by trade and intercourse with England, is now
visibly abating, and giving way too fast to that laxity of practice and
indifference of opinion, (...) which men, not sufficiently instructed to find
the middle point, too easily shelter themselves from rigor and constraint.

The city of St. Andrews, when it had lost its archiepiscopal pre-eminence,
gradually decayed. One of its streets is now lost; and in those that remain,
there is the silence and solitude of inactive indigence and gloomy depopulation.

The university, within a few years, consisted of three colleges, but is now
reduced to two; the college of St. Leonard being lately dissolved by the sale
of its buildings and the appropriation of its revenues to the professors of the
two others. The chapel of the alienated college is yet standing, a fabric not
inelegant of external structure; but I was always, by some civil excuse,
hindered from entering it. A decent attempt, as I was since told, has been made
to convert it into a kind of green house, by planting its area with shrubs.
This new method of gardening is unsuccessful: the plants do not hitherto
prosper. To what use it will next be put, I have no pleasure in conjecturing.
It is something that its present state is at least not ostentatiously
displayed. Where there is yet shame, there may in time be virtue.

The dissolution of St. Leonard's College was doubtless necessary* but of that
necessity there is reason to complain. (...) is surely not without just
reproach, that a nation, of which the commerce is hourly extending and the
wealth increasing, denies any participation of its prosperity to its literary
societies; and while its merchants or its nobles are raising palaces, suffers
its universities to moulder into dust.

Of the two colleges yet standing, one is by the institution of its founder
appropriated to divinity. It is said to be capable of containing fifty
students; but more than one must occupy a chamber. The library, which is of
late erection, is not very spacious, but elegant and luminous.

The doctor, by whom it was shown, hoped to irritate or subdue my English
vanity, by telling me, that we had no such repository of books in England.

St. Andrews seems to be a place eminently adapted to study and education,
being situated in a populous, yet a cheap country, and exposing the minds and
manners of young men neither to the levity and dissoluteness of a capital city,
nor to the gross luxury of a town of commerce, places naturally unpropitious to
learning. In one the desire of knowledge easily gives way to the love of
pleasure, and in the other, is in danger of yielding to the love of money.

The students however are represented as at this time not exceeding a hundred.
Perhaps it may be some obstruction to their increase, that there is no
Episcopal chapel in the place. I saw no reason for imputing their paucity to
the present professors; nor can the expense of an academical education be very
reasonably objected. A student of the highest class may keep his annual
session, or as the English call it, his term, which lasts seven months, for
about fifteen pounds, and one of lower rank for less than ten; in which board,
lodging, and instruction are all included.

The chief magistrate resident in the university, answering to our
vice chancellor, and to the rector magnificus on the continent, had commonly
the title of Lord Rector; but being addressed only as Mr. Rector in an
inauguratory speech by the present chancellor, he has fallen from his former
dignity of style. Lordship was very liberally annexed by our ancestors to any
station or character of dignity. They said, the Lord General and Lord
Ambassador; so we still say, my Lord, to the judge upon the circuit, and yet
retain in our Liturgy the Lords of the Council.

In walking among the ruins of religious buildings, we came to two vaults, over
which had formerly stood the house of the sub-prior. One of the vaults was
inhabited by an old woman, who claimed the right of abode there, and the widow
of a man whose ancestors had possessed the same gloomy mansion for no less than
four generations. The right, however it begun, was considered as established by
legal prescription, and the old woman lives undisturbed. She thinks however
that she has a claim to something more than sufferance; for as her husband's
name was Bruce, she is allied to royality, and told Mr. Boswell, that when
there were persons of quality in the place, she was distingushed by some
notice; that indeed she is now neglected, but she spins a thread, has the
company of her cat, and is troublesome to nobody.

Having now seen whatever this ancient city offered to our curiosity, we left
it with good wishes, having reason to be highly pleased with the attention that
was paid us. But whoever surveys the world must see many things that give him
pain. The kindness of the professors did not contribute to abate the uneasy
remembrance of an university declining, a college alienated, and a church
profaned and hastening to the ground.

St. Andrews indeed has formerly suffered more atrocious ravages and more
extensive destruction; but recent evils affect with greater force. We were
reconciled to the sight of archiepiscopal ruins. The distance of a calamity
from the present time seems to preclude the mind from contract or sympathy.
Events long past are barely known; they are not considered. We read with as
little emotion the violence of Knox and his followers, as the irruptions of
Alaric and the Goths. Had the university been destroyed two centuries ago, we
should not have regretted it; but to see it pining in decay and struggling for
life, fills the mind with mournful images and ineffectual wishes.

DR. JOHNSON.
SECT. CII. OF INVERNESS.
INVERNES may properly be called the capital of the Highlands. Hither the
inhabitants of the inland parts come to be supplied with what they cannot make
for themselves. Hither the young nymphs of, the mountains and valleys are sent
for education, and as far as my observation has reached are not sent in vain.

Inverness was the last place which had a regular communication by high roads
with the southern counties. All the ways beyond it have, I believe, been made
by the soldiers in this century. At Inverness therefore Cromwell, when he
subdued Scotland, stationed a garrison, as at the boundary of the Highlands.
The soldiers seem to have incorporated afterward with the inhabitants, and to
have peopled the place with an English race; for the language of this town has
been long considered as particularly elegant.

Here is a castle, called the castle of Macbeth, the walls of which are yet
standing. It was no very capacious edifice, but stands upon a rock so high and
steep, that I think it was once not accessible, but by the help of ladders or a
bridge. Opposite to it, on another hill, was a fort built by Cromwell, now
totally demolished; for no faction of Scotland loved the name of Cromwell, or
had any desire to continue his memory.

Yet what the Romans did to other nations, was in a great degree done by
Cromwell to the Scots. He civilized them by conquest, and introduced by useful
violence the arts of peace. I was told at Aberdeen, that the people learned
from Cromwell's soldiers to make shoes and to plant kail.

How they lived without kail, it is not easy to guess. They cultivated hardly
any other plant for common tables, and when they had not kail, they probably
had nothing. The numbers that go barefoot are still sufficient to show that
shoes may be spared. They are not yet considered as necessaries of life; for
tall boys, not otherwise meanly dressed, run without them in the streets and in
the islands. The sons of gentlemen pass several of the first years with naked
feet.

I know not whether it be not peculiar to the Scots to have attained the
liberal, without the manual arts; to have excelled in ornamental knowledge, and
to have wanted not only the elegancies, but the conveniences of common life.
Literature soon after its revival found its way to Scotland, and from the
middle of the sixteenth century, almost to the middle of the seventeenth, the
politer studies were very dilligently pursued. The Latin poetry of Delici^
Poetorum Scotorum would have done honor to any nation; at least till the
publication of May's Supplement, the English had very little to oppose.

Yet men thus ingenious and inquisitive were content to live in total ignorance
of the trade by which human wants are supplied, and to supply them by the
grossest means. Till the Union made them acquainted with English manners, the
culture of their lands was unskilful, and their domestic life uninformed.

Since they have known that their condition was capable of improvement, their
progress in useful knowledge has been rapid and uniform. What remains to be
done they will quickly do, and then wonder, like me, why that which was so
necessary and so easy was so long delayed. But they must be forever content to
owe to the English that elegance and culture, which, if they had been vigilant
and active, perhaps the English might have owed to them.

Here the appearance of life began to alter. I had seen a few women with plaids
at Aberdeen; but at Inverness, the Highland manners are common. There is I
think a kirk, in which only the erse language is used. There is likewise an
English chapel, but meanly built, where on Sunday we saw a very decent
congregation.

We were now to bid farewell to the luxury of traveling, and to enter a
country upon which perhaps no wheel has ever rolled. We could indeed have used
our post-chaise one day longer, along the military road to fort Augustus, but
we could have hired no horses beyond Inverness, and we were not so sparing of
ourselves as to lead them, merely that we might have one day longer the
indulgence of a carriage. At Inverness therefore we procured three horses for
ourselves and a servant and one more for our baggage, which was no very heavy
load. We found in the course of our journey the convenience of having
disencumbered ourselves, by laying aside whatever we could spare; for it is not
to be imagined without experience, how in climbing crags, and treading bogs,
and winding through narrow and obstructed passages, a little bulk will hinder,
and a little weight will burden; or how often a man that has pleased himself at
home with his own resolution, will, in the hour of darkness and fatigue, be
content to leave behind him every thing but himself.

We took two Highlanders to turn beside us, partly to show us the way, and
partly to take back from the seaside the horses, of which they were the
owners. One of them was a man of great liveliness and activity, of whom his
companion said, that he would tire any horse in Inverness. Both of them were
civil and ready-handed. Civility seems part of the national charcter of the
Highlanders. Every chieftain is a monarch, and politeness, the natural product
of royal government, is diffused from the lord through the whole clan. But
they are not commonly dextrous. Their narrowness of life confines them to a few
operations, and they are accustomed to endure little wants more than to remove
them.

We mounted our steeds on the thirteenth of August, and directed our guides to
conduct us to Fort Augustus. It is built at the head of Lough Ness, of which
Inverness stands at the outlet. The way between them has been cut by the
soldiers, and the greater part of it runs along a rock, levelled with great
labor and exactness near the waterside.

Most of this day's journey was very pleasant. The day, though bright, was not
hot; and the appearance of the country, if I had not seen the Peak, would have
been wholly new. We went upon a surface so hard and level, that we had little
care to hold the bridle, and were therefore at full leisure for contemplation.
On the left were high and steep rocks shaded with birch, the hardy native of
the North, and covered with fern or heath. On the right the limped waters of
Lough Ness were beating their bank, and waving their surface by a gentle
agitation. Beyond them were rocks sometimes covered with verdure, and sometimes
towering in horrid nakedness. Now and then we espied a little corn-field, which
served to impress more strongly the general barrenness.

Lough Ness is about twenty-four miles long, and from one to two miles abroad.
It is remarkable that Boethius, in his description of Scotland, gives it twelve
miles of breadth. When historians or geographers exhibit false accounts of
places far distant, they may be forgiven, because they can tell but what they
are told; and that their accounts exceed the truth may be justly supposed,
because most men exaggerate to others, if not to themselves. But Boethius lived
at no great distance. If he never saw the lake he must have been very
incurious, and if he had seen it, his veracity yielded to very slight
temptations.

Lough Ness, though not twelve miles abroad, is a very remarkable diffussion of
water without islands. It fills a large hollow between two ridges of high
rocks, being supplied partly by the torrents which fall into it on either side,
and partly, as is supposed, by springs at the bottom. Its water is remarkably
clear and pleasant, and is imagined by the natives to be medicinal. We were
told, that it is in some places one hundred and forty fathoms deep, a
profundity scarcely credible, and which probably those that relate it have
never sounded. Its fish are salmon, trout, and pike.

It was said at Fort Augustus, that Lough Ness is open in the hardest winters,
thoug a lake not far from it is covered with ice. In discussing these
exceptions from the course of nature, the first question is whether the fact be
justly stated. That which is strange is delightful, and a pleasing error is not
willingly detected. Accuracy of narration is not very common, and there are few
so rigidly philosophical as not to represent as perpetual what is only
frequent, or as constant, what is really casual. If it be true that Lough Ness
never freezes, it is either sheltered by its high banks from the cold blasts
and exposed only to those winds which have more power to agitate than congeal:
or it is kept in perpetual motion by the rush of streams from the rocks that
enclose it. Its profundity, though it should be such as is represented, can
have little part in this exemption; for though deep wells are not frozen,
because their waters are excluded from the external air, yet where a wide
surface is exposed to the full influence of a freezing atmosphere, I know not
why the depth should keep it open. Natural philosophy is now one of the
favorite studies of the Scotch nation, and Lough Ness well deserves to be
diligently examined.

The road on which we traveled, and which was itself a source of
entertainment, is made along the rock, in the direction of the lough, sometimes
by breaking off protuberances, and sometimes by cutting the great mass of stone
to a considerable depth. The fragments are piled in a loose wall on either
side, with apertures left at very short spaces, to give a passage to the wintry
currents. Part of it is bordered with low trees, from which our guides gathered
nuts, and would have had the appearance of an English lane, except that an
English lane is almost always dirty. It has been made with great labor, but
has this advantage, that it cannot, without equal labor, be broken up.

Within our sight there were goats feeding or playing. The mountains have red
deer, but they came not within view; and if what is said of their vigilance and
subtlety be true, they have some claim to that palm of wisdom, which the
eastern philosopher, whom Alexander interrogated, gave to those beasts which
live farthest from men.

Dr. JOHNSON.
SECT. CIII. DESCRIPTION OF A HIGHLAND COTTAGE.
NEAR the way, by the water side we espied a cottage. This was the first
Highland Hut that I had seen; and as our business was with life and manners, we
were willing to visit it. To enter a habitation without leave, seems to be
considered here as rudeness or intrusion. The old laws of hospitality still
give this license to a stranger.

A hut is constructed with loose stones, ranged for the most part with some
tendency to circularity. It must be placed where the wind cannot act upon it
with violence, because it has no cement; and where the water will run easily
away, because it has no floor but the naked ground. The wall, which is commonly
about six feet high, declines from the perpendicular a little in ward. Such
rafters as can be procured are then raised for a roof, and covered with heath,
which makes a strong and warm thatch, kept from flying off by ropes of twisted
heath, of which the ends, reaching from the center of the thatch to the top of
the wall, are held firm by the weight of a large stone. No light is admitted
but at the entrance, and through a hole in the thatch, which gives vent to the
smoke. This hole is not directly over the fire, lest the rain should extinguish
it; and the smoke therefore naturally fills the place before it escapes. Such
is the general structure of the houses in which one of the natives of this
opulent and powerful island has been hitherto content to live. Huts however are
not more uniform than palaces; and this which we were inspecting was very far
from one of the meanest, for it was divided into several apartments; and its
inhabitants possessed such property as a pastoral poet might exalt into riches.

When we entered we found an an old woman boiling goat's-flesh in a kettle. She
spoke little English, but we had interpreters at hand; and she was willing
enough to display her whole system of economy. She has five children, of which
none are yet gone from her. The eldest, a boy of thirteen, and her husband, who
is eighty years old, were at work in the wood. Her two next sons were gone to
Inverness to buy meal, by which oatmeal is always meant. Meal she considered as
expensive food, and told us, that in spring when the goats gave milk, the
children could live without it. She is mistress of sixty goats, and I saw many
kids in an enclosure at the end of her house. She had also some poultry. By the
lake we saw a potatoe-garden, and a small spot of ground on which stood four
shucks, containing each twelve sheaves of barley. She has all this from the
labor of their own hands, and for what is necessary to be bought, her kids and
her chickens are sent to market.

With the true pastoral hospitality, she asked us to sit down and drink whisky.
She is religious, and though the kirk is four miles off, probably eight English
miles, she goes thither every Sunday. We gave her a shilling and she begged
snuff; for snuff is the luxury of a Highland cottage.

Soon afterward we came to the General's Hut, so called because it was the
temporary abode of Wade, while he superintended the works upon the road. It is
now a house of entertainment for passengers, and we found it not ill stocked
with provisions.

Dr. JOHNSON.
SECT. CIV. OF THE CLIMATE, SOIL, PRODUCE, AND ANIMALS OF THE HEBRIDES,
PARTICULARLY OF SKY.
AS the island of Sky lies in the fifty-seventh degree, the air cannot be
supposed to have much warmth. The long continuance of the sun above the
horizon, does indeed sometimes produce great heat in the northern latitudes;
but this can only happen in sheltered places, where the atmosphere is to a
certain degree stagnant, and the same mass of air continues to receive for many
hours the rays of the sun, and the vapors of the earth. Sky lies open on the
west and north to a vast extent of ocean, and is cooled in the summer by
perpetual ventilation, but by the same blasts is kept warm in winter. Their
weather is not pleasing. Half the year is deluged with rain. From the autumnal
to the vernal equinox, a dry day is hardly known, except when the showers are
suspended by a tempest. Under such skies can be expected no great exuberance of
vegetation. Their winter overtakes their summer, and their harvest lies upon
the ground drenched with rain. The autumn struggles hard to produce some of our
early fruits. I gathered gooseberries in September; but they were small, and
the husk was thick.

Their winter is seldom such as puts a full stop to the growth of plants, or
reduces the cattle to live wholly on the surplusage of the summer. In the year
seventy-one they had a severe season, remembered by the name of the Black
spring, from which the island has not yet recovered. The snow lay long upon the
ground, a calamity hardly known before. Part of their cattle died for w^nt, and
part were unseasonably sold to buy sustenance for the owners.

The soil, as in other countries, has its diversities. In some parts there is
only a thin layer of earth spread upon a rock, which bears nothing but short
brown heath, and perhaps is not generally capable of any better product. There
are many bogs or mosses of greater or less extent, where the soil cannot be
supposed to want depth, though it is too wet for the plough. But we did not
observe in these any aquatic plants. The valleys and the mountains are alike
darkened with heath. Some grass however, grows here and there, and some happier
spots of earth are capable of tillage.

Their agriculture is laborious, and perhaps rather feeble than unskilful.
Their chief manure is sea-weed, which, when they lay it to rot upon the field,
gives them a better crop than those of the Highlands. They heap sea shells upon
the dunghill, which in time moulder into a fertilizing substance. When they
find a vein of earth where they cannot use it, they dig it up, and add it to
the mould of a more commodious place. Their corn grounds often lie in such
intricacies among the craggs, that there is no room for the action of a team
and plough. The soil is then turned up by manual labor, with an instrument
called a crooked spade, of a forth and weight which to me appeared very
incommodious, and would perhaps be soon improved in a country where workmen
could be (...) found and easily paid. It has a narrow blade of iron fixed to a
long and heavy piece of wood, which must have, about a foot and a half above
the iron, a knee or (...) with the angle downwards. When the farmer encounters
a stone, which is the great (...) of his operations, he drives this blade under
it, and bringing the knee or angle to the ground, his in the long handle a very
forcible lever.

According to the different modes of tillage, farms are distinguished into long
land and short land. Long land is that which affords room for a plough, and
short land is turned up by the spade.

The grain which they commit to the furrows thus tediously formed, is either
oats or barley. They do not sow barley, without very copious manure, and then
they expect from it, ten for one, an increase equal to that of better
countries; but the culture is so operose, that they content themselves commonly
with oats; and who can relate without compassion, that after all their
diligence, they are to expect only a triple increase? It is in vain to hope for
plenty, when a third part of the harvest must be reserved for seed.

When their grain is arrived at the state, which they must consider as
ripeness, they do not cut, but pull the barley. To the oats they apply the
sickle. Wheel carriages they have none, but make a frame of timber, which is
drawn by one horse, with the two points behind pressing on the ground. On this
they sometimes drag home their sheaves, but often convey them home in a kind of
open panier, or frame of sticks upon the horse's back.

Of that which is obtained with so much difficulty, nothing surely ought to be
wasted; yet their method of clearing their oats from the husk is by parching
them in the straw. Thus with the genuine improvidence of savages, they destroy
that fodder for want of which their cattle may perish. From this practice they
have but two petty conveniences. They dry the grain so that it is easily
reduced to meal, and they escape the theft of the thresher. The taste
contracted from the fire by the oats, as by every other scorched substance, use
must long ago have made grateful. The oats that are parched must be dried in a
kiln.

Of their gardens I can judge only from their tables. I did not observe that
the common greens were wanting, and suppose, that by choosing an advantageous
position, they can raise all the more hardy esculent plants. Of vegetable
fragrance or beauty they are not yet studious. Few vows are made to Flora in
the Hebrides. They gather a little hay, but the grass is ^own late; and is so
often almost dry and again very wet, before it is housed, that it becomes a
collection of withered stalks without taste or fragrance. It must be eaten by
cattle that have nothing else, but by most English farmers would be thrown away.

In the islands I have not heard that any subterraneous treasures have been
discovered, though where there are mountains there are commonly minerals. One
of the rocks in Col has a black vein, imagined to consist of the ore of lead:
but it was never yet opened or essayed. In Sky a black mass was accidentally
picked up and brought into the house of the owner of the land, who found
himself strongly inclined to think it a coal, but unhappily it did not burn in
the chimney. Common ores would be here of no great value; for what requires to
be separated by fire, must, if it were found, be carried away in its mineral
state, here being no fuel for the smelting-house, or forge. Perhaps by diligent
search in this world of stone, some valuable species of marble might be
discovered. But neither philosophical curiosity, nor commercial industry, have
yet fixed their abode here, where the importunity of immediate want supplied
but for the day, and craving on the morrow, has left little room for excursive
knowledge, or the pleasing fancies of distant profit.

They have lately found a manufacture considerably lucrative. Their rocks
abound with kelp, a sea-plant, of which the ashes are melted into grass. They
burn kelp in great quantities, and then send it away in ships which come
regularly to purchase them. This new source of riches has raised the rents of
many maritime farms; but the tenants pay, like all other tenants, the
additional rent with great unwillingness; because they consider the profits of
the kelp as the mere product of personal labor, to which the landlord
contributes nothing. However, as any man may be said to give what he gives the
power of gaining he has certainly as much right to profit from the price of
kelp, as of any thing else found or raised upon his ground.

This new trade has excited a long and eager litigation between Macdonald and
Macleod, for a ledge of rocks which, till the value of kelp was known, neither
of them desired the reputation of possessing.

The cattle of Sky are not so small as is commonly believed. Since they have
sent their beeves in great numbers to southern marts, they have probably taken
more care of their breed. At stated times the annual growth of cattle is driven
to a fair, by a general drover, and with the money which he returns to the
farmer, the rents are paid.

The price regularly expected, is from two to three pounds a head. There was
once one sold for five pounds. They go from the Islands very lean, and are not
offered to the butcher till they have been long fatted in English pastures.

Of their black cattle, some are without horns, called by the Scotch humble
cows, as we call a be an bumble be, that wants a sting. Whether this
difference be specific, or accidental, though we enquired with great diligence,
we could not be informed.

Their horses are, like their cows, of a moderate size. I had no difficulty to
mount myself commodiously by the favor of the gentleman.

The goat is the general inhabitant of the earth, complying with every
difference of climate and soil. The goats of the Hebrides are like others; nor
did I hear any thing of their sheep to be particularly remarked.

In the penury of these malignant regions, nothing is left that can be
converted to food. The goats and the sheep are milked like the cows. A single
meal of a goat is a quart, and of a sheep a pint. Such at least was the account
which I could extract from those of whom I am not sure that they ever had
enquired.

The milk of goats is much thinner than that of cows, and that of sheep is much
thicker. Sheep's milk is never eaten before it is boiled. As it is thick, it
must be very liberal of curd, and the people of St. Kilda form it into small
cheeses.

The stags of the mountains are less than those of our parks or forests,
perhaps not bigger than our fallow-deer. Their flesh has no rankness, nor is it
inferior in flavor to our common venison. The roebuck I neither saw nor
tasted. These are not countries for a regular chase. The deer are not driven
with horns and hounds. A sportsman, with his gun in his hand, watches the
animal, and when he has wounded him, traces him by the blood.

They have a race of brinded gray hounds, larger and stronger than those with
which we course hares, and those are the only dogs used by them for the chase.

There are in Sky neither rats nor mice, but the weasel is so frequent, that he
is heard in houses rattling behind chests or beds, as rats in England. They
probably owe to his predominance that they have no other vermin; for since the
grea^rat took possession of this part of the world, scarce a ship can touch at
any port, but some of his race are left behind.

Dr. JOHNSON.
SECT. CV. OF THE INHABITANTS AND HOUSES OF THE HEBRIDES
THE inhabitants of Sky, and of the other islands which I have seen, are
commonly of the middle stature, with fewer among them very tall or very short,
than are seen in England, or perhaps as their numbers are small, the chances of
any deviation from the common measure are necessarily few. The tallest men that
I saw are among those of higher rank. In regions of barrenness and scarcity,
the human race is hindered in its growth by the same causes as other animals.

The ladies have as much beauty here as in other places; but bloom and softness
are not to be expected among the lower classes, whose faces are expossed to the
rudeness of the climate, and whose features are sometimes contracted by want,
and sometimes hardened by the blasts. Supreme beauty is seldom found in
cottages or work-shops, even where no real hardships are suffered. To expand
the human face to its full perfection, it seems necessary that the mind should
cooperate by placidness of content, or consciousness of superiority.

Their strength is proportionate to their size, but they are accustomed to run
upon rough ground, and therefore can with great agility skip over the bog, or
clamber the mountain. For a campaign in the wastes of America, soldiers, better
qualified could not have been found. Having little work to do, they are not
willing, nor perhaps able, to endure a long continuance of manual labor, and
are therefore considered as habitually idle.

Having never been supplied with these accommodadations, which life,
extensively diversified with trades affords, they supply their wants by very
insufficient shifts, and endure many inconveniences which a little attention
would easily relieve. I have seen a horse carrying home the harvest on a crate.
Under his tail was a stick for a crupper, held at the two ends by twists of
straw. Hemp will grow in their islands, and therefore ropes may be had. If they
wanted hemp, they might make better cordage of rushes, or perhaps of nettles,
than of straw.

Their method of life neither secures them perpetual health, nor exposes them
to any particular diseases. There are physicians in the islands, who, I
believe, all practice surgery, and all compound their own medicines.

It is generally supposed, that life is longer in places where there are few
opportunities of luxury; but I found no instance here of extraordinary
longevity. A cottager grows old over his oaten cakes, like a citizen at a
turtle-feast. He is indeed seldom incommoded by corpulence. Poverty preservs
him from sinking under the burden of himself, but he escapes no other injury of
time. Instances of long life are often related, which those who hear them are
more willing to credit than examine. To be told that any man has attained a
hundred years, gives hope and comfort to him who stands trembling on the brink
of his own climacteric.

Length of life is distributed impartially to very different modes of life in
very different climates; and the mountains have no greater examples of age and
health, than the lowlands, where I was introduced to two ladies of high
quality; one of whom, in her ninety-fourth year, presided at her table with the
full exercise of all her powers; and the other has attained her eighty-fourth,
without any diminution of her vivacity, and with little reason to accuse time
of depredations on her beauty.

The habitations of men in the Hebrides may be distinguished into huts and
houses. By a house, I mean a building with one story over another, by a hut, a
dwelling with only one floor. The Lord, who formerly lived in a castle, now
lives in a house; sometimes sufficiently neat, but seldom very spacious or
splendid. The tacksmen and the ministers have commonly houses. Wherever there
is a house, the stranger finds a welcome.

Of the houses little can be said. They are small, and by the necessity of
accumulating stores, where there are so few opportunities of purchase, the
rooms are very heterogeneously filled. With want of cleanliness it were
ingratitude to reproach them; the servants having been bred upon the naked
earth, think every floor clean; and the quick succession of guests, perhaps not
always over-elegant, does not allow much time for adjusting their apartments.

Huts are of many gradations; from murky dens, to commodious dwellings.

The wall of a common hut is always built with mortar, by a skilful adaptation
of loose stones. -- Sometimes, perhaps, a double wall of stones is raised, and
the intermediate space filled with earth. The air is thus completely excluded.
Some walls, are, I think, formed of turfs, held together by a wattle, or
texture of twigs. Of the meanest huts, the first room is lighted by the
entrance, and the second by the smoke-hole. The fire is usually made in the
middle. But there are huts or dwellings, of only one story, inhabited by
gentlemen, which have walls cemented with mortar, glass windows, and boarded
floors. Of these all have chimneys, and some chimneys have grates.

The house and the furniture are not always nicely (...). We were driven once,
by missing a passage, to the hut of a gentleman, where after a very liberal
supper, when I was conducted to my chamber, I found an elegant bed of Indian
cotton, spread with fine sheets. The accommodation was flattering; I undressed
myself, and felt my feet in the mire. The bed stood upon the bare earth, which
a long course of rain had softened to a puddle.

The petty tenants, and laboring peasants, live in miserable cabins, which
afford them little more than shelter from the storms. The Boor of Norway is
said to make all his own utensils. In the Hebrides, whatever might be their
ingenuity, the want of wood leaves them no materials. They are probably content
with such accommodations as stones of different forms and sizes can afford them.

Their food is not better than their lodging. They seldom taste the flesh of
land animals; for here are no markets. What each man cats is from his own
flock. The great effect of money is to break property into small parts. In
towns, he that has a shilling may have a piece of meat; but where there is no
commerce, (...) man can eat mutton but by killing a sheep.

Fish in fair weather they need not want; but, I believe, man never live, long
on fish, but by constraint; he will rather feed upon roots and berries.

The only fuel of the islands is peat. Their wood is all consumed, and coal
they have not yet found. Peat is dug out of the marshes, from the depth of one
foot to that of six. That is accounted the best which is nearer the surface. It
appears to be a mass of black earth held together by vegetable fibers. I know
not whether the earth be bituminous, or whether the fibers be not the only
combustible part; which, by heating the interposed earth red-hot, make a
burning mass. The heat is not very strong nor lasting. The ashes are yellowish,
and in a large quantity. When they dig peat, they cut it into square pieces,
and pile it up to dry beside the house. In some places it has an offensive
smell. It is like wood charked for the smith. The common method of making peat
fires, is by heaping it on the earth; but it burns well in grates, and in the
best houses is so used.

The common opinion is, that peat grows again where it has been cut; which, as
it seems to be chiefly a vegetable substance, is not unlikely to be true,
whether known or not to those who relate it.

Dr. JOHNSON.
SECT. CVI. OF THE HEBRIDIAN TABLES.
IT need not, I suppose, be mentioned, that in countries so little frequented
as the Islands, there are no houses where travelers are entertained for money.
He that wanders about these wilds, either procures recommendations to those,
whose habitations lie near his way, or, when night and weariness come upon him,
takes the chance of general hospitality. If he finds only a cottage, he can
expect little more than shelter; for the cottagers have little more for
themselves. But if his good fortune brings him to the residence of a gentleman,
he will be glad of a storm to prolong his stay. There is, however, one inn by
the seaside at Sconsor, in Sky, where the post office is kept.

At the tables where a stranger is received, neither plenty nor delicacy is
wanting. A tract of land so thinly inhabited, must have much wild fowl; and I
scarcely remember to have seen a dinner without them. The moor-game is every
where to be had. That the sea abounds with fish, need not be told; for it
supplies a great part of Europe. The Isle of Sky, has stags and roebucks, but
no hares. They sell very numerous droves of oxen yearly to England, and
therefore cannot be supposed to want beef at home. Sheep and goats are in great
numbers, and they have the common domestic fowls.

But as here is nothing to be bought, every family must kill its own meat, and
roast part of it somewhat sooner than Apicius would prescribe. Every kind of
flesh is undoubtedly excelled by the variety and emulation of English markets;
but that which is not best may be yet free from bad; and he that shall complain
of his fare in the Hebrides, has improved his delicacy more than his manhood.

Their fowls are not like those plumped for sale by the poulterers of London,
but they are as good as other places commonly afford, except that the geese, by
feeding in the sea, have universally a fishy rankness.

These geese seem to be of a middle race, between the wild and domestic kinds.
They are so tame as to own a home, and so wild as sometimes to fly quite away.

Their native bread is made of oats, or barley. Of oatmeal they spread very
thin cakes, coarse and hard, to which unaccustomed palates are not easily
reconciled. The barley cakes are thicker and softer. I began to eat them with
unwillingness. The blackness of their color raises some dislike, but the taste
is not disagreeable. In most houses there is wheat-flour, with which we were
sure to be treated, if we staid long enough to have it kneaded and baked. As
neither yeast nor leaven are used among them, their bread of every kind is
unfermented. They make only cakes, and never mould a loaf.

A man of the Hebrides, for of the women's diet I can give no account, as soon
as he appears in the morning, swallows a glass of whisky. Yet they are not a
drunken race: at least I never was present at much intemperance. But no man is
so abstemious as to refuse the morning dram, which they call a skalk.

The word whisky signifies water, and is applied by way of eminence to strong
water, or distilled liquor. The spirit drunk in the North is drawn from barley.
I never tasted it, except once for experiment at the inn in Inverary, when I
thought it preferable to any English malt brandy. It was strong, but not
pungent, and was free from the empyreumatic taste or smell. What was the
process I had no opportunity of enquiring, nor do I wish to improve the art of
making poison pleasant.

Not long after the dram may be expected the breakfast, a meal in which the
Scots, whether of the lowlands or mountains, must be confessed to excel us. The
tea and coffee are accompained not only with butter, but with honey, conserves,
and marmalades. If an epicure could remove by a wish, in quest of sensual
gratifications, wherever he had supped, he would breakfast in Scotland.

In the islands however, they do what I found it not very easy to endure. They
polute the tea-table by plates piled with large slices of Cheshire-cheese which
mingles its less grateful odours with the fragrance of the tea.

Where many questions are to be asked, some will be omitted. I forgot to
enquire how they were supplied with so much exotic luxury. Perhaps the French
may bring them wine for wool, and the Dutch give them tea and coffee at the
fishing season, in exchange for fresh provision. Their trade is unconstrained.
They pay no customs, for there is no officer to demand them. Whatever therefore
is made dear only by impost, is obtained here at an easy rate.

A dinner in the Western Islands, differs very little from a dinner in England,
except that in the place of tarts, there are always set different preparations
of milk. This part of their diet will admit some improvement. Though they have
milk, and eggs, and sugar, few of them know how to compound them in a custard.
Their gardens afford them no great variety, but they have always some
vegetables on the table. Potatoes at least are never wanting, which, though
they have not known them long, are now one of the principal parts of their
food. They are not of the mealy, but the viscous kind.

Their more elaborate cookery, or made dishes, an Englishman at the first taste
is not likely to approve; but the culinary compositions of every country are
often such as become grateful to other nations only by degrees; though I have
read a French author, who, in the elation of his heart, says, that French
cookery plea^^^ all foreigners, but foreign cookery never satis^^^^ a Frenchman.

Their suppers are, like their dinners, various and plentiful. The table is
always covered with elegant linen. Their plates for common use are often of
that kind of manufacture which is called cream-coloured, or queen's-ware. They
use silver on all occasions where it is common in England, nor did I ever find
the spoon of horn but in one house.

The knives are not often either very bright or very sharp. They are indeed
instruments, of which the Highlanders have not been long acquainted with the
general use. They were not regularly laid on the table, before the prohibition
of arms and the change of dress. Thirty years ago the Highlander wore his knife
as a companion to his dirk or dagger, and when the company sat down to meat,
the men who had knives, cut the flesh into small pieces for the women, who with
their fingers conveyed it to their mouths.

There was perhaps never any change of national manners so quick, so great, and
so general, as that which has operated in the Highlands, by the last conquest,
and the subsequent laws. We came thither too late to see what we expected, a
people of peculiar appearance, and a system of antiquated life. The clans
retain little now of their original character; their ferocity (...) is
softened, their military ardour is (...) their dignity of independence is
depressed, (...) contempt of government subdued, and their rev^^^^ce for their
chiefs abated. Of what they had before the late conquest of their country,
there remain only their language and their poverty. Their language is (...) on
every side. -- Schools are erected, in which English only is taught, and there
were lately some who thought it reasonable to refuse them a version of the
(...) scriptures, that they might have no monument of (...) mother tongue.

That their poverty is gradually abated, cannot be ^^^tioned among the
unpleasing consequences of sub^^^tion. They are now acquainted with money, and
(...) possibility of gain will by degrees make them industrious. Such is the
effect of the late regulations, that a longer journey than to the Highlands
must be (...) by him, whose curiosity pants for savage virtues (...) barbarous
grandeur.

DR. JOHNSON.
FINIS

